FEBR. 27. 1666.

Tractatus cui Titulus, The Rule of Faith, A doctissimo Viro Iohanne Tillotson
scriptus Imprimatur una cum Appendice.

Humfr. London.

THE Rule of Faith: or an ANSWER to the TREATISE of Mr. I. S. entitled,
Sure-footing, etc.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D.D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn.

To which is Adjoined A REPLY TO Mr. I.S. his 3d APPENDIX, etc.

By EDW. STILLINGFLEET D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by H.C. for O. Gellibrand, at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1676.

To my Honored and Learned Friend, Mr. Edward Stillingfleet.
SIR,
I Have with a great deal of pleasure and satisfaction read over your Book,
which I find in every part answerable to its Title, viz. A Rational Account of
the Grounds of Protestant Religion. And now I thank you for it, not only as a
private favor, but a public benefit. No sooner had I perused it, but I met
with a Discourse entitled, Sure-footing in Christianity. And although I have
no small prejudice against Books with conceited Titles, yet I was tempted to
look into this, because it pretended to contain Animadversions on some Passages
in your Book which I had so lately read over. Upon perusal of which
Animadversions, I found that the Author of them had attaqued (and in his own
opinion confuted) a page or two in your Book. This drew me on to take a view of
his main Discourses; which because they are in great vogue among some of his
own Party, and do with an unusual kind of confidence and ostentation pretend to
the newest and most exact fashion of writing Controversy, as being all along
demonstrative and built upon self-evident Principles: Therefore I resolved
thoroughly to examine them, that I might discover (if I could) upon what so firm
and solid Foundations this High and Mighty Confidence was built.

But before I had entered upon this undertaking, I met with a Letter from the
Author of Sure-footing to his Answerer, directing him how he ought to demean
himself in his Answer. In which Letter, though there be many things liable to
great exception, yet because I am unwilling to be diverted from the main
Question, I shall not argue with him about any of those matters, only take
leave to use the same liberty in managing my Answer, which he has assumed to
himself, in prescribing Laws to me about it: Therefore without taking any
further notice of his Letter, I address my self to his Book.

THE RULE of FAITH.
PART. I. The Explication and State of the Question.
SECT. I.
1. THe Question he propounds to himself to debate, is, The Explication of the
Terms of the Question.
What is the Rule of Faith? In order to the resolution whereof, he endeavors,

First, To fix the true notion of these two Terms, Rule, and Faith. Which way
of proceeding I cannot but allow to be very proper and reasonable; but I can by
no means think his explication of those Terms to be sufficient. He tells us,
That a Rule is that which is able to regulate, or guide him that uses it: In
which description, as in many other passages of his Book, he is plainly guilty
of that which he taxes in Mr. P. 180.
Whitby, that is, the confounding of a Rule and a Guide, by making Regulating
and Guiding to be equivalent words. But for this I am no further concerned,
than to take notice of it by the way: The fault which I find in this definition
is, that it does not make the thing plainer than it was before; so that no man
is the wiser for it, nor one jot nearer knowing what a Rule is. He pretends to
tell Englishmen what a Rule is; and for their clearer understanding of this
word, he explains it by a word less removed from the Latin, A Rule is that
which is able to regulate him that uses it; just as if a man should go about
to explain what a Lawgiver is, by saying, he is one that has the power of
Legislation. Of the two, he had much better have said, that a Rule is a thing
that is able to rule him that uses it, though this be nothing but an
explication of the same word by it self.

2. Not much better is his explication of the term Faith, which he tells us, in
the common sense of Mankind, is the same with Believing. P. 4.
He declared indeed beforehand, that he did not intend to give rigorous
School-definitions of either this or the former word; and (to do him right) he
has not in the least swerved from his intention. It were to be wished he had
prefac'd some such thing to his Demonstrations; for the Reader will find, that
they are not one whit more rigorous than his Definitions; the latter of which
does very much resemble the Country-man's way of defining, who being asked by
his Neighbor what an Invasion was, after some study, told him very gravely,
that an Invasion was as if he should say an Invasion: In like manner Mr. S.
tells us; that Faith (or which is all one, Belief) is the same with Believing;
which in my apprehension is but a Country-definition, unless the interposing of
those solemn words [ in the common sense of Mankind] may be thought to mend the
matter. This puts me in mind of what Mr. S. says in his P. 159^
Transition (as he calls it) where he gives the Reader an account what feats he
has done in his Book: He will see (says he) I take my Rise at the meaning of
the words Rule and Faith; this known, I establish my First Principles in this
present matter, to be these, viz. A Rule is a Rule, Faith is Faith. This is the
right self-evident method he talks so much of, and his Principles agree
admirably well with his Definitions. If he had but proceeded in the same
method, and added, that A Rule of Faith is a Rule of Faith; that Oral Tradition
is Oral Tradition; and that to say, Oral Tradition is the Rule of Faith, is as
much as to say, Oral Tradition is the Rule of Faith, the whole business had
been concluded without any more ado; and I think no body would have gone about
to confute him.

3. Rejecting then his way of Definition, as inept and frivolous, and no ways
tending to give a man a clearer notion of things, I shall endeavor to explain
a little better (if I can) the meaning of these Terms.

A Rule (when we speak of a Rule of Faith) is a Metaphorical word, which in its
first and proper sense being applied to material and sensible things, is the
Measure according to which we judge of the straightness and crookedness of
things. And from hence it is transferred by analogy to things moral or
intellectual. A moral Rule is the Measure according to which we judge, whether a
thing be good or evil; and this kind of Rule is that which is commonly called a
Law, and the agreement or disagreement of our actions to this Rule, is suitably
to the Metaphor called rectitude, or obliquity. An intellectual Rule is the
Measure according to which we judge whether a thing be true or false; and this
is either general, or more particular. Common notions, and the acknowledged
Principles of Reason, are that general Rule, according to which we judge whether
a thing be true or false. The particular Principles of every Science are the
more particular Rules, according to which we judge whether things in that
Science be true or false. So that the general notion of a Rule is, that it is a
measure, by the agreement or disagreement to which we judge of all things of
that kind to which it belongs.

4. Faith, though both among sacred and profane Writers, it be used many times
more generally, for a persuasion or assent of the mind to any thing wrought in
us by any kind of argument; yet, as it is a Term of Art used by Divines, it
signifies that particular kind of assent which is wrought in us by Testimony or
Authority. So that Divine Faith, which we are now speaking of, is an assent to
a thing upon the testimony or authority of God, or, which is all one, an assent
to a truth upon Divine revelation.

5. A Rule of Faith is the Measure, according to which we judge what matters we
are to assent to, as revealed to us by God, and what not. And more
particularly, the Rule of Christian faith is the Measure, according to which we
are to judge what we ought to assent to, as the Doctrine revealed by Christ to
the world, and what not.

. 6. So that this Question, What is the Rule of Christian faith? supposes a
Doctrine revealed by Christ to the world; and that that Doctrine was
intelligibly and entirely delivered by Christ to his Apostles, and sufficient
confirmation given to it; that this Doctrine was in the same manner published
to the world by the Apostles, who likewise gave sufficient evidence of the
truth of it. All this is necessarily supposed in the Question: For it would be
in vain to enquire whether this or that be the Rule of Christian Faith, if such
a thing as the Christian Faith were not first supposed. When therefore we
enquire what is the Rule of Christian Faith? the meaning of that enquiry is, by
what way and means the knowledge of Christ's Doctrine is conveyed certainly down
to us, who live at the distance of so many Ages from the time of it is first
delivery; For this being known, we have the Rule of Faith; that is, a measure
by which we may judge what we are to assent to, as the Doctrine of Christ, and
what not. So that when any Question arises about any particular Proposition,
whether this be part of Christ's Doctrine, we may be able by this Rule to
resolve it.

SECT II.
1. THe next thing to be considered is his resolution of this Question; Mr. S's
Rule of Faith.
by which we shall know what his opinion is concerning the Rule of Faith; for
that being known, the Controversy between us will easily be stated.

His opinion in general is, that oral or practical Tradition (in opposition to
writing; or any other way that can be assigned) is the Rule of Faith. By oral
or practical Tradition, he means p. 41.
a delivery down from hand to hand (by words, and a constant course of frequent
and visible actions, conformable to those words) of the sense and faith of
Forefathers.

2. Now, that I may bring the Controversy between us to a clear state, I am
first to take a more particular view of his Opinion concerning the Rule of
Faith, that so I may the better understand how much he attributes to Oral
Tradition, and what to the Scriptures, or written Tradition. And then I am to
lay down the Protestant Rule of Faith, that so it may appear how far we agree,
and how far we differ. The sum of what he attributes to Oral Tradition, so far
as can be collected out of so obscure and confused a Discourse, may be reduced
to these five Heads.

. 3. First, That the Doctrine of Christian Religion was delivered by Christ to
the Apostles, and by them published to the World; and that the Age which first
received it from the Apostles, delivered it as they received it, without any
change or corruption to their Children, and they to theirs, and so it went on
solely by this way of Oral Tradition. This is the sum of his Explication of
Tradition, Disc. 5 th.

. 4. Secondly, That this way alone is not only sufficient to convey this
Doctrine down to all Ages certainly, and without any alteration; but it is the
only possible way that can be imagined, of conveying down a Doctrine securely
from one Age to another. And this is the natural result of his Discourse about
the Properties of a Rule of Faith: For if the true Properties of a Rule of
Faith do belong to Oral Tradition, then it is a sufficient means; and if those
Properties do solely and essentially appertain to it, and are incompatible to
any thing else (as he endeavors to prove) then it is impossible there should
be any other way.

. 5. Thirdly, That it is impossible this means should fail, or miss of its end;
that is, the Doctrine of Christ being once put into this way of conveyance, it
can neither cease to descend, nor be at any time corrupted or changed in its
descent. This is that which his Demonstrations pretend to prove.

6. Fourthly, That the infallibility of Oral Tradition, or the impossibility of
its failing, is a first and self evident principle. This he frequently asserts
throughout his Book.

7. Fifthly, That this way of Oral Tradition, has de facto in all Ages been
acknowledged by Christians, as the only way and means whereby the Doctrine of
Christianity has been conveyed down to them. And this is that which he
attempts to prove from the Consent of Authority.

8. As for the Scriptures, he grants them indeed to have been written by men
divinely inspired, and to contain a Divine Doctrine, even the same which is
delivered by Oral Tradition; so he tells us P. 117.
, It Is certain the Apostles taught the same Doctrine they writ. But then he
denies it to be of any use without Oral Tradition, because neither the letter,
nor sense of it, can without that be ascertained; so he says in his Letter to
Dr. Casaubon P. 337.
, As for the Scriptures (ascertaining their letter and sense, which is done by
Tradition) it is clear they are of incomparable value; not only for the Divine
Doctrine contained in them, but also for many particular passages, whose source
or first attestation not being universal, nor their nature much practical,
might possibly have been lost in their conveyance down by Tradition. Where,
though he give the Scriptures very good words, it is to be understood, provided
they will be subordinate, and acknowledge that they owe their sense and their
being intelligible and useful to Oral Tradition. For if any man shall presume
to say, That this Book has any certain sense without Oral Tradition; or that
God can write plainly and intelligibly, and that this Book which he has
endited is so written, and does not depend upon Tradition for its sense and
interpretation; then the most scurrilous language is not bad enough for the
Scriptures; then what are those Sacred Writings Append. 4th. p. 319.
, but Ink variously figured in a Book P. 68.
, unsensed Characters, waxen natured words, not yet sensed, nor having any
certain Interpreter, but fit to be played upon diversely by quirks of wit; that
is, apt to blunder and confound, but to clear little or nothing. These, with
many other disgraceful terms, he very liberally bestows upon Divine Oracles;
the consideration whereof, did it not minister too much horror, would afford
some comfort; for by this kind of rude usage, so familiar with him toward his
Adversaries, one may reasonably conjecture, that he does not reckon the
Scriptures among his Friends.

9. And whereas he says, That the Scriptures have preserved many particular
passages, which because their source or first attestation was not universal,
nor their nature much practical, might possibly bave been lost in their
conveyance down by Tradition; this is impossible, according to his Hypothesis.
For if neither the Scriptures letter, nor the certain sense of it, as to the
main body of Christian Doctrine, could have been secured without Oral
Tradition; that is, if we could not have known that those passages which
contain the main points of Christ's Doctrine, either had been written by men
divinely inspired, or what the sense of them was, but from the consonancy and
agreement of those passages with the Doctrine which was orally preached by the
Apostles; how can we be certain either of the letter or sense of other
particular passages which must necessarily want this confirmation from Oral
Tradition; because their first attestation was not universal, nor their nature
much practical? Nay, his discourse plainly implies, that we can have no
security at all either of the letter or sense of any other parts of Scripture,
but only those which are coincident with the main body of Christian Doctrine,
as is evident from these words p. 116.
, Tradition established, the Church is provided of a certain and infallible
Rule to preserve a copy of the Scriptures Letter truly significative of Christ's
sense, as far as it is coincident with the main body of Christian Doctrine
preached at first; because sense writ in men's hearts by Tradition, can easily
guide them to correct the alteration of the outward letter. This I perceive
plainly is the thing they would be at, they would correct the outward letter of
Scripture by sense written in their hearts; and then, instead of leaving out
the second Commandment, they would change it into a precept of giving due
worship to Images, according to the Council of Trent; and a thousand other
alterations they must make in the Bible, to make it truly significative of the
sense of their Church. But surely the outward letter of other passages of
Scripture, which were not intended to signify points of Faith, is equally
liable to alterations; and yet the Church is not by Tradition provided of any
way to correct these alterations when they happen; because Tradition does, as
this Corollary implies, only furnish the Church with a certain and infallible
Rule of preserving a copy of the Scriptures letter, so far as it is coincident
with the main body of Christian Doctrine.

10. Again, he tells us p. 117.
, Tradition established, the Church is provided of a certain and infallible
Rule to interpret Scripture letter by, so as to arrive certainly at Christ's
sense, as far as the letter concerns the body of Christian Doctrine preached at
first, or points requisite to Salvation. So that whatever he may attribute to
Scripture for fashions sake, and to avoid Calumny with the Vulgar, as he says
very ingenuously in his explication of the 15 th Corollary; nevertheless it is
plain, that according to his own Hypothesis, he cannot but look upon it as
perfectly useless and pernicious. That it is altogether useless, according to
his Hypothesis, is plain; for the main body of Christian Doctrine is securely
conveyed to us without it, and it can give no kind of confirmation to it,
because it receives all at its confirmation from it; only the Church is ever
and anon put to a great deal of trouble to correct the alteration of the
outward letter, by tradition and sense written in their hearts. And as for all
other parts of Scriptue which are not coincident with the main body of
Christian Doctrine, we can have no certainty, either that the outward Letter is
true; nor, if we could, can we possibly arrive at any certain sense of them.
And that it is intolerably pernicious, according to his Hypothesis, is plain,
because * every silly and upstart Heresy fathers it self upon it; and when men
leave Tradition (as he supposes all Heretics do) the Scripture is the most
dangerous engine that could have been invented; being to such Persons only *
waxen natured words, not sensed, nor having any certain Interpreter; but fit to
be played upon diversely by quirks of wit; that is, apt to blunder and confound,
but to clear little or nothing. And indeed, if his Hypothesis were true, the
Scriptures might well deserve all the contemptuous language which he uses
against them; and Apology for tradition, p. 165.
Mr. White's comparison of them with Lilly's Almanac, would not only be
pardonable, but proper; and (unless he added it out of prudence, and for the
Peoples sake, whom he may think too superstitiously conceited of those Books)
he might have spared that cold excuse which he makes for using this similitude,
that it was agreeable rather to the impertinency of the Objection than the
dignity of the Subject. Certain it is, if these men are true to their own
Principles, that notwithstanding the high reverence and esteem pretended to be
born by them and their Church to the Scriptures, they must heartily despise
them, and wish them out of the way, and even look upon it as a great oversight
of the Divine Providence to trouble his Church with a Book, which, if their
Discourse be of any consequence, can stand Catholics in no stead at all, and
is so dangerous and mischievous a weapon in the hands of Heretics.

SECT. III.
1. HAving thus taken a view of his opinion, The Protestant Doctrine concerning
the Rule of Faith.
and considered how much he attributes to Oral Tradition, and how little to the
Scriptures; before I assail this Hypothesis, I shall lay down the Protestant
Rule of Faith; not that so much is necessary for the answering of his Book; but
that he may have no color of objection, that I proceed altogether in the
destructive way, and overthrow his Principle, as he calls it, without
substituting another in its room. The opinion then of the Protestants
concerning the Rule of faith, is this in general, That those Books which we
call the Holy Scriptures, are the means whereby the Christian Doctrine has
been brought down to us. And that he may now clearly understand this, together
with the grounds of it, (which in reason he ought to have done before he had
forsaken us) I shall declare it more particularly in these following
Proposi^ions.

2. 1. That the Doctrine of Christian Religion was by Christ delivered to the
Apostles, and by them first preached to the World, and afterward by them
committed to Writing; which Writings, or Books, have been transmitted from one
age to another down to us. So far I take to be granted by our present
Adversaries. That the Christian Doctrine was by Christ delivered to the
Apostles, and by them published to the World, is part of their own Hypothesis.
That this Doctrine was afterward by the Apostles committed to writing, he also
grants, Corol. 29. P. 117.
It Is certain the Apostles taught the same Doctrine they writ; and if so, it
must be as certain that they writ the same Doctrine which they taught. I know
it is the general Tenet of the Papists, that the Scriptures do not contain the
entire body of Christian Doctrine; but that besides the Doctrines contained in
Scripture, there are also others brought down to us, by oral or unwritten
Tradition. But Mr. S. who supposes the whole Doctrine of Christian Religion to
be certainly conveyed down to us solely by oral Tradition, does not any where,
that I remember, deny that all the same Doctrine is contained in the
Scriptures; only he denies the Scriptures to be a means sufficient to convey
this Doctrine to us with certainty, so that we can by them be infallibly
assured what is Christ's Doctrine, and what not. Nay, he seems in that passage
I last cited, to grant this; in saying, that the Apostles did both teach and
write the same Doctrine. I am sure Mr. White (whom he follows very closely
throughout his whole Book) does not deny this, in his Apology for Tradition; P.
171.
where he says, that it is not the Catholic position, that all its Doctrines
are not contained in the Scriptures. And that those Writings or Books which we
call the Holy Scriptures, have been transmitted down to us, is unquestionable
matter of fact, and granted universally by the Papists, as to all those Books
which are owned by Protestants for Canonical.

3. Secondly, That the way of Writing is a sufficient means to convey a
Doctrine to the knowledge of those who live in times very remote from the age of
its first delivery. According to his Hypothesis, there is no possible way of
conveying a Doctrine with certainty and security, besides that of oral
Tradition; the falsehood of which will sufficiently appear, when I shall have
shown, that the true properties of a Rule of Faith do agree to the Scriptures,
and not to oral Tradition. In the mean time, I shall only offer this to his
consideration, that whatever can be orally delivered in plain and intelligible
words, may be written in the same words; and that a Writing or Book which is
public, and in every ones hand, may be conveyed down with at least as much
certainty and security, and with as little danger of alteration as an oral
Tradition. And if so, I understand not what can render it impossible for a Book
to convey down a Doctrine to the knowledge of after-ages. Besides, if he had
looked well about him, he could not but have apprehended some little
inconvenience in making that an essential part of his Hypothesis, which is
contradicted by plain and constant experience: For that any kind of Doctrine
may be sufficiently conveyed, by Books, to the knowledge of after-ages; provided
those Books be but written intelligibly, and preserved from change and
corruption in the conveyance, (both which I shall be so bold as to suppose
possible) is as little doubted by the generality of mankind, as that there are
Books. And surely we Christians cannot think it impossible to convey a Doctrine
to posterity by Books, when we consider that God himself pitched upon this way
for conveyance of the Doctrine of the Jewish Religion to after-ages; because it
is not likely that so wise an Agent should pitch upon a means whereby it was
impossible he should attain his end.

4. Thirdly, That the Books of Scripture are sufficiently plain, as to all
things necessary to be believed, and practiced. He that denies this, ought in
reason to instance in some necessary point of Faith, or matter of Practice,
which is not in some place of Scripture or other plainly delivered. For it is
not a sufficient objection to say, P. 38, 39.
that the greatest wits among the Protestants differ about the sense of those
Texts, wherein the generality of them suppose the Divinity of Christ to be
plainly and clearly expressed: Because, if nothing were to be accounted
sufficiently plain, but what it is impossible a great wit should be able to
wrest to any other sense; not only the Scriptures, but all other Books; and
(which is worst of all to him that makes this objection) all oral Tradition
would fall into uncertainty. Does the Traditionary Church pretend that the
Doctrine of Christ's Divinity is conveyed down to her by oral Tradition, more
plainly than it is expressed in Scripture? I would fain know what plainer words
she ever used to express this point of Faith by, than what the Scripture uses;
which expressly calls him God, the true God, God over all, blessed for evermore.
If it be said, that those who deny the Divinity of Christ have been able to
evade these and all other Texts of Scripture, but they could never elude the
definitions of the Church in that matter; it is easily answered, that the same
Arts would equally have eluded both; but there was no reason why they should
trouble themselves so much about the latter; for why should they be solicitous
to wrest the definitions of Councils, and conform them to their own opinion,
who had no regard to the Churches Authority? If those great Wits (as he calls
them) had believed the sayings of Scripture to be of no greater authority than
the definitions of Councils, they would have answered texts of Scripture, as
they have done the definitions of Councils; not by endeavoring to interpret
them to another sense, but by downright denying their Authority. So that it
seems that oral Tradition is liable to the same inconvenience with the written,
as to this particular.

5. And of this I shall give him a plain instance in two great Wits of their
Church, the present Pope, and Mr. White; the one the Head of the Traditionary
Church, as Mr. S. calls it; the other the great Master of the Traditionary
Doctrine. These two great Wits, notwithstanding the plainness of oral
Tradition, and the impossibility of being ignorant of it, or mistaking it, have
yet been so unhappy as to differ about several points of Faith; insomuch that
Mr. White is unkindly censured for it at Rome, and perhaps here in England the
Pope speeds no better; however, the difference continues still so wide, that
Mr. White has thought fit to disobey the summons of his chief Pastor, and like
a prudent man, rather to write against him here out of harms-way, than to
venture the infallibility of plain oral Tradition for the Doctrines he
maintains, against a practical Tradition which they have at Rome of killing
Heretics.

Methinks Mr. S. might have spared his brags, that he has evinced from clear
reason, P. 54.
that it is far more impossible to make a man not to be, than not to know what
is rivetted into his soul by so often repeated sensations, (as the Christian
Faith is by Oral and Practical Tradition) and that it exceeds all the power of
Nature (abstracting from the cases of madness, and violent disease) to blot
knowledge thus fixed out of the soul of one single Believer; insomuch, that
sooner may all mankind perish, than the regulative virtue of Tradition
miscarry; nay, sooner may the sinews of entire nature by overstraining crack,
and she lose all her activity and motion, that is, her self; than one single
part of that innumerable multitude which integrate the vast testification,
which we call Tradition, can possibly be violated; when after he has told us,
P. 116.
that the City of Rome was blessed with more vigorous causes to imprint Christ's
Doctrine at first, and recommend it to the next Age, than were found any where
else; and consequently, that the stream of Tradition in its source and first
putting into motion, was more particularly vigorous there than in any other
See; and that the chief Pastor of that See has a particular Title to
Infallibility built upon Tradition, above any other Pastor whatsoever; not to
dilate on the particular assistances to that Bishop, springing out of his
divinely constituted Office; when, I say, after all this quaint Reason and
rumbling Rhetoric about the infallibility of Oral Tradition, and the
particular infallibility of the Bishop of Rome built on Tradition; we cannot
but remember, that this great Oracle of Oral Tradition the Pope, and this great
Master of it Mr. White, who is so peculiarly skilled in the Rule of Faith, have
so manifestly declared themselves to differ in points of Faith. For that the
Pope and his Congregation general at Rome have condemned all his Books for this
reason, because Mr. Wh. Exetasis. P. 9.
they contain several Propositions manifestly heretical, is a sign that these
two great Wits do not very well hit it in matters of Faith; and either that
they do not both agree in the same Rule of Faith, or that one of them does not
rightly understand it, or not follow it. And now, why may not that which Mr. S.
unjustly says concerning the use of Scripture, be upon this account justly
applied to the business of Oral Tradition P. 39.
? If we see two such eminent Wits among the Papists (the Pope, and Mr. White)
making use of the self-same, and as they conceive, the best advantages their
Rule of Faith gives them; and availing themselves the best they can by acquired
skills, yet differ about matters of Faith; what certainty can we undertakingly
promise to weaker heads, that is to the generality of the Papists, in whom the
Governors of the Church do professedly cherish ignorance for the increasing of
their devotion.

6. Fourthly, We have sufficient assurance that the Books of Scripture are
conveyed down to us, without any material corruption or alteration. And he that
denies this, must either reject the authority of all Books, because we cannot
be certain whether they be the same now that they were at first; or else, give
some probable reason why these should be more liable to corruption than others.
But any man that considers things, will easily find that it is much more
improbable that these Books should have been either wilfully or involuntarily
corrupted, in any thing material to Faith or a good Life, than any other Books
in the World; whether we consider the peculiar Providence of God engaged for
the preservation of them, or the peculiar circumstances of these Books. If they
were wrirten by men divinely inspired, and are of use to Christians, as is
acknowledged (at least in words) on all hands; nothing is more credible, than
that the same Divine Providence which took care for the publishing of them,
would likewise be concerned to preserve them entire. And if we consider the
peculiar circumstances of these Books, we shall find it morally impossible,
that they should have been materially corrupted, because being of universal and
mighty concernment, and at first diffused into many hands, and soon after
translated into most Languages, and most passages in them cited in Books now
extant, and all these now agreeing in all matters of importance, we have as
great assurance as can be had concerning any thing of this nature, that they
have not suffered any material alteration, and far greater than any man can
have concerning the incorruption of their oral Tradition, as I shall show when
I come to answer the thing which he calls Demonstration.

7. Fifthly, That de facto the Scripture has been acknowledged by all
Christians, in former Ages, to be the means whereby the doctrine of Christ has
with greatest certainty been conveyed to them. One good evidence of this is,
That the Primitive Adversaries of Christian Religion did always look upon the
Scripture as the standard and measure of the Christian Doctrine, and in all
their writing against Christianity, took that for granted to be the Christian
Faith which was contained in those Books; there having not as yet any
Philosopher risen up who had demonstrated to the World, that a Doctrine could
not with sufficient certainty and clearness be conveyed by writing from one Age
to another. But how absurd had this method of confuting Christian Religion
been, if it had been then the public profession of Christians, that the
Scriptures were not the Rule of their Faith? How easy had it been for the
Fathers, who apologized for, and defended Christian Religion, to have told them
they took a wrong measure of their Doctrine; for it was not the principle of
Christians, that their Faith was conveyed to them by the Scriptures, and
therefore it was a fond undertaking to attaque their Religion that way; but if
they would effectually argue against it, they ought to enquire what that
Doctrine was which was orally delivered from father to son, without which the
Scriptures could signify no more to them than an unknown Cipher without a Key;
being of themselves, without the light of Oral Tradition, only an heap of
unintelligible words, unsensed Cha: racters, and Ink variously figured in a
Book; and therefore it was a gross mistake in them, to think they could
understand the Christian Religion (like their own Philosophy) by reading of
those Books, or confute it by confuting them. Thus the Fathers might have
defended their Religion; nay, they ought in all reason to have taken this
course, and to have appealed from those dead senseless Books, to the true Rule
of Faith, the living voice of the Church Essential. But does Mr. S. find any
thing to this purpose in the Apologies of the Fathers? If he has discovered
any such matter, he might do well to acquaint the World with it, and make them
wiser; in the mean time, I shall inform him what I have found, that the Fathers
never except against that method, but appeal frequently from the slanderous
reports and misrepresentations which were made of their Doctrine to the Books
of Scripture, as the true standard of it.

8. Another evidence that Christians in all Ages since the Apostles times, have
owned the Scriptures for the Rule of their Faith, is, That the Fathers in their
Homilies did use constantly to declare to the People what they were to believe,
and what they were to practice, out of the Scriptures; which had been most
absurd and senseless, had they believed not the Scriptures, but something else
to have been the Rule of Faith and Manners. For what could tend more to the
seducing of the People from Mr. S's supposed Rule of Faith Oral Tradition, than
to make a daily practice of declaring and confirming the Doctrins of the
Christian Faith from the Scriptures? Had the ancient Fathers been right for Mr.
S's way, they would not have built their Doctrine upon Scripture; perhaps not
have mentioned it, for fear of giving the people an occasion to grow familiar
with so dangerous a Book; but rather (as their more prudent Posterity have
done) would have locked it up from the people in an unknown Tongue, and have
set open the stores of good wholesome Traditions; and instead of telling them
(as they do most frequently) thus says the Scripture, would only have told
them, this is the voice of the essential Church; thus it has been delivered
down by hand to us, from our Forefathers.

9. I might add for a Third evidence, the great malice of the Enemies and
Persecutors of Christianity, against this Book; and their cruel endeavors to
extort it out of the hands of Christians, and destroy it out of the World, that
by this means they might extirpate Christianity. For it seems they thought,
that the abolishing of this Book would have been the ruin of that Religion.
But (according to Mr. S's opinion) their malice wanted wit; for had all the
Bibles in the World been burnt, Christian Religion would nevertheless have been
entirely preserved, and safely transmitted down to us by sense written in men's
hearts, with the good help of of Mr. S's Demonstration. Nay, their Church would
have been a great gainer by it: For this Occasion and Parent of all Heresy the
Scripture, being once out of the way, she might have had all in her own hands,
and by leading the people in the safe paths of Tradition, and consequently of
Science, might have made them wise enough to obey. Well, but suppose the
Persecutors of Christianity mistook themselves in their design, how came the
Christians in those days to be so tenacious of this Book, that rather than
deliver it, they would yield up themselves to torments and death? And why did
they look upon those who out of fear delivered up their Books, as Apostates and
Renouncers of Christianity, if they had not thought this Book to be the great
Instrument of their Faith and Salvation, and if it had really been of no
greater consideration than Mr. Wh. and Mr. S. would make it? Why should they be
so loath to part with a few unsens'd Characters, waxen natured words, fit to be
played upon diversely by quirks of wit, that is, apt to blunder and confound,
but to clear little or nothing? Why should they value their lives at so cheap a
rate as to throw them away for a few insignificant scrawls, and to shed their
blood for a little Ink variously figured in a Book? Did they not know, that the
safety of Christianity did not depend upon this Book? Did no Christian then
understand that, which (according to Mr. S.) no Christian can be ignorant of,
viz. that not the Scripture, but unmistakeable, indefectible Oral Tradition was
the Rule of Faith? Why did they not consider, that though this Letter Rule of
Heretics had been consumed to ashes, yet their Faith would have lain safe, and
been preserved entire in its * Spiritual Causes, Men's minds, the noblest
pieces in Nature? Some of them indeed did deliver up their Books, and were
called Traditores, and I have some ground to believe, that these were the only
Traditionary Christians of that time, and that the rest were Confessors and
Martyrs for the Letter Rule. And if this be not evidence enough, that the
Scriptures have always been acknowledged by Christians for the Rule of Faith, I
shall, when I come to examine his Testimonies for Tradition, (with the good
leave of his distinction between Speculators and Testifiers) prove by most
express Testimony, that it was the general opinion of the Fathers, That the
Scriptures are the Rule of Christian Faith; and then, if his demonstration of
the infalliblity of Tradition will enforce that as Testifiers, they must nesds
have spoken otherwise, who can help it?

SECT. IV.
. 1. HAving thus laid down the Protestant Rule of Faith, How much Protestants
allow to Oral Tradition.
with the grounds of it; all that now remains for me to do, toward the clear
and full stating of the Controversy between us, is to take notice briefly, and
with due limitations:

1. How much the Protestants do allow to Oral Tradition.

Secondly, What those things are which Mr. S, thinks fit to attribute to his
Rule of Faith, which we see no cause to attribute to ours; And when this is
done, any one may easily discern how far we differ.

2. 1. How much Protestants do allow to Oral Tradition.

First, We grant that Oral Tradition in some circumstances, may be a sufficient
way of conveying a Doctrine; but withal we deny, that such circumstances are
now in being. In the first Ages of the World, when the credenda or Articles of
Religion, and the agenda or Precepts of it, were but few, and such as had the
evidence of Natural light; When the World was contracted into a few Families in
comparison, and the age of man ordinarily extended to six or seven hundred
years; it is easy to imagine, how such a doctrine, in such circumstances,
might have been propagated by Oral Tradition, without any great change or
alterations. Adam lived till Methuselah was above two hundred years old,
Methuselah lived till Sem was near an hundred, and Sem outlived Abraham: So
that this Tradition needed not pass through more than two hands, betwixt Adam
and Abraham. But though this way was sufficient to have preserved Religion in
the world, if men had not been wanting themselves; yet we find it did not prove
effectual. For through the corruption and negligence of men after the Flood,
(if not before) when the world began to multiply, and the age of man was
shortened, the knowledge and worship of the one true God was generally lost in
the world. And so far as appears by Scripture-History, (the only Record we have
of those times) when God called out Abraham from Vr of the Chaldees, the whole
world was lapsed into Polytheisme and Idolatry. Therefore, for the greater
security of Religion afterward, when the posterity of Abraham was multiplied
into a great Nation, the wisdom of God did not think fit to entrust the
Doctrine of Religion any longer to the fallible and uncertain way of Tradition,
but committed it to writing. Now that God pitched upon this way, after the
world had sadly experienced the unsuccesfulness of the other, seems to be a
very good evidence that this was the better and more secure way: it being the
usual method of the Divine dispensations, not to go backwards, but to move
toward perfection, and to proceed from that which is less perfect to that
which is more. And the Apostles Hebr. 8.7.
reasoning concerning the two Covenants is very applicable to these two methods
of conveying the Doctrine of Religion; if the first had been faultless, then
should no place have been sought for a second.

3. So likewise, when Christ revealed his Doctrine to the world, it was not in
his lifetime committed to writing; because it was entertained but by a few,
who were his disciples and followers, and who so long as he continued with them
had a living Oracle to teach them. After his death the Apostles, who were to
publish this Doctrine to the world, were assisted by an infallible Spirit, so
as they were secured from error and mistake in the delivery of it. But when
this extraordinary assistance failed, there was need of some other means to
convey it to posterity, that so it might be a fixed and standing Rule of Faith
and Manners to the end of the world. To this end the providence of God took
care to have it committed to writing. And that Mr. S* may see this is not a
conjecture of Protestants, but the sense of former times, I shall refer him to
St. Chrysostom, (Homil. 1. in Matthew.) who tells us, That Christ left nothing in
writing to his Apostles; but in stead thereof did promise to bestow upon them
the grace of his holy Spirit, saying, John 14. He shall bring all things to
your remembrance, etc. But because in progress of time there were many grievous
miscarriages both in matter of Opinion, and also of Life and Manners; therefore
it was requisite that the memory of this Doctrine should be preserved by
writing. So long then as the Apostles lived, who were thus infallibly assisted,
the way of Oral Tradition was secure, but no longer; nor even then from the
nature of the thing, but from that extraordinary and supernatural assistance
which accompanied the deliverers.

4. And therefore it is no good way of Argument against the way of Tradition by
writing, which he lays so much weight upon, P. 40.
That the Apostles and their Successors went not with Books in their hands to
preach and deliver Christ's Doctrine, but words in their mouths; and that
primitive antiquity learned their faith by another method, a long time before
many of those Books were universally spread among the vulgar. For what if there
was no need of writing this Doctrine, whilst those living Oracles, the
Apostles, were present with the Church? Does it therefore follow that there was
no need of it afterward when the Apostles were dead, and that extraordinary
and supernatural assistance was ceased? If the Preachers now adays could give
us any such assurance, and confirm all they preach by such frequent, and
public, and unquestionable miracles as the Apostles did; then we need not
examine the Doctrines they taught by any other Rule, but ought to regulate our
belief by what they delivered to us. But seeing this is not the case, that
ought in all reason to be the Rule of our Faith, which has brought down to us
the Doctrine of Christ with the greatest certainty: And this I shall prove the
Scriptures to have done.

5. So that in those circumstances I have mentioned, We allow Oral Tradition to
have been a sufficient way of conveying a Doctrine; but now considering the
great increase of mankind, and the shortness of man's life in these latter ages
of the world, and the long tract of time from the Apostles age down to us; and
the innumerable accidents whereby, in the space of 1500 years, Oral Tradition
might receive insensible alterations, so as at last to become quite another
thing from what it was at first, by passing through many hands: in which
passage, all the mistakes and corruptions which (in the several Ages through
which it was transmitted) did happen, either through Ignorance, or
Forgetfulness, or out of interest and design, are necessarily derived into the
last: So that the further it goes, the more alteration it is liable to* because
as it passes along, more Errors and Corruptions are infused into it. I say,
considering all this, we deny, that the Doctrine of Christian Religion could
with any probable security and certainty have been conveyed down to us by the
way of Oral Tradition. And therefore do reasonably believe, that God
foreseeing this, did in his wisdom so order things, that those persons who
were assisted by an infallible spirit in the delivery of this Doctrine, should
before they left the world commit it to writing; which was accordingly done:
And by this Instrument, the Doctrine of Faith has been conveyed down to us.

6. Secondly, We allow, that Oral Tradition is a considerable assurance to us,
that the Books of Scripture which we now have, are the very Books which were
written by the Apostles and Evangelists; but withal we deny, That Oral
Tradition is therefore to be accounted the Rule of Faith.

The general Assurance that we have concerning Books written long ago, that
they are so ancient, and were written by those whose names they bear, is a
constant and uncontrolled Tradition of this, transmitted from one Age to
another; partly Orally, and partly by the Testimony of other Books. Thus much
is common to Scripture with other Books. But then the Scriptures have this
peculiar advantage above other Books, that being of a greater and more
universal concernment, they have been more common and in every bodies hands,
more read and studied than any other Books in the World whatsoever; and
consequently, they have a more universal and better grounded attestation.
Moreover, they have not only been owned universally in all Ages by Christians
(except three or four Books of them, which for some time were questioned by
some Churches, but have since been generally received) but the greatest Enemies
of our Religion, the Jews and Heathens, never questioned the Antiquity of them,
but have always taken it for granted, that they were the very Books which the
Apostles writ. And this is as great an assurance as we can have concerning any
ancient Book, without a particular and immediate Revelation.

7. And this Concession does not, as M. S, supposes, make Oral Tradition to be
finally the Rule of Faith; for the meaning of this question, ( What is the Rule
of Faith?) Is, What is the next and immediate means whereby the knowledge of
Christ's Doctrine is conveyed to us? So that although Oral Tradition be the
means whereby we come to know that these are the Books of Scripture, yet these
Books are the next and immediate means whereby we come to know what is Christ's
Doctrine; and consequently, what we are to believe.

8. Nor does this Concession make Oral Tradition to be the Rule of Faith, by a
parity of Reason; as if because we acknowledge that Oral Tradition can with
sufficient certainty transmit a Book to After ages, we must therefore grant
that it can with as much certainty convey a doctrine consisting of several
Articles of Faith (nay very many, as Mr. White acknowledges Rushw. Dial. 4.
Sect. 9.
) and many Laws and Precepts of Life: So because Oral Tradition sufficiently
assures us that this is Magna Charta, and that the Statute-Book, in which are
contained those Laws which it concerns every man to be skilful in; therefore by
like parity of Reason it must follow, that Tradition it self is better than a
Book, even the best way imaginable, to convey down such Laws to us. Mr. S.
says p. 93.
expressly it is; but how truly, I appeal to experience, and the wisdom of our
Lawgivers, who seem to think otherwise. Tradition is already defined to us, a
delivery down from hand to hand, of the sense and faith of Forefathers; i. e.
of the Gospel, or message of Christ. Now suppose any Oral message, consisting
of an hundred particularities, were to be delivered to an hundred several
persons of different degrees of understanding and memory, by them to be
conveyed to an hundred more, who were to convey it to others, and so onwards,
to a hundred descents; Is it probable this Message, with all the
particularities of it, would be as truly conveyed through so many mouths, as if
it were written down in so many Letters, concerning which every Bearer should
need to say no more than this, That it was delivered to him as a Letter written
by him whose name was subscribed to it? I think it not probable, though the
men's lives were concerned every one for the faithful delivery of his Errand or
Letter. For the Letter is a message which no man can mistake in, unless he
will; but the Errand so difficult, and perplexed with its multitude of
particulars, that it is an equal wager against every one of the Messengers,
that he either forgets, or mistakes something in it; it is ten thousand to one,
that the first Hundred do not all agree in it; it is a Million to one, that the
next Succession do not all deliver it truly; for if any one of the first
Hundred mistook, or forgot any thing, it is then impossible that he that
received it from him should deliver it right; and so the farther it goes, the
greater change it is liable to. Yet after all this I do not say, but it may be
demonstrated, in Mr. S's way, to have more of certainty in it than the Original
Letter.

9. Thirdly, We allow, That the Doctrine of Christian Religion has in all Ages
been preached to the People by the Pastors of the Church, and taught by
Christian Parents to their Children; but with great difference, by some more
plainly, and truly, and perfectly; by others, with less care and exactness,
according to the different degrees of ability and integrity in Pastors or
Parents; and likewise with very different success, according to the different
capacities and dispositions of the Learners. We allow likewise, That there has
been a constant course of visible actions, conformable in some measure to the
Principles of Christianity; but then we say that those outward acts and
circumstances of Religion may have undergone great variations, and received
great change, by addition to them, and defalcation from them, in several Ages.
That this not only is possible, but has actually happened, I shall show when I
come to answer his Demonstrations. Now that several of the the main Doctrines
of Faith contained in the Scriptute, and actions therein commanded, have been
taught and practiced by Christians in all Ages (as the Articles summed up in
the Apostles Creed, the use of the two Sacraments) is a good evidence so far,
that the Scriptures contain the Doctrine of Christian Religion. But then if we
consider, how we come to know that such points of Faith have been taught, and
such external Actions practiced in all Ages, it is not enough to say, there is
a present multitude of Christians that profess to have received such Doctrines
as ever believed and practiced, and from hence to infer that they were so; the
inconsequence of which Argument, I shall have a better occasion to show
afterward: But he that will prove this to any man's satisfaction, must make it
evident from the best Monuments and Records of several Ages, that is, from the
most Authentic Books of those times, that such Doctrines have in all those
Ages been constantly and universally taught and practiced. But then if from
those Records of former times it appear, that other Doctrines, not contained in
the Scriptures, were not taught and practiced universally in all Ages, but have
crept in by degrees, some in one Age, and some in another, according as
Ignorance, and Superstition in the People, Ambition and Interest in the chief
Pastors of the Church, have ministered occasion and opportunity; and that the
Innovators of these Doctrines and Practices, have all along pretended to
confirm them out of Scripture, as the acknowledged Rule of Faith; and have
likewise acknowledged the Books of Scripture to have descended without any
material corruption or alteration, (all which will sufficiently appear in the
process of my Discourse) then cannot the Oral and practical Tradition of the
present Church, concerning any Doctrine, as ever believed and practiced, which
has no real foundation in Scripture, be any argument against these Books, as
if they did not fully and clearly contain the Christian Doctrine. And to say
the Scripture is to be interpreted by Oral and Practical Tradition, is no more
reasonable, than it would be to interpret the ancient Books of the Law, by the
present practice of it; which every one, that compares things fairly together,
must acknowledge to be full of deviations from the ancient Law,

SECT. V.
How much Mr. S. attributes to his Rule of Faith, more than Protestants to
theirs.
1. 2 dly. HOw much more he attributes to his Rule of Faith. than we think fit
to attribute to ours.

1. We do not say, that it is impossible in the nature of the thing, that this
Rule should fail, that is, either that these Books should cease to descend, or
should be corrupted. This we do not attribute to them, because there is no need
we should: We believe the providence of God will take care of them, and secure
them from being either lost, or materially corrupted; yet we think it very
possible, that all the Books in the World may be burnt, or otherwise destroyed.
All that we affirm concerning our Rule of Faith, is that it is abundantly
sufficient (if men be not wanting to themselves) to convey the Christian
Doctrine to all successive Ages; and we think him very unreasonable, that
expects that God should do more than what is abundantly enough, for the
perpetuating of Christian Religion in the world.

2. Secondly, Nor do we say, that that certainty and assurance which we have,
that these Books are the same that were written by the Apostles, is a first and
self-evident Principle; but only that it is a truth capable of evidence
sufficient, and as much as we can have for a thing of that nature. Mr. S. may,
if he please, say that Traditions certainty is a first and self-evident
Principle; but then he that says this, should take heed how he takes upon him
to demonstrate it. Aristole was so wise as never to demonstrate first
Principles, for which he gives this very good reason, because they cannot be
demonstrated. And most prudent men are of opinion, that a self-evident
Principle, of all things in the World, should not be demonstrated, because it
needs not. For to what purpose should a man write a Book to prove that which
every man must assent to, without any proof, so soon as it is propounded to
him? I have always taken a self-evident Principle to be such a Proposition; as
having in it self sufficient evidence of its own truth, and not needing to be
made evident by any thing else, If I be herein mistaken, I desire Mr. S. to
inform me better.

3. So that the true state of the Controversy between us, is, Whether Oral and
Practical Tradition, in opposition to Writing and Books, be the only way and
means whereby the Doctrine of Christ can with certainty and security be
conveyed down to us, who live at this distance from the age of Christ and his
Apostles? This He affirms, and the Protestants deny; not only that it is the
sole means, but that it is sufficient for the certain conveyance of this
Doctrine; and withal affirm, that this Doctrine has been conveyed down to us
by the Books of holy Scripture, as the proper measure and standard of our
Religion: But then they do not exclude Oral Tradition from being the means of
conveying to us the certain knowledge of these Books. Nor do they exclude the
authentic Records of former Ages, nor the constant teaching and practice of
this Doctrine, from being subordinate means and helps of conveying it from one
age to another. Nay, so far are they from excluding these concurrent means,
that they suppose them always to have been used, and to have been of great
advantage for the propagating and explaining of this Doctrine, so far as they
have been truly subordinate to, and regulated by these sacred Oracles, the Holy
Scriptures; which, they say, do truly and fully contain that Doctrine which
Christ delivered to his Apostles, and they preached to the world. To illustrate
this by an instance; suppose there were a Controversy now on foot, how men
might come to know what was the true Art of Logic which Aristotle taught his
Scholars; and some should be of opinion, that the only way to know this would
be by oral Tradition from his Scholars; which we might easily understand by
consulting those of the present age, who learned it from those who received it
from them, who at last had it from Aristotle himself: But others should think
it the surest way to study his Organon, a Book acknowledged by all his
Scholars, to have been written by himself, and to contain that Doctrine which
he taught them. They, who take this latter course, suppose the authority of
oral Tradition, for the conveying to them the knowledge of this Book; and do
suppose this Doctrine to have been taught and practiced in all Ages, and a
great many Books to have been written by way of Comment and explication of this
Doctrine; and that these have been good helps of promoting the knowledge of it.
And they may well enough suppose all this, and yet be of opinion that the
truest measure and standard of Aristotle's Doctrine is his own Book; and that
it would be a fond thing in any man, by forcing an interpretation upon his Book
either contrary to, or very foreign and remote from the obvious sense of his
words, to go about to reconcile this Book with that method of disputing which
is used by the professed Aristotelians of the present age, and withal that
scholastic Jargon which Mr. S. learned at Lisbon, and has made him so great a
man in the Science of Controversy, as to enable him to demonstrate first and
self-evident Principles; a trick not to be learned out of Aristotle's Organon.
The Application is so easy, that I need not make it.

THE RULE of FAITH.
PART. II. Concerning the Properties of the Rule of Faith; and whether they
agree solely to Oral Tradition.
SECT. I.
1. HAving thus endeavored to bring the Controversy between us, to its clear
and true state, that so we might not quarrel in the dark, and dispute about we
know not what; I come now to grapple more closely with his Book. And the main
foundations of his Discourse may be reduced to these three Heads.

First, That the essential Properties of such a way and means, as can with
certainty and security convey down to us the Doctrine of Christ, belong solely
to Oral Tradition. This he endeavors to prove in his five first Discourses.

Secondly, That it is impossible that this way of Oral Tradition should fail.
And this he pretends to prove in his four last Discourses.

Thirdly, That Oral Tradition has been generallly reputed by Christians in all
Ages, the sole way and means of conveying down to them the Doctrine of Christ.
And this he attempts to show in his last Chapter, which he calls The Consent of
Authority to the substance of his foregoing Discourses. If he make good these
three things, he has acquitted himself well in his undertaking. But whether he
has made them good or not, is now to be examined.

2. First, Whether the essential Properties of such a way and means, as can
with certainty and security convey down to us the knowledge of Christ's
Doctrine, belong solely to Oral Tradition?

The true way to measure the essential Properties of this or that means, is by
considering its sufficiency for its end. For whatsoever is necessary to make
any means sufficient for the obtaining of its end, is to be reputed and
essential Property of that Means, and nothing else. Now, because the end we are
speaking of, is the conveyance of the knowledge of Christ's Doctrine to all
those who are concerned to know it, in such a manner as they may be
sufficiently certain and secure that it has received no change or corruption
from what it was when it was first delivered. From hence it appears, that the
means to this end must have these two Properties. 1. It must be sufficiently
plain and intelligible. 2 ly. It must be sufficiently certain to us, that is,
such as we may be fully satisfied concerning it, that it has received no
corruption or alteration. If it have these two conditions, it is sufficient for
its end; but if it want either of them, it must necessarily fall short of its
end. For if it be not plain and intelligible, it cannot convey this Doctrine to
our knowledge; if it be not certain, we cannot be assured, that that Doctrine
which it brings down to us for the Doctrine of Christ, is really such.

3. I know he assigns more Properties of this Means which he calls the Rule of
Faith; but upon examination it will appear, that they either fall in with these
two, or do not at all belong to it. As,

First, That P. 11.
it must be plain and self-evident to all, as to its existence. Nothing can be
more frivolous, than to make this a Property of any thing; because whosoever
enquires into the Properties of a thing, is supposed to be already satisfied
that the thing is.

Secondly, That it be P. 11.
evidenceable, as to its Ruling power, that is, as he explains himself, P 3.
that men be capable of knowing, that it deserves to be relied on as a Rule. By
which he must either understand, the certainty of it; and then it falls in with
the second Property I mentioned, and is the same with the sixth, which he lays
down. Or else he means more generally, that it is the property of a Rule, that
men be capable of knowing that it has the Properties of a Rule. For I
understand not, how a man can know that any thing deserves to be relied on as a
Rule, otherwise than by knowing that it has the properties of a Rule, that is,
that it is sufficient for its end. But at this rate, a man may multiply the
Properties of things without end, if the evidence of a thing, as to its
existence, be one Property; and then, that we be capable of knowing that it is
such a thing, be another.

4. Thirdly, That it be P. 12.
apt to settle, and justify undoubting Persons. What he means here, by settling
undoubting Persons, I am not able, on the sudden, to comprehend; because I
understand not what unsettles a man besides doubting: for if a man be but so
well satisfied about any thing, as to have no doubt concerning it, I do not
easily apprehend how he can be settled better, that is, how his mind can be more
at rest, than not to doubt. But if by undoubting Persons, he means those who do
not doubt for the present, but afterward may doubt, then I perceive what he
means by apt to settle undoubting Persons, viz. apt to settle Persons when they
do doubt, that is, when they are not undoubting Persons. As for justifying
undoubting Persons, if he means that whosoever securely relies on this Rule,
ought of right to be acquitted, as acting rationally in so doing; this is
plainly consequent upon the two Properties I have laid down. For, if the means
of conveying Christ's Doctrine be sufficiently plain and certain, every man
that relies upon it is justified in so doing, because he trusts a means which
is sufficient for its end.

5. Fourthly, That P. 12.
it be apt to satisfy fully the most Skeptical Dissenters, and Rational
Doubters: For it is aptitude to satisfy Rational Doubters, that plainly follows
from the sufficient certainty of it. But why it should be a necessary property
of a Rule of Faith, to be apt to satisfy the most Skeptical Dissenter, I can
no more divine, than I can, why he should call a Dissenter Skeptical, which are
repugnant terms: For a Sceptick is one who neither assents to any thing, nor
dissents, but is in a perpetual suspense; because he looks upon every opinion,
as balanced by a contrary opinion of equal probability, without any inclination
of the Scales either way. But if by the most Skeptical Dissenter he means only
a Sceptick, one that does not believe the Doctrine of Christ, nor any thing
else; then would I fain know, what that is which in reason is apt fully to
satisfy such a person. If any thing will, sure a Demonstration will; but there
is no aptitude at all in a Demonstration, to satisfy him who doubts whether
there be any such thing as a Demonstration; and likewise questions the
certainty of all those Principles, from whence any conclusion can be
demonstrated. And those who are most Skeptical, profess to doubt of all this.

6. Fifthly, That it P. 11, 12.
be apt to convince the most obstinate, and acute Adversary. If the Rule be
plain and certain, the most acute Adversary may be convinced by it if he will,
that is, if he be not obstinate; but if he be obstinate, that is, such a one as
will not be convinced, but will persist in his Error in despite of all evidence
that can be offered him, then I must profess that I do not know any kind of
evidence that is apt to convince that man that will not be convinced by any
reason that can be propounded to him. And that he ought not to have expected
this from any Rule of Faith, though never so self-evident, he might have
learned from the same Author, in whom he may find his chief Properties of the
Rule of Faith, if he had but had the patience to have considered his
Explication of them; I mean Dr. Holden Analys. Fid. L. 1. c. 3.
, who lays down the second Property of the Rule of Faith, (or, as he calls it,
the means whereby we come to the knowledge of Revealed Truth) in these words,
Another (viz. Condition of this Means, etc.) is, That it be apt of its own
Nature, to afford the greatest true and rational certainty, to all men without
exception to whom the knowledge of it shall come; provided they be furnished
with the faculty of Reason, and have their minds purified from all Passion and
Lust, which do (as he tells us, Cap. 6.) often hinder the most sagacious
Persons from understanding the most evident and manifest Truths. Now I suppose
Obstinacy to be the effect of Passion and Lust.

If Mr. S. mean, that the Rule of Faith must be apt to conquer Obstinacy, and
make men lay it aside, I cannot understand this neither; unless he mean, that
the Rule of Faith must be a Cudgel, which the Traditionary Church have been
good at, and may use it again when occasion serves; for none but they have
Title to it upon a Church-account, as Mr. S. tells us, Corol. 10. But setting
aside this, I do not know any thing else that is apt to conquer Obstinacy: Not
the clearest Reason, or the strongest Demonstration; for that I am sure is no
ways fitted to combat a wilful and unreasonable humor with any probability of
success. And if any one doubt of this, if he will but make trial, he may easily
be convinced by experience, how unapt obstinate Persons are to be convinced by
Reason. I do not know any thing that ever carried greater evidence than the
Doctrine of Christ, preached by himself and his Apostles to the obstinate Jews,
and confirmed by multitudes of unquestionable miracles; and yet we do not find
by the success of it, that it was so very apt to convince those that were
obstinate. And no man can judge of the aptitude of a means to an end, otherwise
than by the usual and frequent success of it when it is applied. Nor do I think
that the Doctrine of the Gospel was ever intended for that purpose. God has
provided no remedy for the wilful and perverse, but he has done that which is
sufficient for the satisfying and winning over of those who are teachable and
willing to learn: And such a disposition supposes a man to have laid aside
both Skepticism and Obstinacy.

7. Sixthly, That P. 12.
it be certain in it self.

Seventhly, That P 12.
it be absolutely ascertainable to us.

These two are comprehended in the second Property I laid down; so that I have
nothing to say against them, but that the last looks very like a contradiction,
absolutely ascertainable to us; which is to say, with respect to us, without
respect to us; for absolutely seems to exclude respect, and to us implies it.

Having thus shown, that the seven Properties he mentions, are either
coincident with those two I have laid down, or consequent upon them, or absurd
and impertinent; it remains, that the true Properties of a Rule of Faith are
those two which I first named, and no more.

SECT. II.
That the Properties of a Rule of Faith belong to Scriptute.
1. LEt us now see how he endeavors to show, that these Properties agree solely
to Oral Tradition: He tells us there are but two Pretenders to this Title of
being the Rule of Faith, Scripture, and Oral Tradition; these Properties do not
belong to Scripture, and they do to Oral Tradition; therefore solely to it. A
very good Argument, if he can prove these two things, That these two Properties
do not belong to Scripture; and that they do to Oral Tradition.

2. In order to the proving of the First, that these Properties do not belong
to Scripture, he premiseth this Note, P. 13.
That we cannot by the Scriptures mean the sense of them, but the Book, that
is, such or such Characters not yet sensed, or interpreted. But why can we not,
by the Scriptures, mean the sense of them? He gives this clear and admirable
reason; because the sense of Scripture, is, the things to be known, and these
we confess are the very points of Faith, of which the Rule of Faith is to
ascertain us. Which is just as if a man should reason thus: Those who say the
Statute-Book can convey to them the knowledge of the Statute Law, cannot by the
Statute-Book mean the sense of it, but the Book; that is, such or such
Characters not yet sensed or interpreted: Because the sense of the Statute-Book
is the things to be known; and these are the very Laws, the knowledge whereof is
to be conveyed to them by this Book; which is to say, that a Book cannot convey
to a man the knowledge of any matter, because if it did, it would convey to him
the thing to be known. But that he may farther see what excellent reasoning
this is, I shall apply this Paragraph to Oral Tradition; for the Argument holds
every whit as well concerning that. To speak to them in their own language, who
say that Oral Tradition is their Rule, we must premise this Note, that they
cannot mean by Oral Tradition, the sense of it, that is, the things to be
known; for those, they confess, are the very Points of Faith, of which the Rule
of Faith is to ascertain us; when they say then, that Oral Tradition is the
Rule of Faith, they can only mean by Oral Tradition, the words wherein it is
delivered, not yet sensed or interpreted, but as yet to be sensed; that is,
such or such sounds, with their aptness to signify to them assuredly God's
mind, or ascertain them of their Faith; for abstracting from the sense, and
actual signification of those words, there is nothing imaginable left but those
sounds, with their aptness to signify it. When he has answered this Argument,
he will have answered his own. In the mean while this Discourse, that he who
holds the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, must needs by the Scriptures mean
a Book void of sense, etc. Because otherwise, if by Scripture he should
understand a Book, that has a certain sense in it, that sense must be the
Doctrine of Christ, which is the very thing that this Book is to convey to us;
I say, this Discourse tends only to prove it an absurd thing for any man, that
holds Scripture the means of conveying Christ's Doctrine, to understand by the
Scripture, a Book that conveys Christ's Doctrine. This being his own reason,
put into plain English, I leave the Reader to judge, whether it be not something
short of perfect Science and Demonstration. Nay, if it were thoroughly examined,
I doubt whether it would not fall short of that low pitch of Science which he
speaks of in his Preface, where he tells us, that the way of Science is to
proceed from one piece of sense to another.

3. Having premised this, that by the Scriptures we must mean only dead
Characters, that have no sense under them, He proceeds to show that these dead
Characters have not the Properties of a Rule of Faith belonging to them. Which,
although it be nothing to the purpose when he has shown it, yet it is very
pleasant to observe, by what cross and untoward Arguments he goes about it: Of
which I will give the Reader a taste, by one or two instances.

In the first place he shows, that it cannot be evident to us that these Books
were written by men divinely inspired, because P. 14.
till the seeming contradictions in those Books are solved; which to do, is one
of the most difficult tasks in the world, they cannot be concluded to be of
God's enditing. Now how is this an Argument against those, who by the
Scriptures, must mean unsensed letters and characters? I had always thought
contradictions had been in the sense of words, not in the letters and
characters; but I perceive he has a peculiar opinion, that the four and twenty
letters do contradict one another.

The other instance shall be in his last Argument P. 17.
, which is this, that the Scripture cannot be the Rule of Faith, because those
who are to be ruled and guided by the Scriptures letter to Faith, cannot be
certain of the true sense of it; which is to say, that unsensed letters and
characters cannot be the Rule of Faith, because the Rule of Faith must have a
certain sense, that is, must not be unsensed letters and characters; which in
plain English amounts to thus much, unsensed letters and characters cannot be
the Rule of Faith, that they cannot.

4. And thus I might trace him through all his Properties of the Rule of Faith;
and let the Reader see, how incomparably he demonstrates the falsehood of this
Protestant Tenet (as he calls it) that a senseless Book may be a Rule of Faith.
But I am weary of pursuing him in these airy and fantastical combats, and
shall leave him to fight with his own fancies, and batter down the Castles
which himself has built. Only I think fit here to acquaint him, once for all,
with a great Secret of the Protestant Doctrine, which it seems he has hitherto
been ignorant of (for I am still more confirmed in my opinion, that he forsook
our Religion before he understood it) that when they say, the Scriptures are
the Rule of Faith, or the means whereby Christ's Doctrine is conveyed down to
them, they mean by the Scriptures, Books written in such words as do
sufficiently express the sense and meaning of Christ's Doctrine.

5. And to satisfy him, that we are not absurd and unreasonable in supposing
the Scriptures to be such a Book, I would beg the favor of him to grant me
these four things, or show reason to the contrary.

First, That whatever can be spoken in plain and intelligible words, and such
as have a certain sense, may be written in the same words.

Secondly, That the same words are as intelligible when they are written, as
when they are spoken.

Thirdly, That God, if he please, can endite a Book in as plain words as any of
his creatures.

Fourthly, That we have no reason to think that God affects obscurity, and
envies that men should understand him, in those things which are necessary for
them to know, and which must have been written to no purpose, if we cannot
understand them. St. Luke Luke 1.3, 4.
tells Theophilus, that he wrote the History of Christ to him, on purpose to
give him a certain knowledge of those things which he writ. But how a Book which
has no certain sense, should give a man certain knowledge of things, is beyond
my capacity. St. John John 20.31.
says, that he purposely committed several of Christ's miracles to Writing,
that men might believe on Him. But now had Mr. S. been at his elbow, he would
have advised him to spare his labor, and would have given him this good reason
for it; because when he had written his Book, no body would be able to find the
certain sense of it without oral Tradition, and that alone would securely and
intelligibly convey both the Doctrine of Christ, and the certain knowledge of
those miracles which he wrought for the confirmation of it. If these four
things be but granted, I see not why, when we say that the Scriptures are the
means of conveying to us Christ's Doctrine, we may not be allowed to understand
by the Scriptures, a Book which does in plain and intelligible words express to
us this Doctrine.

SECT. III.
6 1. ANd now, Mr. S's Exceptions against Scripture examined.
although this might have been a sufficient Answer to his Exceptions against
the Scriptures, as being incapable of the Properties of a Rule of Faith;
because all of them suppose that which is apparently false and absurd, as
granted by Protestants, viz. That the Scriptures are only an heap of dead
letters, and insignificant characters, without any sense under them; and that
oral Tradition is that only which gives them life and sense; Yet because
several of his Exceptions pretend to show, that the true Properties of a Rule
of Faith do not at all appertain to the Scriptures; therefore I shall give
particular Answers to them; and as I go along, show that Tradition is liable to
all or most of those Exceptions, and to far greater than those.

2. Whereas he says, P. 13.
it cannot be evident to Protestants, from their Principles, that the Books of
Scripture were originally written by men divinely inspired; I will show him
that it may, and then answer the reasons of this Exception.

It is evident, from an universal, constant, and uncontrolled Tradition among
Christians, not only oral, but written, and from the acknowledgment of the
greatest Adversaries of our Religion, that these Books were originally written
by the Apostles and Evangelists. And this is not only a Protestant Principle,
but the Principle of all mankind, That an undoubted Tradition is sufficient
evidence of the Antiquity and Author of a Book, and all the extrinsecal
Argument that can ordinarily be had of a Book written long ago.

Next, it is evident, that the Apostles were men divinely inspired, that is,
secured from error and mistake in the writing of this Doctrine, from the
miracles that were wrought for the confirmation of it. Because it is
unreasonable to imagine that the Divine power should immediately interpose for
the confirmation of a Doctrine, and give so eminent an attestation to the
Apostles to convince the World that they were immediately appointed and
commissioned by God, and yet not secure them from error in the delivery of it.
And that such miracles were wrought, is evident from as credible Histories as
we have for any of those things which we do most firmly believe. And this is
better evidence that the Apostles were men divinely inspired, than bare oral
Tradition can furnish us withal. For setting aside the authentic relation of
these matters in Books, it is most probable, that oral Tradition of it self and
without Books, would scarce have preserved the memory of any of those
particular miracles of our Savior and his Apostles, which are recorded in
Scripture. And for the probability of this, I offer these two things to his
consideration.

First, No man can deny that memorable persons have lived, and actions been
done in the world innumerable, whereof no History now extant makes any mention.

Secondly, He himself will grant, that our Savior wrought innumerable more
miracles, than are recorded in Scripture. And now I challenge him to show the
single virtue of oral Tradition, by giving an account of any of those persons,
or their actions, who lived 1500 or 2000 years ago, besides those which are
mentioned in Books; or to give a catalogue but of ten of those innumerable
miracles wrought by our Savior, which are nor recorded by the Evangelists,
with circumstances as punctual and particular as those are clothed withal. If
he can do this, it will be a good evidence that oral Tradition singly and by it
self can do something; but if he cannot, it is as plain an evidence on the
contrary, that if those actions of former times, and those miracles of our
Savior and his Apostles, which are recorded in Books had never been written,
but entrusted solely to oral Tradition, we should have heard as little of them
at this day, as we do of those that were not written.

3. Now to examine his Reasons for this Exception:

First, He says, P. 13.
it is most manifest that this cannot be made evident to the vulgar, that
Scripture was written by men divinely inspired. This Reason is as easily
answered, by saying it is most manifest that it can: But besides saying so, I
have showed how it may be made as evident to the vulgar, as other things which
they do most firmly and upon good grounds believe. Even the rudest of the
vulgar, and those who cannot read, do believe upon very good grounds that there
was such a King as William the Conqueror; and the miracles of Christ and his
Apostles are capable of as good evidence as we have for this.

Secondly, He says, P. 13, 14.
this cannot be evident to the curious and most speculative Searchers, but by
so deep an inspection into the sense of Scripture, as shall discover such
secrets, that Philosophy, and human Industry could never have arrived to. As if
we could not be assured that any thing were written by men divinely inspired,
unless it were above the reach of human understanding; and as if no man could
know that this was our Saviors Doctrine, Whatever ye would that men should do
unto you, that do ye likewise unto them, because every one can understand it.
But if there were more mysteries in the Scriptures than there are, I hope a man
might be satisfied that they were written by men divinely inspired, without a
clear comprehension of all those mysteries. The evidence of the inspiration of
any person does not depend upon the plaineness or sublimity of the things
revealed to him, but upon the goodness of the arguments which tend to persuade
us that the person is so inspired: And the Argument that is most fit to satisfy
us of that is, if he work miracles. Now I would gladly know why a learned man
cannot be assured of a miracle, that is, a plain sensible matter of Fact done
long ago, but by so deep an inspection into the sense of Scripture, as shall
discover such secrets that Philosophy and human Industry could never have
arrived to.

4. Thirdly, Because P. 14.
all the seeming contradictions of Scripture must be solved, before we can out
of the bare letter conclude the Scripture to be of God's enditing; to solve
which literally, plainly, and satisfactorily (he tells us) the memory of so
many particulars, which made them clearer to those of the Age in which they
were written, and the matter known, must needs be so worn out by tract of time,
that it is one of the most difficult tasks in the World. As if we could not
believe a Book to be of God's enditing, because there seem now to be some
contradictions in it, which we have reason to believe could easily have been
solved by those who lived in the Age in which it was written. Or as if oral
Tradition could help a man to solve these contradictions, when the memory of
particulars necessary for the clear solution of them is (as himself confesses)
worn out by tract of time. If Mr. S. can, in order to the solution of the
seeming contradictions of Scripture, demonstrate, that oral Tradition has to
this day preserved the memory of those particulars (necessary for that purpose)
the memory of which must needs be long since worn out by tract of time, then I
will readily yield, that his Rule of Faith has in this particular, the
advantage of ours. But if he cannot do this, why does he make that an Argument
against our Rule, which is as strong against his own? This is just like Capt.
Everard's Friend's way of arguing against the Protestants, That they cannot
rely upon Scripture because it is full of plain contradictions, impossible to
be reconciled; and therefore they ought in all reason to submit to the
infallibility of the Church. And for an instance of such a contradiction, he
pitched upon the three fourteen Generations mentioned in the first of St.
Matthew, because the third Series of Generations, if they be counted, will be
found to be but thirteen. Not to mention now, how this difficulty has been
sufficiently satisfied both by Protestant and Popish Commentators, without any
recourse to oral Tradition; that which I take notice of, is the
unreasonableness of making this an Exception against the Protestants, when it
comes with every whit as much force upon themselves. Suppose this Contradiction
not capable of any solution by Protestants (as he affirms) and I should submit
to the infallibility of the Church; can he assure me, that infallibility can
make thirteen, fourteen? If it cannot, how am I nearer satisfaction in this
point, by acknowledging the infallibility of the Church? The case is the very
same, as to Mr S's. Exception, if I owned oral Tradition, I should be never the
nearer solving the seeming contradictions of Scripture, and consequently I
could not in Reason conclude it to be of God's enditing. So that in truth,
these Exceptions if they were true, would not strike at Protestancy, but at
Christian Religion; which is the general unhappiness of most of the Popish
Arguments; than which there is no greater evidence, that the Church of Rome is
not the true Mother, because she had rather Christianity should be destroyed,
than it should appear that any other Church has a claim to it. It was a work
very proper for the Heretic Marcion, to assault Religion this way; who, as
Tertullian L. 1. contr. Marcion.
tells us, writ a whole Book, which he called Antitheses, wherein he reckoned
up all the Contradictions (as he thought) between the Old and New Testament:
But methinks it is very improper for the Papists who pretend to be the only
true Christians in the World, to strain their wits to discover as many
contradictions as they can in the Scripture, and to prove that there is no way
of reconciling them: The natural consequence of which is, the exposing of this
sacred Instrument of our Religion, and even Christianity it self, to the scorn
of Atheists. Therefore, to be very plain with Mr. S. and Captain Everard, I am
heartily sorry to see, that one of the chief fruits of their Conversion is to
abuse the Bible.

5. Secondly, He says P. 14.
that Protestants cannot know how many the Books of Scripture ought to be, and
which of the many controverted ones may be securely put in that Catalogue,
which not; This he proves, by saying, it is most palpable, that few, or at least
the rude vulgar, can never be assured of it. And if this be a good Argument,
this again is a good Answer, to say it is not most palpable. But I shall deal
more liberally, and tell him, that we know that just so many ought to be
received as uncontroverted Books, concerning which, it cannot be shown there
was ever any Controversy; and so many as controverted, concerning which it
appears that Question has been made: And if those which have been
controverted, have been since received by those Churches which once doubted of
them, there is now no further doubt concerning them, because the Controversy
about them is at an end. And now I would fain know, what greater certainty oral
Tradition can give us of the true Catalogue of the Books of Scripture. For it
must either acknowledge some Books have been controverted, or not; if not, why
does he make a supposition of controverted Books? If oral Tradition acknowledge
some to have been controverted, then it cannot assure us that they have not
been controverted; nor consequently, that they ought to be received as never
having been controverted; but only as such, concerning which those Churches who
did once raise a Controversy about them, have been since satisfied that they
are Canonical. The Traditionary Church now, receives the Epistle to the Hebrews
as Canonical. I ask, Do they receive it as ever delivered for such? That they
must, if they receive it from oral Tradition, which conveys things to them
under this notion, as ever delivered; and yet St. Hierom speaking, (not as a
Speculator, but a Testifier) says expressly of it, Com. in Esai. c. 6, etc. 8.
That the custom of the Latin Church does not receive it among the Canonical
Scriptures. What says Mr. S. to this? It is clear from this Testimony, that
the Roman Church in St. Hierom's time, did not acknowledge this Epistle for
Canonical; and it is as plain, that the present Roman Church does receive it for
Canonical. Where is then the infallibility of oral Tradition? How does the
living voice of the present Church assure us, that what Books are now received
by her were ever received by her? And if it cannot do this, but the matter must
come to be tried by the best Records of former Ages, (which the Protestants are
willing to have their Catalogue tried by) then it seems the Protestants have a
better way to know what Books are Canonical, than is the infallible way of oral
Tradition; and so long as it is better, no matter though it be not called
Infallible.

6. Thirdly, He says P. 15.
the Protestants cannot know, that the very Original, or a perfectly true copy
of these Books has been preserved. It is not necessary that they should know
either of these, it is sufficient that they know, that those copies which rhey
have, are not materially corrupted in any matter of Faith or Practice; and that
they have sufficient assurance of this, I have already shown. And how does he
prove the contrary? By his usual Argument, with saying it is manifestly
impossible. But how do the Church of Rome know that they have perfectly true
copies of the Scriptures, in the Original Languages? They do not pretend to
know this, the learned men of that Church acknowledge the various Readings as
well as we, and do not pretend to know otherwise than by probable conjecture,
(as we also may do) which of those Readings is the true one. And why should it
be more necessary for us to know this, than for them? If they think it
reasonable to content themselves with knowing, that no material corruptions
have crept into those Books, so may we. And that there have not, we know by
better Arguments than oral Tradition, even by the assurance we have of God's
vigilant providence; and from a moral impossibility in the thing, that a Book
so universally dispersed, and translated into so many Languages, and constantly
read in the Assemblies of Christians, should have been materially corrupted, so
as that all those copies and translations should have agreed in those
corruptions. And this reason St. Austin Ep. 48.
gives of the preservation of the Scriptures entire rather than any other Book.
If Mr. S. likes it not, he may call St. Austin to account for it.

7. Fourthly, He says P. 15.
, the Protestants, at least the rudest vulgar, can have no assurance that those
Books are rightly translated, because they cannot be assured either of the
ability or integrity of Translators.

Fifthly, Nor can they (says P. 16, 17.
he) be assured, that the Transcribers, and Printers, and Correctors of the
Press have carefully and faithfully done their part, in Transcribing and
Printing the several Copies and Translations of Scripture aright; Because, they
only can have evidence of the right letter of Scripture, who stood at their
elbows attentively watching they should not err in making it perfectly like a
former Copy; and even then, why might they not mistrust their own eyes and
aptness to oversee? I put these two Exceptions together, because the same
Answer will serve them both. The grounds of these Exceptions, if they have any,
are these: That no man is to be trusted, either for his skill, or honesty. And,
that it is dangerous for men to trust their own eyes. Unless both these be
true, these Exceptions are of no force: For if we can be assured, that other
men have sufficient skill in any thing which we our selves do not sufficiently
understand, we may be assured, that those who translated the Bible had skill in
the Original Languages; because very credible persons tell us so; and we have
no reason to doubt their testimony in this particular, more than in any other
matter. So that if we can have sufficient assurance of men's integrity in any
thing, we have no reason to doubt of the skill of Translators, or Transcribers,
or Printers. And if we can have no assurance of men's integrity in any thing,
then no man can be assured that there was such a man as Henry the Eighth; and
yet I hope the Church of Rome makes no doubt of it: Nor can any man be assured
there is such a City as Rome, who has not seen it; nay, if he have P. 16.
, why may he not mistrust his own eyes? And which is the saddest inconvenience
of all, if no body be to be trusted, nor men's own eyes, (and for the same
reason, sure not their ears) what becomes of the Infallibility of oral and
practical Tradition? Which necessarily supposes a competent understanding, a
faithful memory, an honest mind, in the generality of those who delivered
Christ's Doctrine down to us: And by what means soever a man can be assured of
these, by the same he may much more easily be assured of the ability and
integrity of Translators, Transcribers, and Printers. But above all, it
supposes that men's ears and eyes cannot deceive them in those things which
they are taught, and see practiced.

Is it not very pretty to see what pitiful shifts men that serve an Hypothesis
are put to? When to maintain Infallibility they are forced to run to the
extremities of Skepticism; and to defend the certainty of oral Tradition,
(which depends upon the certainty of men's senses, and an assurance of the
ability and integrity of those who were dead 1500 years before we were born)
are glad to take refuge in Principles quite contrary; such as these, That we
can have no assurance, but that whole Professions of men P. 16.
might hap to be Knaves; that we can have no sufficient evidence that any man
made his Copy perfectly like the former, unless P. 16.
we stood at his elbow, attentively watching him: Nay, and if we did so, we
have still reason to distrust our senses. In short, all human Faith supposes
honesty among men; and that for matters of Fact, and plain objects of Sense,
the general and uncontrolled testimony of mankind is to be credited; and for
matters of peculiar skill and knowledge, that the generality of those who are
accounted skilful in that kind, are to be relied upon: For, as Aristotle well
observes, there is no greater sign of an undisciplined wit (or, to use one of
Mr. S's. fine phrases Preface.
, of a man not acquainted with the paths of Science) than to expect greater
evidence for things than they are capable of. Every man has reason to be
assured of a thing which is capable of sufficient evidence, when he has as
much evidence for it as the nature of that thing will bear, and as the capacity
he is in will permit him to have. And, as Mr. White says well Answ. to the Lord
Falkland. P. 33.
Satisfaction is to be given to every one according to his capacity; it is
sufficient for a Child to believe his Parents; for a Clown to believe his
Preacher. And this is universally true in all cases, where we have not better
or equal evidence to the contrary. But such is the unhappiness of the Popish
Doctrines, that if people were permitted the free use of the Scripture, they
would easily discern them to have no probable foundation in it, and some of
them to be plainly contrary to it; so that it cannot be safe for their
Preachers to tell the people that the Scripture is the only Rule of Faith, lest
they should find cause not to believe them, when they teach Doctrines so
plainly contrary to that Rule.

8. Lastly, He says P. 17.
, the Protestants cannot be certain of the true sense of Scripture. Does he
mean of plain Texts, or obscure ones? Of the true sense of plain Texts, I hope
every one may be certain; and for obscure ones, it is not necessary every one
should. But it may be there are no plain Texts in the Scriptures; then the
reason of it must be (till Mr. S. can show a better) either because it is
impossible for any one to write plainly; or because God cannot write so plainly
as men; or because we have good reason to think that he would not write things
necessary for every one to believe, so as men might clearly understand him.

But he tells us P. 17.
, The numerous Comments upon Scripture are an evidence that no man can be
certain of the true sense of it. I hope not; for if those numerous Commentators
do generally agree in the sense of plain Texts (as it is certain they do) then
this Argument signifies nothing as to such Texts: And as for those which are
obscure, let Commentators differ about them as much as they please, so long as
all necessary Points of Faith and matters of Practice are delivered in plain
Texts. He adds P. 17.
, There are infinite disputes about the sense of Scripture, even in most
concerning Points, as in that of Christ's Divinity. But are not Commentators,
both Protestant and Popish, generally agreed about the sense of Scripture in
that Point? And what if some out of prejudice do mistake, or out of
perverseness do wrest the plainest Texts of Scripture for the Divinity of
Christ, to another sense? Is this any argument that those Texts are not
sufficiently plain? Can any thing be spoken or written in words so clear from
ambiguity, which a perverse or prejudiced mind shall not be able to vex and
force to another meaning. God did not write the Scriptures for the froward and
the captious, but for those who will read them with a free and unprejudiced
mind, and are willing to come to the knowledge of the Truth. If Mr. S. had been
conversant in the writings of the Fathers, he could not but have taken notice
with what confidence they attempt to prove the Divinity of Christ out of
Scripture, as if that did afford convincing arguments for this purpose. St.
Chrysostom Hom. 32 de Consubstant.
professes to demonstrate out of Scripture, That the Son is of the same
substance with the Father; and relies upon Scripture alone for this, without
mentioning any other kind of Argument. So that it seems, St. Chrysostom was not
acquainted with the insufficiency of Scripture for the conviction of Heretics
in this Point; and that he was either ignorant of the ( infallible) way of
Demonstrating this point from Oral Tradition, or had no great opinion of it.
The same Father elsewhere Hom. 7 de Sanctc Phoca.
, arguing against Heretics about the Divinity of Christ, says, That they
pervert the Scriptures, to strengthen their Heresy from thence. But then he
does not (with Mr. S.) blame the Scripture, and say that this Doctrine is not
there delivered with sufficient clearness; but contrariwise he says, That the
Scripture is clear enough, but the corrupt minds of Heretics will not see what
is there contained. Had St. Chrysostom been a true Son of the Traditionary
Church, he would have lain hold of this occasion, to vilify the Scriptures,
and to show the necessity of regulating our faith not by such uncertain
Records, but by the infallible Reports of Oral Tradition.

9. But because Mr. S. lays great weight (in several parts of his Book) upon
this Exception against Scripture, viz. That Protestants cannot be certain of
the true sense of it: Therefore I shall not content my self, only to have shown
that we may be sufficiently certain of the sense of Scripture, so far as to
understand all necessary matters of Faith and Practice, and that more than this
is not necessary; but shall likewise return this Exception upon him by
enquiring into these two things.

1. How the Traditionary Church can be more certain of the true sense of
Scripture, than the Protestants?

2. How they can be more certain of the true sense of Tradition, than
Protestants of the true sense of Scripture?

1. How the Traditionary Church can be more certain of the true sense of
Scripture, than Protestants? They pretend to have an Oral Tradition of the true
sense of it, delivered down from Father to Son. But this only reaches to those
Texts, which are coincident with the main body of Christian Doctrine; as for
all other parts of Scripture, they are as useless to Papists, as they suppose
they are to us; because wanting the help of Oral Tradition, they cannot be
certain of one tittle of them. And as for those Texts, the sense whereof is
conveyed down by Oral Tradition; this sense is, I hope, delivered in some words
or other; And have all Preachers, and Fathers, and Mothers, and Nurses, the
faculty of delivering this sense in words so plain as cannot possibly be
mistaken or wrested to another sense? I am sorry that when every one has this
faculty of speaking their thoughts plainly, the Holy Ghost should be
represented as not able to convey his mind to men in intelligible words. And
does not his own Objection rebound upon himself? If the Church have a certain
sense of Scripture orally delivered, whence are the numerous Comments of the
Fathers upon it and of later Writers in their Church, and the infinite Disputes
about the sense of it, in the most concerning Points? viz. The efficacy of Gods
grace, the Supremacy of St. Peter. the infallibility of a Pope and Council by
immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost? What a stir is made about the sense of
Dabo tibi Claves, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. Pasce oves? Do not
they differ about the meaning of these Texts among themselves, as much as they
do from the Fathers, and from the Protestants? Some understanding them of St
Peter's Supremacy only; others of his infallibility; others of his infallibility
only in and with a general Council; which yet others do not allow to Pope or
Council, from any immediate assistance, but only from the rational force of
Tradition, supposing that the Pope and Council hold to it. If oral Tradition
have brought down a certain sense of these Texts, why do they not produce it,
and agree in it? If it have not (to use a hot phrase of his own P. 17.
) it is perfect phrenzy to say they can be certain of the true sense of
Scripture.

If he say, they are by Tradition made certain of the true sense of Scripture,
so far as it concerns the main body of Christian Doctrine, and do all agree in
it, and that is suffcient; then I ask him, What are those points of Faith which
make up the body of Christian Doctrine? He will tell me, they are those which
all Catholics agree to have descended to them from the Apostles by a constant
and uninterrupted Tradition. I enquire farther, how I shall know what is the
certain sense of Scripture so far as it concerns these points? He must answer
as before, that that is the true sense which all Catholics agree to have
descended to them by Tradition. Which amounts to this, that all Catholics do
agree in the sense of Scripture so far as they do all agree in it. It is to be
hoped, that the Protestants (how much soever at present they differ about the
sense of Scripture) may in time come to as good an agreement as this. This
brings to my remembrance a passage or two of Mr. Cressy; the one in his
Appendix Exomolog. 2 d. Edit. p. 554.
, where he tells us, That as it is impossible that Heretics should agree any
other way than in Faction; so it is impossible that Catholics should differ in
points of Faith. Why so? Were not those Catholics first, who afterward became
Heretics; and when they became so, did they not differ in points of Belief?
Yes; but here lies the conceit, when they began to differ, then they ceased to
be Catholics; therefore Catholics can never differ in points of Faith. The
other passage is where he says Exomolog. c. 53. Sect. 2.
, That he has forsaken a Church where Unity was impossible, etc. and betaken
himself to a Church where Schism is impossible. This last Clause, That Schism
is impossible in their Church, cannot possibly be true but in the same absurd
and ludicrous sense, in which it is impossible for Catholics to differ in
points of Belief. For he cannot deny, but that it is possible for men to break
off from the Communion of their Church, which in his sense is Schism; but here
is the subtilty of it, No Schismatic is of their Church, because so soon as he
is a Schismatic he is out of it; therefore Schism is impossible in their
Church. And is it not as impossible in the Church of England? Where Mr. Cr.
might have done well to have continued, till he could have given a better
reason of forsaking Her.

10. But to return to our purpose. Mr. Rushworth Dial. 2. Sect. 12.
acknowledges, that the Scripture is of it self sufficiently plain, as to
matters of practice; for he asks, Who is so blind, as not to see that these
things are to be found in Scripture by a sensible, common, and discreet reading
of it; though perhaps by a rigorous and exact balancing of every particular
word and syllable, any of these things would vanish away we know not how? So
that for the direction of our lives and actions, he confesses the Scripture to
be sufficiently plain, if men will but read it sensibly and discreetly; and (
he says) that he is blind that does not see this. But who so blind as he that
will not see, that the sense of Scripture is as plain in all necessary points
of Faith? I am sure St. Austin makes no difference, when he tells us De Doctr.
Christ. L. 2.
, That in those things which are plainly set down in Scripture, we may find all
those things in which Faith and Manners of life are comprehended. And why
cannot men, in reference to matters of Faith as well as of Practice, read the
Scriptures sensibly and discreetly without such a rigorous balancing of every
word and syllable as will make the sense vanish away we know not how? If the
Scripture be but sufficiently plain to such as will use it sensibly and
discreetly, I do not understand what greater plainness can be desired in a
Rule: Nor can I imagine what kind of Rule it must be that can be
unexceptionably plain to captious Cavillers, and such as are bent to play the
fool with it.

Well, suppose the Scripture be not sufficiently clear as to matters of Faith;
and hereupon I have recourse to the Church for the true sense of Scripture:
Must I believe the Churches sense to be the true sense of such a Text, though I
see it to be plainly contrary to the genuine sense of the words; yes, that I
must, or else I make my self and not the Church judge of the sense of Scripture,
which is the grand Heresy of the Protestants. But then I must not suppose,
much less belive, that the Churches sense of such a Text is contrary to the
genuine meaning of it; no, although I plainly see it to be so: This is hard
again on the other hand; especially if that be true which is acknowledged both
by Dr. Holden, and Mr. Cressy, viz. That though general Councils cannot mistake
in the Points of Faith which they decree, yet they may mistake in the
confirmation of them from Texts of Scripture, that is, they may be mistaken
about the sense of those Texts. And if Mr. S. think his Brethren have granted
too much, he may see this exemplified in the second Council of Nice (to mention
no other) which to establish their Doctrine of Image Worship, does so palpably
abuse and wrest Texts of Scripture, that I can hardly believe that any Papist
in the World has the forehead to own that for the true sense of those Texts
which is there given by those Fathers.

11. Secondly, How the Traditionary Church can be more certain of the true
sense of their Traditional Doctrines, than the Protestants can be of the true
sense of Scripture? And this is worthy our enquiry, because if the business be
searched to the bottom, it will appear (besides all other inconveniences, which
oral Tradition is much more liable to than Scripture) that the certain sense
and meaning of Traditional Doctrine is as hard to come at as the sense of
Scripture. And this I will make appear by necessary consequence from their own
Concessions. Mr. White, and Mr. S. say that the great security of Tradition is
this, that it is not tied to certain phrases, and set-forms of expression, but
the same sense is conveyed and settled in men's hearts by various expressions.
But according to Mr. Rushworth, this renders Tradition's sense uncertain; for
he says Dial. 2. Sect. 6.
, It Is impossible to put fully, and beyond all quarrel, the same sense in
diverse words. So that if men do not receive Tradition in a sensible, common,
discreet way (as Mr. Rushw. speaks concerning reading the Scriptures) but will
come to a rigorous and exact balancing of every particular phrase, word, and
syllable, the sense of Tradition will be in the very same danger of
uncertainty, and be liable to vanish we know not how. Dr. Holden Analys. Fidei.
L. 1. c. 9.
lays down these two Principles. First, That no truth can be conveyed down from
man to man but by speech; and speech cannot be but by words; and all words are
either equivocal in themselves, or liable to be differently understood by
several persons. Secondly, That such is the frame of man's mind, that the same
truths may be differently apprehended and understood by different persons. And
if this be true, then Traditional Doctrines, if they be deliverd by speech and
words, will be liable to uncertainties and ambiguities as to their sense, as
well as Scripture. Mr. Cressy Append. c. 6.
tells us, That Reason and Experience shows, that differences will arise even
about the Writings of the Fathers, and any thing but the Testimony of the
present Church. If this be true, Tradition wholly falls into uncertainty. For
if difference will arise about the Writings of the Fathers how they are to be
interpreted, I suppose the Writings of Councils will be liable to the same
inconvenience: And if the whole present Church cannot declare her sense of any
Traditional Doctrine otherwise than by a Council, (unless with the Jesuits
they will epitomize the Church into the Pope), and the Decrees of a Council
cannot be universally dispersed (or at least never use to be) but by Writing:
And if Differences will arise about the interpretation of that Writing, as well
as any other; then this present infallible Authority (which Mr. Cressy
magnifies so much for ending Differences) leaves all Controversies arising
about the sense of Tradition, as indeterminable as ever; and they must for ever
remain so, till general Councils have got the knack of penning their Decrees in
words which will so infallibly express their meaning to the most captious
Caviller, that no difference can possibly arise about the interpretation of
them; or else (which will be more suitable to this wise Hypothesis) till
general Councils (being convinced by Mr. S's Demonstrations) shall come to
understand themselves so well, as not to entrust their Decrees any more to the
uncertain way of Writing, but for the future to communicate them to the World
by the infallible way of oral Tradition. And to mention no more, Mr Knott Answ.
to Chilling. c* 2. Sect. 6.
, (who agrees with the other thus far, that the certain sense of Scripture is
only to be had from the Church) speaks to this purpose, That before we can be
certain that this is the sense of such a Text, we must either be certain that
this Text is capable of no other sense, as Figurative, Mystical, or Moral; or
if it be, we must have some certain and infallible means to know in which of
them it is taken, which can be known only by revelation. If this be true, then
by a fair parity of reason, before I can be certain that this is the sense of a
Doctrinal Tradition delivered down to me, I must either be certain that the
words, in which this Tradition was expressed when it was delivered to me, are
capable of no other sense (as Figurative, Mystical, or Moral) besides that in
which I understood them; or if they be (as certainly they will be) capable of
any of these other senses, then must I have some certain and infallible means
whereby to know in which of these they are taken: And this can no more be known
without a revelation, than which is the true sense of such a Text of Scripture.
If it be said, that the sense of a Traditional Doctrine may by different
expressions be still further and further explained to me till I come certainly
to understand the sense of it; this will not help the matter: For if these kind
of cavils be good, that a man cannot be certain of the meaning of any words,
till he can by an infallible argument demonstrate either that they cannot be
taken, or that they are not taken in any other sense; I say, if this cavil will
hold, then every new expression whereby any one shall endeavor to explain any
Traditional Doctrine, is liable to the same inconvenience which those words in
which it was first delivered to me were liable to. From all which it is
evident, that the Traditionary Church can be no more certain of the sense of
their Traditional Doctrines, than Protestants may be of the sense of Scripture.

12. These are his Exceptions contained in his second Discourse; and of what
force they are, has been examined. But because he foresaw that it might be
replied that these defects might in part be provided against by History, by the
Providence of God, by Testimonies of Councils and Fathers, and by the
sufficient clearness of Scripture as to Fundamentals; He endeavors to show that
these signify little to this purpose.

First, Not History P. 17, 18.
; because few are skilled in History, and they that are not, cannot safely rely
upon those that are skilled, unless they knew certainly that the Historians
whom they rely on had secure grounds, and not bare hearsay for what they writ,
and that they were not contradicted by others either extant, or perished. How
much credit is to be given to uncontrolled History by the learned, and how much
by the vulgar to men of skill, I have already shown. I shall only add now, that
if this reasoning be true, it is impossible for any man to be certain by
History of any ancient matter of Fact, as namely that there were such persons
as Julius Caesar, and William the Conqueror, and that they invaded and
conquered England, because (according to him) we cannot know certainly that the
Historians, who relate these things, and upon whose authority we rely, had
secure grounds, and not bare hearsay for what they writ: And that they were
not contradicted by others either extant or perished, is, I am sure, impossible
for any man to know: For who can tell now what was contained in those Books
which are perished? So that if this be requisite, to make every Historical
Relation credible, to know certainly that it was not contradicted by any of
those Books which we do not know what they were, nor what was in them, we can
have no certainty of any ancient Fact or History; for who knows certainly that
some Books that are perished did not contradict whatever is written in Books
that are extant? Nay, if this reasoning hold, we can have no certainty of any
thing conveyed by oral Tradition. For what though the Priest tell me this was
the Doctrine of Christ delivered to him? unless I know that all others agree
with him in this Tradition, I cannot rely upon his testimony: Nor then neither
in Mr. Knott's Answ. to Chilling. c. 1. Sect. 33.
opinion, because the testimony of Preachers or Pastors is human and fallible;
unless (according to his Jargon) a conclusion, deduced from Premises, one of
which is only probable, may be sufficient to bring our understanding to an
infallible act of Faith, viz. if such a conclusion be taken Specificative;
whereas, if it be taken Reduplicative, as it is a conclusion, it can only beget
a probable assent; which is to say, that considered barely as a conclusion, and
so far as in reason it can deserve assent, it is only probable; but considered
as it serves an Hypothesis, and is convenient to be believed with reason or
without, so it is infallible. But to carry the supposition further, put the
case, that the whole present Age assembled in a general Council, should declare
that such a Point was delivered to them: yet (according to Mr. S.) we cannot
safely rely upon this, unless we knew certainly, that those whom they relied on
had secure grounds, and not bare hearsay for what they delivered, and that
they were not contradicted within the space of 1500 years by any of those that
are dead; which it is impossible for any one now to know.

But to show how inconsistent he is with himself in these matters, I will
present the Reader with a passage or two in another part of his Book; where he
endeavors to prove that men may safely rely on a general and uncontrolled
Tradition. He tells us P. 49.
, That the common course of human Conversation makes it a madness not to
believe great multitudes of knowers, if no possible considerations can awaken
in our reason a doubt that they conspire to deceive us. And a little after Ibid.
, Nor can any, unless their brains rove wildly, or be unsettled even to the
degree of madness, suspect deceit where such multitudes agree unanimously in a
matter of Fact. Now if men be but supposed to write, as well as to speak, what
they know, and to agree in their Writings about matter of Fact; then it will be
the same madness not to believe multitudes of Historians, where no possible
consideration can awaken in our reason a doubt that they have conspired to
deceive us; and men's brains must rove wildly and be unsettled even to the degree
of phrenzy, who suspect deceit where such multitudes unanimously agree in a
matter of Fact. And this seems to me to be the great unhappiness of Mr. S's
Demonstrations, that they proceed upon conrtadictory Principles; so that in
order to the demonstrating of thc uncertainty of Books and Writings, he must
supopse all those Principles to be uncertain, which he takes to be self-evident
and unquestionable when he is to demonstrate thc Infallibility of Oral
Tradition.

. 13. Secondly, He tells us P. 18.
, the Providence of God is no security against those contingencies the
Scriptures are subject to; because we cannot be certain of the Divine
Providence or assistance to his Church, but by the Letter of Scripture;
therefore that must first be proved certain, before we mention the Church, or
Gods assistance to her. As if we pretended there were any promise in Scripture
that God would preserve the Letter of it entire and uncorrupted, or as if we
could not otherwise be assured of it; as if the light of natural Reason could
not assure us of Gods Providence in general, and of his more especial care of
those things which are of greatest concernment to us, such as this is, That a
Book containing the method and the terms of Salvation should be preserved from
any material corruption. He might as well have said, That without the Letter of
Scripture we cannot know that there is a God,

. 14, Thirdly, Nor (says he P 18, 19.
) can Testimonies of Councils and Fathers be sufficient Interpreters of
Scripture. We do not say they are. Our Principle is, That the Scripture does
sufficiently interpret it self, that is, is plain to all capacities, in things
necessary to be believed and practiced. And the general consent of Fathers in
this doctrine of the sufficient plainness of Scripture (which I shall
afterward show) is a good evidence against them. As for obscure and more
doubtful Texts, we acknowledge the Comments of the Fathers to be a good help,
but no certain Rule of interpretation. And that the Papists think so, as well
as we, is plain; inasmuch as they acknowledge the Fathers to differ among
themselves in the interpretation of several Texts: And nothing is more familiar
in all Popish Commentators, than to differ from the ancient Fathers about the
sense of Scripture. And as for Councils. Dr. Holden, and Mr. Cressy (as I said
before) do not think it necessary to believe that always to be the true sense
of Texts which Councils give of them, when they bring them to confirm Points of
Faith. Nay, if any Controversy arise about the sense of any Text of Scripture,
it is impossible (according to Mr. Rushworth's Principles) for a Council to
decide either that, or any other Controversy: for he Dial. 2. Sect. 8.
makes it his business to prove, That Controversies cannot be decided by words;
and if this be so, then they cannot be decided at all, unless he can prove that
they may be decided without words, and consequently that Councils may do their
work best in the Quakers way, by silent Meetings.

. 15. Fourthly, Nor can (says he P. 20, 21.
) the clearness of Scripture as to Fundamentals, be any help against these
defects. Why not?

First, Because a certain Catalogue of Fundamentals was never given and agreed
to by sufficient Authority, and yet without this all goes to wrack. I hope not,
so long as we are sure that God would make nothing necessary to be believed but
what he has made plain; and so long as men do believe all things that are
plainly revealed (which is every ones fault if he do not) men may do well
enough without a precise Catalogue. But suppose we say, That the Articles of
the Apostles Creed contain all necessary matters of simple belief, what has
Mr. S. to say against this? I am sure the Roman Catechism, set forth by the
Decree of the Council of Trent, says Praefat.
as much as this comes to, viz. That the Apostles having received a command to
preach the Gospel to every creature, thought fit to compose a form of Christian
Faith, namely to this end, that they might all think and speak the same things,
and that there might be no Schisms among those whom they had called to the
unity of Faith, but that they might all be perfect in the same sense, and the
same opinion: And this Profession of the Christian Faith and Hope, so framed by
them, the Apostles called the Symbol or Creed. Now how this end, of bringing
men to unity of Faith, and making them perfectly of the same sense and opinion,
could probably be attained by means of the Creed, if it did not contain all
necessary Points of simple belief, I can by no means understand. Besides, a
certain catalogue of Fundamentals is as necessary for them as for us; and when
Mr. S, gives in his, ours is ready. Mr. Chillingworth had a great desire to
have seen Mr. Knott's catalogue of Fundamentals, and challenged him to produce
it, and offered him very fairly, that when ever he might with one hand receive
his, he would with the other deliver his own: But Mr. Knott, though he still
persisted in the same demand, could never be prevailed with to bring forth his
own, but kept it for a secret to his dying day. But to put a final stop to this
Canting demand of a Catalogue of Fundamentals (which yet I perceive I shall
never be able to do, because it is one of those expletive Topics which Popish
Writers, especialy those of the lowest Form, do generally make use of to help
out a Book) however to do what I can toward the stopping of it, I desire Mr.
S. to answer the reasons whereby his Friend Dr. Holden Analys. Fid. L. 1. c. 4.
shows the unreasonableness of this demand, and likewise endeavors to prove
that such a Catalogue would not only be useless and pernicious if it could be
given, but that it is manifestly impossible to give such a precise Catalogue.

Secondly, He asks P. 21.
, Is it a Fundamental that Christ is God? If so, Whether this be clearer in
Scripture, than that Gad has hands, feet, etc? To which I answer by another
question; Is it clear that there are Figures in Scripture, and that many things
are spoken after the manner of men, and by way of condescension and
accommodation to our capacities; and that custom and common sense teaches men
to distinguish between things figuratively and properly spoken? If so, why
cannot every one easily understand, that when the Scripture says God has
hands and feet, and that Christ is the Vine and the Door, these are not to be
taken properly, as we take this Proposition, that Christ is God, in which no
man has any reason to suspect a Figure? When Mr. S. tells us, That he percheth
upon the specifical nature of things, would it not offend him, if any one
should be so silly as to conclude from hence that Mr. S. believed himself to be
a Bird, and nature a Perch? And yet not only the Sciptures, but all sober
Writers are free from such forced and fantastical Metaphors.

I remember that Origin L. 4.
taxes Celsus his wilful Ignorance in finding fault with the Scriptures, for
attributing to God humane affections, as anger, etc. and tells him, that any
one who had a mind to understand the Scriptures, might easily see, that such
expressions were accomodated to us, and accordingly to be understood; and that
no man, that will but compare these expressions with other passages of
Scripture, need to fail of the true sense of them. But (according to Mr. S.)
Origin was to blame to find fault with Celsus for thinking that the Scripture
did really attribute humane affections to God; for how could he think
otherwise, when the most fundamental Point is not clearer in Scripture, than
that God has hands, feet, etc? How could Origin in reason expect from Celsus
(though never so great a Philosopher) that he should be able without the help
of Oral Tradition, to distinguish between what is spoken literally, and what by
a certain Scheme of speech? Theodoret Haeret. Fabul. l. 4.
tells us of one Audaeus, who held that God had a humane shape, and bodily
members; but he does not say that the reason of this Error was, because he made
Scripture the Rule of his Faith, but expressly because he was a fool, and did
foolishly understand those things which the Divine Scriptures speak by way of
Condescension. So that although Mr. S. is pleased to make this wise Objection,
yet it seems, (according to Theodoret) that men do not mistake such Texts,
either for want of oral Tradition, or of sufficient clearness in the
Scriptures, but for want of common reason and sense. And if Mr. S. know of any
Rule of Faith that is secure from all possibility of being mistaken by foolish
and perverse men, I would be glad to be acquainted with it.

SECT. IV.
. 1. IN his next Discourse he endeavors to show, That Scripture is a
sufficient Rule to the Unlearned, and to the most Rational doubters.
that unlearned Persons cannot be justified as acting rationally in receiving
the Scripture for the Word of God, and relying upon it as a certain Rule;
because they are not capable of satisfaction concerning these matters. But I
have already shown that they are, and shall not repeat the same over again. And
whereas he says P. 24.
, That several Professions all pretend to Scripture, and yet differ, and damn,
and persecute one another about these differences; the answer is easy: That
they all pretend to Scripture, is an argument that they all acknowledge it to be
the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith; and that they are generally agreed
about the sense of those plain Texts which contain the fundamental Points of
Faith is evident, in that those several Professions acknowledge the Articles
contained in the Apostles Creed to be sufficiently delivered in Scripture: And
if any Professions differ about the meaning of plain Texts, that is not an
argument that plain Texts are obsure, but that some men are perverse. And if
those Professions damn and persecute one another about the meaning of obscure
Texts, the Scripture is not in fault, but those that do so.

. 2. And whereas he pretends P. 25.26, 27.
, That the Scripture is not able to satisfy Skeptical dissenters, and Rational
doubters, because nothing under a demonstration can satisfy such persons so
well concerning the incorruptedness of Originals, the faithfulness of
Translations, etc. but that searching and sincere Wits may still maintain their
ground of suspense with A Might it not be otherwise? This has been answered
already: partly, by showing that the Scripture was not intended to satisfy
Scepticks, and that a Demonstration is not sufficient to give satisfaction to
them; and partly, by showing that Rational doubters may have as much
satisfaction concerning those matters, as the nature of the things will bear;
and he is not a Rational doubter that desires more.

But that he may see the unreasonableness of this Discourse, I shall briefly
show him, That all Mankind do in matters of this nature accept of such evidence
as falls short of Demonstration; and that his great Friends and Masters from
whom he has taken the main grounds of his Book (though he manageth them to
less advantage) do frequently acknowledge, that it is reasonable for men to
acquiesce in such assurance as falls short of Infallibility, and such evidence
as is less than Demonstration. Do not mankind think themselves sufficiently
assured of the Antiquity and Authors of several Books, for which they have not
Demonstrative evidence? Does not Aristotle say, that things of a moral and
civil nature, and matters of Fact done long ago, are incapable of
Demonstration; and that it is madness to expect it for things of this Nature?
Are there no passages in Books so plain, that a man may be sufficiently
satisfied that this and no other is the certain sense of them? If there be
none, can any thing be spoken in plainer words than it may be written? If it
cannot, how can we be satisfied of the certain sense of any Doctrine Orally
delivered? And if we cannot be so satisfied, where is the certainty of Oral
Tradition? But if Books may be written so plainly, as that we may be abundantly
satisfied that this is the certain sense of such and such passages; then we may
reasonably rest satisfied in evidence for these matters short of Demonstration.
For was ever the sense of any words so plain as that there did not remain this
ground of suspense, that those words might be capable of another sense. Mr.
Rushworth Dial. 2. Sect. 7.
says, That disputative Scholars do find means daily to explicate the plainest
words of an Author to a quitc different sense: And that the World might be
furnished with an advantageous instance of the possibility of this, Raynaudus
De bonis and malis Libris.
(a Writer of their own) has made a wanton experiment upon the Apostles Creed,
and by a sinister (but possible) interpretation, has made every Article of it
Heresy and Blasphemy, on purpose to show that the plainest words are not free
from ambiguity. But may be Mr. S. can outdo the Apostles, and can deliver the
Christian Doctrine so clearly, that he can demonstrate it impossible for any
man to put any other sense upon any of his words than that which he intended. I
do not know what may be done, but if Mr. S. does this, he must both mend his
style, and his way of Demonstration.

Is Mr. S. sufficiently assured that there is such a part of the World as
America? and can he demonstrate this to any man, without carrying him thither?
Can he show by any necessary Argument, that it is naturally impossible that all
the Relations concerning that place should be false? When his Demonstrations
have done their utmost, cannot P. 27.
a searching and sincere Wit at least maintain his ground of suspense with A
Might it not be otherwise? and with an, Is it not possible that all men may be
Liars, or that a company of Travelers may have made use of their Privilege to
abuse the World by false Reports, and to put a Trick upon Mankind? or that all
those that pretend to go thither, and bring their Commodities from thence, may
go to some other Parts of the World, and taking pleasure in abusing others, in
the same manner as they have been imposed upon themselves, may say they have
been at America? Who can tell but all this may be so? and yet I suppose,
notwithstanding the possibility of this, no man in his Wits is now possessed
with so incredible a folly as to doubt whether there be such a place. The case
is the very same as to the certainty of an ancient Book and of the sense of
plain expressions: We have no demonstration for these things, and we expect
none; because we know the things are not capable of it. We are not infallibly
certain, that any Book is so ancient as it pretends to be, or that it was
written by him whose name it bears, or that this is the sense of such and such
passages in it, it is possible all this may be otherwise; that is, it implies
no contradiction: But we are very well assured that it is not; nor has any
prudent man any just cause to make the least doubt of it. For a bare
possibility that a thing may be, or not be, is no just cause of doubting
whether a thing be or not. It is possible all the people in France may dye this
night, but I hope the possibility of this does not incline any man in the least
to think it will be so. It is possible the Sun may not rise to morrow morning,
and yet for all this I suppose that no man has the least doubt but that it
will.

. 3. But because this Principle, viz. That in matters of Religion a man cannot
be reasonably satisfied with any thing less than that infallible assurance
which is wrought by Demonstration, is the main Pillar of Mr. S's Book;
therefore, beside what has been already said to show the unreasonableness of
this Principle, I shall take a little pains to manifest to him how much he is
contradicted in this by the chief of his Brethren of the Tradition, viz. Mr.
Rushworth, Dr. Holden, Mr. Cressy, and Mr. White, who besides Mr. S. and one I.
B. are (so far as I can learn) all the public Patrons that ever this
Hypothesis of Oral Tradition has had in the World; and if Mr. White (as I have
reason to believe) was the Author of those Dialogues which pass under
Rushworth's name, the number of them is yet less. Now if I can show that this
Principle (esteemed by Mr. S. so fundamental to this Hypothesis) is plainly
contradicted by the principal Assertors of Oral Tradstion, I shall hereby gain
one of these two things; either that these great Patrons of Oral Tradition were
ignorant of the true foundation of their own Hythesis, or that this Principle
is not necessary for the support of it. Not that I would be so understood as if
I did deny that these very Persons do sometimes speak very big words of the
necessity of Infallibility: But if it be their pleasure to contradict
themselves, as I have no reason to be displeased, so neither to be concerned
for it; but shall leave it to Mr. S. to reconcile them first to themselves, and
then (if he pleases) afterward to himself.

. 4. I begin with Mr. Rushworth of immortal memory, for that noble attempt of
his to persuade the World that notwithstanding he was the first Inventer of
this Hypothesis of Oral Tradition, yet he could prove that the Church had in
all Ages owned it, and proceeded upon it as her only Rule of Faith. He in his
third Dialogue Sect. 3. and 4.
, when his Nephew objects to him, That perhaps a Protestant would say that all
his foregoing Discourse was but probability and and likelihood, and therefore
to hazard a man's Estate upon Peradventures, were something hard, and not very
rationally done: Replies thus to him, What security do your Merchants, your
Statesmen, your Soldiers, those that go to Law, nay, even those that Till
your grounds and work for their livings, what security, I say, do all these go
upon? Is it greater than the security which these grounds afford? surely no.
And yet no man esteems them foolish. All humane Affairs are hazardous, and have
some adventure in them. And therefore who requires evident certainty only in
matters of Religion, discovers in himself a less mind to the Goods promised in
the next life, than to these which he seeks here in this World upon weaker
assurance. Howsoever, the greatest evidence that can be to him that is not
capable of convincing Demonstrations (which the greatest part of Mankind fall
short of) is but conjectural. So that (according to Mr. Rushworth) it is not
reason and discretion, but want of love to God and Religion, which makes men
require greater evidence for matters of Religion, than for Humane Affairs,
which yet (he tells us) are hazardous, and have some adventure in them, and
consequently are not capable of Demonstration. Besides, if demonstrative
evidence be an essential Property of the Rule of Faith (as Mr. S. affirms) then
this Rule cannot (according to Mr. Rushworth) be of any use to the greatest
part of Mankind, because they are not capable of convincing Demonstrations.
Again, Do but consider (says he Ibid. Sect. 6.
) how unequal and unjust a condition it is, that the claim of the present
Church shall not be heard, unless she can confute all the Peradventures that
Wit may invent, and solve all the Arguments which the infinite variety of time,
place, and occasions may have given way unto; and then you will see how
unreasonable an Adversary he is, who will not be content with any satisfaction,
but such as man's nature scarcely affords. And is it not equally unjust in Mr.
S. not to let Scripture's claim be heard, unless we can confute every
Peradventure [and might it not be otherwise] that Wit may invent? See then how
unreasonable an Adversary Mr. S. is, who will not be content with any
satisfaction, but such as (according to Mr. Rushworth) man's nature scarcely
affords.

Dr. Holden (I confess) states the matter somewhat cautiously, when he tells us
L. 1. c. 1.
, That it shall suffice for present to determine, that the Wisdom of the
Creator has afforded us such an assurance, especially of Truths necessary to
Salvation, as is suitable to our nature, and best fitted for the safe conduct of
our lives in Moral and Religious Affairs: But if we interpret these general
expressions by the passages I before cited out of Mr. Rushworth (as in reason
we may, since the Doctor is beholding to him for the best part of his Book)
then nothing can make more against Mr. S's Principle.

. 5. Mr. Cressy in his Exomologesis C. 19. Sect. 5.
says, That such Teachers, as approached nearest to the fountain of Truth,
Christ and his Apostles, had means of informing themselves in Apostolical
Tradition incomparably beyond us. Mr. S. may do well to show what those means
were which are so incomparably beyond his Infallibility and Demonstration. The
same Author C. 32. Sect. 4.
does very much applaud Stapleton's determination of the question concerning
the Churches Infallibility, which is as follows, That the Church does not
expect to be taught by God immediately by new Revelations, but makes use of
several means, etc. as being governed not by Apostles, etc. but by ordinary
Pastors and Teachers. That these Pastors in making use of these several means
of Decision, proceed not as the Apostles did, with a peculiar infallible
direction of the Holy Spirit, but with a prudential collection not always
necessary. That to the Apostles who were the first Masters of Evangelical
Faith, and founders of the Church, such an infallible certitude of means was
necessary: not so now to the Church, etc. If this be true, That an infallible
certitude of means is not now necessary to the Church, and that her Pastors do
now in deciding matters of Faith proceed only with a prudent collection not
always necessary; then it should seem that a searching Wit may maintain his
ground of suspense, even against their Church also, with A Might it not be
otherwise? Again, Mr. Cressy Append. c. 5.
tells us, That truth and our obligation to believe it, is in an higher degree
in Scripture, than in the Decisions of the Church, as Bellarmine acknowledges:
which is to say, that we may have greater assurance of the truth of Doctrines
contained in the Scriptures, than we can have of any Doctrine from the
determination of the Church. But if we have the greatest assurance that can be
of Truths delivered to us by the Church, as Mr. S. affirms, then I would fain
learn of him what that greater degree of assurance is which Stapleton speaks
of, and whether it be greater than the greatest? Not to insist upon that (which
yet I cannot but by the way take notice of) that Mr. Cressy, by his approbation
of this determination of Bellarmine's, does advance the Scripture above the
Church as to one of the most essential Properties of the Rule of Faith, viz.
the certainty of it.

But the most eminent Testimony to my purpose in Mr. Cressy, is that famous
passage C* 40. Sect. 3, etc.
(which has given so much offense to several of his own Church) wherein he
acknowledges the unfortunateness (to him) of the word Infallibility, and tells
us, That he could find no such word in any Council; That no necessity appeared
to him that either he or any other Protestant should ever have heard that word
named, and much less pressed with so much earnestness as of late it has
generally been in Disputations and Books of Controversy; and that Mr.
Chillingworth combats this word with too to great success, insomuch that if
this word were once forgotten or but laid by, Mr. Chillingworth's Arguments
would lose the greatest part of their strength; and that if this word were
confined to the Schools where it was bred, there would be still no
inconvenience: And that since by manifest experience the English Protetestants
think themselves so secure, when they have leave to stand or fall by that word,
and in very deed have so much to say for themselves when they are pressed
unnecessarily with it: Since likewise it is a word capable of so high a sense
that we cannot devise one more full and proper to attribute to God himself,
etc. Since all this is so, he thinks he cannot be blamed, if such Reasons move
him to wish that the Protestants may never be invited to combat the Authority
of the Church under that Notion. A very ingenuous acknowledgment, and as cross
to Mr. S's Principle as any thing can be. But the word Infallibility was not so
unfortunate to Mr. Cressy, as is his untoward Explication of the forecited
passage, in his Appendix which he afterward published chiefly by way of
Vindication of himself against the Learned Author of the Preface to my Lord
Falkland's Discourse of Infallibility. There he Append. Sect. 2. and 3.
tells us, That there are several degrees of Infallibility. And that we may
know what degree of Infallibility he thinks necessary to be attributed to the
Church, this following passage will inform us: Methinks (says he) if God have
furnished his divine and supernatural Truth, with evidence equal to this, that
the Sun will shine to morrow, or that there will be a Spring and Harvest next
year, we are infinitely obliged to bless his Providence, and justly condemned,
if we refuse to believe the least of such Truths, as showing less affection to
save our souls, than the dull Plow-men to sow their Corn, who certainly have
far less evidence for their Harvest, than Catholics for their Faith; and yet
they insist not peevishly upon every capricious Objection, nor exact an
infallible security of a plentiful reaping next Summer, but notwithstanding all
difficulties and contingencies proceed cheerfully in their painful Husbandry.
So that according to this Discourse, whatever degree of assurance the Church
has, or can give to those who rely upon her, it is plain that no further
degree is necessary than what the Husbandman, when he sows, has of a plentiful
Harvest; and that men are justly condemned if they refuse to believe the least
truth upon such security, which yet (by his own acknowledgment) is liable to
Contingencies: Nay further, that men are not reasonable, but peevish, in
exacting infallible security, and insisting upon every capricious Objection,
such as is Mr. S's Might it not be otherwise? Now as to this degree of
Assurance, or (as he calls it) Infallibility, I cannot but grant what he says
of it to be most true, viz. That in a severe acception of the word it is not
rigorously infallible, that is (as he explains it) it is not absolutely
impossible, nor does it imply a flat contradiction that the thing whereof we
are so assured may be otherwise: But then I utterly deny that according to any
true acception of this word, such a degree of Assurance as he speaks of can be
called Infallibility; and withal I affirm, That none of those several degrees
of Infallibility which he mentions, excepting that only which imports an
absolute impossibility, can with any tolerable propriety of speech or regard to
the true meaning and use of the word, have the name of Infallibility given to
them. For Infallibility can signify nothing else but an utter impossibility
that one should be deceived in that matter as to which he is supposed to be
infallible; and to say such a thing is impossible, is to say that the existence
of it implies a flat contradiction. So that whosoever asserts degrees of
Infallibility, is obliged to show that there are degrees of absolute
impossibilities, and of perfect contradictions; and he had need of a very sharp
and piercing wit that is to find out degrees where there neither are nor can be
any. Indeed, in respect of the objects of knowledge, it is easy to conceive
how Infallibility may be extended to more objects or fewer; but in respect of
the degree of assurance (of which Mr. Cressy speaks) it is altogether
unimaginable how any one can be more or less out of all possibility of being
deceived in those things wherein he is supposed to be infallible; for no one
can be more removed from the possibility of being deceived, than he that is out
of all possibility of being deceived, and whosoever is less than this, is not
infallible; because he only is so, who is out of all possibility of being
deceived in those matters wherein he is supposed to be infallible. So that Mr.
Cressy's lower degrees of Infallibility are no degrees of that assurance which
may properly be called infallible (for that can have no degrees) but of that
assurance which is less than infallible. And he needed not have raised all this
dust about the degrees of Infallibility, had it not been that by the means of
such a cloud he might make the more convenient escape out of that strait he was
in between the clamours of his own Church, and the advantage which his
Adversaries made of his free and open discourse against Infallibility. For any
one that carefully reads his Book, will find that he understands nothing by the
Infallibility of the Church, but an Authority of obliging all Christians to
submit to her Decisions, which is no more but what every Supreme Civil Judge
has in Civil matters, viz. a power to determine those Controversies that lie
before him as well as he can or will, and when that is done every one is bound
to submit to such determinations; but yet for all this, no man ever dreamed a
Supreme Civil Judge to be infallible more than another man. I do not now dispute
the extent of the Churches Authority; but if she have no other Infallibility
but what a full Authority of decision does suppose, I am sure she has none at
all.

Before I leave Mr. Cressy, I cannot but take notice how unfortunate and
disingenuous he is in explaining the meaning of these words of his own, viz.
[Against this word of Infallibility Mr. Chillingworth 's Book especially
combats, and this with too too great success] which in his Appendix C. 5. Sect.
6.
he interprets thus, Success, I mean, not against the Church, but against his
own Soul, and the Souls of his Fellow-English Protestants, etc. As if one that
had wished well to Caesar should have said, That Pompey had fought against him
with too too great success; and being afterward challenged by Caesar's Party,
as having said that Pompey had Conquered Caesar, he should explain himself
thus, Success, I mean, not against Caesar, but against his own life, and the
lives of his followers. Can any thing be finer than for a man to say that by
Pompey's success in fighting against Caesar, he means that Caesar had beaten
Pompey? which is no more than if one should take the liberty to interpret white
by black.

. 6. Lastly, Mr. White does most expressly contradict this Principle of Mr. S's
in these following passages. In his Preface to Mr. Rushworth he says, That such
a certainty as makes the cause always work the same effect, though it take not
away the absolute possibility of working otherwise, ought absolutely to be
reckoned in the degree of true certainty; and that those Authors are mistaken
who undervalue it. So that it seems Mr. S. is mistaken in affirming that a man
cannot be certain of any thing so long as there is any possibility that it may
be otherwise. In his Answer to my Lord Falkland, he says P. 14, 15.
, That in Moral matters, and such as are subject to humane action, we must
expect such assurance as humane actions bear. If for the government of your
spiritual life you have as much as for the management of your natural and civil
life, what can you expect more? Two or three witnesses of men beyond exception
will cast a man out of not only his lands, but life and all. He that among
Merchants will not adventure, where there is a Hundred to one of gaining, will
be accounted a silly Factor. And among Soldiers, he that will fear danger
where but one of a Hundred is slain, shall not escape the stain of Cowardice.
What then shall we expect in Religion, but to see a main advantage on the one
side which we may rest our selves on? and for the rest, remember we are men
subject to chance and mutability, and thank God he has given us that assurance
in a supernatural way, which we are contented withal in our civil ventures and
possessions, which nevertheless God knows we often love better, and would
hazard less than the unknown good of the life to come. Again P. 30.
, If God Almighty has in all sorts and manners provided his Church that she
may enlighten every man in his way, that goes the way of a man, then let every
man consider which is the sit way for himself, and what in other matters of
that way he accounts evidence. And if there be no interest in his Soul to
make him loath to believe, what in another matter of the like nature he does not
stick at, or heavy to practice what he sees clearly enough, I fear not his
choice. Once more; directing a man in his search after rational satisfaction in
matters of Religion, he has this passage; P. 46.
Besides this, he must have this care; that he seek what the nature of the
subject can yield, and not as those Physicians, who when they have promised no
less than Immortality, can at last only reach to some conservation of health or
youth in some small degree: So I could wish the Author to well assure himself
first, that there is possible an Infallibility, before he be too earnest to be
contented with nothing less; for what if humane nature should not be capable of
so great a good? Would he therefore think it fitting to live without any
Religion, because he could not get such a one as himself desired, though with
more than a man's wish? Were it not rational to see, whether among Religions
some one have not such notable advantages over the rest, as in reason it might
seem humane nature might be contented withal? Let him cast his account with
the dearest things he has, his own or friends lives, his estate, his hope of
posterity, and see upon what terms of advantage he is ready to venture all
these; and then return to Religion, and see whether, if he do not venture his
soul upon the like, it be truly reason, or some other not confessed motive,
which withdraws him. For my own part, as I doubt not of an Infallibility, so I
doubt not but setting that aside, there be those Excellencies found on the
Catholic party, which may force a man to prefer it, and to venture all he has
upon it, before all other Religions and Sects in the World. Why then may not
one who after long searching finds no Infallibility, rest himself on the
like, supposing man's nature affords no better?

Are not these fair Concessions, which the evidence and force of Truth have
extorted from these Authors? So that it seems that that which Mr. S. calls
Letter to his Answerer. p. 5.
a civil piece of Atheistry, is advanced in most express words by his best
Friends, and therefore I hope he will (as he threatens me) be smart with them
in opposition to so damnable and fundamental an Error. And whenever he attempts
this, I would entreat him to remember that he has these two things to prove.
First, That no evidence, but demonstration, can give a man sufficient assurance
of any thing. Secondly, That a bare possibility that a thing may be otherwise,
is a rational cause of doubting, and a wise ground of suspense; which when he
has proved, I shall not grudge him his Infallibility.

SECT. V.
That Scripture is sufficient to convince the most acute Adversaries: and that
it is sufficiently certain.
. 1. THE last part of this Third Discourse endeavors to show that the
Scripture is not convictive of the most obstinate and acute Adversaries. As for
the obstinate, he knows my mind already. Let us see why the most acute
Adversary may not be convinced by Scripture. Because as he objects P. 28.
, First, We cannot be certain that this Book is Gods Word, because of the many
strange Absurdities and Heresies in the open letter as it lies, as that God
has hands and feet, etc. and because of the contradictions in it: To which I
have already returned an answer. Secondly, Because (as he says P. 31.
) we cannot be certain of the Truth of the letter in any particular Text, that
it was not foisted in, or some way altered in its significativeness; and if it
be a negative proposition, that the particle [not] was not inserted, if
affirmative, not left out. And if we pretend to be certain of this, he demands
P. 31.
our demonstration for it. But how unreasonable this demand is, I hope I have
sufficiently shown. And to show it yet further, I ask him, How their Church
knows, that the particle [ not] was not left out of any Text in which it is now
found in their Copies? I know he has a ready answer, viz. by Oral Tradition.
But this (according to him P. 116.
) only reaches to Scriptures letter so far as it is coincident with the main
body of Christian Doctrine; concerning the rest of Scripture it is impossible
(according to his own principles) that they should have any security that the
particle [ not] was not unduly inserted, or left out by the Transcribers. Nay,
as to those Texts of Scripture which fall in with the main body of Christian
Doctrine, I demand his demonstration that the particle [ not] was not unduly
inserted, or left out, not only in those Texts, but also in the Oral Tradition
of the Doctrines coincident with the sense of those Texts. If he say, It was
impossible any Age should conspire to leave out or insert the particle [ not]
in the Oral Tradition; so say I it was that they should conspire to leave it
out of the written Text: But then I differ from him thus far, That I do not
think this naturally impossible, so as that it can rigorously be demonstrated,
but only morally impossible, so that no body has any reason to doubt of it;
which to a prudent man is as good as a demonstration. Pyrrho himself never
advanced any Principle of Skepticism beyond this, viz. That men ought to
question the credit of all Books, concerning which they cannot demonstrate as
to every sentence in them, that the particle [ not] was not inserted (if it be
affirmative) or left out (if it be negative). If so much be required to free a
man from reasonable doubting concerning a Book, how happy are they that have
attained to Infallibility? What he says concerning the Variae Lectiones P. 32.
of Scripture, has already had a sufficient answer.

. 2. In his Fourth Discourse, he endeavors to show P. 33.
, That the Scripture is not certain in it self, and consequently not
ascertained to us. First, Not certain, materially considered P. 34.
as consisting of such and such Characters, because Books are liable to be
burnt, torn blotted, worn out. We grant, it is not impossible but that any, or
all the Books in the World may be burnt: But then we say likewise, That a Book
so universally dispersed may easily be preserved; though we have no assurance
that God will preserve it, in case all men should be so foolish or so careless
as to endeavor or suffer the abolition of it. But it seems the Scriptures
cannot be a Rule of Faith if they be liable to any external accidents. And this
(he tells us P. 34.
) Though it may seem a remote and impertinent Exception, yet to one who
considers the wise dispositions of Divine Providence, it will deserve a deep
consideration; because the salvation of Mankind being the end of Gods making
nature, the means to it should be more settled, strong, and unalterable, than
any other piece of nature whatever. But, notwithstanding this wise reason, this
Exception still seems to me both remote and impertinent. For if this which he
calls a Reason be a Truth, it will from thence necessarily follow, not only
that the Doctrine of Christ must be conveyed by such a means as is more
unalterable than the course of nature; but also by a clear parity of Reason,
that all the means of our salvation do operate toward the accomplishing of
their end with greater certainty than the fire burns, or the Sun shines; which
they can never do, unless they operate more necessarily than any natural
causes; now how they can do so upon voluntary Agents, I desire Mr. S. to inform
me.

. 3. He proceeds by a long Harangue to show P. 34.
, That not only these material Characters in themselves are corruptible, but in
complexion with the causes, actually laid in the World to preserve them entire;
because either those causes are material, and then they are also liable to
continual alterations; or spiritual, that is, the minds of men, and from these
we may with good reason hope for a greater degree of constancy, than from any
other piece of nature; which by the way, is a very strange Paradox, that the
actions of voluntary Agents have a greater certainty and constancy in them,
than those of natural Agents; of which the fall of Angels and Men, compared
with the continuance of the Sun and Stars in their first state, is a very good
evidence.

. 4. But he adds a Caution P. 35.
, That they are perfectly unalterable from their nature, and unerrable, if due
circumstances be observed, that is, if due proposals be made to beget certain
knowledge, and due care used to attend to such proposals. But who can warrant,
That due proposals will always be made to men, and due care used by them? If
these be uncertain, where is the constancy and unerrableness he talks so much
of? So that notwithstanding the constancy of this spiritual cause (the mind of
man) of preserving Scriptures entire, yet in order to this (as he tells P. 36.
us) So many actions are to be done, which are compounded and made up of an
innumerable multitude of several particularities to be observed, every of which
may be mistaken apart, each being a distinct little action in its single self,
such as is the transcribing of a whole Book, consisting of such Myriads of
words, single letters, and tittles or stops; and the several actions of writing
over each of these so short and cursory, that it prevents diligence, and
exceeds humane care, to keep awake and apply distinct attentions to every of
these distinct actions. Mr. Rushworth Dial. 2. Sect. 7.
much outdoes Mr. S. in these minute Cavils, for he tells us, That supposing an
Original Copy of Christ's words, written by one of the Evangelists in the same
language, let him have set down every word and syllable, yet men conversant in
noting the changes of meanings in words will tell us, that diverse accents in
the pronunciation of them, the turning of the speakers head or body this way or
that way, etc. may so change the sense of the words, that they will seem quite
different in writing from what they were in speaking. I hope that Oral and
Practical Tradition has been careful to preserve all these circumstances, and
has delivered down Christ's Doctrine with all the right Traditionary Accents,
Nods, and Gestures necessary for the understanding of it; otherwise the
omission of these may have so altered the sense of it, that it may be now quite
different from what it was at first. But to answer Mr. S. We do not pretend to
be assured, that it is naturally impossible that the Scriptures should have
been corrupted or changed, but only to be sufficiently assured that they have
not received any material alteration, from as good Arguments as the nature of
the Subject will bear. But if his Reason had not been very short and cursory,
he might easily have reflected, that Oral Tradition is equally liable to all
these contingencies. For it does as much prevent diligence, and exceed humane
care, to keep awake and apply distinct attentions to the distinct actions of
speaking, as of writing. And I hope he will not deny, that a Doctrine Orally
delivered, consists of words, and letters, and accents, and stops, as well as a
Doctrine written; and that the several actions of speaking, are as short and
cursory as of writing.

. 5. Secondly, He tells us P. 38.
, Scripture formally considered as to its significativeness, is also uncertain.
First, P. 38.
Because of the uncertainty of the letter. This is already answered. Secondly,
P. 38.
Because the certain sense of it is not to be arrived to by the Vulgar, who are
destitute of Languages and Arts. True, where men are not permitted to have the
Scriptures in their own Language, and understand no other: But where they are
allowed the Scriptures translated into their own Language they may understand
them, all necessary points of Faith and Practice being sufficiently plain in
any Translation of the Bible that I know of: And that P. 38.
eminent Wits cannot agree about the sense of Texts which concern the main
points of Faith, has been spoken to already.

. 6. As for the Reverence he pretends to Scripture in the conclusion of his
Fourth Discourse, he might have spared that, after all the raillery and
rudeness he has used against it. It is easy to conjecture, both from his
principles and his uncivil expressions concerning them, what his esteem is of
those Sacred Oracles. Probably it was requisite in prudence to cast in a few
good words concerning the Scriptures, for the sake of the more tender and
squeamish Novices of their Religion, or (as Mr. Rushworth's Nephew Dial. 2.
Sect. 14.
says frankly and openly) for the satisfaction of indifferent men, that have
been brought up in this verbal and apparent respect of the Scripture, who it
seems are not yet attained to that degree of Catholic Piety and Fortitude as
to endure patiently that the Word of God should be reviled or slighted. Besides
that, in reference to those whom they hope hereafter to convert (who might be
too much alienated from their Religion, if he had expressed nothing but
contempt toward a Book, which Protestants, and Christians in all Ages till the
very dregs of Popery, have been bred up to a high veneration of), it was not
much amiss to pass this formal complement upon the Bible; which the wise of his
own Religion will easily understand, and may serve to catch the rest. But let
him not deceive himself, God is not mocked.

SECT. VI.
. 1. SEcondly, He comes to show P. 41. That the Properties of a Rule of Faith
do not belong to Oral Tradition.
, That the Properties of a Rule of Faith belong to Oral Tradition. And, First,
He gives a tedious explication of the nature of this Oral Practical Tradition,
which amounts to this; That as in reference to the civil Education of Children,
they are taught their own and others names, to write, and read, and exercise
their Trades: So in reference to Religion, the Children of Christians first
hear sounds, afterward by degrees get dim notions of God, Christ, Savior,
Heaven, Hell, Virtue, Vice, and by degrees practice what they have heard; they
are shown to say Grace, and their Prayers, to hold up their hands, or perhaps
eyes, and to kneel, and other postures. Afterward they are acquainted with the
Creed, Ten Commandments, and Sacraments, some common Forms of Prayer, and other
practices of Christianity, and are directed to order their lives accordingly,
and are guided in all this by the actions and carriage of the elder faithful;
and this goes on by insensible degrees, not by leaps, from a Hundred years to a
Hundred, but from Month to Month, and even less. If this be all that Tradition
does, this is nothing but what is done among Protestants, and that with greater
advantage; because we always teach Children to say their Prayers in a known
Tongue so as they may understand them. And we also teach them the Creed, and
Ten Commandments, and the Sacraments, so many as Christ has instituted and no
more. So that if this be so infallible a way of conveying the Doctrine of
Christianity, we have it among us. And we do over and besides, instruct them in
the Scriptures, which are the authentic Instrument whereby Christ's Doctrine
is conveyed to us. But then we do not suppose (as his Hypothesis necessarily
enforces him to do) that the Christian Doctrine is equally taught and learned
by all; but by some more, by others less perfectly, according to the different
abilities and diligence of Parents and Teachers, and the various capacities and
dispositions of Children; whereas his Hypothesis falls, if all or at least the
generality of Parents do not instruct their Children with the like exactness,
and if the generality of Children do not receive this Doctrine in the same
perfection that it is delivered. For if it be taught or received with any
variation, it must necessarily be so conveyed, and these variations will grow
daily. I had thought he would have told us, how all Parents do teach their
Children the whole Body of Christ's Doctrine, and explain to them every part of
it in a Hundred or a Thousand several expressions signifying the same sense,
and not have instanced in two Set-forms, such as the Creed, and Ten
Commandments; for according to Mr. White Apolog. P. 81.
, That cannot be a Tradition, which is delivered in set-words.

. 2. Having thus explained Oral Tradition, he comes to show that the Properties
of a Rule of Faith agree to it. I have already showed that the true Properties
of a Rule of Faith are but two, viz. That it be plain and intelligible, and
that it be sufficiently certain. The first of these, that Oral Tradition may
deliver a Doctrine plainly and intelligibly, I grant him. All the difficulty is
about the second Property, whether we have sufficient assurance that the
Doctrine delivered down by Oral Tradition has received no coruption or change
in its conveyance? And all that he pretends to prove in this Discourse is, That
if this Rule has been followed and kept to all along, the Christian Doctrine
neither has, nor can have received any change; that is, if the next Age after
the Apostles did truly, and without any alteration deliver the Christian
Doctrine to their immediate Successors, and they to theirs, and so on, then
upon this supposition the Doctrine of the present Traditionary Church must be
the very same with that which was delivered to the Apostles. All this is
readily granted to him. But that this Rule has always been followed, nay, that
it is impossible there should have been any deviation from it (as he pretends)
this we deny, not only as untrue, but as one of the most absurd Propositions
that ever yet pretended to demonstrative evidence.

THE RULE of FAITH.
PART III. In which Mr. S's Demonstrations and Corollaries are examined.
SECT. I.
. 1. BEfore I come to speak particularly to his Demonstrations, Considerations
touching his Demonstrations in general.
I shall premise these two Considerations. First, That (according to the
Principles of the Patrons of Tradition) no man can by his private Reason
certainly find out the true Rule of Faith. Secondly, That (according to Mr. S.)
the way of Demonstration is no certain way to find out the Rule of Faith. If
either of these be made out, his Demonstrations lose all their force. If the
first be made good, then he cannot demonstrate the Infallibility of Tradition,
nor consequently that that is the Rule of Faith. If the second, then the way of
Demonstration which he pretends to take signifies nothing.

. 2. First, No man can (according to the principles of the Patrons of
Tradition) by his private Reason certainly find out what is the Rule of Faith.
Suppose a Heathen to be desirous to inform himself of the Christian Faith; in
order to which he is inquisitive after some Rule by which he may take a measure
of it, and come certainly to know what it is: He enquires of Christians what
their Rule is, and finds them divided about it, some saying that the
Scriptures, others that Oral Tradition is the Rule. In this case it is not
possible (without a Revelation) for this man to find out the Rule of Faith, but
by his own private Reason examining and weighing the arguments and pretenses of
both sides. And when he has done this, unless he can by his Reason demonstrate
that the one is a certain and infallible Rule, and the other not so, he has
not (according to Mr. S.) found out the Rule of Faith. But Reason can never do
this, according to Mr. S. For speaking of demonstrating the certainty of
Tradition, he tells us P. 53.
, That Tradition has for its Basis man's nature not according to his
Intellectuals, which do but darkly grope in the pursuit of Science, etc. And
again Append: 2 d. P. 183.
, speaking how Reason brings men to the Rule of Faith, he uses this comparison,
She is like a dim-sighted man, who used his Reason to find a trusty Friend to
lead him in the twilight, and then relied on his guidance rationally without
using his own Reason at all about the Way it self. So that (according to him)
the certainty of Tradition cannot be founded on Demonstration, because it is
not founded in the intellectual part of man, which only can demonstrate.
Besides, if it were founded in the intellectual part, yet that can never be
able to demonstrate the certainty of Tradition, because that faculty which is
dim-sighted, and does but grope darkly in the pursuit of Science, is incapable
of framing Demonstrations. Nor can any man understand how dim-sighted reason
should see clearly to choose its guide, any more than its way, especially if it
be considered what a pretty Contradiction it is, to say that Reason as it is
dim-sighted can see clearly.

But Mr. Cressy is not contented to call every man's Reason dim-sighted, he
ventures a step further, and calls it hoodwinkt and blind: For he tells us
Append. c. 6. Sect. 8.
, That private Reason is apparently a most fallible guide; and he pities Ibid.
Sect. 9.
my Lord Falkland's case, because in the search of the true Religion he did
betake himself to the casual conduct of blind, humane, natural Reason, which
afterward he calls Ibid. Sect. 11.
a guide that two persons cannot possibly follow together, because no two
persons (that ever followed any other guide beside Authority) did or could
think all things to be reasonable that all others thought so; and by
consequence such a guide that as long as he continues in that office, there
cannot possibly be any Church any where: which (says he) is an infallible
eviction that this is an imaginary seducing guide, since it is impossible that
that should be a guide appointed for any Christian, which neither Christ nor
his Apostles, nor any of their Followers ever mentioned, yea, which formally
destroys one of our twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, viz. I believe the
Holy Catholic Church. Thus he does by Reason clearly and infallibly evince,
that Reason cannot be otherwise than a most blind and fallible guide. This it
is to talk of things when a man looks only upon one side of them; as if because
Reason has a blind side and is uncertain in some things, therefore we ought to
conclude her universally blind and uncertain in every thing; and as if because
all men cannot think all things reasonable which any one man thinks to be so,
therefore it is to be doubted whether those common Principles of Reason be true
which Mankind are generally agreed in. And that Mr. Cressy speaks here of the
use of our private Reason in the finding out of our Rule, is clear from what he
says in the next Section, viz. That this hood-wink't guide (enquiring into
Scripture, and searching after Tradition) may possibly stumble upon the way to
Unity and Truth, that is, the true Catholic Church. If this be true, why does
Mr. S. pretend that he can by Reason demonstrate the Infallibility of
Tradition, and by this hood-wink't guide lead men to the true Rule of Faith?
And what a pitiful encouragement would this be to an inquisitive Philosopher
(who knowing no other guide but his Reason, whereby to find out whether
Scripture or Tradition be the true Rule) to tell him that by the help of this
hood-wink't guide he might possibly stumble upon the right?

A man may justly stand amazed at the inconsistency of these men's Discourses
and Principles. In one mood they are all for Demonstration, and for convincing
men in the way of perfect Science which is the true Rule of Faith: But then
again when another fit takes them, there is no such thing as Science, humane
Reason grows all on the sudden dim-sighted, and at the next word is struck
stark blind; and then the very utmost that it can do toward the bringing of an
unprejudiced and inquisitive person to the true Rule of Faith, is to leave him
in a possibility of stumbling upon it; but if he be a Heretic that makes use
of private Reason for his guide, then Append. c. 7. Sect. 8.
it is impossible but that he with his blind guide should fall into the Pit. I
cannot for my part imagine how they can reconcile the blindness of humane
Reason with all that noise which they make about Science and Demonstration; but
this I must confess that these kind of Discourses which I meet with in Mr. S.
and Mr. Cressy, are very proper Arguments to persuade a man of the blindness of
humane Reason. And indeed there is one passage in Mr. Cressy, which gives me
very great satisfaction concerning these matters, where he tells us Ibid.
, That the Wit and Judgment of Catholics is to renounce their own Judgment,
and depose their own Wit. Now he that professes to have done this may write
Contradictions, and no body ought to challenge him for it. However, it is a
very ingenuous acknowledgment, that when he forsook our Church and turned
Papist, he laid aside his Judgment and Wit; which is just such an heroic act
of Judgment, as if a man in a bravery to show his liberty should sell himself
for a slave. I am glad to understand from an experienced Person, what charges a
man must be at when he turns Roman-Catholique, namely, that whoever will
embrace that Religion must forfeit his Reason.

. 3. Secondly, The way of Demonstration is (according to Mr. S.) no certain way
to find out the Rule of Faith. In his 4th Appendix P. 253. and 254.
against my Lord of Down, one of the Eight Mines (as he calls them) which he
lays to blow up my Lords Dissuasive against Popery, is this, That the method he
takes in dissuading cannot be held in reason to have power to dissuade, unless
it be proper to that effect, that is, not common to that effect and a contrary
one. Now, that being most evidently no method or way to such an effect which
many follow and take, yet arrive not at that effect, it is plain to common
sense, that my Lord of Down miscalls his Book A Dissuasive, and that it can
have in it no power of moving the understanding one way or other, unless he can
first vouch some particularity in the method he takes, above what is in others
in which we experience miscarriage, etc. If this be true, then his method of
Demonstration is no way to make men certain of what he pretends to demonstrate,
because that is most evidently no way to an effect which many follow and take,
yet arrive not at that effect; so that it is plain to common sense that Mr. S's
Demonstrations can have in them no power of moving the understanding one way or
other, unless he can vouch some particularity in the Demonstrations he pretends
to bring, above what is in other pretended Demonstrations in which we
experience miscarriage. Do not Thomas, and Scotus (as Mr. White tells us
Extasis, P. 24.
) all along pretend to demonstrate? and yet it is generally believed that (at
least where they contradict one another) one of them failed in his
Demonstrations. Did not Mr. Charles Thynne pretend to have demonstrated that a
man at one jump might leap from London to Rome? and yet I do not think any one
was ever satisfied with his Demonstration. And Mr. S. knows one in the World
(whom I will not name, because he has since ingenuously acknowledged his
Error) who thought he had demonstrated the Quadrature of the Circle, and was
so confident of it as to venture the reputation of his Demonstrations in
Divinity upon it, and some of those Divinity Demonstrations were the very same
with Mr. S's. Since therefore the World has experienced so much miscarriage in
the way of Demonstration, before Mr. S's Demonstrations can be allowed to
signify any thing, he must (according to his own Law) vouch some particularity
in his way and method of Demonstration above what is in other men's. He has not
any where (that I remember) told us what that particularity is, wherein his way
of Demonstration is above other men's: Nor can I upon the most diligent search
find any peculiar advantage that his Way has more than theirs above mentioned;
unless this be one that he pretends to demonstrate a self-evident Principle,
and herein I think he has plainly the advantage of Mr. Charles Thynne; and
unless this may be counted another advantage, that he has so extraordinary a
confidence and conceit of his own Demonstrations; and in this particular, I
must acknowledge that he clearly excels all that have gone before him: In all
other things, his way of Demonstration is but like his neighbors.

SECT. II.
. 1. I Come now to examine his Demonstrations of this Self-evident Principle
(as he often calls it) that Oral Tradition is a certain and infallible way of
conveying Christ's Doctrine from one Age to another, Mr. S's demonstration a
priori.
without any corruption or change; which is to say, that it is impossible but
that this Rule should always have been kept to. That this is not a Self-evident
Principle, needs no other evidence than that he goes about to demonstrate it.
But yet, notwithstanding this, I think he has as much reason to call this a
Self-evident Principle, as to call his proofs of it Demonstrations.

. 2. In order to his Demonstration a Priori, he lays P. 59, 60.
these four grounds, which I shall set down in his own words. First, That
Christian Doctrine was at first unanimously settled by the Apostles, in the
hearts of the faithful dispersed in great multitudes over several parts of the
World. Secondly, That this Doctrine was firmly believed by all those faithful
to be the way to Heaven, and the contradicting or deserting it, to be the way
to damnation; so that the greatest hopes and fears imaginable were by engaging
the Divine Authority strongly applied to the minds of the first Believers,
encouraging them to the adhering to that Doctrine, and deterring them from
relinquishing it; and indeed infinitely greater than any other whatever,
springing from any temporal consideration: and that this was in all Ages the
persuasion of the faithful. Thirdly, That hopes of good and fears of harms
strongly applied are the causes of actual will. Fourthly, That the thing was
feasible or within their power; that what they were bred to was knowable by
them. This put, it follows as certainly that a great number or body of the
first Believers and after faithful in each Age, that is, from Age to Age would
continue to hold themselves and teach their Children as themselves had been
taught, that is, would follow and stick to Tradition, as it does, that a cause
put actually causing produces its effect. This is his Demonstration with the
grounds of it.

. 3. To show the vanity and weakness of this pretended Demonstration, I shall
assail it these three ways; by showing, First, That if the grounds of it were
true they would conclude too much, and prove that to be impossible which common
experience evinceth, and himself must grant to have been. Secondly, That his
main grounds are apparently false. Thirdly, That his Demonstration is confuted
by clear and undeniable Instances to the contrary.

SECT. III.
. 1. IF the grounds of it were true, The First answer to this Demonstration.
they would conclude too much, and prove that to be impossible which common
experience evinceth and himself must grant to have been. For if these two
Principles be true, That the greatest hopes and fears are strongly applied to
the minds of all Christians; and that those hopes and fears strongly applied
are the cause of actual will to adhere constantly to Christ's Doctrine: then
from hence it follows that none th^^ entertain this Doctrine can ever fall from
it; because falling from it is inconsistent with an actual will of adhering
constantly to it. For supposing (as he does) certain and constant causes of
actual will to adhere to this Doctrine, those who entertain it must actually
will to adhere to it, because a cause put actually causing produces its
effect, which is constant adherence to it. And if this were true these two
things would be impossible. First, That any Christian should turn Apostate or
Heretic. Secondly, That any Christian should live wickedly. Both which not
only frequent and undoubted experience does evince, but himself must grant, de
facto to have been.

. 2. First, It would be impossible that any Christian should turn Apostate or
Heretic. Heresy according to him is nothing else but the renouncing of
Tradition. Now he tells us P. 60.
, That the first Renouncers of Tradition must have been true Believers or
holders of it, ere they renounced it; and I suppose there is the same reason
for Apostates. But if all Christians or true Believers (as he calls them) have
these Arguments of hope and fear strongly applied; and hope and fear strongly
applied be the causes of actual will to adhere to this Doctrine; it is necessary
all Christians should adhere to it, and impossible there should be either
Apostates or Heretics. For if these causes be put in all the faithful actually
causing (as the Grounds of his Demonstration suppose) and indefectibleness be
the proper and necessary effect of these causes, as he also says P. 75.
, then it is impossible, that where these causes are put, there should be any
defection. For a proper and necessary effect cannot but be where the causes of
such an effect are put; especially if they be put actually causing; and
consequently it is impossible that any single Christian should ever either
totally apostatize or fall into Heresy, that is, renounce Tradition.

. 3. And that this is a genuine consequence from these Principles (though he
will not acknowledge it here, because he saw it would ruin his Demonstration)
is liberally acknowledged by him in other parts of his Discourse. For he tells
us P. 54.
, That it exceeds all the power of nature (abstracting from the causes of
madness and violent disease) to blot the knowledges of this Doctrine out of the
soul of one single Believer. And P. 78.
that since no man can hold contrary to his knowledge, nor doubt of what he
holds, nor change and innovate without knowing he does so, it is a manifest
impossibility a whole Age should fall into an absurdity so inconsistent with
the nature of one single man. And P. 89.
, That it is perhaps impossible for one single man to attempt to deceive
posterity by renouncing Tradition. Which passages laid together amount to thus
much, That it is impossible that Tradition should fail in any one single
person. And though in the passage last cited he speak faintly, and with a
perhaps, as if he apprehended some danger in speaking too peremptorily, yet any
one would easily see the last to be as impossible as any of the rest. And he
himself elsewhere, being in the full Career of his Bombast Rhetoric, delivers
it roundly without fear or wit P. 54.
, Sooner may the sinews of entire nature by overstraining crack, and she lose
all her activity and motion, that is, her self, than one single part of that
innumerable multitude which integrate that vast testification which we call
Tradition can possibly be violated.

. 4. But it may be we deal too hardly with him and press his Demonstration too
far, because he tells us he only intends by it to prove that the generality of
Christians will always adhere to Tradition. But if he intended to prove no more
but this, he should then have brought a Demonstration that would have concluded
no more; but this concludes of all as well as of the generality of Christians:
A clear evidence that it is no Demonstration, because it concludes that which
is evidently false, That there can be no Apostates or Heretics. Besides,
supposing his Demonstration to conclude only that the generality of Christians
would always adhere to Tradition, this is as plainly confuted by experience, if
there be any credit to be given to History. St. Hierom tells us Chron. ad Annum
Christ. 352.
, That Liberius Bishop of Rome (for all his particular Title to Infallibility
built upon Tradition, as Mr. S. speaks, Coroll. 28.) turned Arian. And that Ad
An. 363.
Arianism was established by the Synod of Ariminum, which was a Council more
general than that of Trent. And that Ad An. 364.
almost all the Churches in the whole World under the names of Peace and of the
Emperor, were polluted by Communion with the Arians. Again, That Advers.
Lucifer.
under the Emperor Constantius (Eusebius and Hippatius being Consuls)
Infidelity was subscribed under the names of Unity and Faith. And Ibid.
that the whole World groaned and wondered to see it self turned Arian. And he
Ibid.
uses this as an argument to the Luciferians, to receive into the Church those
who had been defiled with the Heresy of Arius, because the number of those who
had kept themselves Orthodox, was so exceeding small: For (says he) the Synod
of Nice which consisted of above Three hundred Bishops, received Eight Arian
Bishops whom they might have cast out without any great loss to the Church; I
wonder then how some, and those the followers of the Nicene Faith can think
that three Confessors (viz. Athanasius, Hilarious, Eusebius) ought not to do
that in case of necessity for the good and safety of the whole World, which so
many and such excellent Persons did voluntarily. It seems Arianism had
prevailed very far, when St. Hierom could not name above three eminent Persons
in the Church who had preserved themselves untainted with it. Again In Epist.
ad Galat. l. 3.
, Arius in Alexandria was at first but one spark, but because it was not
presently extinguish't it broke out into a flame which devoured the whole
World. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 20. and 21.
likewise tells us to the same purpose, That the Arian Heresy seized upon the
greatest part of the Church. And, to show that he knew nothing of Mr. S's
Demonstration of the indefectibility of the generality of Christians, he asks
Orat. 25.
, Where are those that define the Church by multitude, and despise the little
Flock, etc? And this Heresy was of a long continuance, for from its first rise
which happened in the 20 th year of Constantine, it continued (as Joh. Abbas
Chron. ad Annum octavum Maurit.
has calculated it) 266 years. And the Pelagian Heresy (if we may believe
Bradwardine, one of the great Champions of the Church against it) did in a
manner prevail as much as Arianism, as the said Author complains in his Preface
to his Book Cause. Dei.
, That almost the whole World was run after Pelagius into Error. Will Mr. S.
now say, that in the height of these Heresies the generality of Christians did
firmly adhere to Tradition? If he say they did, let him answer the express
Testimonies produced to the contrary: But if they did not, then his
Demonstration also fails as to the generality of Christians. And if the greater
part of Christians may fall off from Tradition, what Demonstration can make it
impossible for the lesser to do so? Who will say it is in Reason impossible
that a Thousand persons should relinquish Tradition, though Nine hundred of
them have already done it, and though the remainder be no otherwise secured
from doing so than those were who have actually relinquish't it? Now is not
this a clear evidence that this which he calls a Demonstration a Priori, is no
such thing? Because every Demonstration a Priori, must be from causes which are
necessary, whereas his Demonstration is from voluntary causes. So that unless
he can prove that voluntary causes are necessary, he shall never demonstrate
that it is impossible for the generality of any company of men to err who have
every one of them free will, and are every one of them liable to passion and
m^stake.

. 5. From all this it appears, that his whole Discourse about the Original and
Progress of Heresy, and the multitudes of Heretics in several Ages, is as
clear a confutation of his own Demonstration as can be desired. The only thing
that he offers in that Discourse, to prevent this Objection which he foresaw it
liable to, is this, It is not (says he P. 65.
) to be expected but that some contingencies should have place, where an whole
Species in a manner is to be wrought upon; it suffices that the causes to
preserve Faith indeficiently entire are as efficacious as those which are laid
for the preservation of Mankind, the virtue of Faith not being to continue
longer than Mankind its only subject does; and they will easily appear as
efficacious as the other, if we consider the strength of those causes before
explicated, and reflect that they are effectively powerful to make multitudes
daily debar themselves of those pleasures which are the causes of Mankinds
propagation; and if we look into History for experience of what has passed in
the World since the propagating of Christianity, we shall find more particulars
failing in propagating their kind, than their Faith. To which I answer,

First, That it may reasonably be expected there should be no contingencies in
any particulars, where causes of actual will are supposed to be put in all:
Because (as he says truly) a cause put actually causing cannot but produce its
effect. Suppose then constant causes laid in all Mankind of an actual will to
speak Truth to the best of their knowledge, were it not reasonable to expect
that there would be no such contingency to the Worlds end as that any man
should tell a lie? Nay, it were madness for any man to think any such
contingency should be, supposing causes actually causing men always to speak
Truth.

Secondly, It is far from Truth that the causes to preserve Faith indeficiently
entire, are as efficacious as those which are laid for the propagation of
Mankind. And whereas he would prove the strength of these causes which are laid
to preserve Faith, because they are effectively powerful to make multitudes
daily debar themselves of those pleasur^s which are the causes of Mankinds
propagation; I hope no body that has read the innumerable complaints which
occur in their own Historians, and others of the best and most credible of
their own Writers, of more than one Age, concerning the general viciousness and
debauchery of their Priests and Monks, will he overforward to believe that all
those who debar themselves of lawful Marriage, do abstain from those unlawful
pleasures.

. 6. But nothing can be more impudent than what he adds, That if we look into
Histories for experience of what has past in the World since the first
planting of Christianity, we shall find far more particulars failing in
propagating their kind, than their Faith, Do any Histories confirm it to have
been the experience of the World, that the far greatest part of the World did
in any Age give over propagating their kind? But Histories do confirm that the
far greatest part of the Christian World did fall off to Arianism and
Pelagianism; and consequently, as he supposes, did desert and renounce
Tradition. Did ever whole Nations and vast Territories of the World either
wholly, or for the far greatest part of them, take upan humor against
propagating Mankind? And yet both History, and the experience of the present
Age assures us, that a great part of Asia and of Africa (where the most
flourishing Churches in the World once were) are fallen off from Christianity,
and become either Mahometans or Heathens. In Africa almost all those vast
Regions, which Christianity had gained from Heathenism, Mahometanism has
regained from Christianity. All the North-part of Afrique lying along the
Mediterranean (where Christianity flourish't once as much as ever it did at
Rome) is at this time utterly void of Christians, excepting a few Towns in the
hands of the European Princes. And not to mention all particular places, the
large Region of Nubia, which had (as is thought) from the Apostles time
professed the Christian Faith, has within these 150 years for want of
Ministers (as Alvarez Hist. Aethiop.
tells us) quitted Christianity, and is partly revolted to Heathenism, partly
fallen off to Mahometanism. So that it seems, that notwithstanding the
Arguments of hope and fear, the very Teachers of Tradition may fail in a
largely extended Church. As for Asia, in the Easterly parts of it, there is not
now one Christian to four of what there were 500 years ago; and in the more
Southerly parts of it (where Christianity had taken deepest root) the
Christians are far inferior in number to the Idolaters and Mahometans, and do
daily decrease. What thinks Mr. S. of all this? Have those Christian Nations
which are turned Mahometans and Pagans failed in their Faith or not? If they
have, I expect from him clear Instances of more that have failed in propagating
their kind.

. 7. But, besides those who have totally Apostatized from Christianity, has
not the whole Greek Church with the Jacobites and Nestorians, and all those
other Sects which agree with and depend upon these, and which taken together
are manifoldly greater than the Roman Church; I say, have not all these
renounced Tradition for several Ages? And here in Europe, has not a great part
of Poland, Hungary, both Germany's, France, and Switzerland? Have not the
Kingdoms of great Britain, Denmark, Sweden, and a considerable part of
Ireland, in Mr. S's opinion deserted Tradition? If I should once see a whole
Nation fail, because no body would marry and contribute to the propagation of
Mankind; and should find this sullen humor to prevail in several Nations, and
to overspread vast Parts of the World, I should. then in good earnest think it
possible for Mankind to fail; unless I could show it impossible for other
Nations to do that which I see some to have done, who were every whit as
unlikely to have done it. So that whatever cause he assigns of Heresy P. 67.
, as Pride, Ambition, Lust, or any other vice or interest, if these can take
place in whole Nations, and make them renounce Tradition, then where is the
efficacy of the causes to preserve Faith indeficiently entire in any? For the
Demonstration holds as strongly for all Christians as for any.

. 8. Secondly, From these grounds it would follow that no Christian can live
wickedly; because the end of Faith being a good life, the arguments of hope and
fear must in all Reason be as powerful and efficacious causes of a good life,
as of a true belief. And that his Demonstration proves the one as much as the
other, will be evident from his own reasoning; for he P. 62.
argues in this manner, Good is the proper object of the will, good proposed
makes the will to desire that good, and consequently the known means to obtain
it: Now infinite goods and harms sufficiently proposed are of their own nature
incomparably more powerful causes to carry the will than temporal ones. Since
then, when two causes are counterpoised, the lesser when it comes to execution
is no cause as to the substance of that effect, it follows that there is no
cause to move the wills of a World of Believers to be willing to do that which
they judge would lose themselves and their Posterity infinite goods, and bring
them infinite harms, etc. in case a sufficient Proposal or Application be not
wanting, which he tells us P. 6^.
is not wanting, because Christianity urged to execution, gives its followers a
new life and a new nature, than which a nearer Application cannot be imagined.
Does not this Argument extend to the lives of Christians, as well as their
Belief? So that he may as well infer from these grounds, that it is impossible
that those who profess Christianity should live contrary to it, as that they
should fail to deliver down the Doctrine of Christ; because whatever can be an
inducement and temptation to any man, to contradict this Doctrine by his
practice, may equally prevail upon him to falsify it. For why should men make
any more scruple of damning themselves and their Posterity by teaching them
false Doctrines, than by living wicked Lives? which are equally pernicious with
Heretical Doctrines, not only upon account of the bad influence which such
examples of Fathers and Teachers are like to have upon their Scholars, but
likewise as they are one of the strongest arguments in the World to persuade
them, that their Teachers do not themselves believe that Religion which they
teach; for if they did, they would live according to it. Why should any man
think, that those arguments of hope and fear which will not prevail upon the
generality of Christians to make them live holy Lives, should be so necessarily
efficacious to make them so much concerned for the preserving of a right
Belief? Nay, we have great reason to believe that such persons will endeavor
as much as may be, to bend and accommodate their Belief to their Lives. And
this is the true source of those Innovations in Faith for which we challenge
the Church of Rome; which any man may easily discern, who will but consider how
all their new Doctrines are fitted to a secular Interest, and the gratifying of
that inordinate appetite after riches and dominion which reigns in the Court of
Rome, and in the upper part of the Clergy of that Church.

SECT. IV.
. 1. SEcondly, The second Answer to his Demonstration.
The main grounds of his Demonstration are apparently false: For,

First, This Demonstration supposes that the generality of Christian Parents
in all Ages perfectly understood the Doctrine of Christ, and did not mistake
any part of it; that they remembered it perfectly, and that they were faithful
and diligent to instruct their Children in it; which is as contrary to
experience as that the generality of Christians are knowing and honest. It
supposes likewise, that this Doctrine, and every substantial part of it, was
received and remembered by the generality of Children as it was taught, and was
understood perfectly by them without the least material mistake: So he tells us
P. 53.
, That the substance of Faith comes clad in such plain matters of Fact, that
the most stupid man living cannot possibly be ignorant of it. But whether this
be reasonable to be supposed or no, may easily be determined not only from
every man's own experience of the World, but from a more advantageous Instance
of the experience of the first Age of Christianity. Was there ever a more
knowing and diligent Teacher of this Doctrine than our Savior? and yet his
Disciples fell into many mistakes concerning it. So that in order to the
certain propagating of it, the wisdom of God thought it requisite to endue even
those who had learned this Doctrine from himself with an infallible spirit, by
which they might be led into all Truth, and secured from error and mistake;
which had been unnecessary had it been impossible for them to mistake this
Doctrine. The Apostles, who taught the World by an infallible Spirit, and with
infinitely more advantage than ordinary Parents can teach their Children, yet
in all the Churches which they planted they found Christians very apt to
mistake and pervert their Doctrine, as appears by their frequent complaints in
most of their Epistles. Nay the Apostle charge the Generality of the Hebrews
Heb. 5.11, 12.
with such a degree of dullness and stupidity, that after fitting time and means
of instruction they were still ignorant of the very Principles of Christianity:
So he tells them, That when for the time they ought to be Teachers of others,
they had need that one should teach them again which be the first Principles of
the Oracles of God. And St. Hierom tells us Advers. Luciferian.
, That the Primitive Churches were tainted with many gross Errors whilst the
Apostles were alive, and the blood of Christ yet warm in Judea. But it may be
there have been better Teachers since, and Children are more apt to learn now
than Men were then. Who knows how the World may be changed?

. 2. Secondly, This Demonstration supposes the hopes and fears which Christian
Religion applies to Men's minds to be certain and necessary causes of actual
will in Men to adhere to the Doctrine of Christ; and consequently that they
must necessarily adhere to it. That he supposes them to be necessary, I have
his own word for it; for he tells us P. 75.
, That he has endeavored to demonstrate the indefectibleness of Tradition as
the proper and necessary effect of those causes which preserve and continue
Tradition on foot; and what those causes are he told us before P. 60.
, That they are Hopes and Fears strongly applied. But I hope that the
indefectibleness of Tradition cannot be a necessary effect of the strong
application of those Hopes and Fears, unless those Hopes and Fears be a
necessary cause of that effect. And indeed this is sufficiently implied in his
saying that they are the causes of actual will in Christians to adhere to
Tradition. For if these causes of actual will be constant (as he must suppose)
then they are certain and necessary and infallible causes of adhering to this
Doctrine. For whatever is in act is necessary while it is so, and if it be
constantly in act, the effect is always necessary. But what a wild Supposition
is this, That Moral Motives and Arguments working upon a free Principle, the
Will of Man, do necessarily produce their Effect? Is it necessary that the
hopes of Heaven, and the fears of Hell should keep Christians constant to the
Doctrine of Christ? and is it not as necessary that these arguments should
prevail upon them to the practice of it? It is in vain to go about to
demonstrate that all men must be good who have sufficient arguments propounded
to them, when experience tells us the contrary. Nay, it is in reason impossible
that Moral arguments should be of a necessary and infallible efficacy, because
they are always propounded to a free Agent, who may choose whether he will
yield to them or not. Indeed it is always reasonable that men should yield to
them, and if they be reasonable they will; but so long as they are free it can
never be infallibly certain that they will. And if men be not free, it is no
virtue at all in them to be wrought upon by these arguments. For what virtue
can it be in any man to entertain the Christian doctrine and adhere to it and
live accordingly, if he does all this necessarily, that is, whether he will or
no, and can no more choose whether he will do so or not, than whether he will
see the light when the Sun shines upon his open eyes, or whether he will hear a
sound when all the Bells in the Town are Ringing in his ears, or (to use Mr.
S's P. 53.
own similitudes) whether he will feel heat, cold, pain, pleasure, or any other
material quality that affects his senses. We see then how unreasonable his
Suppositions are, and yet without these Grounds his Demonstration falls. For if
it be possible that Christians may mistake or forget the Doctrine of Christ, or
any part of it, or be defective in diligence to instruct others in it; or if it
be possible that the Will of man which is free, may not be necessarily and
infallibly swayed by the arguments of hope and fear, then it is possible that
Tradition may fail. And is not this a good Demonstration which supports it self
upon such Principles as do directly affront the constant experience, and the
clearest reason of Mankind?

. 3. And here I cannot but take notice how inconsistent he is to himself in
laying the Grounds of Tradition's certainty. In one Part of his Book he tells
us P. 53.
, That Tradition has for its Basis the best Nature in the Universe, that is,
Man's; Not according to his Moral part, defectible by reason of Original
Corruption; nor yet his Intellectuals, darkly groping in the pursuit of
Science, etc. But according to those Faculties in him perfectly and necessarily
subject to the operations and strokes of Nature, that is, his Eyes, Ears;
Handling, and the direct impressions of knowledge, as naturally and necessarily
issuing from the affecting those senses, as it is to feel heat, cold, pain,
pleasure, or any other material quality. So that according to this Discourse,
the Basis of Tradition is not Man's Nature considered as Moral, and capable of
Intellectual Reflection; for in this consideration it is dark and defectible:
But Man's Nature considered only as capable of direct sensitive knowledge, and as
acting naturally and necessarily. Which is to say, That Tradition is foundded
in the Nature of Man considered not as a Man but a Brute; under which
consideration, I see no reason why he should call it the best Nature in the
Universe. But now how will he reconcile this Discourse with the Grounds of his
Demonstration? where he tells us, That the stability of Tradition is founded in
the Arguments of Hope and Fear, the Objects of which being future and at a
distance, cannot work upon a man immediately by direct Impressions upon his
senses, but must work upon him by way of Intellectual Reflection and
Consideration. For I hope he will not deny but that the Arguments of Hope and
Fear work upon man according to his Moral and Intellectual part, else how are
they Arguments? And if man according to his Moral part be (as he says)
defectible, how can the indefectibility of Tradition be founded in those
Arguments which work upon man only according to his Moral part? I have
purposely all along (both for the Readers ease and mine own) neglected to take
notice of several of his inconsistencies, but these are such clear and
transparent Contradictions, that I could do no less than make an example of
them.

SECT. V.
. 1. THirdly, This Demonstration is confuted by clear and undeniable Instances
to the contrary. I will mention but two.

First, The Tradition of the one true God, which was the easiest to be
preserved of any Doctrine in the World, being short and plain, planted in every
man's Nature, and perfectly suited to the reason of Mankind. And yet this
Tradition, not having past through many hands (by reason of the long Age of
man) was so defaced and corrupted, that the World did lapse into Polytheism and
Idolatry. Now a man that were so hardy as to demonstrate against matter of
Fact, might by a stronger Demonstration than Mr. S's, prove that though it be
certain this Tradition has failed, yet it was impossible it should fail; as
Zeno demonstrated the impossibility of motion against Diogenes walking before
his eyes. For the Doctrine of the one true God was settled in the heart of Noah,
and firmly believed by him to be the way to happiness, and the contradicting or
deserting of this, to be the way to misery. And this Doctrine was by him so
taught to his Children, who were encouraged by these Motives to adhere to this
Doctrine, and to propagate it to their Children, and were deterred by them from
relinquishing it. And this was in all Ages the persuasion of the faithful. Now
the Hopes of Happiness, and the Fears of Misery strongly applied, are the
causes of actual will. Besides, the thing was feasible, or within their power;
that is, what they were bred to was knowable by them, and that much more easily
than any other Doctrine whatsoever, being short, and plain, and natural. This
put, it follows as certainly that a great number in each Age would continue to
hold themselves, and teach their Children as themselves had been taught, that
is, would follow and stick to this Tradition of the one true God, as it does
that a cause put actually causing produces its effect. Actually I say; for
since the cause is put, and the Patient disposed, it follows inevitably that
the cause is put still actually causing. This demonstration which concludes an
apparent falsehood has the whole strength of Mr. S's, and several advantages
beyond it. For the Doctrine conveyed by this Tradition is the most important,
being the first Principle of all Religion; the danger of corrupting it as
great, the facility of preserving it much greater, than of the Christian
Doctrine, for the causes before mentioned. And yet after all, it signifies
nothing against certain experience, and unquestionable matter of Fact; only it
sufficiently shows the vanity of Mr. S's pretended Demonstration built upon the
same or weaker Grounds.

. 2. Secondly, The other Instance shall be in the Greek Church, who received
the Christian Doctrine as entire from the Apostles, and had as great an
obligation to propagate it truly to Posterity, and the same fears and hopes
strongly applied to be the actual causes of will; in a word, all the same
Arguments and Causes to preserve and continue Tradition on foot, which the
Roman Church had: And yet, to the utter confusion of Mr. S's Demonstration,
Tradition has failed among them. For as Speculators, they deny the procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son, and as Testifiers they disown any such Doctrine
to have been delivered to them by the precedent Age, or to any other Age of
their Church by the Apostles as the Doctrine of Christ.

. 3. To this Instance of the Greek Church, because Mr. White has offered
something by way of answer, I shall here consider it. He tells us Apology for
Tradition, p. 51.
, That the plea of the Greek Church is Non-Tradition, alleging only this, That
their Fathers do not deliver the Doctrine of the procession of the Holy Ghost;
not that they say the contrary, which clearly demonstrates there are no
opposite Traditions between them and us. But this was not the thing Mr. White
was concerned to do, to demonstrate there were no opposite Traditions between
the Greeks and the Latins, but to secure his main Demonstration of the
impossibility of Traditions failing against this Instance. For that the Greeks
have no such Tradition as this, That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, is
as good an evidence of the failure of Tradition as if they had a positive
Tradition, That he proceeds only from the Father; especially if we consider
that they Phoc. Ep. 7.
charge the Latin Church with Innovation in this matter, and say that the
addition of that Clause, of the Procession from the Son also, is a corruption
of the ancient Faith, and a Devilish Invention. Why then does Mr. White go
about to baffle so material an Objection (and, I fear, his own Conscience
likewise) by a pitiful Evasion instead of a solid Answer? What though there be
no opposite Traditions between the Greek and Latin Church, yet if their Faith
be opposite, Will it not from hence follow that Tradition has failed in one of
them? I wonder that Mr. White, who has so very well confuted the Infallibility
of Popes and Councils, and thereby undermined the very Foundations of that
Religion, should not by the same light of Reason discover the fondness of his
own Opinion concerning the Infallibility of Oral Tradition, which has more and
greater absurdities in it than that which he confutes. And to show Mr. White
the absurdity of it, I will apply his Demonstration of the Infallibility of
Christian Tradition in general, to the Greek Church in particular; by which
every one will see that it does as strongly prove the impossibility of
Traditions failing in the Greek Church, as in the Roman Catholic, as they are
pleased to call it. His Demonstration is this De Fid. and Theol. Tract. 1.
Sect. 4.
, Christ commanded his Apostles to preach to all the World, and lest any one
should doubt of the effect, he sent his Spirit into them to bring to their
remembrance what he had taught them; which Spirit did not only give them a
power to do what he inclined them to, but did cause them actually to do it. I
cannot but take notice by the way of the ill consequence of this, which is,
that men may doubt, whether those who are to teach the Doctrine of Christ, will
remember it, and teach it to others, unless they have that extraordinary and
efficacious assistance of the Holy Ghost which the Apostles had; if this be
true, his Demonstration is at an end, for he cannot plead that this assistance
has been continued ever since the Apostles. He proceeds, The Apostles preached
this Doctrine; the Nations understood it, lived according to it, and valued it
as that which was necessary to them and their Posterity incomparably beyond any
thing else. All this I suppose done to, and by the Greeks as well as any other
Nation. These things being put, it cannot enter into any man's understanding,
but that the Christian [Greeks] of the first Age, being the Scholars of the
Apostles, could and would earnestly commend the Christian Doctrine to their
Posterity; if so, it is evident that they did. So that the continuance of the
purity of the Faith in the [Greek] Church is founded upon this, That Fathers
always delivered the same Doctrine to their Children which they had received
from their Fathers, and did believe it under this very Notion and Title as
received; nor could any one [of that Church] deliver another Doctrine under
this Title, but he would be convinced of a Lie by the rest; and if the whole
[Greek] Church should endeavor to deliver a new Doctrine under that Title,
[and there is the same reason if they should leave out any Article of the old
Doctrine] that whole Age would be in their Consciences condemned of
perfidiousness and parricide. Now this is as impossible as it is that all
Mankind should conspire to kill themselves. And he afterward Ibid. Sect. 5.
gives the reason why it is so. impossible that Tradition should fail, and it
is a very bold and saucy one, That if the Tradition of the Christian Faith be
not more firm than the course of the Sun and Moon, and the propagation of
Mankind, then God has shown himself an unskilful Artificer. What is there in
all this Demonstration, which may not be accommodated to the Greek Church with
as much force and advantage as to the Catholic? Unless he can show that it is
very possible that all the Men in Greece may conspire to kill themselves, but
yet absolutely impossible that all the Men in the World should do so; which I
am sure he cannnot show, unless he can demonstrate, that though it be possible
for a Million, of as wise Men as any are to be found in the World together, to
conspire to do a foolish action, yet it is impossible that an Hundred millions
not one jot wiser than the other, should agree together to the doing of it.

. 4. From all this it appears, That Mr. White's Answer to this Objection, does
not signify any thing to his purpose. For if the Procession of the Holy Ghost
was part of Christ's Doctrine, then it was delivered by the Apostles to the
Greek Church; if so, they could not fail to deliver it down to the next Age,
and that to the next, and so on; but it seems they have failed. Where then is
the force of hopes and fears strongly applied? Where are the certain Causes of
actual Will to adhere to this Doctrine? Why is not the effect produced, the
Causes being put actually causing? If the Apostles delivered this Doctrine,
Oral Tradition is so clear and unmistakable, and P. 53. and 54.
brings down Faith clad in such plain matters of Fact, that the most stupid man
living (much less the Greeks, that were the flower of Mankind) could not
possibly be ignorant of it; nay Ibid.
, it exceeds all the power of Nature to blot Knowledges thus fixed out of the
Soul of one single Believer (much more out of so vast a Church) And P. 78.
since no man can hold contrary to his knowledge, or doubt of what he holds, nor
change and innovate without knowing he did so, it is a manifest impossibility, a
whole Church should in any Age fall into an absurdity so inconsistent with the
nature of one single man. And P. 86.
since it is natural for every man to speak Truth, and Grace is to perfect
Nature in whatever is good in it, it follows that one truly Christian heart is
far more fixed to Veracity, than others not imbued with these heavenly Tenets;
and consequently that a multitude of such must incomparably exceed in point of
testifying the same number of others, unfortified by Christ's Doctrine. And
since P. 89.
such a thought cannot enter into the most depraved Nature, as to harm another
without any good to himself, and yet this must be if we put Christian Fathers
misteaching their Children unreceived Doctrines for received (and I hope for
the same reason, received Doctrines for unreceived) contrary to their knowledge.
For supposing Sanctity in the (Greek) Church (and why may we not as well as in
the Latin) That is, that multitudes in it make Heaven their first love, and
look on spiritual goods as their main concern, etc. it follows, that had the
Fathers of that Church in any Age consented to mislead their Posterity from
what themselves (not only) conceited (but knew) to be true, they should do the
most extreme harm imaginable to others without any the least good to
themselves; which is perhaps impossible in one single man, more in few, but
infinitely in a multitude, especially of good men.

. 5. Thus I might apply the rest of his Ranting Rhetoric (but that I am weary
of Transcribing it) concerning P. 90, 91.
the natural love of Parents to their Children (unless we suppose the Greek
Church destitute of it) which must needs engage them to use the means proper to
bring them to Heaven, and save them from Hell: As also concerning the natural
care men have of not losing their Credit by telling pernicious Lies. And, not
to omit the best part of his Demonstration P. 93.
(which was therefore prudently reserved to the last place) I might likewise
show how the Principles of each Science, Arithmetic, Geometry, Logic, Nature,
Morality, Historical Prudence, Politics, Metaphysics, Divinity, and last of
all the new Science of Controversy (as he calls it) or the blessed Art of
Eternal wrangling and disputing ( the first Principle whereof (he tells us) is,
That Tradition is certain) do all contribute to show the certainty of
Tradition, that is, the impossibility that any part of Christ's Doctrine should
fail in the Greek Church any more than in the Latin. And surely Arithmetic,
Geometry, Logic, Natural Philosophy, Metaphysics, etc. will all stand up for
the Greek Church in this quarrel; for considering that Greece was the place
where the Arts and Sciences were born and bred, it is not to be imagined that
they should be so disingenuous and unnatural, as not to contribute their best
assistance to the service of their Country.

. 6. But it may be the Greeks cannot so justly pretend to Oral Tradition as the
Latins. What if St. Peter, the Head of the Apostles, thought fit to share
Scripture and Tradition between these two Churches, and laying his left hand on
the Greek Church, and his right on the Latin, was pleased to confer the great
blessing of Oral Tradition upon the Latin Church? which being to be the seat of
Infallibility, it was but fitting that she should be furnished with this
infallible way of conveying the Christian Doctrine. And therefore it may be,
that as the Scriptures of the New Testament were left in Greek, so Oral
Tradition was delivered down only in Latin. This I confess is not altogether
without some show of reason: Mr. S. may do well to take the matter into his
deeper consideration; he has in his time improved as weak probabilities as
these into lusty Demonstrations. And if he could but demonstrate this, it would
very much weaken the force of this Instance of the Greek Church; otherwise (for
ought I see) this Instance will hold good against him; and whatever he can say
for the impossibility of Tradition's failing in the Latin Church, may all be
said of the Greek Church, if he will but grant that the Apostles preached the
same Doctrine to them both; that the arguments of hope and fear which this
Doctrine contains in it, were applied as strongly to the Greeks as the Latins.
And yet notwithstanding all this, Tradition has plainly failed in the Greek
Church. Let him now assign the Age wherein so vast a number of men conspired to
leave out the Article of the Procession of the Holy Ghost; and show how it was
possible a whole Age could conspire together to damn their Posterity; or how
the Faith of immediate Forefathers might be altered without any such
Conspiracy; and we are ready to satisfy him how the Doctrine of the Latin
Church might be corrupted and altered, and to tell him punctually in what Age
it was done. And until he do this, I would entreat him to trouble us no more
with those canting questions (wherein yet the whole force of his Demonstration
lies) How is it possible a whole Age should conspire to change the Doctrine of
their Forefathers? And in what Age was this done? For if it be reasonable to
demand of us, in order to the overthrowing of his Demonstration, to assign the
particular Age wherein the Latin Church conspired to change the ancient
Doctrine; with the same reason we require of him, in order to the maintaining
of his Demonstration, to name the particular Age wherein the Greek Church
conspired to alter the Doctrine of Christ (which was undoubtedly in the first
Age truly delivered to them by the Apostles) and also to show from the rational
force and strength of Tradition, how it is more impossible for the whole Church
to have failed in transmitting the Doctrine of Christ down to us, or to have
conspired to the altering of it, than for such a multitude of Christians as is
the vast body of the Greek Church. If Mr. S. or Mr. White show this, they do
something; otherwise, I must tell them, that unless they can manage these
pretty things they call Demonstrations better, they must shortly either quit
their Reason, or their Religion; or else return to the honest old Mumpsimus of
the Infallibility of the Church from an extraordinary and immediate assistance
of the Holy Ghost; or (to make the business short, and stop all gaps with one
Bush) come over to the Jesuits, and acknowledge the Popes Infallibility both in
matters of Faith and Fact; by which means they may reconcile themselves to him,
and prevent that direful stroke which threatens them from Rome, and is ready to
cut them off from the Body of the Traditionary Church. And thus I have done
with his First Demonstration; and I take it for a good sign that the Popish
Cause is at a very low ebb, when such stuff as this must be called
Demonstration.

SECT. VI.
Mr. S's Demonstration a posteriori.
. 1. I Come now to his Demonstration a Posteriori, which although it fall of it
self if the Demonstration a Priori fail; yet because it has some peculiar
absurdities of its own, I shall consider it by it self as well as with relation
to the other.

. 2. Before he comes to lay it down with the Grounds of it, according to his
usual fashion, he premiseth something as yielded by Protestants which, in his
sense, no Protestant ever granted. Just so he dealt with us before concerning
the Scriptures, saying, That by them the Protestants must mean unsensed Letters
and Characters. But let us see what it is. P. 76.
That this Demonstration a Posteriori, seems a needless endeavor against the
Protestants, who yield that those Points in which we agree, as the Trinity,
Incarnation, etc. came down by this way of Tradition; And this (he says) no
Protestant ever denied. And then he asks. Whether the same virtue of Tradition
would not have been as powerful to bring down other Points in which we do not
agree, had any such been? Now if he speak any thing to his own purpose, he must
suppose Protestants to yield, that all those Points wherein we are agreed, were
conveyed down to us solely by Oral Tradition without Writing: But this all
Protestants deny. So that, that only which would avail his Cause against us, is
to show, that those Points wherein we differ, have not only come down to us by
Oral Teaching, but that they are likewise contained in Scripture, without
which, we say, we can have no sufficient certainty and assurance at this
distance, that they were the Doctrine of Christ, and that they were not either
totally innovated, or else corrupted in the conveyance from what they were at
first. And if he can show this concerning any Point in difference, I promise to
yield it to him.

. 3. I come now to his Demonstration, which I shall set down in his own words
with the Principles upon which it relies. P. 77, 78.
The effect then we will pitch upon, and avow to be the proper one of such a
cause, is the present persuasion of Traditionary Christians (or Catholics)
that their Faith has descended from Christ and his Apostles uninterruptedly,
which we find most firmly rooted in their heart; and the existence of this
persuasion we affirm to be impossible without the existence of Traditions ever
indeficiency to beget it. To prove this, I lay this first Principle; That Age,
which holds her Faith thus delivered from the Apostles, neither can it self
have changed any thing in it nor know or doubt that any Age since the Apostles
had changed or innovated therein. The second Principle shall be this. No Age
could innovate any thing, and withal deliver that very thing to Posterity as
received from Christ by continual Succession. The Sum of which is this, That
because a present multitude of Christians ( viz. the Roman Church) are
persuaded, that Christ's Doctrine has descended to them solely by an
uninterrupted Oral Tradition, therefore this persuasion is an effect which
cannot be attributed to any other cause but the indeficiency of Oral Tradition.
For if neither the present Age, nor any Age before, could make any change or
innovation, then the persuasion of the present Age is a plain Demonstration
that this Doctrine was always the same, and consequently that Tradition cannot
fail.

. 4. In answer to this, I shall endeavor to make good these four things.

First, That these Principles wholly rely upon the Truth of the Grounds of his
Demonstration a Priori.

Secondly, That these Principles are not sufficiently proved by him.

Thirdly, That Doctrines and Practices, which must be acknowledged to have been
innovated, have made the same pretense to uninterrupted Tradition.

Fourthly, That it is not the present persuasion of the Church of Rome, (whom
he calls the Traditionary Christians) nor ever was, that their Faith has
descended to them solely by Oral Tradition. If I can now make good these four
things, I hope his Demonstration is at an end.

SECT. VII.
The First Answer to his second Demonstration.
. 1. THat these Principles wholly rely upon the truth of the Grounds of his
Demonstration a Priori. For if the Doctrine of Christ was either imperfectly
taught in any Age, or mistaken by the Learners, or any part of it forgotten (as
it seems the whole Greek Church have forgot that fundamental Point of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, as the Roman Church accounts it) or if the
Arguments of hope and fear be not necessary causes of actual will to adhere to
Tradition; then there may have been changes and innovations in any Age, and yet
men may pretend to have followed Tradition. But I have shown, that Ignorance,
and Negligence, and Mistake, and Pride, and Lust, and Ambition, and any other
Vice or Interest, may hinder those causes from being effectual to preserve
Tradition entire and uncorrupted. And when they do so, it is not to be expected
that those Persons, who innovate and change the Doctrine, should acknowledge
that their new Doctrines are contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; but that they
should at first advance them as Pious, and after they have prevailed and gained
general entertainment, then impudently affirm that they were the very Doctrines
which Christ delivered; which they may very securely do, when they have it in
their power to burn all that shall deny it.

. 2. I will give a clear Instance of the possibility of this in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, by showing how this might easily come in, in the Ninth or
Tenth Age after Christ. We will suppose then that about this time, when
universal Ignorance, and the genuine Daughter of it (call her Devotion or
Superstition) had overspread the World, and the generality of People were
strongly inclined to believe strange things; and even the greatest
Contradictions were recommended to them under the notion of Mysteries, being
told by their Priests and Guides, that the more contradictions any thing is to
Reason, the greater merit there is in believing it: I say, let us suppose, that
in this state of things, one or more of the most eminent then in the Church,
either out of design, or out of superstitious ignorance and mistake of the
sense of our Savior's words used in the Consecration of the Sacrament, should
advance this new Doctrine, That the words of Consecration, This is my Body, are
not to be understood by any kind of Trope (as the like forms in Scripture are,
as I am the Vine, I am the Door, which are plain Tropes) but being used about
this great Mystery of the Sacrament ought in all reason to be supposed to
contain in them some notable Mystery; which they will do, if they be understood
of a real change of the substance of Bread and Wine, made by virtue of these
words, into the real Body and Blood of our Savior. And in all this, I suppose
nothing but what is so far from being impossible, that it is too usual, for men
either out of Ignorance or Interest, to advance new Opinions in Religion. And
such a Doctrine as this was very likely to be advanced by the ambitious Clergy
of that time, as a probable means to draw in the People to a greater veneration
of them; which advantage Mr. Rushworth Dial. 1. Sect. 4.
seems to be very sensible of, when he tells us, That the power of the Priest
in this particular, is such a privilege, as if all the learned Clerks that ever
lived since the beginning of the World, should have studied to raise, advance,
and magnify some one state of men to the highest pitch of Reverence and
Eminency, they could never (without special light from Heaven) have thought of
any thing comparable to this. I am of his mind, that it was a very notable
device, but (I am apt to think) invented without any special light from Heaven.
Nor was such a Doctrine less likely to take and prevail among the People in an
Age prodigiously ignorant, and strongly inclined to Superstition, and thereby
well prepared to receive the grossest Absurdities under the notion of
Mysteries; especially if they were such as might seem to conciliate a greater
honor and reverence to the Sacrament. Now supposing such a Doctrine as this,
so fitted to the humor and temper of the Age, to be once asserted, either by
chance, or out of design; it would take like wildfire: especially if by some
one or more who bore sway in the Church, it were but recommended with
convenient gravity and solemnity. And although Mr. Rushworth says Dial. 3.
Sect. 7.
, It is impossible that the Authority of one man should sway so much in the
World, because (says he) surely the Devil himself would rather help the
Church, than permit so little pride among men; yet I am not so thoroughly
satisfied with this cunning reason: For though he delivers it confidently, and
with a surely, yet I make some doubt whether the Devil would be so forward to
help the Church; nay, on the contrary, I am inclined to think that he would
rather choose to connive at this humble and obsequious temper in men, in order
to the overthrow of Religion, than cross a design so dear to him by
unseasonable temptations to pride: So that notwithstanding Mr. Rushworth's
reason, it seems very likely that such a Doctrine, in such an Age, might easily
be propagated by the influence and authority of one or a few great Persons in
the Church. For nothing can be more suitable to the easy and passive temper of
superstitious Ignorance, than to entertain such a Doctrine with all imaginable
greediness, and to maintain it with a proportionable zeal. And if there be any
wiser than the rest, who make Objections against it as if this Doctrine were
new and full of contradictions, they may easily be born down by the stream, and
by the eminency and authority and pretended sanctity of those who are the heads
of this Innovation. And when this Doctrine is generally swallowed, and all that
oppose it are looked upon and punished as Heretics, then it is seasonable to
maintain that this Doctrine was the doctrine of forefathers; to which end it
will be sufficient to those who are willing to have it true, to bend two or
three sayings of the Ancients to that purpose. And as for the contradictions
contained in this Doctrine, it was but telling the People then (as they do in
effect now) that contradictions ought to be no scruple in the way of Faith:
that the more impossible any thing is, it is the fitter to be believed: that it
is not praiseworthy to believe plain possibilities, but that this is the
gallantry and heroical power of Faith, this is the way to oblige God Almighty
for ever to us, to believe flat and downright contradictions: For God requires
at the Peoples hands (as Mr. Rushworth Dial. 1. Sect. 4.
tells us) a Credulity of things above and beyond Nature; nay, beyond all the
Fables, be it spoken with respect, that ever man invented. After this Doctrine
has proceeded thus far, and by the most inhumane severities and cruelties
suppressed Dissenters, or in a good measure rooted them out; then if they please
even this new word Transubstantiation may pretend also to Antiquity, and in
time be confidently vouched for a word used by Christians in all Ages, and
transmitted down to them by those from whom they received the Doctrine of the
Sacrament, as a term of Art appendant to it. And when a superstitious Church
and designing Governors have once gained this Post, and by means of this
enormous Article of Transubstantiation have sufficiently debauched the minds of
men, and made a breach in their understandings wide enough for the entertaining
of any Error, though never so gross and senseless; then Innovations come in
amain, and by sholes; and the more absurd and unreasonable any thing is, it is
for that very reason the more proper matter for an Article of Faith. And if any
of these Innovations be objected against, as contrary to former belief and
practice, it is but putting forth a lusty act of Faith, and believing another
contradiction, that though they be contrary yet they are the same.

. 3. And there is nothing in all this, but what is agreeable both to History
and Experience. For that the Ninth and Tenth Ages, and those which followed
them till the Reformation, were thus prodigiously ignorant and superstitious,
is confirmed by the unanimous consent of all Historians; and even by those
Writers, that have been the greatest Pillars of their own Religion. And
Experience tells us, that in what Age soever there are a great company of
superstitious People, there will never be wanting a few crafty Fellows to make
use of this easy and pliable humor to their own ends. Now that this was the
state of those Ages of the Church, will be evident to any from these
Testimonies. Platina In Vit. Romani. Papae 117. A. C. 900.
writes of Pope Romanus, that he nulled the Acts of his Predecessor Stephanus;
For (says he) these Popes minded nothing else but how they might extinguish
both the Name and Dignity of their Predecessors. And if so, who can doubt, but
that these Popes who made it their business to destroy the very memory of their
Ancestors, would be very little careful to preserve the Doctrine of
Forefathers. But what the care of those Times was in this particular, may be
conjectured from what Onuphrius In Platin.
says by way of confutation of that passage in Platina, concerning Pope Joan's
reading publicly at Rome at her first coming thither. This (says he) is
utterly false, for there was nothing that they were less sollicitous about in
those Times, than to furnish the City with any public Teachers. And the time
which Onuphrius speaks of, was much about the beginning of the Tenth Century.
Phil. Bergomensis Anno 506.
says, It happened in that Age through the slothfulness of men, that there was
a general decay of Virtue both in the Head and Members. Again Anno 9.8.
, These Times through the Ambition and cruel Tyranny of the Popes were
extremely unhappy -- For the Popes setting aside the fear of God and his
Worship, fell into such enmities among themselves, as cruel Tyrants exercise
toward one another. Sabellicus Ennead. 9. L. 1. Anno. 900.
says, It is wonderful to observe what a strange forgetfulness of all Arts did
about this time seize upon men; insomuch that neither the Popes, nor other
Princes seemed to have any sense or apprehension of any thing that might be
useful to humane life. There were no wholesome Laws, no Reparations of Churches,
no pursuit of liberal Arts; but a kind of stupidity and madness and
forgetfulness of manners had possessed the minds of men. And a little after, I
cannot (says he) but much wonder, from whence these Tragical Examples of Popes
should spring; and how their minds should come to be so devoid of all Piety, as
neither to regard the Person which they sustained, nor the place they were in.
Sigonius De Regn. Ital. L. 6.
speaking of these Times, about the beginning of the Tenth Century, calls them
the foulest and blackest, both in respect of the wickedness of Princes, and the
madness of the People, that are to be found in all Antiquity, Genebrard Chron.
L. 4.
speaking of the same Time, This (says he) is called the unhappy Age; being
destitute of men eminent for Wit and Learning, as also of famous Princes and
Popes. In this Time there was scarce any thing done worthy to be remembered by
Posterity. And he adds afterward, But chiefly unhappy in this one thing, that
for almost 150 years together, about 50 Popes, did utterly degenerate from the
virtue of their Ancestors. He should have added further, but even to a miracle
happy in another respect, that during this long and total degeneracy from the
Piety and Virtue of their Ancestors, they did not in the least swerve from them
in matter of Faith and Doctrine: A thing incredible, were there not
Demonstration for it. Werner Fascic. Tempor.
gives this Character of that Time; About the year of our Lord One Thousand,
there began an effeminate Time, in which the Christian Faith begun to
degenerate exceedingly, and to decline from its ancient vigor; insomuch that
in many Countries of Christendom, neither Sacraments nor Ecclesiastical Rites
were observed -- And people were given to Soothsaying and Witchcrafts, and the
Priest was like the People. It seems by this Testimony, that Tradition did
faulter a little in that Age, else the Christian Faith could not possibly have
degenerated and declined so very much: And (which threatens Mr. S's
Demonstration most of all) that the Practical Tradition of Sacraments, and
other Ecclesiastical Observances did fail in many Christian Countries. Gerbert
Epist. 40.
, who lived in that Time, gives this short Character of the Roman Church, in an
Epistle of his to Stephen Deacon of that Church; The World stands amazed at the
Manners of Rome. But most full is the complaint of a great Prelate of the
Church Bell. Sacr. L. 1. c. 8.
concerning those Times; In the West (says he) and almost all the World over
(especially among those who were called the Faithful) Faith failed, and there
was no fear of God among them: (it seems the Argument of Fear had lost its
force) Justice was perished from among men, and violence prevailing against
equity governed the Nations. Fraud, Deceit, and the Arts of Couzenage were
grown universal. All kind of Virtue gave way as an useless thing, and
wickedness supplied its place. The World seemed to be declining apace toward
its Evening, and the second coming of the Son of man to draw near: For Love was
grown cold, and Faith was not found upon Earth. All things were in Confusion,
and the World looked as if it would return to its old Chaos. -- All sorts of
Fornication were committed with the same freedom as if they had been lawful
Actions; for men neither blushed at them, nor were punished for them. -- Nor
did the Clergy live better than the People. -- For the Bishops were grown
negligent of the Duty of their place. etc. In a word, men ran themselves
headlong into all Vice, and all Flesh had corrupted its way. And farther to
show the great neglect of Priests and Bishops in the work of Teaching and
Instruction (which is so necessary to the preserving of Tradition inviolable) I
will add the Testimony of one Elfric. Sermon. ad Sacerdot.
who lived in those Times; who tells us, That in those days, the Priests and
Bishops, who ought to have been the Pillars of the Church, were so negligent
that they did not mind the Divine Scripture; nor take any care to teach and
instruct Scholars that might succeed them, as we read holy Men had used to do,
who left many Scholars perfectly instructed to be their Successors. If they had
only neglected the Scriptures, all might have been well enough; but it seems
they took no care to instruct people in the way of Oral Tradition, nor to
furnish the Church with a new Generation of able Teachers who might deliver
down from hand to hand the sense and faith of Forefathers. This last
Testimony, the late Learned Lord Primate of Ierland, Bishop Usher (in his Book
De Christian. Eccles. Success. etc. C. 2. and 3.
where several of the Testimonies I have produced, with many more to the same
purpose, may be seen) cites out of a M. S. in Bennet College Library in
Cambridg; concerning the authority of which M. S. there need be no dispute
between Mr. S. and me; because the whole force and effect of this Testimony is
sufficiently contained in those Citations which I have brought out of public
and unquestionable Books.

. 4. All these Testimonies which I have produced are, in general and for the
substance of them, confirmed by Two of the greatest Props of the Romish Church;
Bellarmine, and Baronius. Bellarmine De Romans Pontif. L. 4. c. 12.
says of this Tenth Age, That there was never any either more unlearned, or
more unhappy. Baronius Annal. Tom. 10. Anno 900.
speaks more particularly, What was then the face of the Roman Church? How
deformed? When Whores, no less powerful than vile, bore the chief sway at Rome;
and at their pleasure changed Sees, appointed Bishops; and (which it is
horrible to mention) did thrust into St. Peter's See their own Gallants,
false-Popes, who would not have been mentioned in the Catalogue of the Roman
Popes, but only for the more distinct Recording of so long a Succession of
Times. And a little after, Christ was then (it seems) in a very deep sleep --
And which was worse; when the Lord was thus asleep there were no Disciples to
awaken him, being themselves all fast asleep. What kind of Cardinal Presbyters
and Deacons can we think were chosen by these Monsters, when nothing is so
natural as for every one to propagate his own likeness? It is very much that
these lewd Women, and their Favourite-Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops who then
swayed the Church, should, when they were so careless of their own Souls, be so
tender of the salvation of Posterity; and, when they administered all other
affairs of the Church so extravagantly, should be so careful of the main
chance, as to transmit the Christian Doctrine entire and uncorrupted to
succeeding Ages. Yet Mr. S. has demonstrated this a Posteriori, which seems so
very strange to a man that considers things a Priori.

. 5. But it may be, this dismal state of the Roman Church lasted but a little
while; and she did in the same Age, before Tradition could be interrupted,
recover her self out of this degenerate condition. I will therefore enquire a
little into the state of succeeding Times. And I find in the Thirteenth
Century, St. Bernard In Convers. Sancti Pauli. Sermon. 1.
complaining, That the degeneracy of the Priests was in his days greater than
ever; We cannot (says he) now say, as is the People so is the Priest; for the
People are not so bad as their Priests. In the Fifteenth Century, Nic. de
Clemangiis, who lived in that Time, wrote a Book upon this argument, Of the
corrupt state of the Church; by which we may make some judgment whether in that
Age it was (as Mr. S. says) impossible but that the Christian Doctrine should
be entirely preserved, and faithfully and diligently taught. He says C. 3.
there was an universal degeneracy in the Church, from the very Head of it to
its lowest Members. In the same Chapter he complains, Who is there that
preaches the Gospel to the People? Who shows them the way to Salvation either
by Word or Action? It seems there was a great failure both of Oral and
Practical Tradition. Again C. 5.
, speaking of the Pope's taking to himself the Collation of all vacant
Bishoprics and Dignities; he says, one might think the Pope did this, that the
Church might be provided of worthier Governors, both in respect of their
Learning, and their lives, did not the thing it self declare the contrary, and
that ignorant and useless Persons (provided they had money) were by Simony
advanced to the highest degrees in the Church. And C. 6.
, speaking what a vast number of Candidates there was usually at Rome from all
Parts waiting for Benefices and Dignities, he tells us, That many of these did
not come from their Studies, or from Schools of Learning, to govern Parishes;
but from the Plow, and from the meanest Professions: and that they understood
Latin and Arabic much at the same rate; and many of them could not read at
all. But it may be (says he) their manners were such as might be some excuse
for their Ignorance. No; though their Learning was but little, their Virtue was
less; for being brought up in Idleness, they followed nothing but Debauchery
and Sports, etc. Hence it comes to pass, that in all places there are so many
wicked, and wretched, and ignorant Priests -- Hence it is that Priests are so
contemned by the common People -- Formerly the Priesthood was highly honored
by the People, and nothing was more venerable than that Order of men; but now
nothing is more vile and despicable. -- C. 9.
I make no doubt, but there are now more Thieves and Robbers, than true Pastors
in the Church. -- C. 11.
Why should any man now flatter himself with hopes of Preferment, because of
his Virtue or Learning? Men do not now (as formerly) rise in the Church by such
Arts -- C. 13*
Which of those that are now adays advanced to the Pontifical Dignity, has so
much as perfunctorily read, or heard, or learned the Scriptures; yea, or ever
touched any more than the cover of the Bible? Again C. 14
, speaking of the prodigious Covetousness of the Governors of the Church, and
the gross neglect of their Flocks, They would (says he) much more contentedly
bear the loss of ten thousand Souls, than of ten or twelve Shillings. But why
do I say more contentedly? When without the least trouble or disturbance to
themselves, they can bear the loss of Souls; a thing so far from their care,
that it never entered into their thoughts. Had the Heretics of those days but
had Wit enough, and a little Money, they might (it seems) for a small Sum have
hired the Governors of the Church to have renounced Tradition, or to have
ceased to propagate it; though they had known that in so doing they should have
damned all their Posterity. He goes on, and tells us, That if there were
perhaps any one who did not take these courses, the rest would all snarle at
him, call him Fool, and say he was unfit to be a Priest. -- So that the study
of the Scriptures (together with the Professors of it) was turned into laughter
and scorn by all; but (which is prodigious) especially by the Popes, who prefer
their own Traditions many degrees before the Commands of God. I desire Mr. S.
to take notice in what kind of Times Tradition was set up against Scripture.
Again C. 16.
, speaking of the choice of persons to be Priests, he tells us, That there was
no enquiry made into their Lives, no question about their Manners: As for their
Learning (says he) what need I speak of that? When we see the Priests, almost
universally* have much ado to read, though but in an haesitating and spelling
fashion, drawing out one syllable after another, without understanding either
the sense of what they read, or the words. I am now reconciled to oral
Tradition, and convinced that there was great need of it in those Ages in which
scarce any of the Priests could either write or read. I omit the particulars of
what he says C. 20, 21, 23.
concerning the common Drunkenness and Incontinency of Priests, who (because
they made Conscience of Marriage) kept Whores in their Houses; concerning the
dissolute Lives of Monks; and concerning Nunneries, which instead of being the
Sanctuaries of God, were he abominable Stews of Venus* and the Receptacles of
lascivious young men; insomuch (says he) that at this day it is the same thing
to put a Virgin into a Nunnery, and to make her a common Strumpet. And to show
that he does not speak these things of a few, but with relation to the general
corruption of that Age, he adds C. 25.
, That wickedness did so abound in all Orders of men, that scarce one among a
thousand was to be found who did truly live up to his Profession: And if there
was any one that did not follow these lewd courses, he became ridiculous to
others, and was branded either as an insolent singular Madman, or an
Hypocrite. I will conclude this long Testimony with the character which he gives
C. 27.
of one of the Popes of his time, Clement by name, viz. That he did chiefly
apply himself to gratify and oblige all the Parasites and Buffoons that had
any interest in the several Courts of Princes: And to this end, did confer upon
these, and upon handsome young Boys (which he much delighted in) almost all the
vacant Bishoprics, and most of the other Church-D^^^nities. It is well that
oral Tradition has the security of Infallibility, otherwise it had in all
probability been lost among this lewd sort of People, which yet they gravely
call the Holy Roman Catholic Church.

6. To this effect I might have produced Testimonies concerning every Age from
the Ninth to the Sixteenth; but Mr. Cressy has saved me that labor, who
acknowledges Exomolog. C. 68.
, that these worst times of the Church, when Ignorance, Wordliness, Pride,
Tyranny, etc. reigned with so much scope: When the Popes (so wicked, so
abominable in their Lives) enjoyed so unlimited a power even over secular
Princes themselves, and much more over the Clergy: I say, he acknowledges that
these worst times continued during the space of about six Ages before Luther: A
competent time (one would think) for Tradition to have miscarried in, were it
not (as Mr. S. says) indefectible. Mr. Cressy indeed tells us Ibid.
, That this was to him an irrefragable Testimony of a strange watchfulness of
Divine Providence over the Church, to preserve it from the Gates of Hell (that
is, established and dangerous Errors) during these worst times. And very likely
it is that this might appear so to such a Catholic whose judgment, he tells
us, it is to renounce his own judgment: but it will never appear irrefragable,
to any man that has his judgment about him, unless Mr. Cressy can prove, that
by that phrase, viz. the Gates of Hell, the Scripture does not mean gross
wickedness of Life, as well as dangerous errors in Opinion; and likewise, that
a general viciousness and debauchery of Manners is not as pernicious to
Christianity, and as destructive to the end of it, as established Errors in
Doctrine: And if so, that the Providence of God is not equally concerned to
preserve the Church from things equally pernicious. When he has proved these
three things, then this Declamatory discourse of his may signify something, but
not before.

7. Now if this be a true representation of the state of the Roman Church in
those Ages, was not this a very fit time for the Devil to play his Pranks in?
Will any man that reads these Testimonies, think it impossible that the
Doctrine of Christ should have been depraved in this Age; or that the most
senseless and absurd Tenets might then be brought in under the notion of
Christian Doctrines? When scarce any one knew what the Doctrine of Christ was:
When a general ignorance of Letters* and almost an universal stupidity and
madness had seized upon the minds of men: When there was a horrid depravation
of manners, and a general failure of Virtue and Piety both in the Head and
Members of the Church: When the lives of the Popes were Tragically wicked, and
no footsteps of Piety appeared in them: When for about 150 years together, in a
continued succession of 50 Popes, there was scarce one pious and virtuous Man
(or Woman) sat in that Chair: When the Whores governed Rome, and put out, and
put in Bishops at their pleasure; and made their own Gallants Popes, who would
be sure to make a College of Cardinals of such Monsters as themselves: When
pretty Boys, and Parasites, and Buffoons led the Head of the Church by the
Nose, and were gratified with the best Bishoprics and Dignities in the Church:
When there was a general decay of knowledge, and defection of the Christian
Faith: When in many Countries neither Sacraments, nor other Ecclesiastical
Rites were observed: When Violence and Fraud, and all the Arts of Deceit and
Couzenage, and blacker Arts than these, were the common study and practice:
When Intemperance, and all kind of Lewdness and Debauchery, reigned in all
sorts and orders of men: When the generality of Bishops and Priests (who,
according to Mr. Rushworth Dial. 3. Sect. 3.
, can only teach the Traditionary Doctrine) were ignorant in the Scriptures and
in every thing else (very few of them being able so much as to read tolerably)
and did neglect to teach the People, and to breed up any in knowledge to succeed
them in their Office; and in the lewdness of their lives did surpass the vilest
of the People. Was not such an Age a fit season to plant the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation in? Or if any thing more monstrous than that can be
imagined, it might then have taken place; for what Weeds would not have grown
in so rank a Soil? Does Mr. S. think it impossible, that those that were born
in the Church then, should be ignorant of the Doctrine of Christ, when scarce
any one would take the pains to teach it them; or that it could then have been
altered, when so few understood, and fewer practiced it: When ptodigious
Impiety and Wickedness did overspread the Church, from the Pope down to the
meanest of the Laity, can any one believe that men generally made Conscience to
instruct their Children in the true Faith of Christ? Was it impossible there
should be any neglect of this Duty, when all others failed? That there should
be any mistake about the Doctrine of Christ, when there was so much Ignorance?
unless he be of Mr. Rushworth's Dial. 3. Sect. 7.
mind, who reckons Ignorance among the Parents of Religion. Where were then the
Arguments of Hope and Fear? Were they strongly applied, or were they not? Were
they causes of actual will in Christians to believe well, when they lived so
ill? Or is Christianity only fitted to form men's minds to a right belief, but
of no efficacy to govern their lives? Has Christ taken care to keep his Church
from Error, but not from Vice? As the great Cardinal Perron Reply to K. James.
L. 4. C. 6.
(stooping below his own Wit and Reason to serve a bad Cause) tells us, That
the Church sings, and will sing to the end of the World, I am black, but I am
fair; that is to say, I am black in Manners, but fair in Doctrine: As if the
meaning of the Prophesies and Promises of Scripture made to the Church were
this, that by the extraordinary care of Gods Providence, and peculiar
assistance of his Holy Spirit, she should be wicked, but Orthodox to the end of
the World. Where were then the vigorous causes imprinting Christ's Doctrine,
and continuing it more particularly at Rome than any where else; and of
securing that See and its supreme Pastor in the faith and practice of the
Christian Doctrine, above any other See or Pastor whatsoever? Who is so little
versed in History, as not to understand the dismal state of Religion in the
Romish Church, in those times? Who does not know what advantages the Bishops of
Rome, and their servile Clergy made of the ignorance and superstition of those
and the succeeding Ages; and by what Arts and steps they raised themselves to
that power which they held in the Church for a long while after? When they
could tread upon the necks of Princes; and make a great King walk barefoot,
and yield himself to be scourged by a company of petulant Monks: When they
could send any man upon an Errand to visit the holy Sepulcher, or the Shrine of
such a Saint; and command five or six Kings with great Armies upon a needless
expedition into the Holy Land, that so during their absence they might play
their own Game the better: When they could mint Miracles, and impose upon the
belief of the People (without the authority of any ancient Books) absurd and
counterfeit Tales of ancient Saints and Martyrs, as delivered down to them by
Tradition; and could bring that foppish Book the Legend, almost into equal
Authority and Veneration with the Bible; and persuade the easy people that St.
Denis carried his own head in his hand after it was cut off two miles, and
kissed it when he laid it down. Any one that shall but reflect upon the
monstrous practices of the Roman Bishops and Clergy in these Ages, the strange
Feats they played, and what absurdities they imposed upon the superstitious
credulity of Princes and People, may readily imagine not only the possibility,
but the easiness of innovating new Doctrines as they pleased, under the
specious pretenses of Antitiquity, and constant and uninterrupted Tradition.

8. And this kind of Discourse concerning the possibility of Errors coming into
the Church, is not, as Mr. White ridiculously compares it Apology for
Tradition, p. 49.
, as if an Orator should go about to persuade people, that George, by the help
of a long staff, and a nimble cast of his body, and such like advantages, might
leap over Paul 's Steeple; never considering all the while the disproportion of
all these advantages to the height of the Steeple: so (says he) he that
discourses at large how Errors use to slide into man's life, without comparing
the power of the causes of Error to the strength of resisting, which consists
in this Principle, Nothing is to be admitted but what descends by Tradition,
etc. says no more toward proving an Error's overrunning the Church, than the
Orator for George 's leaping over the Steeple. How vain is this? When it
appears, from this Instance that I have given of the state of the Roman Church,
in the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, and afterward; that the causes of Error were
infinitely stronger than the power of resistance. The great causes of Error are
Ignorance and Vice; where Ignorance reigns, there is no Power; where Vice, no
Will to resist it. And how great the Ignorance and Viciousness of all orders of
men in the Roman Church was, is too too apparent from the Testimonies I have
brought. Where was the strength of resisting Error, when for 150 years together
the Popes were the vilest of men, Bishops and Priests overwhelmed with
Ignorance, abandoned to all manner of vice, and most supinely negligent in
instructing the People? In such a degenerate state of a Church, what strength
is there in this Principle, Nothing is to be admitted but what descends by
Tradition? When those, who ought to teach men what that Doctrine is which was
derived to them by Tradition, are generally careless of their Duty, and
ignorant themselves what that Doctrine is; When they addict themselves wholly
to the satisfying of their Ambition, and other Lusts, and carry on designs of
Gain, and getting Dominion over the People. What can hinder men so disposed
from corrupting the Doctrine of Christ, and suiting it to their own Lusts and
Interests? And what shall hinder the People from embracing those Corruptions?
when by the negligence of their Pastors to instruct them, and not only so, but
also by their being deprived of the Scriptures in a known Tongue, they are
become utterly incapable of knowing what the true Doctrine of Christ is. So
that in an Age of such profound Ignorance and Vice, and general neglect of
Instruction it is so far from being impossible for Errors to overrun a Church,
that the contrary is morally impossible; and George's long staff and
advantageous cast of his Body are more powerful causes to enable him to leap
over Paul's Steeple, than this Principle, That nothing is to be admitted, but
what descends by Tradition, is to keep Errors out of a Church in an ignorant
and vicious Age; when few or none are either able or willing to instruct men in
the Truth. For suppose this always to have been the Principle of Christians,
viz. That nothing is to be admitted as the Doctrine of Christ, but what is
descended to them by Tradition: How shall this Principle secure the Church from
Heresy, any more than this, viz. That nothing but Truth is to be assented to,
does secure men from Error? Or more than this, viz. That no man is to do any
thing but what is wise and virtuous, does secure the generality of mankind from
folly and vice?

SECT. VIII.
1. SEcondly, The second Answer to his second Demonstration.
The Principles upon which this Demonstration relies are not sufficiently
proved by him.

His first Principle is this, That Age, which holds her Faith delivered thus
from the Apostles, neither can it self have changed any thing in it, nor know
or doubt that any Age since the Apostles had changed or innovated any thing
therein. This Proposition (he tells us) needs no proof to evidence it, but only
an Explication. For since no man can hold contrary to his knowledge, or doubt of
what he holds, nor change or innovate in the case proposed without knowing he
did so; it is a manifest impossibility a whole Age should fall into an absurdity
so inconsistent with the nature of one single man. But (by his favor) that
which he says is no proof, but only an Explication, is a proof if it be any
thing; and the force of it this; That which is inconsistent with the nature if
one single man, is manifestly impossible to a whole Age; but it is inconsistent
with the nature of any single man to hold contrary to his knowledge, etc.
therefore impossible to a whole Age; and consequently, that Age which holds her
Faith delivered thus from the Apostles, neither can it self have changed any
thing, nor, etc. So that in order to the making good of this first Principle,
Mr. S. has left nothing unproved but only this Proposition, namely, That it is
impossible that any one single man that holds his Faith to have been delivered
uninterruptedly from the Apostles, should either himself have changed any thing
in it, or know or doubt that any Age since the Apostles has changed or
innovated any thing therein: And to make out the truth of this Proposition,
there only remains this to be proved, viz. That it is impossible for any single
man to be mistaken. For if that be possible, then contrary to Mr. S. a man may
hold that to have been delivered as a Doctrine of Faith from the Apostles which
was not so delivered.

2. His second Principle is this, That no Age could innovate any thing, and
withal deliver that very thing to posterity as received from Christ by
continual Succession. He proves it thus; Since man is a rational Creature, he
must have some Reason or Motive, good or bad, which he proposes to himself as
an end to be achieved by his action: And whatever his remote end is, his
immediate end, in telling posterity a late invented thing was held immdiately
before, is to make them belive it. Wherefore since a seen impossibility cannot
be a Motive to one not frantic; and since it is evidently impossiible they
should make posterity believe a thing so universally known to be false, as this
must needs be, etc. it is as impossiible this Principle should faulter, as that
the foregoing Age should conspire to act without a motive, or that the
succeeding Age should believe what they know to be otherwise, that is, should
hold both sides of a Contradiction in a clear matter of Fact. The force of
which is this, That it is impossible that any man not frantic should attempt
to innovate in matter of Christian Doctrine, because the immediate end of such
an attempt must be to have his new Doctrine believed; but it is impossible he
should attain this end, and impossible he should not see that it is impossible
to attain it* Now a seen impossibility is an end that cannot move any one that
is not frantic; therefore no man that is not frantic, can attempt to innovate
in matter of Christian Doctrine. Thus he has demonstrated it impossible that
there should be any Heretics, if a Heretic be one that attempts to innovate
in matter of Christian Doctrine. For if there be any such attmpters they must
be frantic, and if they be frantic they can be no Heretics; for Heresy
implies a Crime, but God will not impute the actions of mad men to them as
faults. Again, suppose he that attempts to innovate be mistaken (and I hope Mr.
S. will grant that a Heretic is fallible) and think that which he delivers as
Christ's Doctrine to be really so, though indeed it be not; why should such a
person think it impossible to make men believe that to be received from Christ
which he really thinks was received, and thinks he can makes it appear that it
was so? And if this be granted, then it is not impossible that Man, though he
be a rational Creature, may attempt to innovate. And if so, then his second
Principle is not proved. If Mr. S. had any regard to the noble Science of
Controversy (whereof he pretends to be so great a Master) he would not bring
such trifling Sophisms instead of demonstrative Proofs: And nothing less than a
demonstrative Proof will serve to establish any Principle upon which a
Demonstration is to be built.

SECT. IX.
. 1. DOctrines and Practices which must be acknowledged to have been innovated,
The third Answer to Mr. S's second Demonstration.
have made the same pretense to uninterrupted Tradition. And of this I shall
give several Instances; one among the Jews, the rest among Christians.

1. I shall instance among the Traditionary Jews, whose persuasion in our
Saviors time was, and still is, that their Oral Doctrine, which they call
their C^bala, has descended to them from Moses uninterruptedly. Now here is
the existence of such a persuasion, as Mr. S. affirms to be impossible without
Traditions ever-indeficiency to beget it. And this persuasion of theirs is most
exactly parallel with the pretensions of the Romish Church according to Mr. S.
For here is a multitude of Traditionary Jews, manifoldly greater in proportion
to the Dissenters in that Church, than the Romish Church is in comparison to
those Christians that dissent from Her. Josephus tells us Antiq. Jud. l. 13. c.
18.
, That the richer sort were of the persuasion of the Sadduces, but the
multitude were on the Pharisees side. So that the Pharisees had this mark of
the true Church (as Bellarmine calls it) common to them with the Church of
Rome, that they were the greatest number, and so they continue to this very
day; insomuch that although they do not call themselves the Catholics, yet I
am sure they call all Jews that do dissent from them Schismatics. Now that the
Sadduces were for the written Law against Oral Tradition, is I confess no
credit to us; but that our Savior reproved the Traditionary Doctrines and
Practices of the Pharisees, because by them they made void the written Law, is
much more to the discredit of the Assertors of Oral Tradition. Both Romanists
and Pharisees they own alike a written Doctrine, but then they both pretend the
true sense and explication thereof to have descended to them by Oral Tradition.
For just as the Traditionary Christians do now, so Josephus tells Ibid. l. 17.
c. 3. and de Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. c. 12.
us the Traditionary Jews of old, the Pharisees, did pretend by their Oral
Tradition to interpret the Law more accurately and exactly than any other Sect.
In like manner he Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
tells us, That all things, that belonged to Prayer and Divine Worship, were
regulated and administered according to their interpretations of the Law. And
they both agree in this, to make void the Word of God by their Tradition; which
the Pharisees did no otherwise than Mr. S. does, by equalling Oral Tradition to
Scripture; nay preferring it above Scripture, in making it the sole Rule of
Faith, and interpreting the Scripture according to it. Hence are those common
sayings in the Talmud, and other Jewish Books; Do not think that the written
Law is the foundation, but that the Law Orally delivered is the right
foundation; which is to say with Mr. S. that not the Scripture, but Oral
Tradition is the true Rule of Faith. Again, There is more in the words of the
Scribes (viz. the Testifiers of Tradition) than in the words of the written
Law. Again, The Oral Law excells the Written, as much as the Soul does the
Body; which accords very well with what Mr. S. frequently tells us, That the
Scripture without Tradition is but a dead Letter, destitute of life and sense.
Hence also it is that they required the People (as the Traditionary Church does
now) to yield up themselves to the dictates of Tradition even in the most
absurd things, as appears by that common saying among them, If the Scribes say
that the right hand is the left, and the left the right (that Bread is Flesh,
and Wine is Blood) hearken to them, that is, make no scruple of whatsoever they
deliver as Tradition, though never so contrary to Reason or Sense. And lastly,
The Doctrines of the Pharisees were many of them practical; such were all those
which concerned external rites and observances, as washing of hands and cups,
etc. So that these Pharisaical Traditions had also that unspeakable advantage
which Mr. S. says renders their Traditions unmistakeable, That they were daily
practiced, and came down clad in such plain matters of Fact, that the most
stupid man living could not possibly be ignorant of them. Therefore, according
to Mr. S's Principles, it was impossible that any Age of the Jews should be
persuaded that these things were commanded by Moses and ever since observed, if
they had not been so: And yet our Savior denies these Customs to have been of
any such Authority as they pretended.

. 2. But I needed not to have taken all this pains to show the agreement which
is between the Traditionary Jews and Papists, their own Writers so liberally
acknowledging it. Mr. White De Fid. and Theol. Tract. 1. Sect. 6.
indeed says, That the Faith of the Jews was not delivered to them Orally, but
by Writing; than which nothing can be more inconsistent with his Hypothesis.
For if the Jewish Faith was conveyed to them not Orally, but by Writing, then
either the Jewish Church had no sufficient Rule of Faith, or else a Writing may
be such a Rule. But other of their Champions make great use of the Parallel,
between the Traditionary Jews and the Romish Church, to confirm from thence
their own Traditionary Doctrines. Cardinal Perron has a full passage to this
purpose; As this (says he Rep. to K. James, observe. 3. c. 4.
) is to preserve a sound and entire respect to the Majesty of the ancient
Mosaic Scripture, to believe and observe not only all the things which are
therein actually contained, but also those things which are therein contained
mediately and relatively, as the Doctrines of Paradise, etc. which were not
contained therein but mediately, and by the authority which it gave to the
deposition of the Patriarchal and Mosaic Tradition, preserved by heart, and in
the Oral Doctrine of the Synagogue: So this is to preserve a sound and entire
respect to the Majesty of the Apostolical Scripture, to believe and observe all
the things which it contains, not only immediately and by it self, but
mediately and by reference to the Apostolical Traditions, to which in gross and
generally it gives the Authority of Apostolical Doctrines, and to the Church
the Authority of Guardian and Depositary to preserve* and attest them. Voysin
in his Observations upon Raymundus Martyn, Pugio Fid. p. 145.
tells us, That as in the Old Law the great Consistory at Jerusalem was the
foundation of the true Tradition, so (says he) the Sea of Rome is the
foundation of our Traditions. And as the continual succession of the High
Priests and Fathers among the Jews was the great confirmation of the Truth of
their Traditions, so (says he) with us the Truth of our Catholic Doctrine is
confirmed by a continual succession of Popes.

. 3. From all this it appears, that the Pharisees among the Jews made the same
pretense to Oral Tradition which the Papists do at this day according to Mr. S.
And if so, then Mr. S's Demonstration a Posteriori is every whit as strong for
the Jews against our Savior, as it is for the Papists against the Protestants.
For we find that in our Savior's time, it was then the present persuasion of
the Traditionary Jews, that their Faith, and their Rites, and the true sense
and interpretation of their written Law was descended from Moses and the
Prophets to them uninterruptedly* which we find was most firmly rooted in their
hearts. But the Jews had a constant Tradition among them, that the Messiah was
to be a great temporal Prince: And though the Letters of the Prophesies
concerning him, might well enough have been accommodated to the low and
suffering condition of our Savior; yet they did infallibly know that their
Messiah was to be another kind of person, from sense written in their hearts,
from the interpretation of those Prophesies Orally brought down to them from
the Patriarchal and Mosaic Tradition preserved by heart and in the Oral
Doctrine of the Synagogue, and from the living voice of their Church essential,
that is, the universal consent of the then Traditionary Jews. If it be said,
That the Jewish Tradition did indeed bring down several Doctrines not contained
in Scripture, of Paradise, of Hell, of the last Judgment, of the Resurrection,
etc. (as Cardinal Perron affirms) but it did not bring down this Point of the
Messiah's being a Temporal Prince: Then as Mr. S. P. 76.
asks us, so the Jew does him; By what virtue Tradition brought down those
other Points? and whether the same virtue were not powerful to bring down this
as well as those? Then he will ask him farther, Is there not a necessary
connection and relation between a constant Cause, and its formal Effect? So that
if its formal Effect be Points received as delivered ever, the proper Cause
must be an ever-delivery; whence he will argue from such an Effect to its Cause
for any particular Point, and consequently for this Point that is in
Controversy between Jews and Christians, concerning the Messiah's being a
Temporal Prince, in case it be a Point held ever delivered; but most certain it
is, it was so held by the Jews in our Saviors time, and has been held so ever
since to this day.

I shall not trouble the Reader with transcribing the rest of this
Demonstration, only desire him as he reads it over, to imagine instead of Mr.
S. a Pharisee, demonstrating against one of Christ's Disciples the Infallibility
of the Oral Tradition of the Jews: And I doubt not but he will find this
Demonstration, and every part of it (changing only the Names) as forcibly
concluding Christ not to be the Messiah, as it does infer any point of Popery
against the Protestants.

. 4. Before I leave this Instance of the Jewish Tradition, I shall briefly
consider what Mr. White Apol. 123, etc.
has offered by way of answer to it; as, First, That the matter of these
Traditions is nothing else but Explications of Scripture framed and invented by
their own Rabbines. So we say, that the Popish Traditions are Innovations. But
then Mr. White, and Mr. S. tell us, That they can demonstrate them to be
descended from Christ and his Apostles, because it is the present persuasion of
a multitude of Christians that they are so descended. In like manner, if this
Demonstration be good, the Jews can prove their Traditions to be descended from
Moses and the Prophets. Secondly, He says, that the form of these Traditions is
more ridiculous than the Canting of Gypsies, or the juggling of Hocus-pocus,
because it consists in inventing the sense of Scripture from the mysteries, and
numbers, and changes of Letters. This is a gross inexcusable mistake. For
though the Jews have such a Cabala (called Gematry) as this which Mr. White
describes; yet that Cabala which is urged in this Instance, and which our
Savior reproves in the Pharisees by the name of Tradition, is quite another
thing, and among the Jewish Writers known by the name of the Unwritten or Oral
Law; which they say was delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai, and by him conveyed
to Aaron and Joshua, and the Elders, and successively delivered down from one
Age to another; and at last by Rabbi Jehuda compiled into one Volume, which
they call Mishna, or (...). And this does not consist in the Art of Numbering,
Combining, or changing of Letters, as Mr. White imagines. But suppose it did
so, and were more ridiculous than he conceits it to be; the Instance would be
so much the more conclusive against them, if what they affirm be true, That
Oral Tradition is infallible, and that the persuasion of a Traditionary Church
in any Age, that such a Doctrine descended to them from Christ or Moses, be a
demonstration that it did so: For if this be sufficient evidence, it is nothing
to the purpose what the Doctrine be either for matter or form: For if it be
once demonstrated to have come from Christ or Moses, it is without any farther
dispute to be received as of Divine authority. So that Mr. White quite alters
the state of the question; which was not whether the Jewish Cabala be absurd
and ridiculous, but whether the general persuasion of the Jews in any Age, that
it descended to them by uninterrupted Tradition from Moses, be a demonstration
that it did so. If it be, then the Jewish Cabala is as demonstratively of
Divine Authority as the Oral Doctrine of the Papists. Thirdly, He says, This
Cabala was a Doctrine delivered to few, and that with strict charge to keep it
from Publicity, and so communicate it again successively to a select Committee
of a few; wherein (says he) you may see as fair an opportunity for juggling and
couzenage, as in our case there is an impossibility. This I think is true of
the Cabala which it (seems) Mr. White had only in his view, but is a horrible
mistake if he speak of the Oral Law which was contained in the Mishnah, and
which this Instance only intends. For of this Maimonides In Praefat. Sum.
Talmud.
says expressly, That in every Age, from the time of Moses to Rabbi Jehudah, who
compiled the Mishna, the Oral Law was publicly taught: And that after Rabbi
Jehudah had compiled it into one Volume, the Israelites did generally write out
Copies of it, and it was every where carefully taught, for fear lest the Oral
Law should by forgetfulness be last among the Jews. So that upon account of the
publickness of the Doctrine, there is as great an impossibility of Juggling and
Couzenage in the case of the Jewish as of the Romish Tradition. Besides, was
washing of Hands and Cups, which they also pretended to have come down to them
from Moses, and to have been constantly practiced in every Age, a secret thing?
Was it not a practical Tradition, and performed in a sensible matter? If
therefore no Age can conspire to impose upon the next in a plain custom; and if
an universal Tradition of such a thing cannot come in without such a
conspiracy: How could this be the persuasion of any Age, that washing of Hands,
etc. was prescribed by Moses and practiced in all Ages, if it had not truly
been so?

. 5. Secondly, As for Instances among Christians, whereof many remain yet upon
Record; as namely, the various and opposite Traditions about the time of
Easter, and concerning the Baptism of Heretics; and the Apostolical Tradition
(as St. Austin calls it) concerning the admission of Infants to the Communion;
all which have been frequently urged in this Controversy, and none of them yet
sufficiently answered; I shall to avoid tediousness, passing by these, insist
only upon that of the Chiliasts; which in Justin Martyr's time was the
persuasion of all Orthodox Christians, that is (in Mr. S's Dialect) of all the
holders to Tradition. For if notwithstanding the persuasion of that Age, that
this Doctrine was descended to them from the Apostles, it was not really so
descended; then the persuasion of Christians in any Age, that a Doctrine was
brought down to them from the Apostles, is no Demonstration that it was so.

. 6. To this Instance Mr. White answers Apol. p. 78, 79, etc.
by telling us, that Eusebius says that this Tradition sprang from Papias (a
good but a credulous and simple man) who it seems was mistaken in saying that
it was the Apostles Doctrine. But for all this, Justin Martyr says it was
received by all Orthodox Christians in his Time, as a Doctrine descended to
them from the Apostles. And if Justin said true, nothing can make more against
their Demonstration of the Infallibility of Tradition, than the natural
consequence from these two sayings of Eusebius and Justin, which is this, That
the mistake of one simple and credulous man may in an Age or two give occasion
to the universal entertainment of a Doctrine, as descended down to them from
Christ and his Apostles, when there was no such matter. Has not Mr. White now
done his Rule of Faith great service by this Answer? But it is according to his
manner in all his Writings, to say any thing to remove a present Objection,
though never so much to the prejudice of his main Hypothesis; then which I do
not know any quality in a Writer which does more certainly betray the want
either of judgment, or of sincerity, or of a good Cause.

. 7. And whereas he says Apol. p. 81.
, That Irenaeus his testimony proves it to be no Tradition; for he sets down
the supposed words of our Savior, which plainly shows it is a story, not a
Tradition; a Tradition being a sense delivered not in set words, but settled in
the Auditors hearts by hundreds of different expressions explicating the same
meaning. When I consider this passage of Mr. White, I confess I cannot
complement him, and say (as he makes his Nephew do in the Dialogue Rushworth
Dial. 4. Sect. 4.
between them) I cannot but applaud your Discourse, it has so pleasing and
attractive a countenance. And again Ibid. Sect. 5.
, I am not able to oppose what you say by any weighty Objection, your Arguments
being not only strong and nervous, but of so comely and winning a complexion,
etc. I cannot (I say) speak all this of his present Argument. But I may
deservedly apply to it the last part of his Nephew's Complement, That it is an
Argument so framed, as if without any evidence of its consequence it would
persuade men to believe it. But to return an Answer to this passage: It seems
(according to Mr. White) that Irenaeus was mistaken in the very nature of
Tradition: and if so learned a Father was ignorant in the common Rule of Faith,
what can we (to use Mr. S's words P. 39.
) undertakingly promise to weaker heads? Mr. S. instanceth in the Creed, and
Ten Commandments, as the principal Traditions which Parents teach their
Children; but now Mr. White can show plainly that these are no Traditions but
Stories, because Tradition is a sense delivered not in set words, etc. As if
Christ and his Apostles could deliver no Doctrine unless they expressed the
same thing an hundred several ways. But suppose they did so (which no man has
any reason to imagine, because a thing may be expressed as plainly by one way
as by an hundred) can no man deliver this Tradition who speaks it in any one of
those expressions? If one should employ his Servant to carry a Message, and
(because Mr. White thinks this necessary) should settle the meaning of it in
his heart, by telling him the same thing in an hundred several expressions; and
the Servant should go and deliver this Message in one of those very expressions
that his Master used to him, and should say these were his Masters very words;
would not this be well enough?

No, if he had come to such a Philosopher as Mr. White, he would soon have
given him to understand that he was not fit to bring a Message, or to be
credited in it, who had so little wit as not to know that a Message is a thing
not to be delivered in set-words. And now I would entreat Mr. White to
reconcile himself in this matter to his Friends. Mr. Rushworth says Dialog. 2.
Sect. 6.
, It Is impossible to put fully and beyond all quarrel the same sense in diverse
words: Which if it be true, I would fain know what certain course Mr. White can
prescribe to explicate the same meaning by hundreds of different expressions,
and consequently how Tradition can be infallibly conveyed by settling the sense
of it in the Auditors hearts by such variety of expressions. Mr. Cressy
Exomolog. c. 10. Sect. 4.
likewise (a zealous Assertor of Tradition) does affirm, That the Primitive
Churches were even to excess scrupulous in maintaining the very phrases of
Traditionary Doctrines; which (according to Mr. White) plainly shows these
Doctrines to be stories, not Traditions, because Tradition is a sense delivered
not in set-words. The same Author complains, Ibid. c. 19. Sect. 2.
That few among their learned Masters of Controversy, propose the Points to
be disputed between them and the Protestants, in the Language of the Church. By
which I suppose he does not mean, that these Controvertists were to blame in
that they did not settle the sense of these Points by hundreds of different
expressions explicating the same meaning, but that they did not keep to the
words wherein the Church had in Councils or otherwise (if there be any other
way) declared her sense of those Points. Again Ibid. c. 27. Sect. 2.
he says, That St. Paul, referring to the Doctrine settled by Oral Instruction,
to show the uniformity of it everywhere, calls it a form of wholesome words. From
whence we may conclude either that St. Paul did not well to call the
Traditionary Doctrine (as Mr. Cressy says he does) a form of words, or else
(which is more probable) that Mr. White is mistaken in saying, That a Tradition
is a sense not delivered in set-words. Furthermore, the same Mr. Cressy Ibid.
c. 28. Sect. 1.
tells us, That St. Augustine was careful not only to deliver Traditional
Truths themselves, but the terms also in which those Truths were conveyed to
his Times. But now Mr. White could have informed St. Augustine, that this
officious care of his was not only superfluous, but pernicious to Tradition.

. 8. But to return to Justin's Testimony; to which the sum of Mr. Whites
answer is, That Justin esteemed it not as a point necessary to salvation; but
rather a piece of Learning higher than the common: Since he both acknowledges
other Catholics held the contrary, and entitles those of his persuasion (...)
right in all opinions, that is, wholly of his own mind. It is not material to
my purpose, whether or no Justin looked upon this as a point necessary to
Salvation, so long as it is evident that he looked upon it as a Divine
Revelation and part of the Christian Doctrine. And yet it seems he thought it a
point of more than ordinary importance, because he joins it with the Doctrine
of the Resurrection, and says that it was not disowned by any but those who
also denied the Resurrection. But whereas Mr. White says that Justin
acknowledges other Catohlicks to have held the contrary, I hope to make it
evident from the scope and series of his Discourse, that he acknowledges no
such thing; but that the plain design of his Discourse, is to show that this
Doctrine was owned by all true Christians. For when Trypho asks him Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 306. Edit. Lutet^ 1615.
, Whether the Christians did indeed believe that Jerusalem should be rebuilt,
etc. He returns him this answer, I am not such a Wretch as to speak otherwise
than I think. I have told thee before that my self and many others (as ye all
know) are of the mind that this will come to pass. But, that many indeed of
those Christians who, are [not] of the pure and pious persuasion, do not own
this, I have intimated to thee. That the negative particle (though omitted in
the Copy) ought to be thus inserted, will be clear to any one that considers
what follows. For after he had spoken of those who disown this Doctrine, he
immediately adds by way of further description of them, that though they are
called Christians yet in Truth they are not Christians, in these words; For of
these (viz. the Disowners of this Doctrine) who are called indeed Christians,
but are atheistical and impious Heretics, I have showed thee that they teach
in all Points blasphemous, atheistical and absurd things. But that ye may know
that I do not say this for you only; I will, according to my ability, compile
all these Discourses which have past between us into one piece; in which I will
by Writing make Profession of this very thing which I now declare to you. For I
do not choose to follow men or the Doctrines of men, but God and such Doctrines
as are from him. And though ye may have conversed with some who are called
Christians, and yet do not acknowledge this; but even dare to blaspheme the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; who also say that there
is no Resurrection of the dead, but that so soon as they dye their Souls are
received into Heaven: Do not count these men Christians; no more than a man,
that considers things rightly, would own the Sadduces and such like Sects to be
Jews, etc. But I my self, and as many Christians as are thoroughly of the right
persuasion, do both know that there shall be a Resurrection of the Flesh, and a
thousand years in Jerusalem which shall be built, adorned and enlarged, etc.
Can any thing be plainer than that Justin endeavors by this Discourse to
satisfy Trypho, that this Point they were speaking of was a Divine Doctrine,
and owned to be so by all Christians; except such as did only bear the Name and
Title of Christians, but were indeed blasphemous Heretics and deniers of the
Resurrection? By which Character that he intends to describe the impious Sects
of the Gnostics, will appear by and by. So that Mr. White must either allow
the inserting of the negative Particle (which Mr. Mede Nov. Edit. p. 664.
proves to have been omitted in the Copy) or else acknowledge that those who are
Christians only in Name, but in Truth are impious blasphemous and absurd
Heretics, may properly be said to be of the pure and pious Opinion of the
Christians. And if only these be the other Catholics, whom Mr. White says
Justin acknowledges to have held contrary to the Millenaries, I am contented he
should make his best of them. If Mr. White should blame the inserting of the
negative particle [not] into Justin's Text, as too great a boldness with the
Fathers; it were easily answered, that the sense evidently requires it. And in
such a case it is no boldness, but such a liberty as the most Learned of their
own Interpreters and Commentators upon the Fathers do frequently take. And for
Mr. S. if he takes offense at this, one may with reason (since the exigency of
the sense plainly requires the inserting of it) demand of him (what he p. 31.
unreasonably does of us in relation to all the affirmative Propositions of
Scripture) to demonstrate that the particle [not] was not left out of this
Clause of Justin, by those who Transcribed the Book. But besides the exigency
of the sense in this place; that the negative ought to have been inserted, will
appear by the reference which Justin makes in this passage to something
foregoing in the same Dialogue. I have (says he) declared to thee before that
my self and many others are of the mind that this will come to pass. But, that
many indeed of those Christians, who are [not] of the pure and pious
persuasion, do not own this, I have intimated to thee. For of these, who are
called indeed Christians but are Atheistical and Impious Heretics, I have
showed thee that they teach in all Points blasphemous, atheistical, and absurd
things. In these words he plainly refers to some precedent passage, which if it
can be found will be a certain Key to open to us the sense of this place. I
know that Mr. Mede Ibid.
(perhaps not observing it) thought that passage to have been fraudulently
expunged by the Enemies of the Millenary Opinion: But it seems to me to be
still extant. For I find toward the beginning of this Dialogue, after that
Justin had endeavored to prove at large out of Scripture this glorious coming
of Christ, and to refute those who applied the Texts produced by him to that
purpose to Hezekiah, and to Solomon whose falling off to Idolatry he
occasionally mentions; whereupon Trypho objects to him that many who were
called Christians, did also communicate in the Idol-feasts: To this, I say, I
find Justin returning this answer P. 253.
: First, He denies not that there are such as these who own themselves
Christians, and confess the crucified Jesus to be both Lord and Christ, and yet
teach not his Doctrines, but the Doctrines of seducing spirits. But, says he,
We who are the Disciples of the true and pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ are from
this very thing the more strengthened in our Faith, and become more confirmed in
the Hope which by him has been declared to us. For we now see those things
visibly and effectually accomplished which he beforehand told us would be done
in his Name. For he said, Many shall come in my Name, etc. By which Hope any
one that reads the Antecedents and Consequents will plainly see that Justin
means the Hope of the Millennium (which he had been speaking of before) and
consequently of the Resurrection, which he looked upon as having a strict
Connection with the Doctrine of the Millennium; because (as he tells us
afterward) this Doctrine was denied by none but such as also denied the
Resurrection. And of these men his description runs on in these words, (...),
etc. Many (says he) both are and have been, that have come in the Name of
Jesus, and taught both to speak and do atheistical and blasphemous things; and
are by us denominated from those men from whom each of their Doctrines and
Opinions had its rise (namely as it follows Marcionites, Valentinians, etc.)
and all these in their several ways teach men to blaspheme the Creator of the
Universe, and the Christ whose Coming was foretold by him, and the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But we have no communion with them, as knowing them
to be atheistical and impious, etc. This passage in hand, when I compare it
with the Text before quoted and consider the words and characters of them both,
I cannot but believe it the very same that he refers to in those words, I have
declared to thee, I have intimated to thee, etc. If so, the matter in
Controversy is clear, that the Doctrine of the Millennium was universal. If it
be not the same, I could wish to be showed some other place in this Dialogue,
where Justin makes any such Declaration or Intimation. In the mean while by
comparison of these places, it is evident there are but two sorts of men that
Justin speaks of. First, Who believe the Millennium; We the Disciples (...).
of the true and pure Doctrine, etc. viz. My self and many others; again, my
self and as many Christians as are thoroughly (...).
of the right persuasion. Secondly, Who deny the Millennium; Many Christians,
says Justin; but what Christians? Of a right persuasion? That, says he, I
have signified before. (...) etc. For I have showed thee of them who are called
Christians, but are indeed Atheists and impious Heretics, that they teach
blasphemous and atheistical and absurd things: And true it is, he did show
before that those who denied the Millennium were many in number, and were
called Christians, etc. but were Teachers of blasphemous and atheistical
things, etc. and known to be Atheists and Impious, etc. But he showed it of
none other besides these. So that if this Doctrine were likewise denied by many
Christians of the pure and pious persuasion, than Justin Martyr had foulely
forgot himself. But if not, then it is plain that the Transcribers have wronged
Justin by leaving out a Negative which ought to have been inserted. It is worth
observing by the way how Mr. White pleases himself with false and frivolous
Criticisms upon the words, (...) and (...). False they are, as Mr. White shall
know if he desires to hear any more of them; and frivolous they are rendered by
my preceding Discourse; for which reason I say no more of them. But I think he
may do well hereafter (as Mr. S. P. 68.
warily suggests) not to engage himself, nor be hook't by others, out of his
own infallible way, but leave it wholly to the P. 69.
Bird-witted Heretics (as Mr. S. calls them) to perch upon the specifical
natures of Words, as he does of Things.

. 9. Besides these Instances I have given of Doctrines and Practices which Mr.
S. cannot deny to have been innovated, I might instance likewise in the chief
Points of Popery, and show that for all their pretense to Tradition, they are
really Innovations. But because this would engage me in tedious Disputes about
particular Points, I will only single out one of their most fundamental
Doctrines, viz. that of Transubstantiation; concerning which I shall show that,
notwithstanding it is the universal persuasion of the present Roman Church, yet
they have not, nor can have any assurance that it was the Doctrine of Christ,
and that it is descended to them by an uninterrupted Tradition. I shall not at
all contend against the word Transubstantiation (which is generally
acknowledged to be new) but only the thing signified by it, a substantial
change of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. And this I
might show at large not to have been the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers. But
because Mr. White, and Dr. Holden, and Mr. Cressy do so frequently and
confidently tell us, that nothing is to be reputed a Traditionary Doctrine the
contrary whereof has been publicly held by any Catholic who continued
afterward uncensured, and in the Communion of the Church: Therefore I shall
content my self at present with one clear Testimony, and that of a very eminent
Person in the Church, St. Theodoret, concerning whom Pope Leo (in an Epistle to
him, at the end of Theodoret's Works) gives this Testimony, That in the
judgment of the Apostolic See he was free from all stain of Heresy. The
passage I intend is in his Dialogues, between a Catholic under the name of
Orthodoxus, and Eranistes who sustained the person of an Heretic. Eranistes
Dialog. 2.
maintaining that the Body of Christ was changed into the substance of the
Divinity, he illustrates it by this similitude. As (says he) the Symbols of the
Lords Body and Blood are one thing before the invocation of the Priest; but
after the invocation are changed and do become another thing: So the Body of
our Lord, after his Ascension, is changed into the Divine substance. To which
Orthodoxus returns this answer, Thou art caught in thine own Net. Because the
mystical Symbols after Consecration do not pass out of their own Nature; for
they remain in their former substance, figure, and appearance, and may be seen
and handled even as before. He does not only in express words deny the
substance of the Symbols to be changed, but the occasion upon which these words
are brought in, and the scope of them (if they be of any force against the
Heretics illustration) renders them incapable of any other sense. When Mr. S.
has answered this Testimony, I have more for him.

That which I mainly urge against this Doctrine is, the monstrous Absurdities
and Contradictions contained in it, together with the necessary consequence of
them. Several of the Absurdities of it are well brought together by Scotus
Distinct. l. 4. did. 10. qu. 1. n. 3.
, who tells us, That to prove the possibility of Christ's Body being contained
under the species of Bread and Wine many things must be proved which seem to
involve a Contradiction; as, 1. That one quantum (or extended Body) may be
together in the very same place with another. 2. That a less quantum may be
together in the same place with a greater; i. e. a Body of less extension may
occupy not only the same, but as much room as a Body of greater extension does;
which is to say no more but this, that a Body less than another may be as great
as that other even whilst it is less than it. 3. That a greater quantum may be
together with every part of a less quantum, i. e. a Body that is greater than
another, may be as little as the least part of that other Body which is less
than it. 4. That a subject may be without quantity, i. e. there may be a Body
which has no kind of Magnitude. 5. That a Body may be somewhere where it was
not before, without changing its place, i^ e. a Body may be removed to another
place, whilst it remains still in the same place* 6. That a quantum may be
without any quantitative Mode, i. e. a Body may be extended without any manner
of extension. The possibility of all which, he says (and I am very much of his
mind) it would be too tedious a work to prove; and therefore he only attempts
to prove the two last, which (in all reason) is work enough for one man. All
these seeming Contradictions (as he modestly calls them) are by his own
acknowledgment involved in this Doctrine. To these I might add many more; as,
How a thing can be said to be changed into another thing which did exist
before? How a Body can be present in a place after the manner of a spirit? and
yet this they affirm concerning the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament;
one might as well say that Snow is black, but not after the manner of
blackness, but in the way of whiteness, which is to talk nonsense after the
manner of sense: How the whole Body of Christ can be contained under the least
sensible part of the species of Bread, as is generally affirmed: nay, and
Scotus Ibid. qu. 1. n. 12.
adds, that the whole Body is under every little part in its full proportions;
for he says expressly, That the Head and Foot of the Body of Christ are as far
distant from one another in the sacrament, as they are in Heaven; as if one
should say that a Body, all whose parts lie within the compass of a small
pins-head, may yet within that little compass have parts two yards distant from
one another: And lastly, how the sensible species of Bread, e. g. quantity,
whiteness, softness, etc. can exist without any subject? to affirm the
possibility of which (as generally they do) is to say that there may be
quantities of white and soft nothings; For this is the plain English of that
assertion, that sensible species may exist without a subject; which being
stripped of those terms of Art ( species and subject) that do a little disguise
it, it appears to be plain Nonsense.

Now the proper and necessary consequence of this Doctrine is to take away all
certainty, and especially the certainty of sense. For if that which my sight
and taste and touch do all assure me to be a little piece of Wafer, may
notwithstanding this be Flesh and Blood, even the whole Body of a man; then
notwithstanding the greatest assurance that Sense can give me, that any thing
is this or that, it may be quite another thing from what Sense reported it to
be. If so, then farewell the Infallibility of Tradition, which depends upon the
certainty of Sense: And which is a worse consequence, if this Doctrine be
admitted we can have no sufficient assurance that the Christian Doctrine is a
Divine Revelation. For the assurance of that depending upon the assurance we
have of the Miracles said to be wrought for the confirmation of it, and all the
assurance we can have of a Miracle depending upon the certainty of our senses,
it is very plain that that Doctrine which takes away the certainty of Sense
does in so doing overthrow the certainty of Christian Religion. And what can be
more vain than to pretend, that a man may be assured that such a Doctrine is
revealed by God, and consequently true, which if it be true, a man can have no
assurance at all of any Divine Revelation? Surely nothing is to be admitted by
us as certain, which being admitted we can be certain of nothing. It is a
wonder that any man who considers the natural consequences of this Doctrine can
be a Papist; unless he have attained to Mr. Cressy's pitch of Learning, who
speaking of the difficult Arguments wherewith this Doctrine was pressed, says
Exomol. c. 73. Sect. 7.
plainly, I must answer freely and ingenuously, that I have not learned to
answer such Arguments, but to despise them. And if this be a good way, when
ever we have a mind to believe any thing to scorn those Objections against it
which we cannot solve; then Christian Religion has no advantage above the
vilest Enthusiasms; and a Turk may maintain Mahomet and his Alcoran (in
opposition to Christ and his Doctrine) against all that Grotius, or any other
has said, if he can but keep his countenance, and gravely say, I have not
learned to answer such Arguments, but to despise them.

. 10. I will add one Instance more in another kind, to show the uncertainty of
Oral and Practical Traditions, and that shall be the Tradition concerning Pope
Jone; than which scarce any was ever more generally received in the Historical
kind. Many and great Authors affirm it, as Testifiers of the general Fame. None
ever denied it till the Reformers had made use of it to the disadvantage of
Popery. Since that time not only Papists deny it, but several of our own
Writers cease to believe it. Phil. Bergomensis tells the story thus: Anno 858.
John the 7 th, Pope, etc. The Tradition is that this person was a Woman, etc.
Here Is an Oral Tradition. He concludes thus; In detestation of whose
filthiness, and to perpetuate the memory of her Name, the Popes even to this
day going on Procession with the People and the Clergy, when they come to the
place of her Travel, etc. in token of abomination they turn from it, and go a
by-way; and being past that detestable place, they return into the way, and
finish their Procession. Here is one Practical Tradition. And for avoiding of
the like miscarriages, it was decreed that no one should thereafter be admitted
into St. Peter 's Chair priusquam per foratam sedem futuri Pontificis genitalia
ab ultimo Dyacone Cardinale attractarentur: Here is another with a Witness.
Ennead. 9. L. 1.
Sabellicus relates the same; and moreover says that this Porphyry Chair was in
his time to be seen in the Popes Palace. He adds indeed that Platina thinks
that this Tradition of Pope Jone was not faithfully delivered to Posterity. But
however (says he) such a Tradition there is. Concerning the first Practical
Tradition, Platina says that he may not deny it. For the second, he thinks the
Chair rather designed for a Stool for another use, etc. He concludes, These
things which I have related are commonly reported, yet from uncertain and
obscure Authors: Therefore I resolved (says he) briefly and nakedly to set them
down, lest I should seem too obstinately and pertinaciously to have omitted
that which almost all affirm. It is no wonder that he says the Authors of this
Report were uncertain and obscure, since so very few writ any thing in that
Age. But suppose none had writ of it, so long as he acknowledges it to have
been a general Oral Tradition attested by a solemn and constant Practice, it
has (according to Mr. S's Principles) greater certainty than if it had been
brought down to us by a hundred Books written in that very Age. So that here is
an Oral and Practical Tradition, continued we are sure for some hundreds of
years, preserved and propagated by a solemn practice of the Popes, Clergy and
People of Rome in their Processions, and by a notorious Custom at the Election
of every Pope; and in a matter of so great importance to their Religion (the
honor of the Sea of Rome, and the uninterrupted Succession from St. Peter
being so nearly concerned in it) that, had it been false, they had been obliged
under pain of Damnation, not only not to have promoted it, but to have used all
means to have discovered the falsity of it. Therefore Mr. S. is bound by his
own Principles either to allow it for a Truth, or else to give an account when
and how it begun; which may possibly be made out by We Metaphysitians (as he P.
340.
styles himself, and his Scientifical Brethren) but I assure him it is past the
skill of P. 337.
Note-book Learning.

SECT. X.
. 1. IT is not the present persuasion of the Church of Rome, The fourth Answer
to his second Demonstration.
nor ever was, that their Faith has descended to them by Oral Tradition as the
sole Rule of it. And this being proved, the Supposition upon which his
Demonstration is built falls to the ground.

And for the proof of this, I appeal to that Decret. primum quartae Sess.
Decree of the Council of Trent, in which they declare, That because the
Christian Faith and Discipline are contained in written Books and unwritten
Traditions, etc. therefore they do receive and honor the Books of Scripture
and also Traditions [pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia] with equal pious
affection and reverence; which I understand not how those do, who set aside the
Scripture, and make Tradition the sole Rule of their Faith. And consonantly to
this Decree, the general Doctrine of the Romish Church is, that Scripture and
Tradition make up the Rule of Faith. So the Roman Catechism (set forth by order
of the Council of Trent) says In Praefat.
that the sum of the Doctrine delivered to the Faithful is contained in the
Word of God, which is distributed into Scripture and Tradition. Bellarmine De
Verbo Dei, etc. L. 4. 12.
speaks to the same purpose, That the Scripture is a Rule of Faith, not an
entire but partial one. The entire Rule is the Word of God, which is divided
into two partial Rules, Scripture, and Tradition. According to this, the
adequate Rule of Faith is the Word of God; which is contained partly in
Scripture* and partly in the Tradition of the Church. And that Scripture is
looked upon by them as the principal Rule and primary foundation of their
Faith, and Tradition as only supplying the defects of Scripture, as to some
Doctrines and Rites not contained in Scripture, must be evident to any one that
has been conversant in the chief of their controversial Divines. Bellarmine De
Verbo Dei non scripto. L. 4. c. 9.
where he gives the marks of a Divine Tradition speaks to this purpose, That
that which they call a Divine Tradition is such a Doctrine or Rite as is not
found in Scripture, but embraced by the whole Church; and for that reason
believed to have descended from the Apostles. And he tells us further Ibid. c.
11.
, That the Apostles committed all to Writing, which was commonly and publicly
Preached; and that all things are in Scripture, which men are bound to know and
believe explicitly: But then he says, that there were other things which the
Apostles did not commonly and publicly teach; and these they did not commit to
Writing, but delivered them only by word of mouth to the Prelates and Priests
and perfect men of the Church. And these are the Apostolical Traditions he
speaks of. Cardinal Perron Reply. Observat. 3. c. 4.
says, That the Scripture is the foundation of the Christian Doctrine, either
mediately or immediately. And that the Authority of unwritten Tradition is
founded in general on these sentences of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
Hold the Traditions, etc. Again, 2 Timothy 2.2.
The things which thou have heard of me among many Witnesses commit to faithful
men, etc. And that the Authority of the Church to preserve, and especially to
declare these, is founded in this Proposition, viz. 1 Timothy 3.15.
That the Church is the pillar and ground of Truth. So that according to him,
the primary Rule of Faith is the Scripture, in which the Authority of Tradition
is founded. Mr. Knott Charity maintained. c. 2. Sect. 1.
says expressly, We acknowledge the H. Scripture to be a most perfect Rule, for
as much as a Writing can be a Rule; we only deny that it excludes, either
Divine Tradition, though it be unwritten, or an external Judge to keep, to
propose, to interpret it, etc. So that (according to him) Scripture is a
perfect Rule, only it does not exclude unwritten Tradition, etc. By which that
he does not understand (as Mr. S. does) a concurrent Oral Tradition of all the
same Doctrines which are contained in Scripture, but other Doctrines not
therein contained, is plain from what he says elsewhere Reply to Mr. Chill. c.
2. Sect. 179.
, We do not distinguish Tradition from the written Word, because Tradition is
not written by any, or in any Book or Writing; but because it is not written in
the Srripture or Bible; Bellarmine De Verbo Dei, etc. L. 4. c. 2.
also says the same. And as for the interpreting of Scripture, he tells us that
this is not the office of a Rule, but of a Judge. Charity maintained. c. 2.
Sect. 3.
There is (says he) a great and plain distinction between a Judge and a Rule.
For as in a Kingdom the Judge has his Rule to follow, which are the received
Laws and Customs; which are not fit or able to declare, and be Judges to
themselves, but that Office must belong to a living Judge: So the Holy Scripture
is and may be a Rule, but cannot be a Judge. Here he makes the Scripture as much
a Rule for matters of Faith, as the Laws of the Land are for Civil matters. And
in his Reply to Mr. Chillingworth, he has a Chapter of above 150 Pages, the
Title whereof is, Scripture is not the only Rule of Faith; which (had he with
Mr. S. believed Oral Tradition to be the sole Rule of Faith) had been as absurd
as it would be to write a Book to prove that Turks are not the only Christians
in the World. Mr. Cressy likewise (not very consistently to himself) lays down
this Conclusion; Exomol. c. 20.
The entire Rule of faith is contained not only in Scripture, but likewise in
unwritten Tradition.

. 2. Now all this is as contrary as can be to Mr. Rushworth's new Rule of
Faith. Therefore Mr. White says Tabul. Suffrag. p. 96.
, They speak ill who teach that some things are known in the Church from
Scripture, some by Tradition. And Dr. Holden (in opposition to those who make
Scripture any part of the Rule of Faith) advances one of the most wild and
uncharitable Positions that ever I yet met withal, viz. Analys. Fid. L. 1. c.
6.
That if one should believe all the Articles of the Catholic Faith, etc. for
this reason because he thought they were all expressly revealed in Scripture, or
implicitly contained so as they might be deduced from thence, and would not
have believed them had he not judged that they might be evinced from Scripture;
yet this man could be no true Catholic: Because (as he tells us afterward C.
8.
) we must receive the Christian Doctrine as coming to us by Tradition; for only
by this means (excluding the Scriptures) Christ has appointed revealed Truths
to be received and communicated. In the mean time Cardinal Perron (unless he
altered his mind) is in a sad case, who believed the Authority of Tradition it
self for this reason, because it was founded in Scripture.

. 3. And this fundamental difference about the Rule of Faith, between the
generality of their Divines and Mr* S's small party, is fully acknowledged by
the Traditionists themselves. Dr. Holden says L. 1. ^. 9.
, That their Divines who resolve Faith according to the common Opinion, do
inevitably fall into that shameful Circle (of proving the Divine Authority of
the Scripture by the Church, and the Infallibility of the Church back again by
the Scripture) because they dare not build their Faith upon the natural
evidence and certainty of Tradition. So that Dr. Holden's way of resolving
Faith, is different from the common Opinion of their Divines, which he says L.
1. c. 3.
does not differ from the Opinion of those who resolve their Faith into the
private Spirit; and this (according to Mr. White Exetas. p. 70.
) is the very way of the Calvinists, and of the absurdest Sects. Nay, Mr. White
says farther Ibid.
, That he will be content to suffer all the punishment that is due to
Calumniators, if the Roman Divines (he there speaks of) do not hold the same
Rule of Faith with the Calvinists, and all the absurdest Sects. So that it
seems that the Calvinists, etc. do not in their Rule of Faith differ from the
Papists, but only from Mr. White, Mr. S. etc. Now the Divines he there speaks
of, are the Censors of Doctrines at Rome, according to whose advice his
infallible Holiness and the Cardinals of the Inquisition do usual proceed in
censuring of Doctrines. Concerning these Divines he goes on to expostulate in
this manner; Ib. p. 73.
Shall we endure these men to sit as Censors and Judges of Faith, who agree
with Heretics in the very first Principle which distinguishes Catholics from
Heretics? Again P. 144.
, These are thy gods O Rome! upon these thou dependest, whilst prating
Ignorance triumphs in the Roman College. And he says the same likewise of the
generality of their School-Divines, whom he calls Scepticks, because they do
not own his Demonstrative way. Insomuch that he tells us P. 64.
, That few sound parts are left uninfected with this Plague of Skepticism P.
149.
; that this is an universal Gangrene P. 67, 68.
; that there are but few that go the way of Demonstration, and these are either
wearied out, or else live retiredly, or despair of any remedy of these things.
And indeed all along that Book he bemoans himself and his Traditionary Brethren
as a desolate and forlorn Party, who have Truth on their side, but want company
and encouragement. So he tells us P. 101.
, That the true scientifical Divines dare not profess their knowledge, lest they
should be exposed by the Sophisters of their Church to the derision and scorn
either of their Judges or of the People.

. 4. So that upon examination of the whole matter, it appears that Mr. S's
Demonstration proceeds upon a false Supposition, That it is the persuasion of
their present Church, that Tradition is the sole Rule of Faith. For there is no
such matter; unless Mr. S. mean by their Church a few private persons, who are
looked upon by those who have the chief power in their Church as Heretical: as
we may reasonably conjecture by the proceedings at Rome against Mr. White; many
of whose Books are there condemned Exetas. p. 9.
, as containing things manifestly Heretical, erroneous in the Faith, rash,
scandalous, seditious, and false respectively, etc. And all this done,
notwithstanding that the chief subject of those Books is the explication and
defense of this most Catholic Principle, That Oral Tradition is the only Rule
of Faith. To sum up then the whole business: If nothing be to be owned for
Christian Doctrine (as the Traditionists say) but what is the general
persuasion of those who are acknowledged to be in the communion of the Roman
Catholic Church; then much less can this Principle (That Oral Tradition is the
sole Rule of Faith) which is pretended to be the foundation of the whole
Christian Doctrine, be received as descended from Christ and his Apostles;
since it is so far from being the general persuasion of that Church at the
present, that it has been, and still is generally disowned. But Mr. White has a
salvo for this. For although he grant Apol. p. 38.
, That very many of their Schoolmen maintain that Tradition is necessary only
for some Points, not clearly expressed in Scripture, whence (he says) it seems
to follow that they build not the whole Body of their Faith upon Tradition: yet
he tells us there is a vast difference betwixt relying on Tradition, and saying
or thinking we d^ so, Suppose there be; yet I hope that men's saying that they
do not rely on Tradition as their only Rule, is a better evidence that they do
not, than any man's surmise to the contrary is that they do, though they think
and say they do not; which is in effect to say that they do; though we have as
much assurance as we can have that they do not. Besides, how is this Rule
self-evident to all, even to the rude Vulgar as to its ruling power (as Mr. S.
affirms it is) when the greatest part even of the Learned among them think and
say that it is not the only Rule? But Mr. White endeavors to illustrate this
dark point by a- Ibid. P. 39.
similitude, which is to this sense; As the Scepticks who deny this Principle,
That Contradictions cannot be true at once, yet in their lives and civil
actions proceed as if they owned it: So the Schoolmen, though they deny
Tradition to be the only Rule of their Faith, yet by resolving their Faith into
the Church which owns this Principle, they do also in practice own it, though
they say they do not. So that the generality of learned Papists are just such
Catholics as the Scepticks are Dogmatists, that is a company of absurd people
that confute their Principles by their practice. According to this reasoning, I
perceive the Protestants will prove as good Catholics as any, for they do only
think and say that Tradition is not the Rule of Faith; but that they
practically rely upon it, Mr. S. has past his word for them: For he assures us
P. 30. and 31.
(and we may rely upon a man that writes nothing but Demonstration) that if we
look narrowly into the bottom of our hearts, we shall discover the natural
method of Tradition to have unawares settled our Judgments concerning Faith;
however when our other Concerns awake design in us, we protest against it, and
seem perhaps to our unreflecting selves to embrace and hold to the mere
guidance of the Letter of Scripture. So that in reality we are as good
Catholics, and as true holders to Tradition as any Papist of them all, at the
bottom of our thoughts and in our settled judgments; however we have taken up an
humor to protest against it, and may seem perhaps to our unreflecting selves
to be Protestants.

. 5. Thus much may suffice to have spoken to his two great Arguments; or P. 173.
as he (good man) unfortunately calls them Demonstrations; which yet to say
truth are not properly his, but the Authors of Rushworth's Dialogues, the main
foundation of which Book is the substance of these Demonstrations. Only before
I take leave of them, I cannot but reflect upon a passage of Mr. S s P. 163.
wherein he tells his Readers that they are not obliged to bend their brains to
study his Book with that severity as they would do an Euclid; meaning perhaps
one of Mr. White's Euclids; for it does not appear by his way of Demonstration
that ever he dealt with any other. As for the true Euclid, I suppose any one
that has tasted his Writings, will at the reading of Mr. S's unbend his brains
without bidding, and smile to see himself so demurely discharged from a study
so absurd and ridiculous.

SECT. XI.
Concerning some other advantages of Tradition, etc.
. 1. I Should now take into consideration his Ninth Discourse, in which he
pretends to open the incomparable strength of the Churches humane Authority,
and the Advantages which accrue to it by the supernatural assistances of the
Holy Ghost: But that there is nothing material in it, which has not been
answered already. Only I desire him to explain, how the supernatural
Assistances of the Holy Ghost can (according to his Principles) add to our
assurance of the certainty of Tradition. Because we can have no greater
certainty of the supernatural Assistance of the Holy Ghost, than we have that
there is an Holy Ghost, and of this we can have no certainty (according to Mr.
S.) but by Tradition, which conveys this Doctrine to us. And if Tradition of it
self can infallibly assure us that there are supernatural Assistances of the
Holy Ghost, then a man must know that Tradition is infallible antecedently to
his knowledge of any supernatural Assistance. And if so, what can any
supernatural Assistance add to my assurance of the certainty of Tradition,
which I do suppose to be infallible before I can know of any supernatural
Assistance? Can any thing be more ludicrous, than to build first all our
certainty of the Assistance of the Holy Ghost upon the certainty of Tradition,
and then afterward to make the certainty of Tradition to rely upon the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost? As if that could contribute to our assurance of
the certainty of Tradition, which unless Tradition be first supposed certain,
is it self wholly uncertain.

. 2. The Conclusion of this Ninth Discourse is somewhat Extatical; possibly
from a sudden disorder of his fancy upon the contemplation of his own
performances, to see what a Man he has made himself (with the help of
Rushworth's Dialogues) or rather what his Party has made him by the Office they
put upon him: For it seems (by his telling) P. 165. and 166.
Mr. Cressy and the rest are ordained to cajoll the Fools, leaving him the way
of Reason and Principles; and that himself is chosen out to Demonstrate to the
Wise, or those who judge of things per altissimas causas In the discharge of
which glorious Office he declares that he intends no Confutation of those
Authors which Mr. Cressy and others have meddled with: Yet if any will be so
charitable as to judge he has solidly confuted them, because he has radically
and fundamentally overthrown all their Arguments, etc. he shall rejoice and be
thankful. That the P. 159.
intelligent Reader (for he writes to none but such) may also rejoice with him,
I shall recite the whole passage, for it is thick of Demostration, and as
likely as any in his Book to have the altissimas causas contained in it.

. 3. P. 93.
It would require a large Volume to unfold particularly how each virtue
contributes to show the inerrable indeficiency of Tradition, and how the
Principles of almost each Science are concerned in demonstrating its Certainty:
Arithmetic lends her Numbering and Multiplying Faculty, to scan the vast Number
of Testifiers; Geometry her Proportions to show a kind of infinite strength of
Certitude in Christian Tradition, above those At stations which breed
Certainty in humane Affairs; Logic her skill to frame and make us see the
connexions it has with the Principles of our Understanding; Nature her Laws of
Motion and Action; Morality her first Principle that nothing is done gratis by
a cognoscitive Nature, and that the Body of Traditionary Doctrine is most
conformable to Practical Reason: Historical Prudence clears the Impossibility
of an undiscernable revolt from Points so descended and held so Sacred;
Politics show this to be the best way imaginable to convey down such a Law as
it concerns every man to be skilful in; Metaphysics engages the Essences of
Things, and the very notion of Being which fixes every Truth, so establishing
the scientifical Knowledges which spring from each particular Nature by their
first Causes or Reasons exempt from change or motion. Divinity demonstrates it
most worthy God and most conducive to bring Mankind to Bliss. Lastly,
Controversy evidences the total uncertainty of any thing concerning Faith if
this can be uncertain, and makes use of all the rest to establish the Certainty
of this First Principle. A very fit conclusion for such Demonstrations as went
before. It is well Mr. S. writes to none but intelligent Readers; for were it
not a thousand pities, that so manly, and solid, and convincing a discourse as
this should be cast away upon fools?

SECT. XII.
Mr. S's Corollaries considered.
. 1. AS for his Corollaries, supposing them to be rightly deduced from his
former Discourses, they must of necessity fall with them. For they signify
nothing but upon this supposition that his foregoing Discourses are true. And
yet this being granted, it were easy to show that most of them are grossly
faulty. For, First, Several of them are plainly coincident. The second, viz.
None can with right pretend to be a Church but the followers of Tradition, is
the very same in sense with the 11 th viz No company of men hang together like
a Body of a Christian Commonwealth or Church, but that which adheres to
Tradition. So likewise the 12 th and 14 th are contained in the 15 th: The 16
th, and 17 th, in the 19 th: The 16 th 17, 18 th, and 19 th in the 21 st. And
the 32 d and 34 th in the 31 st. Secondly, Diverse of them are manifestly
absurd, as the 12 th, 13 th, 14 th, 16 th, 17 th, 18 th, 19 th, the sum of
which is, That there is no arguing against Tradition from Scripture, or the
Authority of the Church, or Fathers and Councils, or from History and
Testimonial Writings, or from contrary Tradition, or Reason, or any Instances
whatsoever; which is as much as to say, If this Proposition be true, That
Tradition is certain, then it cannot by any kind of Argument be proved to be
false. But is this any peculiar Consectary from the truth of this Proposition?
Does not the same follow from every Proposition? That if it be true, it cannot
be proved to be false; yet no man was ever yet so frivolous, as to draw such a
consequence from the supposed truth of any Proposition. His 23 d also is
singularly absurd, That there is no possibility of arguing at all against
Tradition rightly understood, or the living voice of the Catholic Church, with
any show of Reason. These are large words. It might have contented a reasonable
man to have said, that no good Argument could be brought against it: But he is
jealous of his Hypothesis, and can never think it safe till it be shot-free;
nor will that content him, but it must be also impossible for any one to make a
show of shooting at it. This were, I confess, a peculiar privilege of Mr. S's
Discourses above other men's; if they were (as he says) by evidence of
Demonstration so secured, that not only no substantial Argument could be
brought against them, but that even the most subtle Schoolman of them all
should not be able to come near them with so much as a videtur quod non. But it
may be he means no more by this Corollary, than what he said in the 18 th, viz.
That no solid Argument from Reason can be brought against Tradition: If so,
then the sense of his 23 d Corollary must be this, That there is no possibility
of arguing at all against Tradition with any solid show, or substantial shadow
of Reason; which would be a little inconvenient. I will instance but in one
more, his 40 th, which is this, The knowledge of Traditions Certainty is the
first knowledge or Principle in Controversial Divinity; i. e. without which
nothing is known or knowable in that Science. Which is to infer, that because
he has with much pains proved the certainty of Tradition, therefore it is self
evident, i. e. needed no proof. Nay, it is to conclude the present matter in
Controversy and that which is the main debate of his Book to be the first
Principle in Controversial Divinity, i. e. such a Proposition as every one
ought to grant before he can have any right to dispute about it. This is a very
prudent course, to make begging the question the first Principle in
Controversy; which would it but be granted, I am very much of his mind that
the method he takes would be the best way to make Controversy a Science;
because he that should have the luck or boldness to beg first, would have it in
his power to make what he pleased certain.

. 2. Were it worth while, I might further pursue the Absurdities of his
Corollaries. For they are not so terrible as he makes show of, by his telling
Dr. Casaubon P. 330.
, That Sure-footing and its Corollaries may put him out of his Wits: Which
though intended for an Affront to the Doctor, yet it may be mollified with a
good interpretation; for if the reading of wild and fantastical stuff be apt
to disorder a very learned head, then so far Mr. S's saying may have truth in
it.

It remains only that I requite his 41 Corol. not with an equal number, but
with two or three natural Consectaries from the Doctrine of his Book.

First, No man can certainly understand the meaning of any Book whatsoever* any
farther than the Contents of it are made known to us by a concurrent Oral
Tradition. For the Arguments whereby he and Mr. Rushworth endeavor to prove it
impossible without Tradition to attain to the certain sense of Scripture, do
equally extend to all other Books.

Secondly, The memory of matters of Fact done long ago may be better preserved
by general Rumor than by public Records. For this is the plain English of that
Assertion, That Oral Tradition is a better and more secure way of Conveyance
than Writing.

Thirdly, That the Generality of Papists are no Christians. For if (as he
affirms) Tradition be the sole Rule of Faith, and those who disown this Rule be
* ipso facto cut off from the Root of Faith, i. e. unchristian'd; And if (as I
have shown) the Generality of Papists do disown this Rule: Then it is plain
that they are no Christians.

THE RULE of FAITH.
PART IV. Testimonies concerning the Rule of Faith.
SECT. I.
. 1. THus far in the way of Reason and Principles. The rest is Note-book
Learning, which he tells us Mr. S's Testimonies examined.
he is not much a Friend to; and there is no kindness lost, for it is as little
a Friend to him and his Cause as he can be to it. I shall first examine the
Authorities he brings for Tradition; and then produce express Testimonies in
behalf of Scripture. In both which I shall be very brief; in the one, because
his Testimonies require no long Answer; in the other, because it would be to
little purpose to trouble Mr. S. with many Fathers, who for ought appears by
his Book is acquainted with none but Father White, as I shall show hereafter.
By the way, I cannot much blame him for the course he uses to take with other
men's Testimonies* because it is the only way that a man in his circumstances
can take; otherwise, nothing can be in it self more unreasonable, than to
pretend to answer Testimonies by ranking them under so many faulty Heads; and
having so done, magisterially to require his Adversary to vindicate them, by
showing that they do not fall under some of those Heads, though he have not
said one word against any of them particularly; nay, though he have not so much
as recited any one of them; for then the Trick would be spoiled, and his
Catholic Reader who perhaps may believe him in the general, might see Reason
not to do so if he should descend to particulars, which (as he well observes)
would make his P. 161.
Discourse to look with a contingent Face.

. 2. I begin with his three Authorities from Scripture; which when I consider,
I see no reason why he (of all men) should find fault with my Lord Bishop of
Down's Dissuasive for being so P. 320.
thin and slight in Scripture-Citations. Nor do I see how he will answer it to
Mr. Rushworth, for transgressing that prudent Rule of his, viz. Dial. 2. Sect.
14.
That the Catholic should never undertake to convince his Adversary out of
Scripture, etc. For which he gives this substantial Reason, Ibid.
because this were to strengthen his Opponent in his own Ground and Principle,
viz. That all is to be proved out of Scripture; which he tells us presently
after is no more fit to convince, than a Beetle is to cut withal; meaning it
perhaps of Texts so applied as these are which follow. Isa. 35.8.
This shall be to you a direct way, so that Fools cannot err in it. Isa. 59.21.
This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; my Spirit which is in thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart from thy mouth, and
from the mouth of thy Seed, and from the mouth of thy Seeds seed from
henceforth for ever. Jer. 31.
I will give my Law in their bowels, and in their hearts will I write it: From
which Texts if Mr. S. can prove Tradition to be the only Rule of Faith, any
better than the Philosophers Stone or the Longitude may be proved from the 1
Cap. of Genesis, I am content they should pass for valid Testimonies: Though I
might require of him (by his own Law) before these Texts can signify any thing
to his purpose, to demonstrate that this is the Traditionary sense of these
Texts, and that it has been universally in all Ages received by the Church
under that Notion; and then to show how it comes to pass that so many of the
Fathers, and of their own Commentators have interpreted them to another sense:
And lastly, to show how Scripture which has no certain sense but from
Tradition, and of the sense whereof Tradition cannot assure us, unless it be
the Rule of Faith; I say, how Scripture can prove Tradition to be the Rule of
Faith, which can prove nothing at all unless Tradition be first proved to be
the Rule of Faith. This I take to be as shameful a Circle as that wherewith Dr.
Holden upbraids the generality of his Brethren.

. 3. I proceed to his Authorities from Fathers and Councils; all which (not one
of them excepted) he has taken out of Mr. White's Tabulae Suffragiales,
without the least acknowledgment from whom he had them. And that it might be
evident that he had not consulted the Books themselves for them, he has taken
them with all their faults, and with the very same errors of Citation which Mr.
White had been guilty of before him. So that though he is pleased to say of
himself that P. 239.
he he is a bad Transcriber* yet I must do him that right, to assure the Reader
that he does it very punctually and exactly.

4. He begins with Councils, of which he tells us he will only mention three in
several Ages.

The first is the First Synod of Lateran. One might have expected, after he had
told us he would mention three in several Ages, he should have produced them
according to the order of Time, and have begun with the Council of Sardica,
which was near 300 years before the Lateran. But there was a good reason why
the Lateran should be first produced viz. because it is mentioned before the
other in Mr White's Book. Well, but what says this Synod? We all confess
unanimously and consequently, with one heart and mouth, the Tenets and Sayings
of the Holy Fathers; adding nothing, substracting nothing of those things which
are delivered us by them; and we believe as the Fathers have believed, we
Preach so as they have taught. The force of which Testimony Mr. S. lays upon
the Word delivered, as if that Word wherever it is met with in Councils or
Fathers, must needs be understood of oral delivery; whereas it is a general
Word indifferently used for conveyance either by writing, or word of mouth. In
this place it plainly refers to the writings of particular Fathers, out of whom
a long catalogue of Testimonies against the Heresy of the Monothelites had
been read just before this Declaration of the Synod. Now what signifies this to
oral Tradition's being the Rule of Faith, that this Synod declares her Faith,
in opposition to the Heresy of the Monothelites, to be consonant in all things
to those Testimonies which had been produced out of the Fathers?

The next is the Council of Sardica; out of an Epistle of which Council he
cites these words, We have received this Doctrine, we have been taught so, we
hold this Catholic Tradition, Faith and Confession. Which are general words,
and indifferently applicable to Oral Tradition, or Writing, or both. But be
they what they will, Mr. S. ought not to have been ignorant, that this Council
was rejected by St. Austin and other Orthodox Fathers, as Council. Tom 1.
Binnius acknowledges; and which is more, that the latter part of this Epistle
(out of which part Mr. S. cites these words) which contains a Confession of
Faith, is by An. 347.
Baronius (and after him by Binnius) proved to have been surreptitiously added.
For though it be found in Theodoret, and mentioned by Sozomen; yet Baronius
thinks that it was the Arian Confession composed by the false-Synod of Sardica
which sat at the same time; and that Sozomen lighting upon it, perhaps mistook
it for the Confession of the Orthodox Synod of the same name. However that be,
he proves out of Athanasius, and from the Testimony both of the Eastern and
Western Bishops, that the Council of Sardica did not so much as add one word or
tittle, no nor so much as explain any thing in the Nicene Faith. But Mr. White
says nothing of this, and therefore Mr. S. could not, who is no Speculator in
these matters, but only as a Testifier delivers down these authorities to us as
he received them by hand from Mr. White; and if the word Tradition be but in
them, they are Demonstrative.

As for his Testimonies from the 2 d Council of Nice (which he calls the 7 th
General Council) who pretended their Doctrine of Image Worship to have
descended to them by an uninterrupted Tradition, and proved it most doughtily
by Texts of Scripture ridiculously wrested, by impertinent sayings out of
obscure and counterfeit Authors, and by fond and immodest Stories (as is
acknowledged by Pope Quodlibet 6. cited by Espencaeus in 2 d Epist. ad Tim. c.
4.
Adrian the 6 th) of Apparitions and Women's Dreams, etc. for which I refer the
Reader to the Council it self; which is such a mess of Popperies, that if a
general Council of Atheists had met together with a design to abuse Religion by
talking ridiculously concerning it, they could not have done it more
effectually: I say, as for his Testimonies from this Council, I shall refer Mr.
S to that Western Council under Charles the Great, which a little after at
Francford condemned, and also fully confuted the Decisions of this Council,
calling their pretended Tradition of Image Worship [putidissimam Traditionem] a
most stinking Tradition.

These are his authorities from Councils; Where (says he) we see General
Councils relying on the Teaching of the Fathers or foregoing Church, and on
the Churches Tradition as their Rule, etc. Where does he see any such matter?
Or where does he see General Councils? Was the Council of Lateran a General
one? Or was the Council of Sardica? If it was, let him show how the 2 d. of
Nice could be the 7 th. General Council. Mr. White must write more explicitly,
and say which are General Councils, which not, otherwise he will lead his
friends into dangerous mistakes.

4. After ancient Councils (not so ancient neither) let us (says he) give a
glance at Fathers. Glance is a modest word, and yet I doubt whether ever the
Fathers had so much as that from him. Before I speak particularly to his
Testimonies from the Fathers, I shall mind him of what Mr. Rushworth says in
general, viz. Dial. 3. Sect. 13.
That who seeks Tradition in the Fathers, and to convince it by their
Testimony, takes an hard task upon him, etc. Again Ibid.
, As in other Points, so even in this of the Resolution of Faith, as Doctors
seem to differ nowadays, so might the Fathers also. If this be true, Mr. S. is
not very likely by a few Testimonies out of the Fathers to prove that Tradition
is the sole Rule of Faith. But let us see what he has done toward it.

He begins with a saying of Pope Celestine to the Fathers of the Ephesin
Council. Now therefore we must act with a common endeavor to preserve things
believed, and retained to this very time by Succession from the Apostles.
Binnius's other Reading [of (...) for (...)] quite spoils the force of this
Citation which Mr. S. puts upon the word Succession. But read it how he will;
why may not the Christian Doctrine be said to come by Succession from the
Apostles, when it is transmitted to us by Scripture, as well as when by oral
Tradition? I am sure the same Celestine in an Epistle to Cyril, commends him
for defending the Faith by Scripture, This (says he) is a great Triumph of our
Faith, to demonstrate our Opinions so strongly, and to overthrow the contrary
by Testimonies from Scripture. And neither in this Epistle, nor the other, does
he make any mention of Oral Tradition.

Next he cites that known place in Irenaeus, But what if the Apostles had not
left us the Scriptures, ought we not to follow the Order of Tradition, etc.?
This makes clearly against him; for it implies, that now the Apostles have left
us the Scriptures, we ought to follow them. The other passage he cites out of
Irenaeus, Lib. 1. c. 3. is a clear eviction that he did not consult the Book.
For he puts two sayings together which he had met with in Mr. White immediately
one after the other; and because Mr. White had cited Lib. 1. c. 3. for the
first saying, and brought in the other immediately upon it with an (Et rursus)
Again, etc. Therefore Mr. S. (who is of a right Traditionary temper, which is
to take things easily upon trust himself, and require Demonstration from
others) concluded that these sayings were in the same place, though in truth
they are in several Books. As for the Testimony it self, there is nothing in it
to Mr. S's purpose besides the word Tradition, which Irenaeus does often apply
to Scripture as well as Oral Tradition; and there is nothing in this place to
determine it to Oral Tradition.

His Testimonies out of Origin will do him less stead: For every one that has
been conversant in the Writings of that Father, knows what he means by the
Churches Tradition preserved by order of Succession, viz. The mystical
Interpretations of Scripture, which (he says) were delivered by the Apostles to
the Governors of the Church, and by them down from hand to hand. If this be the
Tradition Mr. S. contends for, Origin is at his service; if it be not, I assure
him he is not for his turn.

Next comes Tertullian, concerning whom (as also Origin) the Papist upon
occasion thinks it enough to reply in St. Hierom's words Advers. Helvid.
, As for Tertullian, I have nothing to say of him but that he is not a man of
the Church. Whatever he was, these are his words, If thou be but a
Christian, believe what is [traditum] delivered. And here is nothing again but
the word delivered; which (as I have said) is indifferent to Written or Oral
Tradition, if the Circumstances do not determine it to one; as here they do
(very unluckily for Mr. S.) to the Scripture. For he disputes here against
Marcion, who denied the Flesh of Christ; and who to maintain that, denied his
Nativity, and His opinor consiliis tot Originalia Instrumenta Christi delere
Marcion ausus est, ne Caro ejus probaretur. Ex qua, oro te, autoritate, etc.
expunged the whole History of it out of the Gospel; But (says Tertullian) by
what authority do thou do this? If thou be a Prophet, foretell something; If
an Apostle, preach publicly; If Apostolical, be of the Apostle's mind; If no
more but a Christian, believe what is delivered. And where delivered? But in
those Instruments or Books of the Gospel out of which (as Tertullian
immediately before tells us) Marcion had made bold to expunge this Story.

As for his Testimonies out of Athanasius, the two first of them prove nothing
but that Faith comes down from our Ancestors, or was by them delivered to us;
which no body denies: Nor is there a word in either of them concerning oral, in
opposition to written Tradition. The third Testimony is out of an Epistle to
Epictetus, to whom Athanasius writing concerning those who held Christ's Body
to be Consubstantial with his Divinity, tells him this was so gross a conceit
that it needed no sollicitous confutation; but that it would be a sufficient
answer to say in general the Orthodox Church was not of that mind, our Fathers
did not think so. From whence Mr. S. infers that Tradition is held by him a
sole sufficient Rule of Faith, and the only Answer to be given why we reject
Points from Faith, etc. But if he had consulted the Book, he would not have
inferred that this was the only Answer to be given, etc. For it immediately
follows, But lest from our being wholly silent, these Inventers of evil things
should take occasion to be more impudent, it will be good to recite a few
passages out of Scripture, etc. And from thence he confutes them at large. It
was so gross an Error that he thought it might be sufficient, without bringing
particular arguments out of Scripture against it, to say that it was contrary
to the ancient Faith; but yet lest they should (if he had said no more) have
taken boldness from thence, and thought that nothing more could be said against
it, therefore he confutes it from particular Texts of Scripture. And what in
his opinion was the sufficient Rule of Faith, Mr. S. might have seen at the
beginning of this Epistle from these words, That Faith which was professed by
the Fathers in that Council (viz. the Nicene) according to the Scriptures, is
to me sufficient, etc. It seems that Scripture was to him the Rule and Standard
whereby to judge even the Creeds of General Councils.

Mr. S. says he will be shorter in the rest, and so will I. For what is to be
said to Testimonies brought at a venture? when he that brings them, had he read
the Books themselves, could not have had the face to have brought them. Such is
this out of Stromat. L. 7.
Clem. Alezand. As if one of a Man becomes a Beast, like those infected with
Circes poison; so he has forfeited his being a Man of God and faithful to our
Lord, who spurns against Ecclesiastical Tradition, and leaps into Opinions of
human Election. Mr. S. knows whose way of quoting this is, to pick a bit out of
the midst of a Text that sounds something toward his purpose, and leave out
the rest which would make it evident to be meant just contrary. Yet I cannot
charge this wholly upon Mr. S. whose implicit Faith were it not for his
culpable Ignorance might excuse him. But for his Seducer Mr. White, how he can
acquit himself of so foul an Imputation, I leave it to any ingenuous Papist to
judge when I have nakedly set the whole passage before him. Clemens speaking of
Heretics who relinquish the Scripture, or abuse it by wresting it to their
lusts, says, Men who deal in matters of highest importance must needs commit
great Errors, if they do not take and hold the RVLE OF TRVTH from Truth it
self. For such men having once deviated from the right way, do likewise err in
most particulars; probably because they have not the Faculty of distinguishing
Truths and Falsehoods perfectly exercised to choose what ought to be chosen. For
if they had this, they would be ruled by the Divine SCRIPTVRES. [Therefore as
if any of Mankind should become a Beast, in such sort as those who were (...).
bewitched by Circe; even so he has lost his being a Man of God and abiding
faithful to the Lord, who has spurned against the Tradition of the Church, and
skipt into the Opinions of human Sects (...).
,] ( not of human Election, as Mr. S. blindly following Mr. Wh. does most
absurdly translate it), but he that has returned from his Errors, and hearkened
to the SCRIPTVRES, and conformed his life to the Truth, is as it were advanced
from a Man to a God. At the same rate he goes on for several Pages together,
taking the Scriptures for an indemonstrable Principle, from which all Divine
Doctrines are to be demonstrated, and for the Criterion whereby they are to be
tried; and charges the Heretics in such words as we cannot find fitter for our
Adversaries, As (says he) naughty Boys shut out their Schoolmaster, so these
drive the Prophecies out of the Church, suspecting that they will chide and
admonish them; and they patch together abundance of falsehoods and fictions that
they may seem RATIONALLY not to admit the Scriptures. Again, speaking of these
Heretics affronting the Scriptures, he tells us they oppose the (...).
Divine Tradition with human Doctrines (...).
by other Traditions [delivered from hand to hand] that they may establish a
Sect or Heresy. Again he says, they adulterate the Truth, and steal the Rule
of Faith, etc. but for ORAL Frauds they shall have WRITTEN Punishments. But
enough of this; whosoever desires to see more of it, let him read on where
these men to their shame have directed us, and see whether any Protestant can
speak more fully and plainly in this Controversy. The whole trust of the
Papists is upon the equivocal sense of the word Tradition. Which word is
commonly used by the Fathers to signify to us the Scriptures or Divine
Tradition as Clement here calls it; but the Papists understand it of their
unwritten Tradition, and to this they apply all those passages in the Fathers
where Tradition is honorably mentioned. So Mr. S. deals with us, in the
Testimonies I have already examined: And there is nothing of argument in those
few which remain but from the ambiguity of this Word; which I need not show of
every one of them in particular, for whosoever shall read them with this Key
will find that they are of no force to conclude what he drives at.

5. As for his Citations out of the Council of Trent, by which he would prove
it to be the persuasion of their present Church, that Tradition is the sole
Rule of Faith; I have already shown that that Council has declared otherwise,
and is otherwise understood by the chief of their own Writers, And therefore he
did prudently to conceal in an etc. those choking words, in which the Council
declares itself to receive and honor, with equal pious affection and
reverence, the Books of Scripture and unwritten Traditions. And after a great
deal of shuffling, what a pitiful Account is it that he at last gives of that
Council's putting Scripture constantly before Tradition, because Scripture
being interpreted by Tradition, is of the same Authority as if an Apostle or
Evangelist were present, and therefore no wonder they honor
Scripture-Testimony so as to put it before Tradition; which is to say, that
because Scripture is subordinate to Tradition and to be regulated by it,
therefore it deserves to be put before it. Besides if Scripture and Tradition
be but several ways of conveying the Evangelical and Apostolical Doctrine, why
should he imagine an Evangelist or Apostle to be more present by the Scripture
than by oral Tradition? Especially if it be considered, that he supposes
Scripture to be an uncertain, and Tradition an infallible way of conveying this
Doctrine.

SECT. II.
Testimonies on the behalf of Scripture.
1. ALL that now remains, is to confirm the precedent Discourse by Testimonies
of the most eminent Persons of the Church, in several Ages. in which I shall
not need to be large, being so happily prevented by that full Account which is
given of the sense of the Ancients in this matter, in the Answer to Labyrinthus
Cantuariensis; which Mr. S. may if he pleases consult for his further
Conviction.

2 I begin with the Historical Account which Eusebius gives of committing the
Gospel to writing; which is to this purpose, viz Histor. Eccles. l. 2. c. 14.
* That the Romans were not content with the Doctrine Preached, unless it were
also committed to writing; and therefore did earnestly beg of Mark, Peter's
Companion, that he would leave them a Monument in writing of that Doctrine
which had been delivered to them by word of mouth. And this was the occasion of
the writing of St. Mark's Gospel. And when Peter did understand that this Work
was published (being suggested by the Divine Revelation of the Holy Spirit) it
is said he was very much pleased with the ready and earnest desire of those
Persons; and that by his Authority he confirmed this Writing, to the end that
it might be every where read in the Church. As for St. Matthew and St. John, he
tells us Ibid. l. 3. c. 18.
, That of all the Disciples they two only have left monuments in Writing; of
whom it is also reported that they betook themselves to write, being drawn
thereto by necessity. Matthew after he had preached the Word of God to the
Jews, and was resolved to go to other Nations, wrote his Gospel in the Language
of his Country; and thus by the diligence and pains of Writing, did abundantly
supply the the want of his presence to those whom he left. And when Mark and
Luke had published their Gospel, it is reported that John (who had always used
to preach the Word without writing it) being at length wrought upon by the same
reason did betake himself to write. From this account it is clear, that the
Apostles thought it necessary for the preservation and secure conveyance of the
Christian Doctrine, that it should be put into Writing; and that they judged
this a better way to supply the want of their presence, than oral Tradition.
Therefore the same Author tells us Ibid. c. 31.
, That the Disciples, who immediately succeeded the Apostles, as they traveled
to preach the Gospel to those who had not yet heard the Word of Faith, did with
great care also deliver to them the Writings of the Holy Evangelists. Again
Ibid. c. 30.
, That Ignatius as he traveled toward Rome (where he was to suffer) exhorted
the Churches of every City to hold fast the Tradition of the Apostles; which
(as also by Writing he testified) for greater security he held necessary to be
copied in Writing.

4. That the Heretics of Old made the same pretense which the Papists make
now, of oral Tradition in opposition to Scripture, the same Eusebius tells us;
and withal, that Books are a sufficient confutation of this pretense Ibid. L.
5. c. 27.
. Those (says he) who were of the Heresy of Artemon, said that all their
Forefathers and the Apostles themselves had received and taught the same
things which they also did; and had preserved the true Teaching unto the time
of Victor Bishop of Rome, whose Successor Zephyrinus corrupted it. And this
(says he) would have great probability, were it not first of all contradicted
by the Scripture; and next if there did not remain the Writings of other
Brethren much more ancient than Victor 's time, etc. in the Books of all whom
Christ's Divinity is acknowledged. And afterward he tells us that these
Heretics did change and corrupt the Scriptures to bring them to their
Opinions; so Mr. S. tells us that the outward Letter of Scripture ought to be
corrected by Tradition and Sense written in men's hearts.

St. Hierom also tells us Comment. in Isai. c. 19.
, That the Heretics were wont to say, we are the Sons of the Wise, who did
from the beginning deliver down to us the Apostolical Doctrine; but he adds,
that the true Sons of Judah adhere to the Scripture.

4. That Scripture is sufficiently plain in all things necessary.

St. Chrysostom In 2 These. c. 2. Hom. 4.
, All things in the Divine Scriptures are plain and straight. Whatsoever things
are necessary are manifest.

St. Austin having spoken of the profoundness of Scripture, adds Epist. 3.
, Not that those things which are necessary to Salvation are so hard to be come
at: But (says he) when one has there attained Faith without which there is no
pious and right living, there are besides, many dark and mysterious things,
etc. Again Ibid.
, The manner of speech in Scripture how easy is it to all, though few can
penetrate to the bottom of it? Those things which it plainly contains, it
speaks without disguise like a familiar Friend to the heart of the learned and
unlearned. How will Mr. S. reconcile this with his grand Exception against
Scripture? And what these things are, which are plainly contained in Scripture,
the same Father tells us elsewhere, in these words De Doctr. Christ. L. 2. c.
9.
, Among those things which are plainly set down in Scripture, all those things
are to be found which comprehend Faith and good Manners. The same St. Austin
(as also Clement in the Book which Mr. White quoted) for the understanding of
obscure Texts of Scripture directs us not to Tradition, but to the plain Texts,
without which he expressly says De Vnitat. Eccles. c. 5.
there would be no way to understand them.

5. That Scripture is so plain, as to be fit to determine Controversies.

Justin sure thought so, when disputing with Trypho, concerning a point wherein
the Jew had Tradition on his side, he told him he would bring such proofs (to
the contrary) as no man could gainsay: Attend (says he) to what I shall recite
out of the Holy Scriptures, proofs which need not to be explained, but only to
be heard. Mr. White might have found likewise much to this purpose in his
Clement.

But not to tire my Reader in a Point which the Ancients abound with, I shall
only produce the judgment of Constantine Theodoret. Hist. L. 1. c. 7.
in that solemn Oration of his to the Council of Nice; wherein he bewails their
mutual oppositions, especially in Divine things; concerning which they had the
Doctrine of the Holy Spirit Recorded in Writing; For (says he) the Books of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and the Oracles of the old Prophets, do evidently
teach us what we ought to think of the Divine Majesty. Therefore laying aside
all seditious contention, let us determine the matters in question by
Testimonies out of the Divine Writings. Not a word of any other Tradition but
Scripture, which was held evident enough in those days, though now Mr. S. tells
us it is not sufficient to decide that Controversy about the Divinity of Christ.

6. Lastly, That Scripture is the Rule of Faith.

Irenaeus L. 3. c. 1.
, The method of our Salvation we have not known by any other but those men by
whom the Gospel came to us, which then they preached, but afterward by the
Will of God delivered it to us in the Scriptures, to be for the future the
foundation and pillar of our Faith.

St. Cyprian the Church has ever held a good Catholic; yet Mr. S. P. 314.
takes notice that he erred in a Point of Faith, and perhaps the rather because
Mr. Rushworth Dial. 3. Sect. 13.
had told him that he was not theirs in this Controversy. For (says he) St.
Cyprian seems to think that the Resolution of Faith was to be made into
Scripture, and not into Tradition. But that we may not seem to accept of this
of courtesy from him, nor yet wholly to despise it, I shall offer this one
Testimony instead of many out of that Father; who being opposed with an
Argument from Tradition, demands Epist. 74.
, Whence have you that Tradition? Comes it from the Authority of the Lord, and
of the Gospel, or from the Epistles of the Apostles? For God testifies that we
are to do those things which are written, etc. If it be commanded in the
Gospel, or contained in the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles, then let us
observe it as a Divine and Holy Tradition.

Hilary Ad Constant.
commends Constantius the Emperor for regulating his Faith only according to
those things which are written. And to oblige him to deserve this commendation,
he adds, He who refuses this is Antichrist, and who dissembles in it is
Anathema.

Lib. 5. de Schism. Donat.
Optatus, concerning the Controversy with the Donatists, asks who shall be
Judge? and answers himself, the Scriptures: Which he illustrates by the
similitude of a Father who delivered his Will orally to his children while he
was living, but when he was dying caused it to be written in lasting Tables, to
decide all Controversies that might happen among them after his death. The
passage is large, and it is obvious to apply it.

Basil maintaining the Doxology as it was used in his days, says De Sp. Sancto
c. 7.
, Thus we received it from our Fathers; but adds immediately, This is not
enough for us, that it is the Tradition of the Fathers, for they followed the
Authority of the Scriptures, making its Testimonies the Principles upon which
they built. He has indeed in the same Book C. 27.
a passage much insisted on by the Papists concerning unwritten Traditions; but
withal he says those Traditions were secretly conveyed, which makes all the
rest of no use to Mr. S.

Chrysostom Hom. 8. in Epist. ad Heb. c. 5.
having mentioned several Heresies, directs how they may be avoided, viz. By
attending to the Faith delivered, and looking upon all that disagrees from that
as adulterate. For (says he) as those who give Rules do not put men upon a
curious enquiry after many measures, but bid them keep to the Rule given; so is
it in Opinions. But no body will attend to the Scriptures; if we did, we should
not only not fall into Errors our selves, but also rescue those that are
deceived. Again Hom. 52. in Joh.
, If we would be thoroughly conversant in the Scriptures, we should be
instructed both in right Opinions and a good life. Again, among the many Sects
of Christians Hom. 33. in Act. Apost.
it will be easy to judge of the right, if we believe the Scriptures, because
these are plain and true; If any one agree with these, he is a Christian; if he
contradict them, he is far from this Rule.

St. Austin calls the Scipture De Bapt. Cont. Donat. L. 2. c. 6.
the Divine Balance for the weighing of Doctrine. Again, the Holy Scripture
(says he) fixes the Rule of our Doctrine. And accordingly himself uses it
both in his Dispute with Maximinus, to whom he says Contr. Max. L. 3.
, Neither ought I now to alledg the Nicene Council, nor thou that of Arminium;
for neither am I bound to the Authority of the one, nor thou of the other. Let
us both contest with the Authorities of Scripture which are Wtinesses common to
us both. And also against the Donatists in these words De Vnitat. Eccles. c. 16.
, Let them if they can demonstrate their Church not by the Talk and Rumors [or
oral Tradition] of the Africans, not by the Councils of their own Bishops, not
by the Books of their Disputers, not by deceitful Miracles, etc, but by the
prescript of the Law, Prophets, etc. i. e. by all the Canonical Authorities of
the Holy Books.

Hierom says Comment. in Agg. c. 1.
, Of those things, which without the Authorities and Testimonies of the
Scripture men invent of their own heads as from Apostolical Tradition, they are
smitten with the Sword of God.

Theophilus Alexandr. whom Hierom has Translated, calls Scripture more than
once Paschal. L. 3.
the Rule, and the Testimonies of it the firm foundations of Doctrine. And
again says L. 2.
, It comes from a Demonical spirit that men follow the Sophisms of humane
minds, and think any thing Divine that wants the Authority of Scripture.

Theodoret Haeret. Fabul. L. 5.
charges all Heresies upon the not following of Scripture, which he calls the
inflexible Rule of Truth. Again, We have have learned the Rule of Opinions from
the Divine Scripture.

After the Fathers, I shall produce the Testimonies of two Eminent Persons of
latter Times, Gerson and Lyra.

Gerson in his Part 1. Consid. 2.
Book of the Trial of Doctrines, has this remarkable passage; In the Trial of
Doctrines that which is first and principally to be considered is, Whether a
Doctrine be conformable to the H. Scripture, etc. The reason of this is,
because the Scripture is delivered to us as a SVFFICIENT and INFALLIBLE RVLE
for the Government of the whole Ecclesiastical Body and its Members to the end
of the world. So that it is such an Art, such a Rule or Exemplar, that any
other Doctrine which is not conformable to it, is to be renounced as Heretical,
or to be accounted suspicious, or not at all appertaining to Religion. Again,
De Distinct. Verar. Vision. a falsis.
It is evident how pernicious the rejection of the H. Scripture is, and how
certain a preparatory for the reception of Antichrist. Once more, Sermon. in die
Circumcis. etc.
What mischief, what danger, what confusion has happened thorough contempt of
the H. Scripture, which sure is sufficient for the Government of the Church
(else Christ must have been an imperfect Lawgiver) let us ask Experience, etc.

Lyra Prolog. de Lib. Bib. etc.
also writes thus Prolog. de Lib. Bib. etc.
; As in Philosophy truth is discovered by reducing things to their first and
self-evident Principles; so in the Writings delivered by the H. Doctors, Truth
is discovered as to matters of Faith, by reducing them to the Canonical
Scriptures.

Sir, You know how easy it were to swell up a large Volume, with Testimonies to
this purpose; especially if I should take the course that Mr. Wh. does, to hale
in quotations though never so impertinent; or use the wretched importunity
which Mr. S. does, to persuade them to be pertinent. But these Testimonies
which I have nakedly set down, leaving them to speak for themselves, are enough
to satisfy an unpassionate Reader, such an one as dares trust himself with the
use of his own eyes and reason. As for that sort of men which chooses to follow
noise rather than light, we must be content to leave them to the blind conduct
of those Guides who, having no better means to keep their Followers to them, go
halloing in the dark, and fill their ears with the insignificant sounds of
Infallibility, Indefectibility, Self-evidence and Demonstration.

Concerning the Appendix wherein you are particularly challenged, I hope for an
Account very shortly, and so take leave,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, JOHN TILLOTSON.
Lincoln's Inn, Febr. 20. 1665.

FINIS.
A REPLY TO Mr. J. S. his 3d APPENDIX, Containing some Animadversions ON THE
BOOK ENTITLED A RATIONAL ACCOUNT of the Grounds of Protestant Religion.

By Ed. Stillingfleet B. D.

London, Printed by H.C. for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door. 1675.

An Appendix to the Rule of Faith.
To his honored Friend Mr. John Tillotson.
SIR,
AS soon as I understood your intentions to answer Mr. Sergeant, ^*
I could not but rejoice on his behalf, as well as on the truths and your own.
For I have that real kindness for him, that I heartily wish him that reason and
science he pretends to; which I could not but despair of his attaining, unless
he were undeceived in that monstrous opinion he has of himself and his
undertakings. And I knew no person more fit than you, to let him understand the
truth and himself together. In which, your performances have been so clear and
satisfactory, that I hope Mr. Sergeant, in stead of another Letter of
directions to his Answerer, will write you one of thanks, for the reason and
kindness you have showed him throughout your Book. Unless it fares with you, as
it has done with some other Adversaries of theirs, that their civility has
been interpreted as an argument of their uncertainty, and their own confidence
cried up for a demonstration. In which sense only I shall grant our Protestant
Writers to build on uncertainties, and Mr. White and Mr. Sergeant to be the
great Demonstrators of this age. If their own reason had been as severe as the
censures at Rome against them, they had saved us the labor of any answer, and
would have found out their own sophistry without a confutation. But the least
thing we can imagine by their excessive confidence, is, that they are deceived
themselves; and therefore it is a part of charity to them, as well as justice
to the truth, to let the world see, that big words are quite another thing from
science, and a strong presumption from a regular demonstration. As to which, no
more need to have been said, than what you have already done, if Mr. Sergeant
had not thought it an accession to the glory of his achievements, to lead two
Pages of my Book in triumph after him. I confess, I was somewhat surprised to
see a person who would be noted for his valor in assaulting Protestant
Writers, steal so behind the main bulk and design of my Book; and when he had
gotten two single Pages by themselves, fall upon them with as much pomp and
ostentation, as if he had attacked the whole. And this must be noised abroad as
an Answer to me, by the same figure that his arguments are called
demonstrations, which is by an hyperbole unfit for any, but such who never flag
below the sphere of Science in their own judgments, though they seem not to
come near it in others. Yet since Mr. Sergeant is not only pleased to concern
himself so far as to answer that part of my Book relating to oral tradition;
but in most express terms to challenge me to reply to him, p. 236.
he may now see (as soon as I could get any liberty from greater employments)
how ready I am to give him all reasonable satisfaction. And in the first place,
I return him thanks for the weapon he has made choice of, viz. that of reason;
there being no other I desire to make use of, in managing this debate between
us: And I hope he will find as much civility toward him throughout this
discourse, as he expresses toward me in the entrance to his; if that may be
accounted any real civility, which is intended merely out of design, with the
greater advantage to disparage the cause I have undertaken, and yet see no
reason to repent of. If in his cursory view of two Chapters of my Book he had
(as he says) quite lost me, p. 202.
he had no cause to be troubled for it, if he had found far more excellent
persons, such as Dr. Hammond, and the Disswader, and Dr. Pierce, instead of me.
But to be sure, he intends not this in honor to any of us, but by way of a
common reproach to us all, as though we did not talk out of nature or things,
but words and imagination. I could heartily have wished, Mr. S. would have
cropped so much of the victory due to another learning and industry, as to have
showed me one proposition in those discourses, which a rational understanding,
that would be true to it self, could not settle or rely on. But if such
insinuations as these must pass for answers, I must needs say, I judge M. S.
equally happy in confuting our grounds, and in demonstrating his own; in both
which, his greatest strength lies in the self-evidence of his bare
affirmations. But it seems he is willing to resign the glory of this Victory to
the judicious Author of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, or to some others for him;
and when they have once obtained it, I shall not envy them the honor of it.
And I suppose those persons, whoever they are, may be able by this time, to
tell Mr. S. it is an easier matter to talk of Victories than to get them. But
if they do no more in the whole, than Mr. S. has done for his share, they will
triumph nowhere, but where they conquer, viz. in their own fancies and
imaginations. Therefore leaving them to their silent conquests, and as yet,
unheard of Victories, we come to Mr. S. who so liberally proclaims his own in
the point of oral tradition. Which (in a phrase scarce heard of in our language
before) is the Post, he tells us, he has taken upon him to explicate further
and defend. What the explicating a Post means, I as little understand, as I do
the force of his demonstrations; but this, and many other such uncouth forms of
speech, up and down in his Book (which make his style so smooth and easy), are
I suppose intended for embellishments of our tongue, and as helps to
sure-speaking, as his whole Book is designed for sure-footing.

But letting him enjoy the pleasure and felicity of his own expressions,. 2.
I come to consider the matter in debate between us. And his first controversy
with me, p. 203.
is, for opposing the infallibility of oral tradition, to doctrinal
infallibility in Pope and Councils. A controversy fitter to be debated among
themselves, than between him and me: For is any thing more notorious, than that
infallibility is by the far greatest part of Romanists attributed to the
present Church, in teaching and delivering matters of faith, not by virtue of
any oral tradition, but the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost; and that
this is made by them the only ground of divine faith? For which Mr. S. may if
he please, consult his judicious Author of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, or any
other of their present Writers, except Mr. White and himself. He need not
therefore have been to seek for the meaning of this doctrinal infallibility, as
opposed to traditionary, if he had not either been ignorant of the opinion of
their own Writers, or notoriously dissembled it. For this infallibility is not
attributed to the Rulers of the Church, merely as Doctors or Scholars, but as
the representative Church, whose office it is, to deliver all matters of faith
by way of an infallible testimony to every age, and thereby to afford a
sufficient foundation for divine faith. But Mr. S. attributes no such
infallibility to the representative Church, as teaching the rest, but derives
their infallibility from such grounds as are common to all parts of the
essential Church. Wherein he apparently opposes himself to the whole current of
their own Authors, who resolve all faith into the immediate assistance of the
Holy Ghost; without which, they assert, there could be no infallibility at all
in tradition, or any thing else; and therefore these opinions are as opposite
to each other as may be. For such an infallibility is not attributed by them to
the Teachers of the Church, merely on some signal occasions, as Mr. S. seems to
suppose, when they are to explain new matters of says; but it is made by them
to be as necessary as believing it self, because thereby the only sure
foundation of faith is laid; and therefore it is very evident, they make it
proper to the Church in all ages: Or else in some age of the Church men were
destitute of suciffient grounds of faith. For they by no means think it a
sufficient foundation for faith, that one age of the Church could not conspire
to deceive another; for this they will tell him, at most, is but a humane
faith; but that Christ by his promise has assured the Church, that there shall
never be wanting in it the infallible assistance of his Holy Spirit, whereby
they shall infallibly teach and deliver all matters of says. And if this be
not their opinion, let them speak to the contrary, which if they do, I am sure
they must retract their most elaborate discourses about the resolution of
faith, written by the greatest Artists among them. Let Mr. S. then judge, who it
is that stumbles at the Threshold; but of this difference among them, more
afterward. By this it appears, it was not on any mistake that I remained
unsatisfied in the Question I asked, Whether am I bound to believe what the
present Church delivers to be infallible? To which Mr. S. answers, I understand
him not. My reply shall be only that of a great Lawyers in a like case, I
cannot help that. I am sure my words are intelligible enough; for I take
infallible there as he takes it himself, for infallibly true; although I deny
not the word to be improperly used in reference to things; and that for the
reason given by him, because fallibility and infallibility belong to the
knowing power, p. 204.
or the persons that have it, and not to the object. But we are often put to
the use of that word in a sense we acknowledge improper, merely in compliance
with our Adversaries, who otherwise are apt to charge us with having only
uncertainties and probabilities for our faith; if we do not use the term
infallible as applied to the truth of the thing. I am content therefore
wherever, in what I have writ, he meets that term so applied, that he take it
only in his own sense, for that which is certainly true; for I mean no more by
it. And in this sense Mr. S. answers affirmatively, and gives this account of
it, not only because the present Church cannot be deceived in what the Church
of the former age believed, but because the Church in no age could conspire
against her knowledge to deceive that age immediately following in matter of
fact, evident in a manner to the whole world. The Question then is, whether
this be a sufficient account for me to believe that to be certainly true, or to
be the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, which the present Church delivers?
and consequently, whether the resolution of faith be barely into oral tradition?

. 3.
Thus we see the clear state of the Question between us. I come therefore to the
vindication of those things which I had objected against this way of resolving
faith into oral tradition. Three things I especially insisted on: 1. That it is
inconsistent with the pretensions of the present Roman Church. 2. That it has
not been the way owned in all ages of the Christian Church. 3. That it is
repugnant to common sense and experience, and that the Church of Rome has
apparently altered from what was the belief of former ages. If these three be
made good, there will be no cause to glory in this last invention, to support
the sinking fabric of that Church. These three then I undertake to defend
against what Mr. Sergeant has objected against them.

1. That it is contrary to the pretensions of the present Roman Church. And if
it be so, there can be no reason for those who are of it, to rely upon it. For
if so be that Church pretends, that the obligation to faith arises from a quite
different ground from this; how can they who believe that Church infallible,
venture their faith upon any other principle than what is publicly owned by
her? And whosoever thinks himself bound to believe by virtue of an infallible
assistance of the present Church, does thereby show, that his obligation does
not depend upon what was delivered by the former ages of the Church. As those
who believed the Apostles were infallible in their doctrine, could not resolve
their faith into the infallibility of oral tradition, but into that immediate
assistance by which the Apostles spoke; and where there is a belief of a like
assistance, the foundation of faith cannot ly in the indefectibility of
tradition, but in that infallible Spirit which they suppose the Church to be
assisted by. For supposing this oral tradition should fail, and that men might
believe that it had actually failed; yet if the former supposition were true,
there was sufficient ground for faith remaining still. And what assurance can
any one have, that the present Church delivers nothing for matter of faith, but
what has been derived in every age from Christ and his Apostles, if such an
infallible Spirit be supposed in the present Church which was in the Apostles
themselves? For on the same reason that those who heard the Apostles were not
bound to trouble themselves with the tradition of the former age; no more ought
they who believe the present Roman Church to have the same infallible
assistance. They need not then enquire, whether this age knew the meaning of
the former, or whether one age could conspire to deceive another, or whether
notwithstanding both these, errors might not come into the Church; it is
sufficient for them, that the definitions of the present Church are infallible
in all matters of faith. Therefore my demand was built on very good reason; How
can you assure me the present Church obliges me to believe nothing but only
what, and so far as it received from the former Church? And Mr. S's answer is
far from being satisfactory, That this appears by her manifest practice, never
refusing communion to any man, that could approve himself to believe all the
former age did. For this may be resolved into a principle far different from
this, which is the belief of the infallibility of the present Church. For
supposing, that they are not bound to enquire themselves into the reasons why
the tradition could not fail in any age; it is suffient for them to believe the
Church infallible; and if it be so, in proposing matters of faith, it must be
so in declaring what the belief of the former age was. But my demands go on,
What evidence can you bring to convince me both that the Church always observed
this rule, and could never be deceived in it? Which question is built on these
two Principles which the infallibility of oral tradition stands on: 1. That the
Church must always go upon this ground. 2. That if it did so, it is impossible
she should be deceived. Both which are so far from that self-evidence which M.
Sergeant still pretends to in this way, that the Jesuits principles seem much
more rational and consistent, than these do. For granting them but that one
Postulatum, that there must be an inherent infallibility in the testimony of
the present Church, to afford sufficient foundation for divine faith, all the
rest of their doctrine follows naturally from it. Whereas this new way of
resolving faith is built on such suppositions, which no man well in his wits
will be ready to grant. For unless it be self-evident that the Church did
always proceed on this ground, it cannot be self-evident that oral tradition is
infallible; because the self-evidence of this principle depends on this, that
in all ages of the Church, the only rule and measure of faith, was what was
delivered by oral tradition from the age foregoing. Now if it be possible, that
matters of faith might be conveyed in ways quite different from this, what
self-evidence can there be, that the Church much always proceed upon this? Mr.
S. then, must demonstrate it impossible for matters of faith to be conveyed to
posterity in any other way than oral tradition; and not only that the thing is
impossible, but that the Church in all ages judged it to be so; or else he can
never make it at all evident, that the Church always made this her rule of
faith. But if either there may be a certain conveyance of the doctrine of faith
another way, viz. by writing, or that the Church might judge that way more
certain, whether it were so or not, either way it will appear far enough from
self-evidence, that she always judged of doctrines of faith, merely by the
tradition of the preceding age. If another way be granted possible, there must
be clear demonstration, that the Church notwithstanding this, did never make
use of it; for if it did make use of another way of resolving faith in any age
of the Church, then in that age of the Church oral tradition was not looked on
as the ground of faith; and if so, notwithstanding whatever Mr. S. can
demonstrate to the contrary, that age might have believed otherwise than the
immediately preceding did. For let us but suppose, that all necessary doctrines
of faith were betimes recorded in the Church, in Books universally received by
the Christians of the first ages; is it not possible, that age which first
embraced these Books, might deliver them to posterity as the rule of their
faith, and so down from one age to another; and does it not hence follow, that
the rule of faith is quite different from a mere oral tradition? Let Mr. S.
then either show it impossible, that the doctrines of faith should be written;
or that being written, they should be universally received; or that being
universally received in one age, they should not be delivered to the next; or
being delivered to the next, those Books should not be looked on as containing
the rule of faith in them; or though they were so, yet, that still oral
tradition was wholly relied on as the rule of faith; and then I shall freely
grant that Mr. S. has attempted something toward the proof of this new
hypothesis. But as things now stand, it is so far from being self-evident, that
the Church has always gone upon this principle, that we find it looked on as a
great novelty among them in their own Church; and it would be a rare thing, for
a new invention to have been the sense of the Church in all ages; which if it
has been, the strength of it is thereby taken away.

But let us suppose that the Church did proceed upon this principle, 4*
that nothing was to be embraced, but what was derived by tradition from the
Apostles; how does it thence follow, that nothing could be admitted into the
Church but what was really so derived from them? Do we not see in the world at
this day, that among those who own this principle, contradictory propositions
are believed; and both sides tell us, it is on this account, because their
doctrine was delivered by the Apostles? does not the Greek Church profess to
believe on the account of tradition from the Apostles as well as the Latin? If
that tradition failed in the Greek Church, which was preserved in the Latin,
either Mr. S. must instance on his own principles in that age which conspired
to deceive the next, or he must acknowledge, that while men own tradition they
may be deceived in what the foregoing age taught them; and consequently those
things may be admitted as doctrines coming from the Apostles which were not so,
and some which did may be lost, and yet the pretense of tradition remain still.
What self-evidence then can there be in this principle, when two parts of the
Church may both own it, and yet believe contradictions on the account of it? It
is then worth our enquiring, what self-evidence this is which Mr. S. speaks so
much of, which is neither more nor less, but that men in all ages had eyes,
ears, p. 205.
and other senses, also common reason, and as much memory as to remember their
own names and frequently inculcated actions. Which is so very reasonable a
postulatum, that I suppose none who enjoy any of these will deny it. Let us
therefore see how he proceeds upon it. If you disprove this, I doubt we have
lost mankind, the subject we speak of; and till you disprove it, neither I, nor
any man in his wits can doubt, that this rule depending on testifying, that is,
sense or experience, can possibly permit men to be deceivable. Big words
indeed; but such as evidence that all men who are in their wits do not
constantly use them. For I pray Sir, what does Mr, S. think of the Greek
Church? Had not those in it eyes, ears, and other senses, as well as in the
Latin? Do not they pretend and appeal to what they received from their
Forefathers as well as the Latins? It seems then a deception is possible in
the case of testifying, and therefore this does more than permit men to be
deceivable; for here has been an actual deception on one side or other. But we
need not fear losing mankind in this; for the possibility of error supposes
mankind to continue still; and if we take away that, we may sooner lose it than
by the contrary. But what repugnancy can we imagine to humane nature, that men
supposing doctrines of faith to come down from Christ or his Apostles, should
yet mistake in judging what those doctrines are? Had not men eyes, and ears,
and common sense in Christ and the Apostles times? And yet we see even then the
doctrine of Christ was mistaken; and is it such a wonder it should be in
succeeding ages? Did not the Nazarenes mistake in point of circumcision, the
Corinthians as to the resurrection, and yet the mean time agree in this, that
Christ's doctrine was the rule of faith, or that they ought to believe nothing
but what came from him? Did not the Disciples themselves err, even while they
were with Christ, and certainly had eyes, and ears, and common sense as other
men have, concerning some great articles of Christian faith, viz. Christ's
passion, resurrection, and the nature of his Kingdom? If then such who had the
greatest opportunities imaginable, and the highest apprehensions of Christ,
might so easily mistake in points of such moment, what ground have we to
believe, that succeeding ages should not be liable to such misapprehensions?
And it was not merely the want of clear divine revelation which was the cause
of their mistakes; for these things were plain enough to persons not possessed
with prejudices; but those were so strong as to make them apprehend things
quite another way than they ought to do. So it was then, and so it was in
succeeding ages; for let Parents teach what they pleased for matters of faith,
yet prejudice and liableness to mistake in Children, might easily make them
misapprehend either the nature or weight of the doctrines delivered to them. So
that setting aside a certain way of recording the matters of faith in the Books
of Scripture, and these preserved entire in every age, it is an easy matter to
conceive, how in a short time Christian Religion would have been corrupted as
much as ever any was in the world. For when we consider how much
notwithstanding Scripture, the pride, passion, and interests of men have
endeavored to deface Christian Religion in the world, what would not these
have done, if there had been no such certain rule to judge of it by? Mr. S.
imagins himself in repub. Platonis, but it appears he is still in faece Romuli;
he fancies there never were, nor could be any differences among Christians, and
that all Christians made it their whole business to teach their posterity
matters of faith, and that they minded nothing in the world but the imprinting
that on their minds that they might have it ready for their Children; and that
all Parents had equal skill and fidelity in delivering matters of Religion to
their posterity. Whereas in truth, we find in the early ages of the Christian
Church several differences about matters of faith, and these differences
continued to posterity, but all parties still pleading that their doctrine came
from the Apostles; and it fell out unhappily for Mr. S. that those were
commonly most grossly deceived who pretended the most to oral tradition from the
Apostles; still we find the grand debate was, what came from the Apostles, and
what not? whereas had tradition been so infallible a way of conveying, how
could this ever have come into debate among them? What, did not they know what
their Parents taught them? It seems they did not, or their Parents were no more
agreed than themselves; for their differences could never be ended this way.
Afterward came in for many ages such a succession of ignorance and barbarism,
that Christian Religion was little minded either by Parents or Children, as it
ought to have been; instead of that, some fopperies and superstitions were
hugely in request, and the men who fomented these things were cried up as great
Saints and workers of miracles. So that the miracles of S. Francis and S.
Dominick were as much, if not more carefully conveyed from Parents to Children
in that age, than those of Christ and his Apostles; and on this account
posterity must be equally bound to believe them, and have their persons in
equal veneration. If men at last were grown wiser, it was because they did not
believe Mr. S's principles, that they ought to receive what was delivered by
their Parents; but they began to search and enquire into the writings of former
ages, and to examine the opinions and practices of the present, with those of
the primitive Church, and by this means there came a restoration of Learning
and Religion together.

. 5.
But though matters of fact be plain and evident in this case, yet M. S. will
prove it impossible there should any errors come into the Christian Church; and
his main argument is this, because no age of the Church could conspire against
her knowledge to deceive that age immediately following, in matter of fact,
evident in a manner to the whole world. But before I come, more particularly,
to show the weakness of this argument, by manifesting how errors might come
into the Church without such a conspiracy as this is, I shall propound some
Queries to him. 1. What age of the Church he will instance in, wherein all
persons who were not cast out of the Church, had the same apprehensions
concerning all points of faith i. e. that none among them did believe more
things delivered by Christ or the Apostles than others did. I am sure he can
neither instance in the age of the Apostles themselves, nor in those
immediately succeeding them; unless Mr. S. the better to defend his hypothesis,
will question all written records, because they consist of dead letters, and
unsenc't characters, and wordish testimonies. Never considering, that while he
utters this, he writes himself; unless he imagins there is more of life, sense,
and certainty in his Books, than in the Scriptures or any other writing
whatsoever. 2. Where there were different apprehensions in one age of the
Church, whether there must not be different traditions in the next? For as he
looks on all Parents as bound to teach their Children, so on Children as bound
to believe what their Parents teach them. On which supposition different
traditions in the succeeding age must needs follow, different apprehensions in
the precedent. 3. Whether persons agreeing in the substance of doctrines may
not differ in their apprehensions of the necessity of them? As for instance,
all may agree in the article of Christ's descent into Hell, but yet may differ
in the explication of it, and in the apprehension of the necessity of it in
order to salvation. So that we must not only in tradition about matters of
faith enquire, what was delivered, but under what notion it was delivered;
whether as an allowable opinion, or a necessary point of faith. But if several
persons, nay multitudes in the Church may have different notions as to the
necessity of the same points, by what means shall we discern what was delivered
as an opinion in the Church, and what as an article of faith? But Mr. S.
throughout his discourse takes it for granted, that there is the same necessity
of believing and delivering all things which concern the Christian doctrine;
and still supposes the same sacredness, concern, necessity, in delivering all
the points in controversy between the Romanists and Us, as there was in those
main articles of faith, which they and we are agreed in. Which is so
extravagant a supposition, that it is hard to conceive it should ever enter
into the head of a person pretending to reason; but as extravagant as it is, it
is that without which his whole fabric falls to the ground. For suppose we
should grant him, that the infinite concerns which depend on the belief of the
Christian doctrine should be of so prevalent nature with the world, that it is
impossible to conceive any one age should neglect the knowing them, or conspire
to deceive the next age about them; yet what is all this to the matters in
difference between us? Will Mr. S. prove the same sacredness, necessity,
concern, and miraculously attestedness (as he phrases it) in the Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory Transubstantiation, Supremacy, etc. as in the believing the
death and resurrection of the Son of God. If he does not prove this, he does
nothing; for his arguments may hold for doctrines judged universally necessary,
but for no other. Therefore Mr. S. has a new task which he thought not of;
which is, to manifest that these could not be looked on as opinions, but were
embraced as necessary articles of faith. For unless he proves them such, he can
neither prove any obligation in Parents to teach them their Children, nor in
Children to believe what their Parents taught, but only to hold them in the
same degree which they did themselves. When Mr. S. will undertake to prove,
that the whole Church, from the time of Christ, did agree in the points in
difference between us, as necessary articles of faith, I may more easily
believe, that no age could be ignorant of them, or offer to deceive the next
about them. But when Mr. S. reflects on his frequent concession, that there are
private opinions in the Church, distinct from matters of faith, he must
remember, before he can bring home his grounds to the case between their Church
and ours, that he must prove none of the things in debate, were ever
entertained as private opinions, and that it is impossible for that which was a
private opinion in one age, to become a matter of faith in the next.

6.
But because this distinction of his ruins his whole demonstration, I shall
first propound it in his own terms, and then show how from thence it follows,
that errors may come into the Church, and be entertained as matters of faith.
His words are, It being evident, that we have but two ways of ordinary
knowledge, by acts of our soul, or operations on our body, that is, by reason
and experience; the former of which belongs to Speculators or Doctors, the
second to Deliverers of what was received, or Testifiers. And this distinction
he frequently admits, not only in the present age of the Church, but in any;
for the same reason will hold in all. From hence I propose several Queries
further to Mr. S. 1. If every one in the Church looked on himself as bound to
believe just as the precedent age did, whence came any to have particular
opinions of their own? For either the Church had delivered her sense in that
case or not; if not, then tradition is no certain conveyer of the doctrine of
Christ; if she had, then those who vented private speculations were Heretics
in so doing; because they opposed that doctrine which the Church received from
Christ and his Apostles. If Mr. S. replies, that private speculations are in
such cases where there is no matter of faith at all, he can never be able to
help himself by that distinction in the case of his own Church; for I demand,
whether is it a matter of faith, that men ought to believe oral tradition
infallible? If not, how can men ground their faith upon it? If it be, then
either some are mere speculators in matters of faith; or all who believe on the
account of the Popes infallibility are Heretics for so doing. 2. If there were
speculators in former ages as well as this, whether did those men believe their
own speculations or no? If not, then the Fathers were great Impostors, who
vented those speculations in the Church which they did not believe themselves.
And it is plain, Mr. S. speaks of such opinions which the asserters of, do
firmly believe to be true: And if they did, then they look on themselves as
bound to believe something which was not founded on the tradition of the
Church; and consequently, did not own oral tradition, as the rule of faith. So
that as many speculators as we find in the Churh, so many testifiers we have
against the infallibility of oral tradition. 3. Whether those persons who did
themselves believe those opinions to be true, did not think themselves obliged
to tell others they ought to believe them; and consequently, to deliver these
as matters of faith to their children? Let Mr. S. show me any inconsequence in
this; but that it unavoidably follows upon his principles, that they were bound
to teach their Children what themselves received as the doctrine of Christ; and
that the obligation is in all respects equal as if they had believed these
things on the account of oral tradition. 4. If Children be obliged to believe
what their Parents teach them for matters of faith, then upon Mr. S's, own
concessions, is not posterity bound to believe something which originally came
not from Christ or his Apostles? For it appears in this case, that the first
rise was from a private opinion of some Doctors of the Church; but they
believing these opinions themselves, think themselves obliged to propagate them
to others; and by reason of their learning and authority, these opinions may by
degrees gain a general acceptance in the ruling part of the Church; and all who
believe them true, think they ought to teach them their Children; and Children
they are to believe what their Parents teach them. Thus from Mr. S's own
principles, things that never were delivered by Christ or his Apostles, may
come to be received as matters of faith in the present Church. Thus the
intelligent Reader needs no bodies help but Mr. S. to let him understand how
Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, etc. though never
delivered either by Christ or his Apostles, may yet now be looked on as
articles of faith, and yet no age of the Church conspire to deceive another.
Either then Mr. S. must say, there never were any private opinators or
speculators in the Church, as distinct from testifiers, and then he unavoidably
contradicts himself; or he must deny that posterity is bound to believe what
their forefathers delivered them as matters of faith; which destroys the force
of his whole demonstration. Perhaps he will answer, that Children are not bound
to believe what barely their Parents, or any other number of persons might
deliver as matters of faith, but what the whole Church of every age delivers.
This, though the only thing to be said in the case, yet is most unreasonable,
because it runs men upon inextricable difficulties in the way of their
resolving faith. For suppose any Children taught by their Parents what they are
to believe; Mr. S. must say, they are not bound to believe them presently, but
to enquire whether they agree with the whole Church of that age first, before
they can be obliged to assent. Which being an impossible task either for
Children, or men of age, to find out in the way of oral tradition, this way of
resolving faith, does but offer a fairer pretense for infidelity. For we see,
how impossible it is for Mr. S. to make it appear, that their Church is agreed
about the rule of faith; for by his own confession, the far greater number as
speculators oppose the way asserted by him; how much more difficult then must
it needs be, to find out what the sense of the whole essential Church is in all
matters which Parents may teach their Children for doctrines of faith? So that
if Children are not bound to believe what their Parents teach them, till they
know they teach nothing but what the whole Church teaches, it is the most
compendious way to teach them they are not bound to believe at all. But if this
distinction be admitted, as Mr. S. makes much use of it, then it appears, how
errors may come into the Church at first under the notion of speculations, and
by degrees to be delivered as points of faith, by which means those things may
be received in the Church, for such, which were never delivered by Christ or
his Apostles, and yet no age conspire to deceive the next, which was the thing
to be showed.

7.
This is one way of showing how errors may come into the Church, without one
ages conspiring to deceive the next: but besides this, there are several others
I might insist upon; but I shall mention only two more: 1. Misinterpreting the
sense of Scripture. 2. Supposing it in the power of some part of the Church to
oblige the whole in matters of faith. For the first we are to consider, that no
imaginable account can be given either of the writing or universal reception of
the Books of the New Testament, if they were not designed for the preservation
of the doctrine of Christ. And although it should be granted possible for the
main and fundamental articles of Christian faith (such as the Apostles Creed
gives a summary account of) to have been preserved by the help of tradition;
yet, unless we be extremely ungratful, we cannot but acknowledge, that God has
infinitely better provided for us, in not leaving the grounds of our Religion
to the mere breath of the people, or the care of Mothers instructing their
Children but has given us the certain records of all the doctrines and motives
of faith, preserved inviolably from the first ages of the Church. And when the
Church saw with what care God had provided for the means of faith, oral
tradition was little minded; thence the memory of those other things not
recorded in Scripture is wholly lost; all the care was employed in searching,
preserving, and delivering these sacred Books to posterity. To these the
primitive Church still appeals; these they plead for against all adversaries,
defending their authority, explaining their sense, vindicating them from all
corruptions. Tradition they rely not on, any further than as a testimony of the
truth of these records, or to clear the sense of them from the perverse
interpretation of those Heretics who pretended another kind of tradition than
what was in Scripture. And when these were silenced, all the disputes that
arose in the Church concerning matters of faith, was about the sense of these
Books; as is evident by the proceedings in the case of Arius and Pelagius.
Wherein tradition was only used as a means to clear the sense of the
Scriptures, but not at all as that which the faith of all was to be resolved
into. But when any thing was pleaded from tradition, for which there was no
ground in Scripture, it was rejected with the same ease it was offered; and
such persons were plainly told, this was not the Churches way; if they had
plain Scripture, with the concurrent sense of Antiquity, they might produce it,
and rely upon it. So that the whole use of tradition in the primitive Church
(besides attesting the Books) was, to show the unreasonableness of imposing
senses on Scripture, against the universal sense of the Church from the
Apostles times. But as long as men were men, it was not avoidable, but they
must fall into different apprehensions of the meaning of the Scripture,
according to their different judgments, prejudices, learning, and education.
And since they had all this apprehension, that the Scripture contained all
doctrines of faith, thence as men judged of the sense of it, they differed in
their apprehension, concerning matters of faith. And thence errors and mistakes
might easily come into the Church, without one age conspiring to deceive the
next. Nay if it be possible for men to rely on tradition without Scripture,
this may easily be done; for by that means they make a new rule of faith, not
known to the primitive Church, and consequently, that very assertion is an
error in which the former age did not conspire to deceive the next. And if
these things be possible, M. S's. demonstration fails him; for hereby a
reasonable account is given, how errors may come into a Church without one age
conspiring to deceive another. Again, let me enquire of Mr. S. whether men may
not believe it in the power of the ruling part of the Church, to oblige the
whole to an assent to the definitions of it? To speak plainer, is it not
possible for men to believe the Pope and Council infallible in their decrees?
And I hope the Jesuits (as little as Mr. S. loves them, or they him) may be a
sufficient evidence of more than the bare possibility of this. If they may
believe this, does it not necessarily follow, that they are bound to believe
whatever they declare to be matter of faith? Supposing then, that
Transubstantiation, Supremacy, Invocation of Saints, were but p^ivate opinions
before, but are now defined by Pope and Council, these men cannot but look on
themselves as much obliged to believe them, as if they had been delivered as
matters of faith, in every age since the Apostles times. Is it now repugnant to
common sense, that this opinion should be believed or entertained in the
Church? if not, why may not this opinion be generally received? if it be so,
does it not unavoidably follow, that the faith of men must alter according to
the Churches definitions? And thus private opinions may be believed as articles
of faith, and corrupt practices be established as laudable pieces of devotion,
and yet no one age of the Church conspire to deceive another. Thus I hope Mr.
S. may see how far it is from being a self-evident principle, that no error can
come into the Church, unless one age conspire to deceive the next in a matter
of fact, evident in a manner to the whole world. Which is so wild an
apprehension, that I believe the Jesuits cannot entertain themselves without
smiles, to see their domestic adversaries expose themselves to contempt with
so much confidence.

Thus I come to the reason I gave, 8.
why there is no reason to believe that this is the present sense of the Roman
Church. My words are, For I see the Roman Church asserts, that things may be de
fide in one age, which were not in another; at least Popes and Councils
challenge this; and this is the common doctrine maintained there, and others
are looked on as no members of their Church who assert the contrary; but as
persons at least meritoriously, if not actually excommunicate. Where then shall
I satisfy my self, what the sense of your Church is, as to this particular?
Must I believe a very few persons, whom the rest disown as heretical and
seditious? or ought I not rather to take the judgment of the greatest and most
approved persons of that Church? And these disown any such doctrine; but
assert, that the Church may determine things de fide, which were not before. In
answer to this Mr. S. begs leave to distinguish the words de fide, p. 205.
which may either mean Christian faith, or points of faith taught by Christ;
and then he grants, it is nonsense to say, they can be in one age, and not in
another. Or de fide may mean obligatory to be believed. In this latter sense
none I think (says he) denies things may be de fide in one age and not in
another; in the former sense none holds it. Upon which very triumphantly he
concludes, What Is now become of your difficulty? I believe you are in some
wonderment, and think I elude it rather then answer it; I shall endeavor to
unperplex you. I must confess it a fault of humane nature, to admire things
which men understand not; on which account I cannot free my self from some
temptation to that he calls wonderment; but I am presently cured of it, when I
endeavor to reduce his distinction to reason. For instead of explaining his
terms, he should have showed how any thing can be obligatory to be believed in
any age of the Church, which was no point of faith taught by Christ, which
notwithstanding his endeavor to unperplex me, is a thing as yet I apprehend
not; because I understand no obligation to faith to arise from any thing but
divine revelation; and I do not yet believe any thing in Christian doctrine to
be divinely revealed, but what was delivered by Christ or his Apostles. And my
wonderment must needs be the greater; because I suppose this inconsistent with
Mr. S's. principles. For oral tradition does necessarily imply, that all points
of faith were first taught by Christ, and conveyed by tradition to us; but if a
thing may be de fide in this latter sense, which was not before, what becomes
of resolving faith wholly into oral tradition? For faith is resolved into that
from whence the obligation to believe comes; but here Mr. S. confesses, that
the obligation to believe does arise from something quite different from oral
tradition; and therefore faith must be resolved into it. Besides, all the sense
I can find in that distinction, is, that men are bound to believe something in
one age, which they were not in another; and if so, I shall desire Mr. S. to
unperplex me in this, how every age is bound to believe just as the precedent
did, and yet one age be bound to believe more than the precedent. But however,
I am much obliged to him for his endeavor to unperplex me as he speaks; for
really I look on no civilities to be greater than those which are designed for
clearing our understandings; so great an adorer am I of true reason and an
intelligible Religion. And therefore I perfectly agree with him in his saying,
p. 206.
that Christianity aims not to make us beasts, but more perfectly men; and the
perfection of our manhood consists in the use of our reasons. From whence he
infers, that it is reasonable, consequences should be drawn from principles of
faith, which, he says, are of two sorts; first such as need no more but common
sense to deduce them; the others are such as need the maxims of some science
got by speculation to infer them; and these are Theological conclusions: The
former sort, he tell us, the Church is necessitated to make use of upon
occasion, i. e. when any Heretic questions those, and eadem opera, the whole
point of faith it self, of which they were a part; as in the case of the
Monothelites, about Christ's having two wills. But all this while, I am far
enough from being unperplexed; nay by this discourse, I see every one who
offers to unperplex another, is not very clear himself. For since he makes no
Theological conclusions to be de fide, but only such consequences as common
sense draws, I would willingly understand how common sense receives a new
obligation to faith. For to my apprehension the deducing of consequences from
principles by common sense, is not an act of believing, but of knowledge
consequent upon a principle of faith. And the meaning is no more than this,
that men, when they say they believe things, should not contradict themselves,
as certainly they would do, if they deny those consequences which common sense
draws from them. As in the case of the Monothelites, for men to assert that
Christ had two natures, and yet not two wills; when the will is nothing else
but the inclination of the nature to that good which belongs to it. So that
there can be no distinct obligation to believe such consequences as are drawn
by common sense; but every one that believes the principles from whence they
are drawn, is thereby bound to believe all the consequences which immediately
follow from them. Indeed the Church, when people will be so unreasonable to
deny such things, may explain her sense of the article of faith in those terms
which may best prevent dispute; but this is only to discriminate the persons
who truly believe this article, from such as do not. Not that any new
obligation to faith results from this act of the Church; but the better to
prevent cavils, she explains her sense of the article it self in more explicit
terms. Which, as he says, is only to put the faith out of danger of being
equivocated. Which is quite another thing from causing a new obligation to
believe. As suppose the Church, to prevent the growth of the Socinian doctrine,
should require from men the declaring their belief of the eternal existence of
the Son of God; Would this be to bind men to believe some thing which they were
not bound to before? No, but only to express their assent to the Deity of
Christ in the simplest terms; because otherwise they might call him God by
office, and not by nature. Now how can any one conceive, that any should be
first obliged to believe, that Christ is God, and yet receive a new obligation
afterward to believe his eternal existence? Thus it is in all immediate
consequences drawn by common sense; in all which, the primary obligation to
believe the thing it self, extends to the belief of it in the most clear and
least controverted terms, which are not intended to impose on men's faith, but
to promote the Churches peace. For neither is there a new object of faith; for
how can that be, which common sense draws from what is believed already?
neither is there any infallible proponent, unless common sense has usurped the
Popes prerogative. But Mr. S. offers at a reason for this, which is, that none
can have an obligation to believe what they have not an obligation to think of;
and in some age the generality of the faithful have no occasion, nor
consequently obligation to mind, reflect, or think on those propositions
involved in the main stock of faith. From whence, he says, it follows, that a
thing may be de fide, or obligatory to be believed in one age, and not in
another. But let Mr. S. show, how a man can be obliged to believe any thing as
an article of faith, who is not bound to think of all the immediate
consequences of it? Because faith is an act of a reasonable nature, which ought
to enquire into the reasons and consequences of things which it does believe.
But Mr. S's mistake lies here, in not distinguishing the obligation to believe
from the obligation to an explicit declaration of that assent. The former
comes only from God, and no new obligation can arise from any act of the
Church; but the latter being a thing tending to the Churches peace, may be
required by it on some occasions; i. e. when the doctrine is assaulted by
Heretics, as in the time of the four first General Councils; but still a man
is not at all the more obliged to assent, but to express his assent in order to
the Churches satisfaction.

But Mr. S. supposes me to enquire,. 9. p. 208.
how the Church can have power to oblige the generality to belief of such a
point. To which his answer is, she obliges them to believe the main point of
faith, by virtue of traditions, being a self-evident rule, and these implied
points by virtue of their being self-evidently connected with those main and
perpetually used points, so that the vulgar can be rationally and connaturally
made capable of this their obligation. But we are not now enquiring, what the
obligation to believe the main points of faith is, nor whether tradition be a
self-evident rule; but how there should be a new obligation to believe
something self-evidently connected with the former points, is beyond my
capacity to understand. And they must be vulgar understandings indeed, that can
rationally and connaturally be made capable of such an obligation. For if it be
self-evidently connected with the main points, no one can believe the one,
without believing the other; for nothing is self-evident, but what a man
assents to at the first apprehension of it; and if he does so, how comes there
a new obligation to believe it? Is it possible to believe, that any thing
consists of parts, and not believe that that whole is greater than any of those
parts? for this is a thing self-evidently connected with the nature of the
whole. But these are self-evident riddles, as the former were unintelligible
demonstrations. And yet, though these be rare Theories, the application of them
to the case of the Roman Church exceeds all the rest. Whence, says he, the
Government of our Church is still justified to be sweet, and according to right
nature, and yet forcible and efficacious. Although I admire many things in Mr.
S's Book, yet I cannot say I do any thing more than this passage, that because
men are obliged to believe no implied points, but such as are self-evidently
connected with the main ones, therefore the Government of the Roman Church is
sweet, and according to right nature, etc. Alas then, how much have we been
mistaken all this while, that have charged her with imposing hard and
unsufferable conditions of communion with her! No, she is so gentle and sweet,
that she requires nothing but the main points on the account of a self-evident
rule, and implied points by reason of self-evident connection with the former. I
see Mr. S. (if he will make good his word) is the only person who is ever like
to reconcile me with the Church of Rome: For I assure you, I never desire any
better terms of communion with a Church, than to have no main points of faith
required from me to assent to, but what are built on a self-evident rule, nor
any implied points but such as are self-evidently connected with the former.
And no work can be more easy, than to convince me upon these grounds; for all
endeavors of proof are taken away by the things being said to be self-evident.
For the very offer of proof that they are so, self-evidently proves they are
not so: For what ever is proved by something beside it self, can never be said
without a contradiction to be self-evident. But not to tie up Mr. S. from his
excellent faculty of proving, if Mr. S. will prove to me that any of the points
in difference between us, as Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Supremacy of the
Roman Church, etc. have any self-evident connection with any main point of faith
in the Apostles Creed, I solemnly promise him to retract all I have writ
against that Church; so far shall I be from needing a new obligation to believe
them. But if these be so remote from self-evidence, that they are plainly
repugnant to sense and reason (witness that self-evident doctrine of
Transubstantiation) what then must we think of Mr. S.? Surely the least is,
that since his being a Roman Catholic, his mind is strangely enlightened, so
far that those things are self-evident to him, which are contradictions to the
rest of the world. But withal M. S. acquaints us with another mystery; which
is, how these points descended by a kind of tradition, and yet confesses, they
were never thought of or reflected on by the generality, till the Church took
occasion to explain them. Such a silent tradition does very sutably follow the
former self-evident connection. For he that can believe Transubstantiation to be
self-evident, no wonder if he believes that to have been delivered by a
constant Tradition, which was never heard of from the Apostles times to these.

Now Mr. S. is pleased to return to me, and draws up a fresh charge against me,
which is, that I act like a Politician, and would conquer them by first
dividing them, and making odious comparisons between two parties of Divines.
But to show us how little they differ, he distinguishes them, as faithful, and
as private discoursers; in the former notion, he says, they all hold the same
divinely constituted Church Government, and the same self-evident rule of
faith; but as private discoursers he acknowledges they differ in the
explication of their belief. I meddle not here with the Government of their
Church, (which I have elsewhere proved to be far enough from being divinely
constituted) but with the rule of faith; and the question is, whether the
infallibility of oral tradition, be that self-evident rule which that Church
proceeds on; Yes, says Mt. S. they are all as faithful agreed in it, but as
discourses they differ about it. Which in short is, that all in the Church of
Rome, who are not of his opinion, know not what they say; and that they oppose
that which they do really believe. Which in plain English is, that they are
egregious dissemblers and prevaricators in Religion; that they do intolerably
flatter the Pope and present Church with loud declamations for their
infallibility, but they do really believe no such thing, but resolve all into
oral tradition. But is not this an excellent agreement among them, when Mr.
White and his party not only disown the common doctrine of the infallibility of
Pope and Councils, but dispute against it as pernicious and destructive to
Christian faith? on the other side the far greater part of Romanists say, there
can be no certainty of faith, unless there be an infallible divine testimony in
the present Church, and this lodged in Pope and Councils; that those who
endeavor to overthrow this, are dangerous, seditious, heretical persons,
Accordingly their Books are censured at Rome, their opinions disputed against,
and their persons condemned. And yet all this while, we must believe that these
stick together like two smooth Marbles as faithful, though they are knocked one
against another as discoursers; and that they perfectly agree in the same
self-evident rule of faith, when all their quarrels and contentions are about
it; and those managed with so great heat, that heresy is charged of one side,
and Arch-heresie and undermining Religion on the other. Does he think we never
heard of Mr. White's Sonus Succinae, nor of that Chapter in it, where he says,
that the doctrine of Pope and Councils infallibility tends to overthrow the
certainty of Christian faith; De fide and Theol. tract^ 2. sect. 22. p. 158.
and that the propagating such a doctrine is a greater crime than burning
Temples, ravishing the sacred Virgins on the Altars, trampling on the body of
Christ, or the sending the Turk or Antichrist into Christian Countries? Or does
he think we can believe that the Pope and Cardinals, the Jesuits and all the
Papists of foreign Countries do as faithful agree with Mr. White in this? It
seems not so by the proceedings in the Court of Rome against him, in which as
appears by the censure of the Inquisition against him, dated 17. November 1661.
his doctrine is condemned not only as false, seditious and scandalous, but as
heretical and erroneous in faith. And if it were not for this very doctrine he
was there censured, why does Mr. White set himself purposely to defend it in
his Tabulae suffragiales? If these then do agree as faithful, who cannot but
envy the excellent harmony of the Roman Church, in which men condemn each other
for heretics, and yet all believe the same things still? Well Sir, I am in
hopes upon the same grounds Mr. S. will yield us the same charity too, and tell
us that we agree with him as faithful, only we differ a little from him as
discoursers; for I assure you, there is as great reason: the only difference
is, we give them not such ill words as they do each other. For let Mr. S. show
us wherein we differ more from him about the Rule of Faith, than they do among
themselves: For Mr. White when he has said, that all kind of heresy does
arise from hence, that men make the holy Scripture, or a private spirit, the
rule of faith; he presently adds, it is all one, if one make Councils or Pope
any other way than as witnesses to be the authors of faith. For, says he, this
is to subject the whole Church to that slavery, to receive any error for an
article of faith, which they shall define, or propose modo illegitimo, i. e.
any other way then as witnesses of tradition. Either then we differ from Mr. S.
only as discoursers, or he and his Brethren differ from each other more then as
such. And so any one would think who reads the oppositions and arguments
against each other on this subject, particularly Mr. Whites Tabulae
suffragiales. But let Mr. White say what he will Mr. S. tells me, I am not
aware how little they differ even as Divines. The more shame for them to have
such furious heats and oppositions where there is so little difference. But as
little as they differ, Mr. White thinks it safer to talk of their unity in
England, than to try whether they be of his mind at Rome, by going thither to
clear himself; for he justly fears he should find them differ from him some
other way than as bare discoursers. Yet let us hear Mr. S's. reason; for, says
he, though some speculators attribute to the Church a power of defining things
not held before, yet few will say she has new revelations or new articles of
faith. But we know the temper of these men better than to rely on what they
barely say. For they say what they think is most for their purpose; and one of
Mr. White's adversaries, (if himself may be credited) plainly told him, if the
doctrine of the Popes infallibility were not true, Tabul. sufrag. p. 3.18.
yet it ought to be defended because it was for the interest of the Church of
Rome: for which he is sufficiently rebuked by him. It is one thing then what
they say, and another what necessarily follows from the Doctrine which they
assert. But for plain dealing commend me to the Canonists, who say expressly,
the Church (by which they mean the Pope) may make new articles of faith: and
this is the sense of the rest, though they are loath to speak out. Else Mr.
White was much too blame in spending so much time in proving the contrary. But
what man of common sense can imagine that these men can mean otherwise, who
assert such an infallibility in Pope and Councils, as to oblige men under pain
of eternal damnation to believe those things which they were not obliged to,
before such a definition? And what can this be else but to make new articles of
faith? For an article of faith supposes a necessary obligation to believe it:
now if some doctrine may become thus obligatory by virtue of the Churches
definition which was not so before, that becomes thereby an article of faith
which it was not before. But these subtle men have not yet learnt to
distinguish a new doctrine from a new article of faith: they do not indeed
pretend that their doctrine is new, because they deny any such thing as new
revelation in the Church; but yet they must needs say, if they understand
themselves, that old implicit doctrines, may become new articles of faith by
virtue of the Churches definition. So little are they relieved by that silly
distinction of explicit and implicit delivery of them, which Mr. S. for a great
novelty accquaints us with. For what is only implicitly delivered, is no
article of faith at all: for that can be no article of faith, which men are not
bound to believe; now there are none will say that men are bound to believe
under pain of damnation if they do not the things which are only implicitly
delivered; but this they say with great confidence of all things defined by the
Church. And let now any intelligent person judge; whether those who assert such
things, do not differ wide enough from those who resolve all into oral
tradition, and make the obligation to faith wholly dependent upon the constant
tradition of any doctrine from age to age ever since the Apostles times.

. 11.
But Mr. S. is yet further displeased with me for saying, that Pope and Councils
challenge a power to make things de fide in one age, which were not in another.
For 1. he says, I speak it in common, and prove it not. 2. He adds, That take
them right, this is both perfectly innocent, and unavoidably necessary to a
Church. And is it not strange he should expect any particular proofs of so
innocent and necessary a thing to the being of a Church? But he will tell me it
is in his own sense of de fide, which I have already shown to signify nothing
to his purpose. Let him therefore speak out whether he does believe any such
thing as inherent infallibility in the definitions of Pope and Councils? if
not, I am sure at Rome they will never believe that Mr. S. agrees with them as
faithful; if he does, whether does not such an infallible definition bind men
by virtue of it to the belief of what is then defined? if it does, then things
may become as much de fide by it, as if they were delivered die Christ or his
Apostles. For thereby is supposed an equal obligation to faith, because there
is a proposition equally infallible. But will he say, the Pope does not
challenge this? Why then is the contrary doctrine censured and condemned at
Rome? Why is the other so eagerly contended for, by the most zealous sons of
that Church, and that not as a school-opinion, but as the only certain
foundation of faith? Mr. S. is yet pleased to inform me further, that nothing
will avail me but this, if a Pope and Council should define a new thing, and
declare they ground themselves on new lights, as did their first reformers in
England: but I shall find, he says, no such fopperies in faith-definitions
made by the Catholic Church. Is this the man who made choice of reason for his
weapon? could there be a greater calumny cast on our Church, than to say her
reformers grounded themselves on new lights: when our great charge against the
Church of Rome is for introducing Novelties, and receding from pure and
primitive antiquity. Whether the charge be true or no, yet sure it follows they
did not declare they ground themselves on new lights; but expressly the
contrary. Well, but Pope and Councils neither define new things, nor ground
themselves on them: but what means the man of reason? that they make no new
definitions: surely not; for then what did they meet for? and what mean their
decrees? but he intends, that they deliver no new doctrine: but how must that
be tried? or has Mr. S. gained the opinion of infallibility both from Pope and
Councils, that we must believe his bare word? but we not only say but prove
that even their last Council has defined many things, which never were
delivered by Christ or his Apostles. And it is to no purpose whether they say
they ground themselves on new lights, or pretend to an infallible assistance;
for it comes all to the same at last. For if the assistance be infallible, what
matter is it whether the doctrine has been revealed or no? for on this
supposition it is impossible that Pope and Council should miscarry. Therefore
if any Church be guilty of fopperies in faith-definitions, it must be that
which you miscall the Catholic, but is more truly known by the name of the
Roman Church. There is yet one piece of Mr. S's. sagacity to be taken notice of
as to this particular, which is, p. 210.
that I am at an end of my argument, because I say the opinion of the Pope and
Councils infallibility is the common doctrine maintained: in which I confound
the Church with the schools, or some private opinaters, and then carp at those
men's tenets, And this is the force of all that Paragraph, He tells me, I want
not wit to know that no sober Catholic holds humane deductions the rule of
their faith, schoolmen definers of it, nor the schools the Tribunal whence to
propose it authoritatively and obligingly to the generality of the faithful.
Neither does Mr. S. want the wit to know that our present enquiry is concerning
the sense of their present Church about the rule of faith. Since then Mr. S.
must confess it necessary to faith to know what the certain rule of it is; let
me enquire further, whether any particular person can know certainly what it
is, unless he knows what the Church owns for her rule of faith; and whether
that may be owned as the Churches judgment, which is stiffly opposed by the
most interessed persons in the Roman Church, and the most zealous contenders
for it? Especially when the Pope who is said to be Head of the Church, condemns
the doctrine asserted, and that only by a small number of such who are as much
opposed by themselves, as by any of us. Is it then possible to know the
Churches judgment or not? if not, it is to no purpose to search for a rule of
faith: if it be, which way can we come to know it, either by most voices or the
sense of the Governors of the Church; either of the ways, I dare put it to a
fair trial whether oral tradition, or the infallibility of Pope and Councils be
the Doctrine most owned in the Church of Rome? But Mr. S. still tells us, these
are only private opinators and schoolmen who assert the contrary doctrine to
his. But wiill not they much more say on the other side, that this way of oral
trodition is a novel fancy of some few half-Catholicks in England, and tends to
subvert the Roman Church. But is the present Pope with Mr. S. a private
opinator, or was the last a mere schoolman? I am sure what ever Mr. S. thinks
of him, he thought not so of himself, when he said, he was no Divine in the
controversy of Jansenius. Does the Court of Rome signify no more with Mr. S.
than a company of scholastic Pedants, that know not what the sense of the
Church is, concerning the rule of faith? I meddle not with the Schools but with
the authority of the present Church, and him whom Mr. S. owns for the head of
it: and is it consistent with his headship to condemn that doctrine which
contains in it the only certain rule of faith? Mr. S. may then see they were no
such impertinent Topics which I insisted on, and as stout as Mr. S. seems to
be, I an apt to believe he would not look on the censure of the Inquisition as
an impertinent Topic.

. 12
But at last Mr. S. offers at something whereby he would satisfy me of the
sense of the Church, as to this particular, and therefore asks, whether I never
heard of such a thing as the Council of Trent? p. 211.
I must ingenuously confess I have; and seen more a great deal of it, than I am
satisfied with. But what of that? there, he tells me, I may find a clear
solution of my doubt by the constant procedure of that most grave Synod in its
definitions. That is, I hope to find that oral tradition was acknowledged there
as the only self-evident rule of faith. If I do this, I confess my self
satisfied in this enquiry. But how much to the contrary is there very obvious
in the proceedings of it? For in the 4 th Session the Decree is, That Scripture
and tradition should be embraced with equal piety and reverence; and the reason
is, because the doctrine of faith is contained partly in Scripture, partly in
tradition; but what arts must Mr. S. use to infer from hence, that oral
tradition in contradistinction to Scripture was looked on as the only rule of
faith? I cannot but say, that the ruling men of that Council were men wise
enough in their generation; and they were too wise wholly to exclude Scripture;
but because they knew that of it self could not serve their purposes, they
therefore help it out with tradition, and make both together the complete rule
of faith. Where I pray in all the proceedings of that Council does Mr. S. find
them define any thing on the account of oral tradition? instead of which we
find continual bandyings about the sense of Scripture and Fathers, which might
have been all spared, if they had been so wise as to consider, they could not
but know the sense of the present Church, nor that of the precedent, and so up
to the time of Christ. But they were either so ignorant as not to light on this
happy invention; or so wise and knowing as to despise it. It is true, they
would not have their doctrines looked on as novelties, therefore they speak
much of tradition and the ancient faith; but that was not by what their Parents
taught them, but what the Fathers of the Church delivered in their writings;
for by these they judged of traditions, and not the oral way. And therefore I
see little reason to believe, that this was either the sense of the Council of
Trent, or is the sense of any number of Roman Catholics, much less of the
whole Church, p. 212.
none excepted, as Mr. S. in his confident way expresses it. And if he will, as
he says, disavow the maintaining any point, or affecting any way which is not
assented to by all, I hope to see Mr. S. retract this opinion, and either fall
in with the Court of Rome, or return, as reason leads him, into the bosom of
the Church of England. But there seems to be somewhat more in what follows,
viz. that though schoolmen question the personal infallibility of the Pope, or
of the Roman Clergy, nay of a General Council, yet all affirm the infallibility
of tradition, or the living voice of the Church essential; and this, he says,
is held by all, held firmly, and that it is absolutely infallible. To this
therefore I answer, either Mr. S. means, that none do affirm that the universal
tradition of the Church essential can err, or that the Church of Rome, being
the Church essential, cannot err in her tradition: But which way soever he
takes it, I shall easily show how far it is from proving that he designs it
for. For if he take it in the first sense, viz. that all the faithful in all
ages could not concur in an error, then he may as well prove Protestants of his
mind as Papists, for this is the foundation on which we believe the particular
Books of Scripture. If this therefore proves any thing, it proves more then he
intends, viz. that while we thus oppose each other, we do perfectly agree
together; and truly so we do, as much as they do among themselves. But if Mr.
S's. meaning be, that all of their Religion own the Roman Church to be the
Church essential, and on that account, that it cannot err, (setting aside the
absurdity of the opinion it self), I say from hence it does not follow, that
they make oral tradition the rule of faith, because it is most evident, that
the ground why they say their Church cannot err, is not on Mr. S's. principles,
but on the supposition of an infallible assistance, which preserves that Church
from error. So that this falls far short of proving, that they are all agreed
in this rule of faith; which is a thing so far from probability, that he might,
by the same argument prove, that Scripture is owned by them all to be the rule
of faith. For I hope it is held by all, and held firmly, that the living voice
of God in Scripture, as delivered to us, is infallible; and if so, then there
is as much ground for this as the other. But if we enquire what it is men make
a rule of faith, we must know not only that they believe tradition infallible,
but on what account they do so. For if tradition be believed infallible barely
on the account of a promise of infallibility to the present Church, then the
resolution of faith is not into the tradition, but into that infallible
assistance; and consequently the rule of faith is not, what bare tradition
delivers, but what that Church, which cannot err in judging tradition, does
propose to us. It is not therefore their being agreed in general, that
tradition is infallible, does make them agree in the same rule of faith; but
they must agree in the ground of that infallibility, viz. that it depends on
this, that no age could conspire to deceive the next. But all persons who
understand any thing of the Roman Church, know very well that the general
reason why tradition is believed infallible, is, because they first believe the
Church to be infallible; whereas Mr. S. goes the contrary way, and makes the
infallibility of the the Church, to depend on the infallibility of tradition.
And therefore, for all that I can see, we must still oppose private Opinators
in this controversy; the Church of Rome, not having declared her self at all
on Mr. S's behalf, but the contrary, and the generality believing on the
account of the present Churches infallibility. And it is strange Mr. S. should
find no difference between men's resolving faith into common sense, and into the
immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost. If this then be the first principle of
controversy, as Mr. S. pretends, p. 213.
we see how unlikely they are to agree about other matters, who are so much
divided about the principle of resolving them. And if this be the ground of
faith, then most Romanists build on a wrong Foundation. But if the
infallibility of oral tradition be the foundation on which that formidable
structure is erecting, which he speaks of, woe then to the Court of Rome, for
that is known to build on quite a different foundation. And if this, as he
says, rises apace, and has advanced many stories in a small time, it only lets
us know how fast their divisions grow, and that they are building so fast one
against another, that their Church will not stand between them. By this
discourse, Mr. S. pretends to answer all those If's which follow; which are
these, In case the Church may determine things de fide, which were not before,
whether the present Church does then believe as the precedent did or no? if it
did, how comes any thing to be de fide which was not before? if it did not,
what assurance can I have that every age of the Church believes just as the
precedent did, and no otherwise; when I see they profess the contrary? And if a
thing may be de fide in one age, which was not in a foregoing, then a Church
may deliver that as a matter of faith at one time, which was never accounted so
before; by which means the present Church may oblige me to believe that as a
matter of faith, which never was so in Christ's or the Apostles times, and so
the infallibility on the account of tradition is destroyed. To all which Mr. S.
gives a very easy answer, viz. that they do not hold any disparate or
unimplied points of faith; but such as are involved and implied in the main
point. This is no more easily said then understood; for if these be implied in
the former, how can there come a new obligation to believe them? For to take
his own instance, will any man in his senses say, that he that believes homo
est animal rationale, does not believe homo est animal? and this he makes
choice of as an example, how one point of faith may be involved in another, so
as to receive a distinct obligation to believe it. I grant that homo est animal
is involved in the other, but he that shall say, that after he has assented to
that proposition, homo est animal rationale, he may be capable of a new
obligation to believe the former, which is involved in this, it may be justly
questioned whether such an one, as to himself, can truly say, homo est animal
rationale, or no. But after such rare subtilties, he does very well to tell me,
that I ought to consider what Logic tells us, that the conclusion is in the
premises, which reflection (in his his court-like expression) he says, p. 214.
will much unblunder my thoughts. But let the conclusion be as long as it will
in the premises, will any man in his wits say, that he that believes the truth
of the premises, is not hereby bound to believe the conclusion? and the more
the one is involved in the other, the less is it possible to make the
obligation to believe them distinct. And it is hard for me to believe, that
this is a way to unblunder my thoughts, when I see what horrible confusion such
expressions argue in his own. Let the Church then clear her thoughts never so
much, yet all this cannot amount to a distinct obligation to believe those
things which were involved before, but to a more explicit declaring them for
the Churches peace and satisfaction. The only conclusion then involved in these
premises, is, that if some things may be de fide in one age which were not in
another, then the present age may believe otherwise than the precedent did. And
if this doctrine be held in the Church of Rome, nothing can be more evident,
than that Mr. S's. first principle of controversy, is far from being the
doctrine of the Roman Church, which was the thing to be proved.

My second chief argument against this way of oral tradition was, 13.
that it had not been owned in all ages of the Christian Church; to manifest
which, I enquired into the reason of the obligation in any age of the Church to
believe and practice just as the precedent did. Mr. S. rejoices in that
confession of mine, that the only thing to be proved in this case is, p. 216.
that every age of the Church, and all persons in it, looked on themselves as
obliged not to vary in any thing from the doctrine and practice of the
precedent age. And I there offer the choice of three ways to prove it, reason,
testimony, or tradition; he tells me, he excepts the way of reason; yet
quarrels with me for pressing for a demonstrative medium to prove it, when yet
Mr. S. seldom speaks under the rate of demonstrations. But he thereby notes the
unconsonancy of my carriage, Wherein I wonder? That I should desire them to
perform this promise, viz. to give us demonstrations for the grounds of faith?
But says withal, he will yield me the honor of professing I have no
demonstration but probability for the ground of mine, and he makes this serious
protestation for himself, that he should esteem himself very dishonest, did he
assert and press on others any argument for the ground of his faith, which he
judged not evident, that is demonstrative. What is it these men mean, when they
cry up their own way for demonstrative, and say that we build our faith merely
on probabilities? Do they say, that Religion is capable of strict and rigorous
demonstration? If so, let them demonstrate the being of God and immortality of
the soul, with as much evidence, as that the three angles of a triangle are
equal to two right angles. And it is strange, if they think particular problems
in religion are more capable of demonstration than those Theorems on which they
are built. But by all the enquiry I can make, all the difference between us is,
that Mr. S. will have that called a demonstration, which is scarce a
probability; and we call that sufficient reason, which any wise man may safely
rely on in matters of Religion. In the mean time how much do we suffer by our
modesty, that because we speak not as big as Mr. S. does, we must be censured
presently to have nothing but probabilities fot our faith? Are those bare
probabilities which leave no suspicion of doubt behind them? And such we freely
assert the grounds of our Religion to do; i. e. I assert, that we have the
highest actual certainty of the truth of our Religion, which the mind of any
reasonable man can desire; and if Mr. S's. demonstrations can do any more than
this, let him tell us what it is. For my part, I know nothing higher in the
mind of man than a certain assent, and if I did not think there was the
greatest ground in Religion for that, I abhor dissimulation so much, that I
should leave off persuading men to embrace it. And if any men have made us shy
of the word demonstration and infallibility, they are such men as Mr. S. have
done it, who talk of these things, when their arguments fall beneath some of
the remotest probabilities we insist on. Nay, if there be any force in his
demonstration, as to matters of fact, it has been used by us long before his
Book saw the light. But we love to give the true names to things, and not to
lose our credit with all intelligent persons, by playing Mountebanks in
Religion, crying up those things for infallible cures, which an ordinary
capacity may discern the insufficiency of. But was it any thing but justice and
reason in me to expect and call for a demonstration from them who talk of
nothing under it? And therefore I said, that it was impossible to demonstrate
this way of oral tradition, unless it were proved impossible for men not to
think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their predecessors did.
For where the contrary is not only possible, but easily supposable, as that men
may believe those things, as new articles of faith which are defined by Pope
and Council, I wonder how Mr. S. will demonstrate, that men must look on
themselves as obliged to believe just as their predecessors did? For I had
thought demonstrations had never place in contingent propositions; but it seems
Mr. S. who tells me, Logic will unblunder my thoughts, intends to make a new
one for me. And I assure you so he had need, before I shall ever call his
arguments demonstrations: and although he thinks himself very honest in calling
them so, yet I should think him much wiser if he did not.

But before I come to the particular debate of these things,. 14.
I freely tell him, that I grant all he requests; I shall take along with me
the nature of the matter in hand, p. 236.
the doctrines and practices spoken of, the manner of delivering them, the
necessary circumstances which give weight to both; yet for all these, I cannot
look on his way as demonstrative. And that both our meanings may be better
understood, it is very necessary the Reader should have a true account of the
state of the Question between us. And if he will believe me, I never intended
to dispute with him or any one else, whether men were bound to wear their
clothes, or build houses, p. 217.
or manage estates just as their predecessors did; but whether every age is
obliged to believe and practice just as the precedent did, by virtue of mere
oral tradition; for about that is all the controversy between us. I do not
deny, but that a succeeding age may look on it self as bound to believe what
the precedent did; but whether that obligation does arise purely from the
delivery of that doctrine by the precedent in the way of of tradition, is the
thing in dispute between us. For in case the ground of faith be wholly the
written Word, conveyed from age to age, I deny not but an obligation to believe
descends with the doctrine to every succeeding age. But that which Mr. S. is to
prove is, that abstractly from Scripture every age is absolutely bound to
believe just as the precedent did, without any enquiry whether that doctrine
does agree with Scriptures or no; but that he is therefore bound to believe all
which is proposed to him, because it was the doctrine of the immediately
preceding age. And this is that which I deny, and desire Mr. S. to prove. For
which he first gives us a large instance in historical matters, and then comes
to the matters of Christian faith. His instance is, in Alexanders conquest of
Asia, as to which he says, that the memory of it is fresh and lively, p. 218.
though some thousand years since; and that the universal and strong persuasion
of this matter of fact was not caused by Books, as Curtius his History, but by
human tradition; that the continuance of this persuasion was the notoriety of
the fact to the then livers, which obliged them to relate it to their
posterity, and that this testifying by the forefathers, was that which obliged
posterity to believe things, as true because there could be no imaginable
motive why the whole world should conspire to deceive them, or be deceivable in
their sensations; on which principle it passed to the next age, and so came
down by way of tradition to our days; and the obligation to believe in every
age depended upon this, that the senses of the first could not be deceived; and
having this security in every age, that no one would conspire to deceive the
next, it follows, that no age could say a former age testified so, unless it
did; so therefore, says he, it follows demonstratively, that it was testified;
and so the descendents in every age to the very end of the world have the same
obligation to believe their immediate forefathers, saying it was testified by
theirs, and so to the very first, who were witnesses of his actions. This is
the substance of what he more largely discourses in several Paragraphs; which
when he has done, he tells me, he expects what I will reply to this discourse.
p. 223.
Not to frustrate therefore his expectation, and in order to the Readers
satisfaction, we are to consider, that in the present case there are two
distinct questions to be resolved: 1. How a matter of fact evident to the world
comes to be conveyed to posterity? 2. By what means a complete history of all
passages relating to it may be conveyed? As to the first, I grant that a fact
so notorious as Alexanders conquest of Asia might have been preserved by human
tradition, and conveyed in a certain way from one age to another. But if we
enquire into that which is alone proper to our question, viz. by what means we
may judge what is true and false as to the particulars of that conquest, then I
deny that bare tradition is to be relied on in this case. For the certainty of
conveyance of all paticulars does depend not upon the bare veracity, but the
capacity and skill of communicating from one age to another. For which one
would think we need no clearer evidence than the consideration of the different
account of former times in the several Nations of the world. For who can
imagine, but the barbarous Nations were as unwilling to deceive their posterity
as any other? yet we see a vast difference in the histories of former ages
among them, and more civilized people. And I wish Mr. S. would rather have
instanced in some history which had been preserved merely by tradition, and not
in such a one, which, if any other, has been most carefully recorded and
propagated to posterity. If Mr. S. would have undertaken to have told us, who
they were that first peopled America, and from what place they came, by the
tradition of the present inhabitants, and what famous actions had been done
there in former ages, we might have thought indeed, that sole tradition had
been a very safe way to convey matters of fact from one age to another. But
since all Mr. S's. arguments will hold as well for the Scythians and Americans,
and the most barbarous Nations, as the most civil and polite; what reason can
Mr. S. give, why there is not among them as certain an account of former ages,
as among the Greeks and Romans? Were not their senses, who saw those matters of
fact, as incapable of being deceived as others? Was not every age among them as
unwilling to deceive their posterity as elsewhere? Yet notwithstanding the
force of Mr. S's demonstration, we see for want of letters how grossly ignorant
they are of what was done before them. And if this principle were true, why
have we not as true an account of the eldest ages of the world, as of any
other? Nay, why were letters invented, and writing ever used, if tradition had
been found so infallible? But it is one thing superficially to discourse what
is impossible should be otherwise, and another to consider what really has
been in the world. Does not the constant experience of all times prove, that
where any history has not been timely recorded, it has been soon corrupted by
notorious falsities, or obscured by fabulous reports? As we see among our
selves, what difference there is in point of certainty between the several
stories of K. Arthur and William the Conqueror; what will Mr. S. say, that
those who lived in K. Arthurs time could not know what he did, or that they
conspired to deceive their posterity? But if tradition be so infallible, why
have we not the ancient story of Britain as exact as the modern? If Mr. S. will
impute it to the peoples ignorance, want of letters, frequent conquests by
other Nations, and succeeding barbarism, he may easily find how many ways there
are for matters of fact to be soon lost or corrupted, when they have not been
diligently preserved by authentic records; and that without one age conspiring
to deceive another. But notwithstanding Mr. S's confidence, I cannot think it
possible for Mr. S. to believe, that we should have had as true an account of
Alexanders conquest of Asia, if Arrian Curtias, or Plutarch had never writ his
story, as we have now. Yet this he must assert by virtue of his principle. And
he that can believe that, I wonder he should scruple believing the Popes
infallibility; for certainly no principle of the Jesuits is more wild and
absurd than this is. Besides, I admire how it came into Mr. S's head to think,
no error could come into history unless one age conspired to deceive another,
when we find no age agreed in the present matters of fact which are done in it,
as to the grounds and particulars of them; to give Mr. S. an instance home to
his purpose, in the late Council of Trent we see already what different
representations there are made of it in so little a time as has already passed
since the sitting of it. One, though he had all the advantages imaginable of
knowing all proceedings in it, living at the same time, conversing with the
persons present at it, having the memoires and records of the Secretaries
themselves, yet his story is since endeavored to be blasted by a great person
of the Roman Church, as fictitious and partial. We see then it is at least
supposed that interest and prejudice may have a great hand in abusing the world
in matter of story, though one age never agree to deceive another. And instead
of being persuaded by Mr. S's demonstrations, I am still of the mind, that we
have no sufficient security of the truth of any story, which was not written
while those persons were in being who were able to contradict the errors of it.
However I deny not, but some notorious matters of fact, such as Alexanders bare
conquests of Asia, might by the visible effects of it be preserved both in Asia
and Greece for a long time. But if we come to enquire particularly, whether
this or that was done by him in his conquest, which is alone pertinent to our
purpose, we have no security at all from tradition, but only from the most
authentic records of that story. p. 213.
And by this, I hope Mr. S. will have cause to thank me for unblundring his
thoughts (his own civil expressions), and showing him how errors may come into
a story without one age conspiring to deceive the next; and what a vast
difference there is between preserving a bare matter af fact, and all the
particulars relating to it. And hereby he may easily see how far the obligation
extends in believing the report of former ages. For there can be no obligation
to believe any further than there is evidence of truth in the matter we are
obliged to. If then there be not only a possibility, but a very great
probability of mistakes and errors in matters of fact, I pray what obligation
does there ly upon men absolutely to believe what is delivered by the preceding
age? But to put an issue to this controversy, let Mr. S. examine himself, and
try if he can name one story that was never written, which was ever certainly
propagated from one age to another by mere oral tradition; and if he cannot, he
may thereby see how little real force his argument has in the world. For all
the force of tradition lies in an unquestionable conveyance of those Books
which contain in them the true reports of the actions of the times they were
written in. But can Mr. S. think, that if the Roman history had never been
written, it had been possible for us to have known what was done under the
Kings and Consuls as now we do? Yet if his principle holds, this necessarily
follows; for those of that age could not but know them, and no age since could
conspire to deceive the next. And from hence, the most useful consequence of
all is, that Mr. S. might have writ a history from the beginning of the world
to this day, with a full relation of all particulars, if there had never been
any Book written in the world before. And does not Mr. S. deserve immortal
credit for so rare an invention as this is, and all built on nothing short of
demonstrations.

But Mr. S. very prudently foresees, what it is I must be forced to recur to,.
15. p. 224.
viz. that being baffled with his former demonstration, I have no other shift
to betake my self to, but to say the case is different between histories and
points of faith. And therefore to bring his business home, he applies it at
large to the delivery of the Christian faith, which that he might do in more
ample sort, he very finely descants on the old Verse, Quis, quid, ubi, etc.
containing the circumstances of human actions, and from every one of them
derives arguments for the infallibility of oral tradition; which briefly and in
plain English may be summed up thus; Since the author of this doctrine was the
Son of God, the doctrine it self so excellent, and delivered in so public a
manner, in the most convincing way, by miracle and good living, and for so good
an end as to save men's souls, and that by writing it in men's hearts, and
testified to others; and all this at a time when men might judge of the miracles
and motives for believing it; therefore since in all these respects it was
incomparably beyond the story of Alexanders conquests, it follows, that in a
manner infinitely greater must the obligation be to believe Christ's doctrine,
than Alexanders or William the Conqerours victories, or any history of the like
nature whatsoever. All which I freely grant, but cannot yet see how from thence
it follows; that oral tradition is the only rule of faith, or the means whereby
we are to judge what is the doctrine of Christ, and what not. Those arguments I
confess prove, that the Christians of the first age were highly concerned to
enquire into the truth of these things, and that they had the greatest reason
imaginable to believe them; and that it is not possible to conceive that they
should not endeavor to propagate so excellent a doctrine, and of so high
concernment to the world. But the question is, whether abstractly from the
Books written in the first age of the Christian Church, there is so much
infallibility in the oral tradition of every age, that nothing could be
embraced for Christ's doctrine which was not; and consequently, whether every
age were bound to believe absolutely what was delivered it by the precedent for
the doctrine of Christ? Mr. S. therefore puts himself to a needless task of
proving that every age was bound to believe the doctrine of Christ, which I
never questioned; but the dispute is, whether every age be bound on the account
of oral tradition to believe what is delivered by the precedent for Christ's
doctrine. But it is to be observed all along how carefully Mr. S. avoids
mentioning the written Books of the New Testament; because he knew all his game
about oral tradition would be quite spoiled by a true stating the matter of
fact in the first ages of the Christian Church. I hope he will not be angry
with me, for asking him that question about the Scripture, which he asks me
about the Council of Trent; did he never hear of such a thing as the Scripture?
or is it so hard to find it? But if he has heard of it, I entreat him to
resolve me these Questions: 1. Whether he does not believe, that the Books of
the New Testament were written at such a time, when the matters of fact therein
recorded, were capable of being thoroughly examined? which he cannot deny upon
his own principle; for tradition being then infallible as to the doctrine of
Christ, the writers of these Books cannot be conceived to deliver it amiss,
unless they resolved to contradict the present tradition of the Church; which
if they had done, those Books could never have found any reception among
Christians. If tradition then convey the doctrine of Christ infalilbly, these
Books must convey it infallibly, because they contain in them the infallible
tradition of the first age of the Christian Church; and were written at the
time when many persons living had been able to disprove any thing contained
therein repugnant to truth. And that these Books were written by those persons
whose names they bear, I appeal to Mr, S's own rule, Tradition; for if that be
infallible in any thing, it must be in this; and if one age could conspire to
deceive another in a matter of such concernment, what security can be had, that
it may not do so in all other things? 2. Whether he believes, that those whose
intention was to write an account of the life, actions, and doctrine of Christ,
did leave any thing out of their Books which did relate to them as of
concernment for us to believe? For upon Mr. S's principles, any one may easily
know what the tradition of the Church is; and especially such certainly who
were either present themselves at the matters of fact, or heard them from those
who were; and what satisfaction can any one desire greater than this? But the
question is, whether this testimony were not more safely deposited in the
Church to be conveyed by word of mouth, than it could be by being committed to
writing by such who were eye and ear witnesses of the actions and doctrine of
Christ? Upon which I advance some further Queries. 3. If oral Tradition were
the more certain way, why was any thing written at all? It may be Mr. S. will
tell us, for moral instructions, and to give precepts of good life; but then
why may not these be as infallibly conveyed by tradition as doctrines of faith?
And why then were any matters of fact and points of faith inserted in the Books
of the New Testament? By which it certainly appears, that the intention of
writing them was to preserve them to posterity. Let Mr. S. tell me whether it
was consistent with the wisdom of men, much less with the wisdom of an infinite
Being to employ men to do that which might be far better done another way, and
when it is done can give no satisfaction to the minds of men? 4. Whether those
things which are capable of being understood when they are spoken, cease to be
so when they are written? For Mr. S. seems to understand those terms of a
living voice, and dead letters in a very strict and rigorous manner; as though
the sense were only quick when spoken, and became buried in dead letters. But
Mr. S. seems with the sagacious Indian to admire how it is possible for dead
letters and unsenc'd characters to express men's meanings as well as words. I
cannot enter into Mr. S's apprehension, how 24 letters by their various
disposition can express matters of faith? And yet to increase the wonder, he
writes about matters of faith, while he is proving that matters of faith cannot
be conveyed by writing. So that Mr. S's. own writing is the best demonstration
against himself; and he confutes his own Sophistry with his fingers, as
Diogenes did Zeno's by his motion. For does Mr. S. hope to persuade men, that
tradition is a rule of faith by his Book or not? if not, to what purpose does
he write? if he does, then it is to be hoped some matters of faith may be
intelligibly conveyed by writing; especially if Mr. S. does it. But by no means
we are to believe that ever the Spirit of God can do it. For whatever is
written by men assisted by that, is according to him but a heap of dead
letters, and insignificant characters; when Mr. S. the mean while is full of
sense and demonstration. Happy man that can thus outdo infinite wisdom, and
write far beyond either Prophets or Apostles. But if he will condescend so far
as to allow that to inspired persons which he confidently believes of himself,
viz. that he can write a Book full of sense, and that any ordinary capacity may
apprehend the design of it, our controversy is at an end; for then matters of
faith may be intelligibly and certainly conveyed to posterity by the Books of
Scripture; and if so, there will be no need of any recourse to oral tradition.
5. If the Books of Scripture did not certainly and intelligibly convey all
matters of faith, what made them be received with so much veneration in the
first ages of the Christian Church? which were best able to judge of the truth
of the matters contained in them, and the usefulness of the Books themselves.
And therein we still find, that appeals were made to them, that they thought
themselves concerned to vindicate them against all objections of Heathens and
others; and the resolution of faith was made into them, and not tradition, as I
have already manifested, and must not repeat. 6. Whether it be in the least
credible, Part 1. chap. 9.
since the Books of Scripture were supposed to contain the doctrines of faith,
that every age of the Church should look on it self as obliged absolutely to
believe the doctrine of the precedent by virtue of an oral-tradition? For since
they resolved their faith into the written Books, how is it possible they
should believe on the account of an oral tradition? Although then the Apostles
did deliver the doctrine of Christ to all their Disciples; yet since the
records of it were embraced in the Church, men judged of the truth or falsehood
of doctrines, by the convenience or repugnancy of them to what was contained in
those Books. By which we understand, that the obligation to believe what was
taught by the precedent age, did not arise from the oral tradition of it, but
by the satisfaction of the present age, that the doctrine delivered by it was
the same with that contained in Scripture.

It is time now to return to Mr. S. who proceeds still to manifest this
obligation in posterity to believe what was delivered as matter of faith, 16.
p. 229, etc.
by the precedent age of the Church; but the force of all is the same still;
viz. that otherwise one age must conspire to deceive the next. But the
inconsequence of that, I have fully showed already, unless he demonstrates it
impossible for errors to come in any other way: For if we reduce the substance
of what he says to a Syllogistical form, it comes to this; Where there is no
possibility of error, there is an absolute obligation to faith; but there is no
possibility of error in the tradition of any age of the Church: ergo in every
age there is an absolute obligation to believe the tradition of the present
Church. The minor he thus proves; If no age of the Church can be ignorant of
what the precedent taught, or conspire to deceive the next, then there is no
possibility of error coming into the tradition of the Church in any age; but
the antecedent is true, and therefore the consequent. Now, who sees not that
the force of all this lies not in proving the minor proposition, or that no age
could conspire to deceive another? but the consequence, viz. that no error can
come into a Church, but by a general mistake, in one whole age, or the general
imposture of it which we utterly deny; and have showed him already the
falseness of it from his own concessions. And I might more largely show it from
those Doctrines or opinions which they themselves acknowledge to have come into
their Church without any such general mistake or imposture, as the doctrines of
Papal infallibility, and the common belief of Purgatory. The very same way that
Mr. White and Mr. S. will show us how these came in, we will show him how many
others came in as erroneous and scandalous as those are. For whether they
account these matters of faith or no, it is certain many among them do, and
that the far greatest number, who assert and believe them to be the doctrine of
their Church too. If therefore these might come in without one age mistaking or
deceiving the next, why might not all those come in the same way which we
charge upon them as the errors of their Church? And in the same manner that
corrupt doctrines come in, may corrupt practices too, since these, as he says,
spring from the other. He might therefore have saved himself the trouble of
finding out how an acute Wit, or great Scholar would discover the weakness of
this way. p. 231.
For without pretending to be either of these, I have found out another way of
attaquing it, than Mr. S. looked for; viz. from his own principles and
concessions; showing how errors might come into a Church, without a total
deception or conspiracy in any one age. Which if it be true, he cannot bind me
to believe what ever he tells me the present Church delivers, unless he can
prove that this never came into the Church as a speculation or private opinion,
and from thence by degrees has come to be accounted a point of faith.
Therefore his way of proof is now quite altered, and he cannot say we are bound
to believe whatever the present Church delivers; for that which he calls the
present Church, may have admitted speculations and private opinions into
doctrines of faith; but he must first prove such doctrines delivered by Christ
or his Apostles, and that from his time down to our age they have been received
by the whole Church for matters of faith; and when he has done this, as to any
of the points in controversy between us, I will promise him to be his
Proselyte. But he ought still to remember, that he is not to prove it
impossible for one whole age to conspire to deceive the next; but that
supposing that it is impossible for any errors to come into the tradition of
the Church. Let us now see what Mr. S. objects against those words I then used
against the demonstrating this way; It is hard to conceive what reason should
enforce it, but such as proves the impossibility of the contrary; and they have
understandings of another mould from others, who can conceive it impossible men
should not think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their
predecessors. And whatever Mr. S. says to the contrary, I cannot yet see, p.
234.
but that therein I argued from the very nature and constitution of the thing.
For that which I looked for, was a demonstration, which I supposed could not be
unless the impossibility of the contrary were demonstrated. But if it be
possible for Men, Christians, nay Romanists to believe on other accounts than
tradition of the precedent age, I pray what demonstration can there be, that
men must think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their
predecessors did? Surely if Mr. S's. fancy had not been very extravagant, he
could never have thought here of men's being obliged to cut their Beards, or
wear such Garters and Hat-bands as their forefathers did. For do I not mention
believing first, and then doing? by which it were easy to apprehend, that I
meant matters of faith, and such practices as flow from them. Neither was there
any such crafty and sophistical dealing as he charges me with; p. 235.
for I am content his doctrine be taken in his own terms; and I have now given
a larger and fuller account why I am far from being convinced by the way he
has used for resolving faith. Passing by therefore his challenge, which I
accept of, as long as he holds to the weapon of reason and civility, I come to
consider his last enquiry, why I should come to doubt of such an obligation in
posterity, p. 236.
to believe their ancestors in matters of faith; and he judiciously resolves it
into a strange distortion of human nature, but such as it seems, is the proper
effect of the Protestants temper, p. 237.
which is, says he, to choose every one his faith by his private judgment, or
wit, working upon disputable words. Which as far as we own it, is not to
believe what we see no ground for; and if this be such a distortion of human
nature, I envy not Mr. S's. uprightness and perfection. If he means that we
build our faith on our private judgments, in opposition to Scripture, or the
universal tradition of the Church in all ages, let him prove it evidently in
one particular, and I engage for my self and all true Protestants, we will
renounce the belief of it. If he has any thing further to object against the
grounds of our Religion, he knows where to attaque me; let him undertake the
whole, or else acknowledge it a most unreasonable thing thus to charge falsities
upon us, and then say we have nothing else to say for our selves. We pretend
not to choose our faith, but heartily embrace whatever appears to have been
delivered by Christ or his Apostles; but we know the Church of Rome too well to
believe all which she would impose upon us, and are loath to have her choose our
Religion for us, since we know she has chosen so ill for her self. But if Mr.
S. will not believe me in saying thus, what reason have I to believe him in
saying otherwise? Such general charges then signify nothing, but every one
must judge according to the reason on both sides.

I now come to the last part of my task; which is to show,. 17.
that this way is repugnant to common sense and experience, and that the Church
of Rome has apparently altered from what was the belief of former ages. To
which purpose my words are, It is to no purpose to prove impossibility of
motion when I see men move; no more is it to prove that no age of the Church
could vary from the preceding, when we can evidently prove that they have done
it. And therefore this argument is intended only to catch easy minds that care
not for a search into the history of the several ages of the Church, but had
rather sit down with a superficial subtilty, than spend time in further
enquiries. But two things M. S. tells me are required ere I can see that their
faith varies from the former; p. 238.
first to see what their Church holds now, and then to see what the former
Church held before; and he kindly tells me, if he sees any thing, I see neither
well. It seems I want Mr. S's. spectacles of oral tradition to see with; but as
yet I have no cause to complain of the want of them, but I see much better
without them than with them. He tells me, I cannot see what their present
Church holds, and therefore I cannot assure any what was held before; because,
if I renounce tradition, I take away all means of knowing. The reason why I
cannot heartily see (as he phrases it) what their Church holds now, is, because
I cannot distinguish between faith and its explication, some Schoolmen and the
Church. By which it seems it is impossible for me to know what their Church
holds concerning Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, Communion in one
kind; for those are the points I there mention, wherein it is evident, that the
Church of Rome has receded from the doctrine and practice of the primitive
Church. Or are these only the opinions and practices of some Schoolmen among
them, and not the doctrine and practice of their Church? But that we might come
to some fuller state of these controversies, I wish M. S. would settle some
sure way whereby we might know distinctly what are the doctrines and practices
of their Church. If the Council of Trent and Roman Catechism be said to be the
rule of doctrine, I desire no other; so that those may be interpreted by
practices universally allowed among them. As when that Council only defined,
that due honor be given to Saints; the general practice of that Church may
tell us what they mean by that due honor; and if that be not fair, I know not
what is. But I see all the shift Mr. S. has, is, when he is pinched, to say
these are the opinions of Schoolmen and private speculators, and not the
doctrine of their Church. And if such shifts as these are must serve the turn,
I should wonder if ever he be to seek for an answer. But the shortest answer of
all would be, that none but those of their Church can know what she holds; and
therefore it is to no purpose for Protestants to write against her; or it may
be, that none but Mr, S. and one or two more can tell; for many among them say,
those are the doctrines of their Church which they deny to be. So that except
Mr. White and Mr. S. and some very few demonstrators more, all the rest are
Schoolmen, private Opinators, and not to be relied on. But I cannot see what
their Church held formerly neither. p. 236.
No wonder at all of that; for if I cannot see an object so near me as the
present Church, how can it be expected I should see one so much further off as
the doctrine of former ages? And his reason is so strong, as may well persuade
me out of one, at least, of my five senses. For, says he, if I question
tradition, I question whether there be any doctrine delivered, and so any
Fathers. And is not this argued like a Demonstrator? First he supposes there
never was any way used in the world but oral tradition, and then strongly
infers, if I deny that, I can know nothing. But I can yet hardly persuade my
self that the Fathers only sat in Chimney-corners teaching their Children by
word of mouth, and charging them to be sure to do so to theirs; but as they
loved preserving the doctrine of faith, they should have a great care never to
write down a word of it. But why, I wonder, should Mr. S. think, that if I do
not allow of oral tradition, I must needs question whether there were any
Fathers? I had thought I might have known there had been Fathers by their
Children; I mean the Books they left behind them. But if all Mr. S. pleads for
be only this, that no Books can be certainly conveyed without tradition, he
dispute's without an adversary; but as I never opposed this, so I am sure it
does him little service. It is then from the Books of the Fathers that I find
what the sense of the Church of their age was, and from thence I have showed
how vastly different the opinions and practices of the Roman Church are from
those of the primitive. Although then I may not think my self obliged to
believe all that the present Church delivers for matter of faith; yet I hope I
may find what the opinions and practice of the former Church were by the
records that are left of it. And the reason why I cannot think any one obliged
to believe what every age of the Church delivers, is, because I think no man
obliged to believe contradictions; and I see the opinions and practices of
several ages apparently contrary to each other.

Well, but I call this way a superficial subtilty; 18.
and so I think it still; so little have Mr. S's. demonstations wrought upon
me. But, says he, is that which is wholly built on the nature of things
superficial? No; but that which pretends to be so built, may. And of that
nature I have showed this way to be, and not the former. But that I may not
think him superficial as well as his way, he puts a profound Question to me,
What do I think Controversy is? and that he may the better let me know what it
is, he answers himself. I deal plainly with you, says he, you may take it to
be an art of talking, and I think you do so, though you will not profess it;
but I take it to be a noble science. But to let him see that I will deal as
plainly with him, as he does with me, I will profess it, that I not only think
Controversy as usually managed, but some men's way of demonstrating (Mr. S. may
easily know whom I mean) to be a mere art of talking, and nothing else. But he
takes it to be a noble science; yes doubtless, if Mr. S. manage it, and he be
the judge of it himself. His meaning I suppose is, by his following words, p.
240.
that he goes upon certain principles, and we do not. We have already seen how
certain his principles have been, and I should be somewhat ashamed of my
Religion if I had no better. But what our rule of faith is, has been amply
discoursed already by you, and that in Mr. S's clearing method, that nothing is
left for me to do, but to touch at what remains, and concludes this answer. I
had the better to illustrate the weakness of that argument from oral tradition,
brought an instance in that case parallel, viz. that if one ages delivering to
another would prove that the faith of Christ was in every age unalterable,
because no age did testify any such alteration to be in it; by the same
argument the world might be proved eternal, because no age did ever testify to
another, that the world was ever otherwise than it is. So that if oral
tradition were only to be relied on, there could be no evidence given of the
worlds being ever otherwise than it is, and consequently the world must be
believed to have been always what we see it is. This, as far as I can
apprehend, is a clear and distinct ratiocination, and purposely designed to
prove that we must admit of other rules to judge of alterations in the Church
by, besides oral tradition. But Mr. S. (in his own expression) strangely roving
from the mark I aimed at, professes there is not a tittle in it parallel to his
medium, p. 241.
nay, that he never saw in his life more absurdities couched in fewer words.
But I must take all patiently from a man who still perches on the specifical
nature of things, and never flags below the sphere of science. Yet by his good
leave, he either apprehends not, or wilfully mistakes my meaning; for my
argument does not proceed upon the belief of the worlds eternity, which, in his
answer, he runs wholly upon as far as eighthly and lastly, p 242.
but upon the evidence of oral traditias to no discernable alteration in any
age of it. For the Question between us, is, whether in matters of alteration in
the faith or practice of the Church, we are bound to rely only on the testimony
of oral tradition; so that if no age can be instanced in wherein any alteration
was made, and this delivered by that age, then we are bound to believe there
has been no alteration since Christ and the Apostles times; now I say, if this
hold good, I will prove the world eternal by the same argument; taking this for
our principle, that we are bound to rely only on oral tradition in the case,
originally derived from the matter of fact seen by those of the first age; for
that which never was otherwise then it is, is eternal; but we cannot know by
oral tradition that the world ever was otherwise then it is; for no age of the
world can be instanced in, wherein we have any testimony of any alteration that
was in it. Either then we must believe that the world ever was what it is, i.
e. eternal; or else we must say, that we are not to rely barely on oral
tradition in this case, but we must judge whether the world were made or no, by
other mediums of Scripture and reason. And this was all which I aimed at, viz.
to show that where there is no evidence from oral tradition; yet if there be
Scripture and reason, there is sufficient ground for our faith to stand upon.
And so I apply it to the present case; though we could not prove barely from
the tradition of any one age, that there had been any alteration in the faith
or practice of the Church; yet if I can prove that there has been such from
Scripture and reason, this is sufficient for me to believe it. And now I dare
appeal to the indifferent Reader, whether this be so full of absurdities, or it
be such a rambling Chimerical argument (as he calls it), l. 243.
no two pieces of which hang together with themselves, or any thing else. Which
being expressions of as great modesty as science, I am content Mr, S. should
bear away the hoour of them and his demonstrations together.

The last thing he quarrels with me for,, 19.
is, that I say, if we can evidently prove, that there have been alterations in
the Church, then it is to no purpose to prove that impossible which we see
actually done. And this appears not only because the Scripture supposes a
degeneracy in the Christian Church, which could never be, if every age of the
Church did infallibly believe and practice as the precedent up to Christ's time
did; but because we can produce clear evidence that some things are delivered
by the present Church, which must be brought in by some age since the time of
Christ; for which I refer the Reader to what I had said about communion in one
kind, invocation of Saints, and worship of Images: In all which, I say, I had
proved evidently that they were not in use in some ages of the Christian
Church; and it is as evident that these are delivered by the present Church,
and therefore this principle must needs be false. In answer to this, Mr. S.
wishes, I would tell him first what evidence means, whether a strong fancy, or
a demonstration? I mean that which is enough to persuade a wise man, who judges
according to the clearest reason, which I am sure is more than ever his
demonstrations will do. But it is a pleasant spectacle to see how Mr. S, lays
about him, at my saying that the Scripture supposes a degeneracy in the
Christian Church. Incomparably argued! says he, why, see we not the place?
does it evidently speak of faith, or manners; the Universal Church, or
particular persons? but be it in faith, be it universal, does it suppose this
degeneracy already past, which is only proper to your purpose, or yet to come?
That is, does it say there must be a total Apostasy in faith before the year
1664? Alas, he had forgot this. Most incomparably answered! For if the
degeneracy be in 1665. or any years after, what becomes of M. S's demonstration
then, that no errors could come into the Church? but it seems his demonstration
holds but till 1664. and I easily believe another year will never believe the
truth of it. But if such a thing as a degeneracy be possible, how then stands
the infallibility of tradition, when there can be no degeneracy without falling
from the doctrine and practices of Christ and his Apostles? But that such a
degeneracy has already been in that which calls it self the Catholic Church,
and that both in faith and manners, I shall refer Mr. S to the learned Author
of the late Idea of Antichristianism and Synopsis Prophetica, where he may find
enough to persuade him that his demonstration was far from holding so long as
1664. And now I leave the Reader to judge whether the foregoing evidences
against the infallibility of oral tradition, or Mr. S's. demonstrations have
the greater force of reason in them. And if he will not stoop so far from the
height of his perch, as to take notice of what I have elsewhere said, I am
resolved to let him see I am not at all concerned about it: I begin to
understand him so well by this Appendix, that I can give my self a reasonable
account why he thought it not fit to meddle with any other part of my Book. But
if Mr. S. be resolved not to answer any of the testimonies I there produce, p.
244.
unless I single them out, and print them at the end of this Answer, (i. e.
remove them from that evidence which attends them in the series of the
discourse) I can only say, he is the most imperious answerer I have met with,
who is resolved never to deal with an adversary, but on his own unreasonable
terms. Thus heartily wishing. Mr. S's. Science as great as his opinion of it,
and a good effect of our endeavors to promote the one, by removing the other,
I am

Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant, Edward Stillingfleet.
London. June 28. 1665.
FINIS
Postscript.
SIR,
SInce the dispatch of the former Papers, I have met with another Treatise,
wherein I find my self concerned, written by the Author of Fiat Lux, the Title
whereof is Diaphanta: I am afraid the Title affrights you; for I assure you it
is the most formidable thing in his whole Book. But the man is a very modest
man, and hugely different from Mr. S's. humor; for he is so far from offering
to demonstrate the grounds of faith; that all he pretends to in the title of
his Book, is to excuse Catholic Religion against the opposition of several
Adversaries. What fault I pray has the Catholic Religion committed, that it
must now come to be excused instead of being defended? But when I look into
that part which concerns my self, I presently understand the meaning of it,
which is not to excuse Catholic Religion, but themselves for not being able to
defend it. For he very ingeniously tells us, that faith is firm and constant,
p. 210.
though all his talk for it be miserably weak: i. e. he is sure they have an
excellent Religion, though he knows not what to say for it; and their faith is
a very good faith, but it has not yet had the good fortune to be understood by
them. For he acknowledges, that as often as they dispute, they are beyond the
business, p. 209.
(so may any one believe, who reads their late Books,) which is in effect to
say, there is no way left of disputing any longer with adversaries about their
faith; only they must believe it stoutly themselves; but it is to no purpose to
offer to defend it. Nay, it does their faith a great deal of mischief; for,
says he, in reading controversies, we see not so much the nature of the faith,
as the wit of him who opposes or defends it. From whence we may easily gather
what unspeakable mischief they do their cause by writing for it. By which
expressions, we may guess at what a low ebb the defense of their faith is among
them: for the way now taken to defend it, is by disowning the defenders of it,
and by saying that they only vent their own opinions; and though we confute
them never so much, yet their faith holds good still. Was ever a good cause
driven to such miserable shifts as these are, especially among those who
pretend to wit and learning? One, he says, T. C. vents a private opinion of
his own, and it is not a pin matter whether it stand or fall; another, he says
the same of I. S. a third of J.V.C. and yet for all this, their religion is
very firm and sure, and they are all at perfect agreement about it. Is this the
victory over me, Mr. S. mentions to be so easy a thing? I see that by the same
figure M. S. calls his way of arguing demonstration, running out of the field
shall be accounted conquering. For I never saw any person do it more openly
than this Author does. For he plainly confesses, that his Catholic Gentleman
went quite besides his business, that he built upon indefensible principles,
that his theological ratiocination was indeed pretty, but too weak to hold. And
are not we hugely too blame, if we do not cry up such mighty Conquerors as
these are? Truly, Sir, I expect the very same answer should be returned to your
Book; that Mr. S's argument is a pretty theological ratiocination; and that
your answer is not unwitty: but though that way will not hold, another will.
Thus, when they are beaten off Infallibility, they run to Tradition: and when
they are again beaten off Tradition, then back again to Infallibility. So that
the short of all their answers is, though such a one cannot defend our faith,
yet I can; though I cannot, yet the faith is firm and constant still. I wonder
what their Superiors think of this way of proceeding among them; we should
imagine, if they be so weak as they say themselves, they had much better keep
them from appearing abroad, and exposing their cause so ridiculously to
contempt. But it may be, they think their faith is the better as well as their
devotion, for their ignorance: and that it would be a mighty disparagement to
their cause, for such silly people to be able to defend it. It is enough for
them to admire it themselves, and to say as their common people use to do,
though they cannot defend it, yet there are some that can. And although it may
be no particulat person can do it, yet their cause is able to defend it self,
But for all that I can see, by such kind of answers, the intention of them is,
to entreat us not to triumph over the weakness of their present Writers, but to
wait till the Cause it self thinks fit to write. And when it does so, they may
expect a further answer; but it were a great piece of cruelty for us to hasten
their ruin, who fall so fast before us by each others Pens.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the white Heart in Westminster Hall.
A Rational account of the grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord-Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference* etc., from the
pretended Answer of T.C. folio. Sermons preached upon several occasions, with a
discourse annexed concerning the true reasons of the sufferings of Christ,
wherein Crellius's Answer to Grotius is considered, fol. Irenicum: A
Weapon-Salve for the Churches wounds: in quarto. Origines Sacrae; or a Rational
Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to the Truth and Divine Authority
of the Scriptures, and matters therein contained, quarto. A Discourse
concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of
Salvation in the Communion of it, in Answer to some Papers of a revolted
Protestant, wherein a particular account is given of the Fanaticisms and
Divisions of that Church, octavo. An Answer to several late Treatises
occasioned by a Book entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced
in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the communion of it, the
first Part, octavo. A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant grounds
of Faith, against the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer
to the Guide in Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and
Reason and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular
enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church, octavo. An Answer to Mr.
Cresey's Epistle Apologetical to a person of Honor, touching his Vindication
of Dr. Stillingfleet, octavo. All written by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. Chaplain
in Ordinary to his Majesty. Knowledge and Practice: or a plain Discourse of the
chief things necessary to be known, believed and practiced in order to
Salvation: by S. Cradock, quarto; A Book very useful for Families. The Remains
of Sir Walter Rawleigh, in twelves. A Discourse of War and Peace, by Sir Robert
Cotton, in octavo. The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics, in octavo. Hodders
Arithmetic, twelves. The Triumphs of Rome over despised Protestancy, octavo.
The Original of Romances, octavo. The Advice of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of
Germany and King of Spain, to his Son Philip the Second, upon resignation of
his Crown to his said Son, twelves. Observations upon Military and Political
affairs, by the Right Honorable George Duke of Albemarle, folio, published by
Authority. A Fathers Testament: by Phineahs Fletcher, in octavo.

