OF Sincerity and Constancy IN THE Faith and Profession OF THE TRUE RELIGION,
In Several SERMONS.

By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON. Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCV.

IMPRIMATUR,

Febr. 16. 169^. Tho. Cantuar.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY, King William, THESE SERMONS ARE Most humbly Dedicated,
By the Author's Relict, Elizabeth Tillotson.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE AUTHOR of these Sermons was so well known, particularly for his most
Excellent and Useful Discourses from the Pulpit, that I shall not attempt, by
any thing I can say, to recommend them to the Public. I know very well, they
have already that Credit in the World, which will render any Apology needless;
especially when by this Publication of them, they shall speak for themselves.

I think it requisite, only to assure the Reader, That they are what they
pretend to be, the genuine Works of that great Man.

Whilst I had the Happiness of Conversing with him, he was pleased (at my
Request) to instruct me in the Character in which he wrote all his Sermons; and
some of these now Published, having been Transcribed by me some Years since,
were found amongst his Papers, Corrected with his own Hand.

By what he had been pleased to say, that I was Master of his Character, and by
the few Errata he observed in my first Performance, I was encouraged to set
about this Work; in which I can Solemnly Profess, that I have observed a
Religious care and strictness, neither to omit nor add any thing, but an of, a
the, or the like, when the Sense plainly required it; and of that too I have
given notice, by affixing this Mark [``] upon the Word which I did not find in
the Original; so that the Reader is left to judge of the fitness of such
Additions; which, after all, are so very few and inconsiderable, as scarcely to
deserve this notice; only that he might be satisfied (in case the Printer do
his part) that he has here, what he expects, a perfect Transcript of these
Sermons; and in them a true and lively strain of Christian Piety and Eloquence,
so fitted to all Capacities, that I cannot but hope, all that shall read them
will be the better for them, even those not excepted (if there be any such) who
may have entertained any unreasonable Prejudices against them, or their most
Reverend Author.

I have always thought, and often said it, that if any were Leavened with
Prejudice against Him, they were, to be sure, such as did not know him; and the
farther I go in his Writings, the more I am assured, that it must be so. But
because the Sermons themselves, to which I refer, are not yet all of them
Published, I must leave this to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader, when the
whole shall be finished, which is designed with all convenient speed.

Lambeth, April 2. 1695. Ra. Barker.

THE TEXTS OF EACH SERMON IN THIS VOLUME.
SERMON I. JOHN I. 47. JEsus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him,
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. Page 1 SERMON. II. HEB. XI. 17,
18, 19. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten son; Of whom it was said,
That in Isaac shall thy seed be called: Accounting that God was able to raise
him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. p. 39
SERMON. III. HEB. XI. 24, 25. By faith Moses when he was come to years, refused
to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; Choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. p. 77 SERMON. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. X. HEB. X. 23. Let us hold fast the
Profession of our faith without wavering; for he is faithful that has
promised. p. 109 136, 171, 209, 239, 277.
There is a mistake in Numbering of these Sermons: The Tenth should be called
the Ninth, and so on to the end. For there are but Fifteen Sermons in this
Volume, and should be no more.

SERMON. XI. 2 COR. V. 7. For we walk by Faith, not by Sight. p. 309 SERMON. XII.
HEB. X. 38. But if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. p.
337 SERMON. XIII. XIV. MATTHEW. XVI. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples; If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
me. p. 367, 395 SERMON. XV. XVI. HEB. XI. 13. And confessed that they were
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth. p. 421, 449
A SERMON Preached at KINGSTON, July 29. 1694. The last his GRACE Preached.
JOHN I. 47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him, Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.
WHO this Nathanael was, upon whom our Savior bestows this extraordinary
Character, does not certainly appear, his Name being but once more mentioned in
the whole History of the Gospel: For certain, he was a good Man, who deserved
this extraordinary Commendation; and none but our Savior, who knew what was in
Man, and needed not that any should tell him, could have given it, especially
of one, whom he had never seen before that time; for when Jesus saw him coming
to him, he says of him Behold an Israelite indeed.

The whole Nation of the Jews were Israelites, by Natural Descent, being the
Seed of Jacob, or Israel; but in a special, and more excellent sense, none are
esteemed the true Posterity of Israel, but those, who resembled this Father of
their Nation, in true Piety, and Goodness; for (as the Apostle reasons) they
are not all Israel, who are of Israel; they only are Israelites indeed, who
resemble good Old Jacob, in the sincerity of his Piety, and the simplicity of
his Temper, and Disposition; for our Savior seems here to allude to that
Character which is given of Jacob (Genesis 25. 27.) That he was a plain Man, or as
the Hebrew word signifies, a perfect and sincere Man, in opposition to his
Brother Esau, who is said to be cunning; so that to be an Israelite indeed, is
to be a downright honest Man, without fraud, and guile, without any arts of
hypocrisy and deceit.

In speaking of this virtue of Sincerity, which is the highest Character and
Commendation of a good Man, I shall consider it, as it respects God, and Man.
As it respects God, so it imports the truth and sincerity of our Piety and
Devotion toward him. As it regards Men, so it signifies a simplicity of Mind
and Manners, in our Carriage and Conversation, one toward another; both these
are included, and very probably were intended, in the Character which our
Savior here gives of Nathanael.

I. I shall consider this Grace, or Virtue what he appeared to be; that he did
sincerely love God, and his Truth, and was ready to embrace it, whenever it was
fairly proposed to him, as did plainly appear in his Carriage toward our
Savior; for when Philip invited him to come and see him, he did not conceal
the prejudice and objection he had against him, grounded upon a common, but
uncharitable Proverb, That out of Nazareth arises no Prophet, but having an
honest and sincere mind, he was not so carried away by a popular prejudice, as
not to have patience to be better informed, and therefore was easily persuaded
to go and see our Savior, and to discourse with him himself, and being
satisfied that he was the Messiah, he presently owns him for such, calling him
the Son of God, and the King of Israel; and because sincerity is the very heart
and substance of Religion, it concerns us not only to endeavor after this
temper and disposition, but to enquire into the nature and properties of it,
that we may know when we have it, and may have the comfort of it. I shall
mention five or six Properties of a sincere Piety, by which Men may
sufficiently know the integrity of their hearts toward God.

1. Our Piety is then sincere when the chief reasons and predominant motives of
it are Religious; and I call that a Religious or rational motive, which regards
God, and another World, in opposition to Men, and to our present temporal
Advantages; when the principal and swaying motives of our Piety, are a sense of
God's Authority over us, and of our Duty and Obligation to him; a fear of his
Displeasure and Threatenings, and the hopes of the Glorious Reward which he has
promised to Obedience; these motives are properly Religious, because they
respect God, and are the Arguments to Obedience, which he himself offers to us,
to persuade us to our Duty; and that is a sincere Piety, which is wrought in us
by these Considerations, how unequally soever mixed; for even in the most of
Men Fear does many times prevail more than Love, and in case of great
temptation, may preserve Men from sin, when perhaps no other consideration will
do it. On the contrary, that is an unsincere Piety, to which we are moved,
merely by the regard of Men, and the consideration of some temporal Advantages;
and when these have the chief influence upon us, it is easy for any Man to
discern in himself; for he that will carefully observe himself, can hardly be
ignorant of the true spring and motive of his own actions; but there is one
sign, whereby a Man may certainly know that his heart is not right toward God,
and that is, if when these motives are absent, our Piety and Zeal for the true
Religion does either cease, or be sensibly cooled and abated, as if Impiety, or
Popery, or any thing else that is bad, begin to be in fashion, and to have the
Countenance of great Examples; if those whom we fear, and upon whom we depend,
do discover any inclination that way, if the garb of Religion cease to be for
our interest, or in the revolution of things, happen to be contrary to it; if
in any of these cases, we let fall the profession of our Religion, or neglect
the practice of it, this is a plain, and undeniable demonstration of the
insincerity of our former Piety.

2. A sincere Piety must be rooted in the heart, and be a living principle
within us; for as the Apostle reasons in another case, he is not a Jew who is
one outwardly, but he who is one inwardly, and in the heart; and without this
all outward acts of Piety and Devotion, are hypocrisy, a picture of Religion
and a form of Godliness, without the life and power of it.

3. A Third Evidence of a sincere Piety is, when Men are Religious in private
and in secret, as well as in public and in the open view of Men; he is truly
devout, who is so in his Family, and in his Closet, where he has no Witness,
but God, and his own Soul, as well as in the Church; he is a downright honest
Man, who will make good his Word, and perform his Promise (when no proof can be
made of it, and no Law compel him to it) as readily as if there had been an
hundred Witnesses of it; he is sincerely just, who will not detain from another
his right, though he be ignorant of it, nor wrong any Man, though he could do it
with all the secrecy and safety in the World; who will not impose upon
another ignorance or unskilfulness, tho never so much to his own benefit and
advantage; he is truly Charitable, who would not only as soon, but rather
sooner give his Alms in secret, than in the sight of Men; and he is truly
grateful, who when there is occasion and opportunity, will acknowledge a
kindness and requite a benefit to the Relations of his Deceased Friend, though
he be sure that all memory of the Obligation dyed with him, and that none are
conscious to it, but God and his own Conscience: And indeed there is scarce any
act of Piety, and Virtue, the sincerity of which may not by this evidence be
known to us: As on the contrary a Man may for certain conclude himself a
Hypocrite, if he be not the same, in the presence of God, and his own
Conscience that he is in the sight of Men.

4. Another Evidence of a sincere Piety is a constant tenor of goodness in the
general course of our Lives: I do not now speak of the first beginnings of
Piety, in new Converts, which are many times very imperfect, and such as afford
little or no evidence of a Man's sincerity; but in those who have made any
considerable progress in goodness; the habits of any known sin, and the wilful
and deliberate neglect of our Duties, and even the single acts of more heinous
Crimes, will bring in question our sincerity, and are by no means to be
sheltred under the name of infirmity; for these the Grace of God, if we be not
wanting to our selves, will enable us to subdue; and he is not sincerely good,
who does not seriously endeavor to be as good as he can, and does not make use
of that Grace which God is ready to afford to all the purposes, (though not of
a perfect, yet) of a sincere obedience to the Laws of God.

5. Another Evidence of a sincere Piety is, that our obedience to God be
uniform and universal, equally respecting all the Laws of God, and every part
of our Duty; that it do not content it self with an especial regard to some
Precepts of the Law, though never so considerable, and allow it self in the
breach, or neglect of the rest; no nor with observing the Duties of one Table
of the Law, if it overlook the other, no nor with obedience to all the
Commandments of God, one only excepted. St. James puts this case, and
determines, That he that keeps the whole Law, saving that he offends in one
point, is guilty of all, that is, is not sincere in his obedience to the rest;
and therefore we must take great heed, that we do not set the Commandments of
God at odds, and dash the two Tables of the Law, against one another, lest as
St. James says, we break the whole Law: And yet I fear this is too common a
fault, even amongst those who make a great profession of Piety, that they are
not sufficiently sensible of the obligation and necessity of the Duties of the
second Table, and of the excellency of those Graces, and Virtues, which respect
our Carriage and Conversation with one another: Men do not seem to consider,
that God did not give Laws to us, for his own sake, but ours; and therefore
that he did not only design that we should Honor him, but that we should be
happy in one another; for which reason, he joins with our humble and dutiful
Deportment toward himself, the Offices of Justice and Charity toward others,
Mich. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God? And 1 John 4. 21. This Commandment have we from him, that he who
loves God, love his Brother also. And yet it is too visible that many, who
make a great profession of Piety toward God, are very defective in Moral
Duties; very unpeaceable, and turbulent in their Spirits, very peevish and
passionate, very conceited and censorious, as if their profession of Godliness
did exempt them from the care and practice of Christian Virtues: But we must
not so fix our eye upon Heaven, as to forget that we walk upon the Earth, and
to neglect the ordering of our steps and Conversation among Men, lest while we
are gazing upon the Stars, we fall into the Ditch of gross and foul Immorality.

It is very possible, that Men may be devout and zealous in Religion, very
nice, and scrupulous about the Worship and Service of God, and yet because of
their palpable defect in points of Justice and Honesty, of Meekness and
Humility, of Peace and Charity, may be gross and odious Hypocrites; for Men
must not think for some acts, either of outward or inward Piety, to compound
with God for the neglect of Mercy and Judgment, or to demand it as a right from
Men to be excused from the great Duties and Virtues of Humane Conversation; or
pretend to be above them, because they relate chiefly to this World, and to the
temporal happiness of Men; as if it were the privilege of great Devotion, to
give a license to Men to be peevish and froward, sower and morose, supercilious
and censorious in their behavior toward others: Men must have a great care,
that they be not intent upon the outward parts of Religion, to the prejudice of
inward and real goodness, and that they do not so use the means of Religion, as
to neglect and lose the main end of it; that they do not place all Religion in
Fasting and outward Mortification; for though these things be very useful and
necessary in their place, if they be discreetly managed, and made subservient
to the great ends of Religion; yet it is often seen that Men have so unequal a
respect to the several parts of their Duty, that Fasting and Corporal severity,
those meager and lean Duties of Piety, in comparison, do like Pharaoh's lean
kine, devour and eat up almost all the goodly and well-favoured, the great and
substantial Duties of the Christian Life; and therefore Men must take great
heed, lest whilst they are so intent upon mortifying themselves, they do not
mortify Virtue and good Nature, Humility and Meekness and Charity, things
highly valuable in themselves and amiable in the eyes of Men, and in the sight
of God of great price.

For the neglect of the Moral Duties of the second Table is not only a mighty
scandal to Religion, but of pernicious consequence many other ways: A fierce
and ill governed, an ignorant and injudicious Zeal for the Honor of God, and
something or other belonging necessarily, as they think, to his true Worship
and Service, has made many Men do many unreasonable, immoral and impious
things, of which History will furnish us with innumerable instances, in the
practice of the Jesuits, and other Zealots of the Church of Rome; and there are
not wanting too many examples of this kind amongst our selves; for Men that are
not sober, and considerate in their Religion, but give themselves up to the
conduct of blind prejudice, and furious zeal, do easily persuade themselves,
that any thing is lawful, which they strongly fancy to tend to the Honor of
God, and to the advancement of the cause of Religion; hence some have proceeded
to that height of absurdity, in their Zeal for their Religion and Church, as to
think it not only lawful, but highly commendable and meritorious, to equivocate
upon Oath, and break Faith with Heretics, and to destroy all those that differ
from them; as if it were Piety in some cases, to lie for the Truth, and to kill
Men for God's sake.

So that if we would approve the integrity of our hearts to God, and evidence
to our selves the sincerity of our Obedience, we ought impartially to regard
all the Laws of God, and every part of our Duty; and if we do not, our heart is
not upright with God: It Is observable that sincerity in Scripture is often
called by the name of Integrity, and Perfection, because it is integrated, and
made up of all the parts of our Duty.

6. The last evidence I shall mention of the sincerity of our Religion is, if
it hold out against persecution, and endure the fiery trial; this is the utmost
proof of our integrity, when we are called to bear the Cross, to be willing
then to expose all our worldly interest, and even life it self, for the Cause
of God, and Religion; this is a trial which God does not always call his
faithful Servants to, but they are always to be prepared for it, in the purpose
and resolution of their minds; this our Savior makes the great mark of a true
Disciple, if any man (says he) will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross, and follow me; this is a certain sign, that Men have
received the word into good ground, and are well rooted in their Religion, when
they are not shaken by these fierce assaults; for many (as our Savior tells
us) hear the word, and with joy receive it, but having not root in themselves,
they endure but for a while, and when persecution, or tribulation arises,
because of the word, presently they are offended; nay, some when they see
persecution coming at a distance, wheel off, and bethink themselves of making
their retreat in time, and of agreeing with their adversary whilst he is yet in
the way.

So that constancy to our Religion in case of danger, and suffering for it, is
the best proof of our sincerity: This is the fiery trial, as the Scripture
calls it, which will try what materials we are made of, and whether we love God
and his truth in sincerity.

And thus I have considered sincerity as it respects God, and imports true
Piety and Religion toward him; and I proceed to the second consideration

II. Of sincerity as it regards Men, and so it signifies a simplicity of mind
and manners in our conversation, and carriage one toward another, singleness
of Heart, discovering it self in a constant plainness and honest openness of
behavior, free from all insidious devises, and little tricks, and fetches of
Craft and Cunning; from all false appearances and deceitful disguises of our
selves in word or action; or yet more plainly, it is to speak as we think, and
do what we pretend and profess, to perform and make good what we promise, and
in a word, really to be, what we would seem and appear to be.

Not that we are obliged to tell every Man all our mind, but we are never to
declare any thing contrary to it; we may be silent, and conceal as much of our
selves, as prudence, or any other good reason requires; but we must not put on
a disguise, and make a false appearance and empty show of what we are not,
either by word or action. Contrary to this Virtue is (I fear) most of that
compliment, which is current in conversation, and which for the most part is
nothing but words, to fill up the Gaps, and supply the emptiness of Discourse,
and a pretense to that kindness and esteem for persons, which either in truth
we have not, or not to that degree which our expressions seem to import, which
if done with design, is that which we call Flattery, a very odious sort of
Insincerity; and so much the worse, because it abuses Men into a vain, and
foolish opinion of themselves, and an ill grounded confidence of the kindness
and good will of others toward them; and so much the more dangerous, because
it has a party within us, which is ready to let it in; it plays upon our
self-love, which greedily catches at any thing that tends to magnify and
advance us; for God knows, we are all too apt to think and make the best of our
bad selves, so that very few Tempers have Wisdom and firmness enough to be
proof against Flattery; it requires great Consideration, and a resolute Modesty
and Humility to resist the Insinuations of this Serpent; yea, a little rudeness
and moroseness of Nature, a prudent distrust and infidelity in Mankind to make
a Man in good earnest to reject and despise it.

Now besides that all Hypocrisy and Insincerity is mean in it self, having
falsehood at the bottom, it is also often made use of, to the prejudice of
others, in their Rights and Interests; for not only Dissimulation is contrary
to Sincerity, because it consists in a vain show of what we are not, in a false
muster of our Virtues and good Qualities, in a deceitful representation and
undue Character of our Lives; but there are likewise other Qualities and
Actions more inconsistent with Integrity, which are of a more injurious and
mischievous consequence to our nature, as falsehood, and fraud, and
perfidiousness, and infinite little Crafts and arts of deceit, which Men
practice upon one another in their ordinary conversation and intercourse; the
former is great vanity, but this is gross iniquity.

And yet these Qualities dexterously managed, so as not to lie too plain and
open to discovery, are looked upon by many, as signs of great depth and
shrewdness, admirable instruments of business, and necessary means for the
compassing our own ends and designs; and though in those that have suffered by
them, and felt the mischief of them, they are always accounted dishonest, yet
among the generality of lookers on, they pass for great policy, as if the very
skill of governing and managing humane affairs, did consist in these little
tricks and devices: But he that looks more narrowly into them, and will but
have the patience to observe the end of them, will find them to be great
follies, and that it is only for want of true wisdom and understanding, that
Men turn aside to tricks, and make dissimulation and lies their refuge. It is
Solomon's Observation, That he that walks uprightly walks surely, but the
folly of Fools is deceit: The folly of Fools, that is, the most egregious piece
of folly that any Man can be guilty of, is to play the Knave; the vulgar
Translation renders this clause a little otherwise, but yet toward the same
sense, Sed stultus divertit ad dolos, but the Fool turns aside to tricks; to
make use of these is a sign the Man wants understanding to see the plain and
direct way to his end: I will not deny but these little Arts may serve a
present turn, and perhaps successfully enough, but true Wisdom goes deep, and
reaches a great way further, looking to the end of things and regarding the
future as well as the present, and by judging upon the whole matter and sum of
affairs, does clearly discern, that Craft and Cunning are only useful for the
present occasion, whereas Integrity is of a lasting use, and will be
serviceable to us upon all occasions, and in the whole course of our Lives; and
that Dissimulation and Deceit, though they may do some present execution in
business, yet they recoil upon a Man terribly afterward, so as to make him
stagger, and by degrees to weaken, and at last to destroy his Reputation, which
is a much more useful and substantial and lasting instrument of prosperity and
success in humane affairs than any tricks and devices whatsoever. Thus have I
considered this great virtue of Sincerity, both as it regards God, and the
mutual conversation and intercourse of Men one with another.

And now having explained the nature of Sincerity to God and Man, by declaring
the properties of it, and in what instances we ought chiefly to practice it,
and what things are contrary to it; that which now remains, is to persuade Men
to endeavor after this excellent quality, (...) to practice it in all the
words and (...) of their Lives.

Let us then in the first place be sincere in our Religion, and serve God in
truth and uprightness of heart out of Conscience of our Duty and Obligations to
him, and not with sinister respects to our private interest or passion, to the
public approbation or censure of Men; let us never make use of Religion to
serve any base and unworthy ends, cloaking our designs of Covetousness, or
Ambition, or Revenge, with pretenses of Conscience and Zeal for God; and let us
endeavor after the reality of Religion, always remembering that a sincere Piety
does not consist in show, but substance, not in appearance, but in effect; that
the Spirit of true Religion is still and calm, charitable and peaceable, making
as little show and stir as is possible; that a truly and sincerely good Man
does not affect vain Ostentation, and an unseasonable discovery of his good
Qualities, but endeavors rather really to be, than to seem Religious; and of
the two rather seeks to conceal his Piety than to set it out with pomp; gives
his Alms privately, prays to God in secret, and makes no appearance of Religion
but in such fruits and effects as cannot be hid; in the quiet and silent
virtues of Humility, and Meekness, and Patience, of Peace and Charity; in
governing his Passions, and taking heed not to offend with his Tongue by
slander and calumny, by envious detraction, or rash censure, or by any word or
action that may be to the hurt and prejudice of his Neighbor: But on the
contrary, it is a very ill sign if a Man affect to make a great noise and
bustle about Religion, if he blow a Trumpet before his good Works, and by
extraordinary shows of Devotion summon the Eyes of Men to behold him, and do,
as it were, call aloud to them to take notice of his Piety, and to come to see
his zeal for the Lord of Hosts: It is not impossible but such a Man with all
his vanity and ostentation may have some real goodness in him; but he is as the
Hypocrites are, and does as like one as is possible; and by the mighty show
that he makes to wise and considerate Men, greatly brings in question the
sincerity of his Religion.

And with the sincerity of our Piety toward God, let us join the simplicity
and integrity of Manners in our Conversation with Men; let us strictly charge
our selves to use truth and plainness in all our words and doings; let our
Tongue be ever the true Interpreter of our Mind, and our Expressions the lively
Image of our Thoughts and Affections, and our outward actions exactly agreeable
to our inward purposes and intentions.

Amongst too many other Instances of the great corruption and degeneracy of the
Age wherein we live, the great and general want of sincerity in Conversation is
none of the least; the World is grown so full of Dissimulation and Complement,
that Men's words are hardly any signification of their thoughts; and if any Man
measure his words by his heart, and speak as he thinks, and do not express more
kindness to every man than men usually have for any man, he can hardly escape
the censure of rudeness and want of breeding: The old English plainness and
sincerity, that generous integrity of Nature and honesty of Disposition which
always argues true greatness of mind, and is usually accompanied with undaunted
courage and resolution, is in a great measure lost amongst us; there has been
a long endeavor to transform us into foreign Manners and Fashions, and to
bring us to a servile imitation of none of the best of our Neighbors in some
of the worst of their Qualities: The Dialect of Conversation is now adays so
swelled with Vanity and Complement, and so surfeited (as I may say) of
expressions of kindness and respect, that if a man that lived an Age or two ago
should return into the World again, he would really want a Dictionary to help
him to understand his own Language, and to know the true intrinsic value of
the phrase in fashion, and would hardly at first believe at what a low rate the
highest strains and expressions of kindness imaginable do commonly pass in
current payment; and when he should come to understand it, it would be a great
while before he could bring himself, with a good Countenance and a good
Conscience to converse with Men upon equal terms and in their own way.

And in truth it is hard to say whether it should more provoke our contempt or
our pity to hear what solemn expressions of respect and kindness will pass
between men, almost upon no occasion; how great honor and esteem they will
declare for one whom perhaps they never heard of or saw before, and how
entirely they are all on the sudden devoted to his service and interest for no
reason; how infinitely and eternally obliged to him for no benefit, and how
extremely they will be concerned for him, yea, and afflicted too for no cause.
I know it is said in justification of this hollow kind of Conversation, that
there is no harm, no real deceit in Complement, but the matter is well enough
so long as we understand one another, Et verba valent ut Nummi, Words are like
Money, and when the current value of them is generally understood, no Man is
cheated by them; this is something if such words were any thing, but being
brought into the Account they are mere Ciphers. However it is still a just
matter of complaint, that sincerity and plainness are out of fashion, and that
our Language is running into a Lie; that Men have almost quite perverted the
use of Speech, and made words to signify nothing; that the greatest part of
the Conversation of Mankind, and of their intercourse with one another, is
little else but driving a Trade of Dissimulation, insomuch that it would make a
Man heartily sick and weary of the World, to see the little sincerity that is
in use and practice among Men, and tempt him to break out into that melancholy
Complaint and Wish of the Prophet (Jer. 9.) O that I had in the Wilderness a
lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people and go from them;
for they are all Adulterers, and an assembly of treacherous Men; and they bend
their tongue like their bow for lies, but have no courage for the truth upon
earth. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any
Brother; for every Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will walk
with slanders. Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; one speaks
peaceably to his Neighbor, but in his heart he lies in wait: Shall not I
visit for these things, says the Lord; and shall not my Soul be avenged of
such a Nation as this?

Such were the Manners of the people of Israel at that time, which were both
the forerunner and the cause of those terrible Calamities which befell them
afterward; and this Character agrees but too well to the present Age, which is
so wretchedly void of Truth and Sincerity, for which reason there is the
greater need to recommend this Virtue to us, which seems to be fled from us,
that truth and righteousness may return, and glory may dwell in our land, and
God may show his mercy upon us and grant us his Salvation, and Righteousness
and Peace may kiss each other. To this end give me leave to offer these
following Considerations.

First, That Sincerity is the highest commendation and the very best Character,
that can be given of any man; it is the solid foundation of all Virtue, the
Heart and Soul of all Piety and Goodness; it is in Scripture called perfection,
and frequently joined with it; and throughout the Bible, there is the greatest
stress and weight laid upon it; it is spoken of as the sum and comprehension of
all Religion: Only fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity and truth, says
Joshua to the people of Israel, (Jos. 24. 14.) God takes great pleasure in it;
so David assures us, (1 Chronicles. 29. 17.) I know my God that thou tryest the
Heart, and have pleasure in uprightness: And again, Thou love truth in the
inward parts.

To this disposition of mind the promises of divine favor and blessing are
particularly made, Psalm. 15. 1, 2. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who
shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth from his Heart. Psalm. 32. 2. Blessed is
the Man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose Spirit there is no
guil.

And it is observable that this Character of our Savior here given of
Nathaniel, is the only full and perfect commendation that we read was ever
given by him of any particular person. He commends some particular acts of
Piety and Virtue in others, as St. Peter's confession of him, the Faith of the
Centurion, and of the Woman that was healed by touching the Hem of his Garment,
the Charity of the Woman that cast her two Mites into the Treasury, and the
Bounty of that other devout Woman who poured upon him a Box of precious
Ointment: But here he gives the particular Character of a good Man when he says
of Nathaniel that he was an Israelite indeed, in whom was no Guil: And the
Apostle mentions this quality, as the chief ingredient into the Character of
the best Man that ever was, our blessed Savior, who did no Sin, neither was
Guil found in his mouth.

Secondly, The rarity of this Virtue is a farther commendation of it. A
sincerely pious and good Man, without any guil or disguise is not a sight to be
seen every day: Our Savior in the Text, speaks of it, as a thing very
extraordinary and of special remark and observation, and breaks out into some
kind of wonder upon the occasion, as if to see a Man of perfect integrity and
simplicity were an occurrence very rare and unusual, and such as calls for our
more especial attention and regard, Behold (says he) an Israelite indeed in
whom there is no Guil.

Thirdly, The want of Sincerity will quite spoil the virtue and acceptance of
all our Piety and Obedience, and certainly deprive us of the reward of it: All
that we do in the service of God, all our external obedience to his Laws, if
not animated by Sincerity, is like a Sacrifice without a Heart, which is an
abomination to the Lord.

Fourthly, Hypocrisy and Insincerity is a very vain and foolish thing; it is
designed to cheat others, but is in truth a deceiving of our selves: No Man
would flatter or dissemble, did he believe he were seen and discovered; an open
Knave is a great Fool, who destroys at once both his design and his Reputation;
and this is the case of every Hypocrite; all the disagreement which is between
his Tongue and his Thoughts, his Actions and his Heart, is open to that Eye,
from which nothing can be hid; for the ways of Man are before the Eyes of the
Lord, and he sees all his goings; there is no darkness nor shadow of Death
where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves.

Fifthly, Truth and Reality have all the advantages of appearance, and many
more; if the show of any thing be good for any thing, I am sure Sincerity is
better; for why does any man dissemble, or seem to be that which he is not, but
because he thinks it good to have such a quality as he pretends to? for to
counterfeit and dissemble, is to put on the appearance of some real excellency:
Now the best way in the world for a man to seem to be any thing, is really to
be what he would seem to be: Besides, that it is many times as troublesome to
make good the pretense of a good quality, as to have it; and if a man have it
not, it is ten to one, but he is discovered to want it, and then all his pains
and labor to seem to have it is lost. There is something unnatural in
Painting, which a skilful Eye will easily discern from native Beauty and
Complexion.

It is hard to personate and act a part long; for where truth is not at the
bottom, nature will always be endeavourring to return, and will peep out and
betray herself one time or other; therefore if any man think it convenient to
seem Good, let him be so indeed, and then his Goodness will appear to every
body's satisfaction; for Truth is convincing and carries it is own light and
evidence along with it, and will not only commend us to every Man's Conscience,
but, which is much more, to God, who searches and sees our Hearts; so that
upon all accounts Sincerity is true Wisdom: Particularly as to the affairs of
this World Integrity has many advantages over all the fine and artificial ways
of Dissimulation and Deceit; it is much the plainer and easier, much the safer
and more secure way of dealing in the world; it has less of trouble and
difficulty, of entanglement and perplexity, of danger and hazard in it; it is
the shortest and nearest way to our end, carrying us thither in a straight
line, and will hold out and last longest. The Arts of Deceit and Cunning do
continually grow weaker and less effectual and serviceable to them that use
them, whereas Integrity gains strength by use, and the more and longer any Man
practices it, the greater service it does him, by confirming his Reputation,
and encouraging those with whom he has to do, to repose the greater Trust and
Confidence in him, which is an unspeakable advantage in the business and
affairs of life.

But a Dissembler must always be upon his guard and watch himself carefully,
that he does not contradict his own pretense, for he acts an unnatural part,
and therefore must put a continual force and restraint upon himself. Truth
always lies uppermost, and if a Man do not carefully attend, he will be apt to
bolt it out: Whereas he that acts sincerely, has the easiest task in the
world, because he follows Nature, and so is put to no trouble and care about
his words and actions; he needs not invent any pretenses beforehand, nor make
excuses afterward for any thing he has said or done.

But Insincerity is very troublesome to manage; a Man has so many things to
attend to, so many ends to bring together, as make his life a very perplexed and
intricate thing: Oportet mendacem esse memorem, A liar had need have a good
memory, lest he contradict at one time what he said at another; but Truth is
always consistent with it self, and needs nothing to help it out; it is always
near at hand, and sits upon our Lips, and is ready to drop out before we are
aware, whereas a Lie is troublesome and sets a Man's invention upon the Rack,
and one trick needs a great many more to make it good: It is like building upon
a false Foundation, which continually stands in need of props to shore it up,
and proves at last more chargable, than to have raised a substantial Building
at first upon a true and solid Foundation; for Sincerity is firm and
substantial, and there is nothing hollow and unsound in it, and because it is
plain and open, fears no discovery, of which the Crafty Man is always in
danger, and when he thinks he walks in the dark, all his pretenses are so
transparent, that he that runs may read them; he is the last Man that finds
himself to be found out, and whilst he takes it for granted that he makes Fools
of others, he renders himself ridiculous.

Add to all this, that Sincerity is the most compendious Wisdom, and an
excellent instrument for the speedy dispatch of Business; it creates confidence
in those we have to deal with, saves the labor of many enquiries, and brings
things to an issue in few words: It is like traveling in a plain beaten Road,
which commonly brings a Man sooner to his Journeys end, than By-ways in which
Men often lose themselves. In a word, whatsoever convenience may be thought to
be in falsehood and dissimulation, it is soon over; but the inconvenience of it
is perpetual, because it brings a Man under an everlasting jealousy and
suspicion, so that he is not believed when he speaks truth, nor trusted when
perhaps he means honestly: When a Man has once forfeited the reputation of his
Integrity, he is set fast, and nothing will then serve his turn, neither Truth
nor Falsehood.

And I have often thought, that God has in great Wisdom hid from Men of false
and dishonest minds the wonderful advantages of Truth and Integrity to the
prosperity even of our worldly Affairs; these Men are so blinded by their
Covetousness and Ambition, that they cannot look beyond a present advantage,
nor forbear to seize upon it, tho by ways never so indirect: They cannot see so
far, as to the remote Consequences of a steady Integrity, and the vast benefit
and advantages which it will bring a Man at last. Were but this sort of Men
wise and clearsighted enough to discern this, they would be honest, out of very
Knavery, not out of any love to Honesty and Virtue, but with a crafty design to
promote and advance more effectually their own Interests; and therefore the
Justice of the Divine Providence has hid this truest point of Wisdom from
their Eyes, that bad men might not be upon equal Terms with the Just and
Upright, and serve their own wicked Designs by honest and lawful means.

Indeed, if a man were only to deal in the world for a day, and should never
have occasion to converse more with Mankind, never more need their good
opinion, or good Word, it were then no great matter (speaking as to the
concernments of this world) if a man spent his Reputation all at once, and
ventured it at one throw; but if he be to continue in the world, and would have
the advantage of Conversation whilst he is in it, let him make use of Truth and
Sincerity in all his Words and Actions, for nothing but this will last and hold
out to the end; all other Arts will fail, but Truth and Integrity will carry a
man through, and bear him out to the last.

It Is the Observation of Solomon (Prove. 12. 19.) The lip of Truth is
established, for ever, but a lying Tongue is but for a moment. And the wiser
any man is, the more clearly will he discern, how serviceable Sincerity is to
all the great ends and purposes of humane life; and that man has made a good
progress, and profited much in the School of Wisdom, who valueth Truth and
Sincerity according to their worth: Every man will readily grant them to be
great Virtues and Arguments of a generous mind; but that there is so much of
true Wisdom in them, and that they really serve to profit our interest in this
World seems a great Paradox to the generality of Men, and yet I doubt not but
it is undoubtedly true, and generally found to be so, in the experience of
Mankind.

Lastly, Consider that it is not worth our while to dissemble, considering the
shortness and especially the uncertainty of our Lives. To what purpose should
we be so cunning, when our abode in this world is so short and uncertain? Why
should any man by dissembling his Judgment, or acting contrary to it, incur at
once the displeasure of God, and the discontent of his own mind? Especially if
we consider, that all our Dissimulation shall one day be made manifest and
published on the open Theater of the World, before God Angels and Men, to our
everlasting Shame and Confusion; all Disguise and Vizards shall then be plucked
off, and every man shall appear in his true Colors. For then the Secrets of
Men shall be judged, and God will bring every Work into Judgment, and every
secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Nothing is now
covered, which shall not then be revealed, nor hid which shall not then be
known.

Let us then be now what we would (...) glad to be found in that day, when all
pretenses shall be examined, and the closest Hypocrisy of Men shall be laid
open and dashed out of Countenance; when the Secrets of all Hearts shall be
disclosed, and all the hidden Works of Darkness shall be revealed, and all our
Thoughts, Words and Actions shall be brought to a strict and severe Trial, and
be censured by that impartial and infallible Judgment of God, which is
according to Truth: In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, by
Jesus Christ, To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory now and for
ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL MDCLXXXVI. Before the Princess ANN.
HEB. XI. 17, 18, 19. By Faith Abraham when he was Tried offered up Isaac: And
he that had received the Promises offered up his only begotton Son; Of whom it
was said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called: Accounting that God was able
to raise him up, even from the Dead; From whence also he received him in a
Figure.
THE design of this Epistle to the Hebrews, is to recommend to them the
Christian Religion, to which they were but newly Converted, and to encourage
them to Constancy in the profession of it, notwithstanding the Sufferings which
attended it. He sets before them in this Chapter several examples in the Old
Testament of those, (who tho? they were under a much more imperfect
dispensation) yet by a steadfast belief in God and his promises, had performed
such wonderful acts of Obedience and Self-denial.

He begins with the Patriarchs before the Flood, but insists chiefly upon the
examples of two eminent Persons of their own Nation, as nearest to them, and
most likely to prevail upon them, the Examples of Abraham and Moses, the one
the Father of their Nation, the other their great Lawgiver, and both of them
the greatest Patterns of Faith, and Obedience, and Self-denial, that the
History of all former Ages, from the beginning of the World, had afforded.

I shall at this time, by God's assistance, treat of the first of these, the
Example of Abraham, the Constancy of whose Faith, and the cheerfulness of whose
Obedience, even in the difficultest Cases, is so remarkable above all the other
Examples mentioned in this Chapter. For at the Command of God, he left his
Kindred and his Country, not knowing whither he should go.

By which eminent Act of Obedience, he declared himself to be wholly at God's
Disposal, and ready to follow him: But this was no trial in comparison of that
here in my Text, when God commanded him to offer up his only Son.

But such was the immutable stedfastness of his Faith, and the perfect
submission of his Obedience, that it does not appear that he made the least
check at it; but out of perfect Reverence and Obedience to the Authority of the
divine Command, he went about it as readily and cheerfully, as if God had bid
him do some small thing: By Faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac.

For the explication of which Words, it will be requisite to consider two
things.

First, The Trial or Temptation in general.

Secondly, The Excellency of Abraham's Faith and Obedience upon this Trial.

First, The Trial or Temptation in general: It is said that Abraham when he was
tried, the word is (...), being Tempted: That is, God intending to make Trial
of his Faith and Obedience; and so it is expressed Genesis 22. 1. Where it is said,
that God did Tempt Abraham, and said unto him, take now thy Son, thine only Son.

Now there are two difficulties concerning this matter: It seems contrary to
Scripture, that God should Tempt any Man; and contrary to Reason, because God
who knows what every Man will do, needed not to make trial of any Man's Faith
or Obedience.

First, It seems contrary to Scripture, which says, God Tempts no Man: and
it is most true, that God Tempts no Man, with a design to draw him into Sin; but
this does not hinder, but he may try their Faith and Obedience with great
difficulties, to make them the more illustrious. Thus God Tempted Abraham; and
he permitted Job, and even our Blessed Savior himself to be thus Tempted.

Secondly, It seems contrary to Reason, that God, who knows what any Man will
do in any Circumstances, should go to make Trial of it. But God does not try
Men for his own information, but to give an illustrious Proof and Example to
others of Faith and Obedience: And tho after this Trial of Abraham, God says to
him, now I know that thou love me, because thou have not withheld thy Son,
thine only Son from me; Yet we are to understand this as spoken after the
manner of Men; As God elsewhere speaks to Abraham concerning Sodom; I will go
down now to see whether they have done altogether aecording to the cry which is
come up unto me, and if not, I will know.

I proceed to the Second thing I proposed, The Excellency of Abraham's Faith
and Obedience upon this Trial: By Faith Abraham when he was tried offered up
Isaac. God accepts of it, as if he had done it, because he had done it in part,
and was ready to have performed the rest, if God had not countermanded him.

And this act of Faith and Obedience in Abraham will appear the more
illustrious, if we consider these three things.

First, The firmness and stedfastness of his Faith, notwithstanding the
objections against it.

Secondly, The constancy of his resolution, notwithstanding the difficulty of
the thing.

Thirdly, The reasonableness of his Faith, in that he gave satisfaction to
himself in so hard and perplexed a Case.

First, The firmness and stedfastness of his Faith will appear, if we consider
what objections there were in the case, enough to shake a very strong Faith.
There were three great objections against this Command, and such as might in
reason make a wise and good Man doubtful whether this Command were from God.

The horrid nature of the thing commanded.

The grievous scandal that might seem almost unavoidably to follow upon it.

And the horrible consequence of it, which seemed to make the former promise of
God to Abraham void.

First, the horrid nature of the thing commanded, which was for a Father to
kill his own Child; this must needs appear very barbarous and unnatural, and
look liker a Sacrifice to an Idol, than to the true God.

It seemed to be against the Law of Nature, and directly contrary to that
kindness and affection which God himself had planted in the hearts of Parents
toward their Children.

And there is no affection more natutural and strong than this, for there are
many persons that would redeem the Lives of their Children with the hazard of
their own. Now that God has planted such an affection in Nature, is an
argument that it is good, and therefore it could not but seem strange that he
should command any thing contrary to it: And in this case, there were two
circumstances that increased the horror of the fact; That his Son was
innocent; and that he was to Slay him with his own hands.

First, That his Son was Innocent. It would grieve the heart of any Father to
give up his Son to Death, tho he were never so undutiful and disobedient.

So passionately was David affected with the death of his Son Absalom, as to
wish he had dyed for him, tho he dyed in the very act of Rebellion, and tho the
saving of his Life had been inconsistent with the Peace of his Government.

How deep then must it sink into the heart of a Father to give up his innocent
Son to death? And such a Son was Isaac, for any thing appeared to the contrary.
God himself gave him this testimony, that he was the Son whom his Father loved,
and there is no intimation of any thing to the contrary: Now this could not but
appear strange to a good Man, that God should command an innocent person to be
put to death. But, Secondly,

That a Father should be commanded, not only to give up his Son to death, but
to slay him with his own Hands; not only to be a Spectator, but to be the Actor
in this Tragedy; What Father would not shrink, and start back at such a
Command? What good Man, especially in such a case, and where Nature was so hard
pressed, would not have been apt to have looked upon such a Revelation as this,
rather as the suggestion and illusion of an evil Spirit, than a Command of God?
And yet Abraham's Faith was not staggered, so as to call this Revelation of God
in question.

Secondly, The grievous scandal that might seem almost unavoidably to follow
upon it, was another great objection against it; the report of such an action
would in all appearance blemish the reputation, even of so good a Man, amongst
all sober and considerate persons, who could hardly forbear to censure him, as
a wicked and unnatural Man.

And this was a hard case, for a Man to be put to Sacrifice at once, two of the
dearest things in the world, his Reputation and his Son; nor could he have
easily defended himself from this imputation, by alleging an express
Revelation and Command of God for it; for who would give credit to it?

A Revelation to another Man is nothing to me, unless I be assured that he had
such a Revelation, which I cannot be, but either by another immediate
revelation, or by some Miracle to confirm it.

The act had an appearance of so much horror, that it was not easily credible
that God should command it; and if every Man's confident pretense to revelation
be admitted, the worst actions may plead this in their excuse.

So that this pretense would have been so far from excusing his fault, that it
must rather have been esteemed a high aggravation of it, by adding the boldest
Impiety to the most barbarous Inhumanity. But Abraham was not stumbled at this,
nor at the advantage which the Enemies of his Religion would make of such an
occasion, who would be ready to say, Here is your excellent good Man, and
likely to be a Friend of God, who was so cruel an Enemy to his own Son. All
this it is probable he might consider, but it did not move him, being resolved
to obey God, and to leave it to his Wisdom to provide against all the
inconveniences that might follow upon it.

Thirdly, The strongest Objection of all, was the horrible consequence of the
thing, which seemed to clash with former Revelations, and to make void the
promise which God had before made to Abraham, That in his Seed all the Nations
of the Earth should be blessed, which promise was expressly limited to Isaac and
his Posterity, who had then no Son.

And of this difficulty the Apostle takes express notice in the Text, that he
that had received the promises (that is, was persuaded of the truth and
faithfulness of them) offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it was said,
that in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

And this Objection is really so strong, that if Abraham could not have given
himself satisfaction about it, he might justly have questioned the truth of the
Revelation; for no Man can possibly entertain two contradictory Revelations, as
from God, but he must of necessity question one or both of them; but so strong
was Abraham's Faith, as not to be shaken by the seeming contradiction of these
two Revelations.

II. We will consider the constancy of his Resolution to obey God,
notwithstanding the harshness and difficulty of the thing. Tho Abraham were
firmly persuaded that this Command to kill his Son, was really from God; yet it
is no easy matter for a Man to bring himself to obey God in so difficult a
case, and out of mere reverence to the Divine Authority, to divest himself of
his Nature, and to thwart the strongest inclinations of it; a Man would be very
apt to confer with flesh and blood in such a case. Let but any Man that knows
what it is to be a Father, lay his hand upon his heart and consider his own
Bowels, and he will be astonished at Abraham's Obedience as well as his Faith.

To take his Son, his only Son, his Son whom he loved, and in whom he placed
all his hopes of a happy Posterity, and with his own hands to destroy him and
all his hopes together; it must be a strong Faith that will engage a Man to
Obedience in so difficult an instance.

There is one circumstance more especially, which renders Abraham's Obedience
very remarkable; The deliberateness of the action. It had not been so much, if
so soon as he had received this Command from God, he had upon a sudden impulse
and transport of zeal done this.

But that his Obedience might be the more glorious, and have all the
circumstances of advantage given to it, God would have it done deliberately,
and upon full consideration; and therefore he bad him go to the Mountain three
days Journey from the place where he was, and there to offer up his Son.

It is in acts of Virtue and Obedience, as in acts of Sin and Vice; the more
deliberate the Sin is, and the more calm and sedate temper the Man is in when
he commits it, the greater is the fault; whereas what is done by surprise, in
the heat of Temptation or transport of Passion, has some excuse from the
suddainness and indeliberateness of it.

So is it in acts of Virtue and Obedience, especially if they be attended with
considerable difficulty, the more deliberately they are done, the more virtuous
they are, and the greater praise is due to them.

Now that Abraham's Obedience might want nothing to highten it, God seems on
purpose to have put so long a space betwixt the Command and the performance of
it; he gives him time to cool upon it; to weigh the command, and to look on
every side of this difficult duty; he gives scope for his reason to argue and
debate the case, and opportunity for natural affection to play its part; and
for flesh and blood to raise all its batteries against the resolution which he
had taken up.

And now we may easily imagine, what conflict this good Man had within himself,
during those three days that he was traveling to the Mountain in Moriah; and
how his heart was ready to be rent in pieces, betwixt his duty to God, and his
affection to his Child; so that every step of this unwelcome and wearisome
journey, he did as it were lay violent hands upon himself.

He was to offer up his Son but once, but he Sacrificed himself and his own
Will every moment for three days together; and when he came thither, and all
things were ready, the Altar, the Wood, and the Fire, and the Knife, it must
needs be a stabbing Question, and wound him to the Heart, which his Innocent
Son so innocently asked him, Where is the Lamb, for a Burnt-Offering?

It must be a strong Faith indeed, and a mighty Resolution, that could make him
to hold out three days against the violent Assaults of his own Nature, and the
charming Presence of his Son, enough to melt his Heart, as often as he cast his
Eyes upon him; and yet nothing of all this, made him to stagger in his Duty,
but being strong in Faith, he gave glory to God, by one of the most miraculous
acts of Obedience that ever was exacted from any of the Sons of Men.

III. In the Third and last place, I come to consider the Reasonableness of his
Faith, in that he was able to give satisfaction to himself in so intricate and
perplexed a case. The constancy of Abraham's Faith, was not an obstinate and
stubborn Persuasion; but the result of the wisest reasoning, and soberest
consideration.

So the Text says, that he counted (the word is (...) he Reasoned with himself)
that God was able to raise him up from the Dead; so that he debated the matter
with himself, and gave himself satisfaction, concerning the Objections and
Difficulties in the case; and being fully satisfied that it was a Divine
Command, he resolved to obey it.

As for the Objections I have mentioned.

1. The horrid appearance of the thing, that a Father should Slay his Innocent
Son. Why should Abraham scruple the doing this, at the Command of God, who
being the Author of Life, has power over it, and may resume what he has
given, and take away the Life of any of his Creatures when he will, and make
whom he pleases instruments in the execution of his Command?

It was indeed a hard case, considering natural affection; and therefore God
did not permit it to be executed.

But the question of God's Right over the lives of Men; and of his authority to
command any Man to be the instrument of his pleasure in such a case, admits of
no dispute.

And the God has planted strong affections in Parents toward their Children;
yet he has written no Law in any Man's heart, to the prejudice of his own
Soverign Right: This is a case always excepted, and this takes away the
objection of Injustice.

2. As to the scandal of it, that could be no great objection in those times,
when the absolute power of Parents over their Children was in it is full force,
and they might put them to Death without being accountable for it.

So that then it was no such startling matter, to hear of a Father putting his
Child to Death; nay, in much later times we find that in the most ancient Laws
of the Romans (I mean those of the 12 Tables) Children are absolutely put in
the power of their Parents, to whom is given, jus vitae and necis, a power of
Life and Death over them; and likewise to sell them for Slaves.

And tho amongst the Jews this paternal power was limited by the Law of Moses;
and the judgment of Life and Death was taken out of the Fathers hands, except
in case of Contumacy and Rebellion; (and even in that case the Process was to
be before the Elders of the City) yet it is certain, that in elder times the
paternal power was more absolute and unaccountable, which takes off much from
the horror and scandal of the thing, as it appears now to us who have no such
power.

And therefore we do not find in the History, that this Objection did much
stick with Abraham: It being then no unusual thing for a Father to put his
Child to Death, upon a just account.

And the Command of God, who has absolute Dominion over the Lives of his
Creatures, is certainly a just reason; and no Man can reasonably scruple the
doing of that, upon the Command of God, which he might have done by his own
Authority, without being accountable for the Action, to any but God only.

3. As to the Objection from the horrible consequence of the thing Commanded,
that the Slaying of Isaac seemed to overthrow the Promise, which God had made
before to Abraham, That in Isaac his Seed should be called: This seems to him
to be the great difficulty, and here he makes use of Reason, to reconcile the
seeming Contradiction of this Command of God, to his former Promise. So the
Text tells us, that he offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it was said,
that in Isaac, shall thy Seed be called; Reasoning that God was able to raise
him up from the Dead. So that though Isaac were put to Death, yet he saw how the
Promise of God might still be made good by his being raised from the Dead, and
living afterward to have a numerous Posterity.

There had then indeed been no Instance, or Example of any such thing in the
World, as the Resurrection of one from the Dead, which makes Abraham's Faith
the more wonderful, but he confirmed himself in this Belief, by an Example as
near the case as might be. He Reasoned, that God was able to raise him from the
Dead, from whence also he had received him in a Figure.

This I know is by Interpreters generally understood of Isaac's being delivered
from the Jaws of Death, when he was laid upon the Altar, and ready to be Slain.
But the Text seems not to speak of what happend after, but of something that
had passed before: By which Abraham confirmed himself in this peruasion, that
if he were Slain, God would raise him up again.

And so the words (...) ought to be rendered, in the past time, from whence also
he had received him, in a Figure. So that this Expression plainly refers to the
miraculous Birth of Isaac, when his Parents were past the Age of having
Children; which was little less than a Resurrection from the Dead.

And so the Scripture speaks of it. Romans 4. 17. Abraham believed God, who
quickens the Dead, and calls the things which are not, as if they were, and
not being weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body which was Dead; and a
little before the Text, (speaking of the miraculous Birth of Isaac) and
therefore sprang there of one, and him as good as dead, as many as the Stars of
Heaven.

From whence (as the Apostle tells us) Abraham Reasoned thus; That God who gave
him Isaac at first, in so miraculous a manner, was able by another miracle to
restore him to life again, after he was Dead, and to make him the Father of
many Nations. He Reasoned, that God was able to raise him up from the Dead,
from whence also he had received him in a Figure.

Thus you see the reasonableness of Abraham's Faith; he pitched upon the main
difficulty in the Case, and he answered it, as well as was possible: And in his
reasoning about this matter, he gives the utmost weight to every thing, that
might tend to vindicate the Truth and faithfulness of God's Promise, and to
make the Revelations of God consistent with one another; and this though he had a
great Interest, and a very tender concernment of his own, to have biassed him.

For he might have argued with great appearance and probability the other way:
But as every Pious and Good Man should do, he reasoned on God's side, and
favored that part. Rather than disobey a Command of God, or believe that his
promise should be frustrate, he will believe any thing that is credible and
possible, how improbable soever. Thus far Faith will go, but no farther: From
the believing of plain Contradictions and Impossibilities, it always desires
to be excused.

Thus much for explication of the Words; which I hope has not been altogether
unprofitable, because it tends to clear a point which has something of
difficulty and obscurity in it, and to vindicate the Holy Scripture, and the
Divine Revelation therein contained, from one of the most specious Objections
of Infidelity.

But I had a farther design in this Text; And that is to make some Observations
and Inferences from it, that may be of use to us. As

First, That Humane Nature is capable of clear and full satisfaction,
concerning a Divine Revelation; for if Abraham had not been fully and past all
doubt assured that this was a Command from God, he would certainly have spared
his Son. And nothing is more reasonable, than to believe that those to whom God
is pleased to make immediate Revelations of his Will, are some way or other
assured that they are Divine, otherwise they would be in vain, and to no
purpose.

But how Men are assured concerning Divine Revelations made to them, is not so
easy to make out to others: Only these two things we are sure of.

1. That God can work in the Mind of Man, a firm persuasion of the Truth of
what he Reveals, and that such a Revelation is from him. This no Man can doubt
of, that considers the great power and influence which God, who made us, and
perfectly knows our Frame, must needs have upon our Minds and Understandings.

2. That God never offers any thing to any Man's belief, that plainly
contradicts the Natural and Essential Notions of his Mind. Because this would
be for God to destroy his own Workmanship, and to impose that upon the
understanding of Man, which whilst it remains what it is, it cannot possibly
admit.

For instance, We cannot imagine, that God should Reveal to any Man any thing,
that plainly contradicts the Essential Perfections of the Divine Nature; for
such a Revelation can no more be supposed to be from God, than a Revelation
from God, that there is no God; which is a downright Contradiction.

Now to apply this to the Revelation, which God made to Abraham concerning the
Sacrificing of his Son. This was made to him by an audible Voice, and he was
fully satisfied by the Evidence which it carried along with it, that it was
from God.

For this was not the first of many Revelations that had been made to him, so
that he knew the manner of them, and had found by manifold experience, that he
was not deceived, and upon this experience, was grown to a great Confidence in
the Truth and Goodness of God. And it is very probable, the first time God
appeared to Abraham, because it was a new thing, that to make way for the
credit of future Revelations, God did show himself to him in so glorious a
manner, as was abundantly to his Conviction.

And this St. Stephen does seem to intimate Acts 7. 2. The God of glory
appeared to our Father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia. Now by this
glorious Appearance of God to him at first, he was so, prepared for the
Entertainment of after Revelations, that he was not staggered even at this,
concerning the Sacrificing of his Son, being both by the manner of it, and the
assurance that accompanied it, fully satisfied that it was from God.

Secondly, I observe from hence the great and necessary use of Reason, in
matters of Faith. For we see here that Abraham's Reason, was a mighty
strengthening and help to his Faith. Here were two Revelations made to Abraham,
which seemed to clash with one another; and if Abraham's Reason could not have
reconciled the Repugnancy of them, he could not possibly have believed them
both to be from God; because this natural Notion, or Principle, that God cannot
contradict himself, every Man does first, and more firmly believe, than any
Revelation whatsoever.

Now Abraham's Reason relieved him in this strait; so the Text expressly tells
us, that he reasoned with himself, that God was able to raise him from the Dead.

And this being admitted, the Command of God, concerning the Slaying of Isaac,
was very well consistent with his former Promise, That in Isaac his Seed should
be called.

I know there has a very rude clamor been raised by some persons, (but of
more Zeal I think than Judgment) against the use of Reason in matters of Faith;
but how very unreasonable this is, will appear to any one that will but have
patience to consider these following particulars.

1. The nature of Divine Revelation: That it does not endow Men with new
Faculties; but propounds new Objects to the Faculties, which they had before.
Reason is the Faculty whereby Revelation is to be discerned; for when God
reveals any thing to us, he reveals it to our Understanding, and by that we are
to judge of it: Therefore St. John cautions us 1 Jo. 4. 1. Not to believe every
spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
prophets are gone out into the world: That is, there are many that falsely
pretend to Inspiration; but how can these pretenders be tried and discerned
from those that are truly inspired, but by using our Reason, in comparing the
evidence for the one and the other?

2. This will farther appear, if we consider the nature of Faith. Faith (as we
are now speaking of it) is an assent of the Mind to something as revealed by
God: Now all assent must be grounded upon evidence, that is, no Man can believe
any thing, unless he have, or thinks he has some reason to do so. For to be
confident of a thing without reason, is not Faith, but a presumptuous
persuasion, and obstinacy of mind.

3. This will yet be more evident, if we consider the method, that must of
necessity be used to convince any Man of the truth of Religion. Suppose we had
to deal with one that is a Stranger, and Enemy to Christianity, What means are
proper to be used to gain him over to it? The most natural method surely were
this, to acquaint him with the Holy Scriptures, which are the Rule of our Faith
and Practice. He would ask us, why we believe that Book? The proper answer
would be, because it is the Word of God; this he could not but acknowledge to
be a very good reason, if it were true: But then he would ask, Why we believed
it to be the Word of God, rather than M^homet' s Alchoran, which pretends no
less to be of divine Inspiration.

If any Man now should answer, that he could give no reason why he believed it
to be the word of God, only he believed it to be so, and so every man else
ought to do, without enquiring after any further reason, because reason is to
be laid a side in matters of Faith; would not the Man presently reply, that he
had just as much reason as this comes to, to believe the Alchoran, or any thing
else; that is none at all?

But certainly the better way would be, to satisfy this Man's reason, by
proper arguments; that the Scriptures are a divine Revelation, and that no
other Book in the world can with equal reason pretend to be so; and if this be
a good way, then we do and must call in the assistance of reason for the proof
of our Religion.

4. Let it be considered farther, that the highest commendations that are given
in Scripture to any ones Faith, are given upon account of the reasonableness of
it. Abraham's Faith is famous, and made a pattern to all generations, because
he reasoned himself into it, notwithstanding the objections to the contrary;
and he did not blindly break through these objections, and wink hard at them,
but he looked them in the face, and gave himself reasonable satisfaction
concerning them.

The Centurian's Faith is commended by our Savior, Math. 8. 11. Because when
his Servant was sick, he did not desire him to come to his house, but to speak
the word only, and his Servant should be healed: For he reasoned thus, I am a
man under authority, having Soldiers under me, and I say to this man go and he
goes, and to another come and he comes; and to my Servant do this, and he
does it.

Now if he that was himself under authority, could thus command those that were
under him; much more could he that had a divine Power and Commission, do what
he pleased by his word. And our Savior is so far from reprehending him for
reasoning himself into this belief, that he admires his Faith so much the more
for the reasonableness of it, v. 10. When Jesus heard this, he marvelled, and
said to them that followed him, verily, I say unto you, I have not found so
great Faith, no not in Israel.

Inlike manner our Savior commends the Woman of Canaan's Faith, because she
enforced it so reasonably. Matthew 15. 22. She sued to him to help her
Daughter, but he answered her not a word; and when his Disciples could not
prevail with him to mind her, yet still the pressed him, saying, Lord help me;
and when he repulsed her with this severe answer, It is not meet to take the
Childrens bread and cast it to dogs, she made this quick and modest reply,
truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters Table.
She acknowledges her own unworthiness, but yet believes his goodness to be
such, that he will not utterly reject those who humbly seek to him; upon which
he gives her this testimony, O woman great is thy faith.

The Apostles were divinely inspired, and yet the Bereans are commended,
because they enquired and satisfied themselves in the reasons of their belief,
before they assented to the doctrine which was delivered to them, even by
Teachers that certainly were Infallible.

5. None are reproved in Scripture for their unbelief, but where sufficient
reason and evidence was offered to them. The Israelites are generally blamed
for their Infidelity; but then it was after such mighty wonders had been
wrought for their Conviction.

The Jews in our Saviors time, are not condemned simply for their unbelief,
but for not believing when there was such clear evidence offered to them. So
our Savior himself says, If I had not done amongst them, the works which no
other man did, they had not had sin.

Thomas indeed is blamed for the perverseness of his unbelief, because he would
believe nothing but what he himself saw.

Lastly, To show this yet more plainly, let us consider the great
inconvenience, and absurdity of declining the use of Reason in matters of
Religion: There can be no greater prejudice to Religion, than to decline this
trial.

To say we have no Reason for our Religion, is to say it is unreasonable.
Indeed it is Reason enough for any Article of our Faith, that God has revealed
it, because this is one of the strongest and most cogent reasons for the belief
of any thing. But when we say God has revealed any thing, we must be ready to
prove it, or else we say nothing. If we turn off Reason here, we level the best
Religion in the World with the wildest and most absurd Enthusiams.

And it does not alter the case much, to give Reason ill names, to call it
blind, and carnal Reason. Our best reason is but very short and imperfect: But
since it is no better, we must make use of it as it is, and make the best of it.

Before I pass from this Argument, I cannot but observe, that both the extremes
of those who differ from our Church, are generally great Declamers against the
use of Reason in matters of Faith: If they find their account in it, it is well;
for our parts we apprehend no manner of inconvenience, in having Reason on our
side; nor need we to desire a better evidence, that any Man is in the wrong,
than to hear him declare against Reason, and thereby to acknowledge that reason
is against him. Men may vilify Reason as much as they please; and tho being
reviled she reviles not again, yet in a more still and gentle way, she commonly
has her full revenge upon all those that rail at her.

I have often wondered that people can with patience endure to hear their
Teachers and Guides talk against Reason; and not only so, but they pay them the
greater submission and veneration for it. One would think this but an odd way
to gain authority over the minds of Men; but some skilful and designing men,
have found by experience, that it is a very good way to recommend them to the
ignorant, as Nurses use to endear themselves to Children, by perpetual noise
and nonsense.

III. I observe, that God obliges no Man to believe plain and evident
Contradictions, as matters of Faith. Abraham could not reasonably have believed
this second revelation to have been from God, if he had not found some way to
reconcile it with the first. For tho a Man were never so much disposed to
submit his Reason to divine Revelation; yet it is not possible for any Man to
believe God against God himself.

Some Men seem to think that they oblige God mightily, by believing plain
contradictions. But the matter is quite otherwise. He that made Man a
reasonable Creature, cannot take it kindly from any Man, to debase his
workmanship, by making himself unreasonable. And therefore, as no service, or
obedience; so no Faith is acceptable unto God, but what is reasonable; if it be
not so, it may be confidence or presumption, but it is not Faith; for he that
can believe plain contradictions, may believe any thing how absurd soever;
because nothing can be more absurd, than the belief of a plain contradiction;
and he that can believe any thing, believes nothing upon good grounds, because
to him Truth and Falsehood are all one.

4. I observe that the great cause of the defect of Men's obedience is the
weakness of their Faith. Did we believe the commands of God in the Gospel, and
his promises and threatenings, as firmly as Abraham believed God in this case;
what should we not be ready to do, or suffer in obedience to him?

If our Faith were but as strong and vigorous as his was, the effects of it
would be as great and conspicuous; were we verily persuaded that all the
Precepts of our Religion are the express Laws of God, and that all the promises
and threatenings of the Gospel will one day be verified and made good, What
manner of persons should we be in all holy conversation and godliness? How
would the lively thoughts of another world, raise us above the vanities of this
present life; and set us out of the reach of the most powerful temptations that
this world can assault us withal; and make us to do all things with regard to
Eternity, and to that solemn and dreadful account which we must one day make to
God the Judge of all?

It is nothing but the want of a firm and steady belief of these things, that
makes our Devotion so dead and heartless, and our resolutions of doing better
so weak and inconsistent. This it is, that makes us so easy a prey to every
temptation; and the things of this world to look so much bigger than they are;
the enjoyments of it more tempting, and the evils of it more terrible than in
truth they are. And in all disputes betwixt our Conscience and our Interest, to
hold the balance so unequally, and to put our foot upon the lighter Scale, that
it may seem to weigh down the other.

In a word, in proportion to the strength or weakness of our Faith, our
obedience to God will be more or less constant, uniform, and perfect; because
Faith is the great source and spring of all the Virtues of a good life.

5. We have great reason to submit to the ordinary strokes of God's Providence
upon our selves, or near relations, or any thing that is dear to us. Most of
these are easily compared with Abraham's case; it requires a prodigious
strength of Faith to perform so miraculous an act of obedience.

6. And lastly, We are utterly inexcusable, if we disobey the easy Precepts of
the Gospel. The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light, in comparison of
God's former dispensations. This was a grievous Commandment which God gave to
Abraham, to sacrifice his only Son: It was a hard saying indeed; and which of
us could have been able to hear it?

But if God think fit to call us to the more difficult duties of self-denial,
and suffering for his truth and righteousness sake, we must after the example
of faithful Abraham, not think much to deny or part with any thing for him, no
not life it self. But even this which is the hardest part of Religion, is
easier than what God put upon Abraham.

For it does not offer near the violence to nature, to lay down our life in a
good cause, as it would do, to put a Child to death with our own hands. Besides
the consideration of the extraordinary comfort and support, and the glorious
rewards that are expressly promised to our obedience and self denial in such a
case; encouragement enough to make a very difficult duty easy.

And whilst I am persuading you and my self to resolution and constancy in our
Holy Religion, notwithstanding all hazards and hardships that may attend it, I
have a just sense of the frailty of humane nature, and of humane resolution:
But with all, a most firm persuasion of the goodness of God, that he will not
suffer those who sincerely love him and his Truth, to be tempted above what
they are able.

I will add but one consideration more, to show the difference betwixt
Abraham's case and ours. God commanded him to do the hardest thing in the
world, to sacrifice his only Son; but he has given us an easy commandment;
and that he might effectually oblige us to our duty, he has done that for us
which he required Abraham to do for him; he has not spared his own Son, his
only Son, but has given him up to death for us all: And hereby we know that he
loves us, that he has given his Son for us.

What God required of Abraham, he did not intend should be executed; but one
great design of it was to be a Type and Figure of that immense love and
kindness which he intended to all mankind, in the Sacrifice of his Son, as a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

And as the most clear and express promise of the Messiah was made to Abraham;
so the most express and lively Type of the Messiah that we meet with in all the
old Testament, was Abraham's offering up his Son. And as St. Hierom tells us
(from an ancient and constant Tradition of the Jews) the Mountain in Moriah,
where Abraham was commanded to Sacrifice Isaac, was Mount Calvary, where our
Lord also was Crucified and offered up, that by this one sacrifice of himself
once offered, he might perfect for ever them that are sanctified, and obtain
eternal redemption for us.

Now to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb that was slain, to
God even our Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ the first begotten from the
dead; to the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; to him that loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood; to him be Glory and honor, thanksgiving and
power, now and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL MDCLXXXVII. Before the Princess ANN.
HEB. XI. 24, 25. By Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
THE Text sets before us a great pattern of self-denial; for our better
understanding whereof, I will give a brief account of the History of Moses, to
which our Apostle in this passage does refer.

When Moses was born, his Parents (for fear of the cruel law which Pharaoh had
made, That all the male Children of the Hebrews, so soon as they were born,
should be put to death) after they had hid him three months, did at last expose
him in an Ark of Bulrushes, upon the River Nile, and committed him to the
providence of God, whom they despaired to conceal any longer by their own care.

Pharaoh's Daughter coming by the River side, espied him, and had compassion on
him; and guessing him to be one of the Hebrew Children, called for an Hebrew
Nurse, to take care of him, who, as the Prviodence of God had ordered it,
proved to be the Child's own Mother. As he grew up, Pharaoh's Daughter took care
of his Education in all Princely qualities, and adopted him for her Son; and
Pharaoh(as Josephus tells us) being without Son, designed him Heir of his
Kingdom.

Moses refused this great offer. But why did he refuse it, when it seemed to be
presented to him by the providence of God, and was brought about in so strange
a manner, and when by this means he might probably have had it in his power to
have eased the Israelites of their cruel bondage, and perhaps have had the
opportunity of reducing that great Kingdom from the worship of Idols to the true
God? Why would he refuse a Kingdom which was offered to him with so fair an
opportunity of doing so much good?

That which seems to have prevailed with Moses, was this, That he could not
accept the offer, without forsaking God, and renouncing his Religion; for
considering how strangely the Egyptians were addicted to Idolatry, he could
never hope to be accepted for Heir of that Kingdom, unless he would violate his
Conscience, either by abandoning or dissembling his Religion.

And how unlikely it was that he should prevail with them to change their
Religion, he might easily judge by the example of Joseph, who tho he had so
much authority and esteem amongst them, by having been so great a Benefactor to
their Nation; yet he could never move them in the least, in that matter.

Now seeing he had no hopes of attaining, or enjoying that dignity without
sinning grievously against God, he would not purchase a Kingdom at so
unconscionable a price. And as for the deliverance of his people, he was
content to trust the providence and promise of God for that; and in the mean
time was resolved rather to take a part in the afflictions of God's people,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

From the words thus explained, I shall take occasion to consider these Four
things.

I. Moses's self-denial, in preferring and choosing a state of afflicted piety,
before any sinful enjoyments whatsoever; before the greatest earthly happiness
and prosperity, when it was not to be attained and enjoyed upon other terms
than of sinning against God.

II. I shall consider those circumstances of this self-denial of Moses, which
do very much commend and set off the virtue of it.

III. The prudence and reasonableness of this choice, in preferring a state of
afflicted Piety and Virtue, before the greatest prosperity and pleasure of a
sinful course.

IV. Supposing this choice to be reasonable, I shall inquire how it comes to
pass that so many make another choice.

I. We will consider Moses his self-denial, in preferring a state of afflicted
piety, before the greatest earthly happiness and prosperity, when it is not to
be enjoyed upon other terms, than of sining against God. He was adopted Heir of
the Kingdom of Egypt, (one of the greatest and most flourishing Kingdoms then
in the World;) But he could not hope to attain to this dignity, and to secure
himself in the possession of it, upon other terms than of complying with that
Nation, in their Idolatrous Religion and Worship.

Now being brought up in the belief of the true God, the God of Israel, by his
Mother, to whom Pharaoh's Daughter had committed him, he could not without
great violence to his Conscience, and the principles of his Education, renounce
the true God, and fall off to the Idolatry of the Egyptians: And for this
reason he refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the worshipers of the true God, than to have the
temporary enjoyment of any thing that was not to be had without sin; for so the
word ought to be rendered, (...) than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin.
So here was Moses his self-denial, that he chose rather to suffer affliction
with the worshipers of the true God, than to gain a Kingdom, by the renouncing
of God and Religion.

II. We will consider those circumstances of his self denial, which do very
much commend and set off the virtue of it.

1. What it was he refused to be called; the Son of Pharaoh' s Daughter; that
is, to be Heir of one of the greatest and most flourishing Kingdoms in the
world: a temptation so great, that the Devil himself could not find out one
much greater, when he set upon the Son of God, to tempt him to fall down and
worship him.

And when we consider for what inconsiderable things some men sell their
Religion and their Consciences, we shall think it no small temptation which
Moses here resisted. Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa violandum est; If a
Man would do any unjust thing, and violate his Religion and Conscience, he
would not do it for less than a Kingdom; and it would be a very hard bargain,
even upon those terms.

2. Consider not only what he refused; but what he chose in the place of it; a
state of great affliction and suffering. Had he refused a Kingdom, and chosen
the quiet condition of a Subject of middle rank (beneath envy and above
contempt,) his self-denial had not been so great; nay perhaps he had made a
wise choice, in the account of the wiseest men, in preferring a plentiful and
quiet retirement, before the cares of a Crown, and the burden of public
Government.

But it is very rare to find a Man, that would choose rather to be oppressed and
persecuted; than to be a Prince, and to have the sweet power to use others as
he pleased.

3. Consider how fair a prospect he had of enjoying this Kingdom, if he could
but have come up to the terms of it. He did not reject it, because he despaired
of attaining it: for he had all the right that a good title could give him,
being adopted Heir to it; and yet he refused it.

To which I may add, that his breeding was such, as might easily kindle
ambitious thoughts in him. He was brought up in Pharaoh's Court, and was the
Darling and Favorite of it; exceeding beautiful (as Josephus tells us) and
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; than which no two qualities are
more apt to puff up, and swell a Man with big thoughts of himself.

They that are bred in a low condition, never think of a Kingdom; Men not being
apt to aspire to things which are remote, and at a great distance from them.
But nothing is more rare in persons of great and generous minds, than such a
self-denial as this.

4. Let it be considered in the last place, that this was a deliberate choice,
not any rash and sudain determination made by him, when he was of incompetent
age to make a true judgment of things. And this the Apostle takes notice of in
the Text, as a very memorable circumstance, that when he was come to years, he
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. And St. Stephen tells us,
that he was full forty years old when he made this choice, Acts 7. 23. When he
was full forty years old, it came into his heart, to visit his brethren, the
children of Israel. When he was of ripest judgment, and in the height of his
prosperity, and reputation, he made this choice: for it is said in the verse
before, that Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty
in word and deed; that is, he was in great reputation for his Wisdom and Valor.

This seems to refer to other passages of his Life, which are not recorded in
the Scripture History, but related at large by Josephus out of Historians
extant in his time. For he tells, that when the Ethiopians had invaded Egypt,
and almost overrun it, that Pharaoh was directed by the Oracle at Memphis, to
make Moses his General, who by his extraordinary Conduct and Courage overthrew
the Ethiopians, and drove them out of Egypt.

This Moses did not think fit to relate of himself; but St. Stephen seems to
allude to it, when he says, that he was mighty in word and deed: And then it
follows; and when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit
his brethren the children of Israel; that is, when he was at full maturity of
judgment, and in the hight of his Prosperity, and Reputation, he quitted the
Court of Egypt, and went to visit his afflicted Brethren, and chose rather to
take part with them in their sufferings, than to accept those great offers that
were made to him.

There is likewise another passage in Josephus concerning Moses, which seems to
be a forerunner of the contempt which he showed afterward of the Crown of
Egypt; That when Moses was about three years old, Thermuthis, the Daughter of
Pharaoh, brought the Child to him, who took him in his arms and put his Diadem
upon his Head, But Moses took it off, and cast it to the ground, and trampled
it under his feet. This was but a childish act, and they who saw it, would
easily believe, that for all his childish contempt of it then, it it were put
upon his Head in good earnest, when he came to be a Man, he would hold it on
faster, and use it with more respect.

And it is not improbable, but that the Apostle might have some regard to this,
when he says, that Moses when he came to Years; intimating that he did not only
trample upon the Diadem of Pharaoh, when he was a Child; but when he was come
to years, and was capable of judging better of those things, he refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter.

But before I proceed any farther, I cannot but take notice of an objection,
which may seem to reflect greatly upon the integrity of Moses. Can we think him
so very conscientious a Man, who persuaded the people of Israel (and pretended
God's direction in the case) to cheat the Egyptians of their Jewels, under a
fraudulent pretense of borrowing them? There is some difficulty in the thing,
as at first sight it appears: And yet I doubt not, with your favorable
attention, and free from prejudice, to vindicate Moses clearly in this matter.

And I shall not insist upon that, which is commonly and truly said in this
case; That God, who is the supreme Lord of all things, may transfer the Rights
of Men from one to another: because the objection does not lie against God's
Right to take away from any Man what he has given him; but against the
fraudulent manner of doing it, which seems unworthy of God to command or
encourage.

Now this matter I think is capable of another, and much clearer answer; which
in short, is this, and grounded upon the History, as we find it related, Ex.
12. The Providence of God did, it seems, design by this way to make some
reparation to the Israelites, for the tyrannical usage which they had received
from the Egyptians: And that first (as the Text expressly tells us) in giving
them favor with the Egyptians, who in truth, for their own ends, and to get
rid of such troublesome Guests, were disposed to lend them any thing they had.

Thus far all is right. Here is nothing but fair borrowing and lending: And if
the Israelites acquired a right to those things afterward, there was then no
obligation to restitution.

Let us see then how the Providence of God brought this about: Namely, by
permitting the Egyptians afterward, without cause, and after leave given them
to depart, to pursue them, with a design to have destroyed them; by which
Hostility and Perfidiousness they plainly forfeited their Right to what they
had only lent before. For this hostile attempt, which would have warranted the
Israelites, to have spoiled them of their Jewels, if they had been in the
possession of the Egyptians, did certainly warrant them to keep them when they
had them; and by this means they became rightful possessors of what they had
only by Loan before, and could not have detained without fraud and injustice,
if this hostility of the Egyptians had not given them a new title and clear
right to them.

But I proceed to the third thing I proposed, which was to vindicate the
prudence and reasonableness of this choice. And in speaking to this, I shall
abstract from the particular case of Moses, and show in general, That it is a
prudent and reasonable thing, to prefer even an afflicted state of Piety and
Virtue, before the greatest pleasures and prosperity of a sinful course: And
this will appear, if we consider these two things.

1. The sufferings of good Men upon account of Religion, together with the the
reward of them.

2. The temporary enjoyment of sin, with the mischiefs and inconveniences
consequent upon them.

1. The sufferings of good Men, upon the account of Religion, together with the
reward of them. This Moses had in his eye, when he made this choice; for
therefore he chose to suffer Affliction with the People of God, rather than to
enjoy the Pleasures of sin, which are but for a Season, because he had respect
to the recompense of reward: And tho he had but a very imperfect discovery, in
comparison of the future state, yet it seems he had so much assurance of the
goodness of God, as firmly to believe that he should be no loser at the last,
by any thing that he suffered for God and Religion. Indeed if there were no
life after this, and we had no expectation beyond this world, the wisest thing
we could do, would be to enjoy as much of the present contentment of this
world, as we could make our selves Masters of.

But if we be designed for immortality, and shall be unspeakably happy, or
intorably miserable in another world, according as we have demeaned our selves
in this life; then certainly it is reasonable that we should take the greatest
care of the longest duration, and be content to dispense with some present
inconveniences, for an eternal felicity; and be willing to labor and take
pains for a little while, that we may be happy forever. And this is accounted
prudence in the account of the wisest Men, to part with a little in present,
for a far greater future advantage.

But the disproportion betwixt Time and Eternity is so vast, that did we but
firmly believe, that we shall live for ever, nothing in this world could
reasonably be thought too good to part withal, or too grievous to suffer for
the obtaining of a blessed Immortality. And upon this belief and persuasion of
a mighty reward, beyond all their present sufferings, and that they should be
infinite gainers at the last, the Primitive Christians were kept from sinking
under their present sufferings, and fortified against all that the malice and
cruelty of the world could do unto them. And if we would consider all things
together, and mind the invisible things of another world, as well as the things
which are seen, we should easily discern that he who suffers for God and
Religion, does not renounce his happiness, but put it out to Interest, upon
terms of greatest advantage; and does wisely consider his own best, and and
most lasting interest. This is the First.

II. This will yet more evidently appear, if we consider the temporary
enjoyments of sin, together with the mischiefs and inconveniences attending,
and consequent upon them: That as to the nature of them, they are mixed, and
imperfect; as to the duration of them, they are short, and but for a season;
and as to the final issue and consquence of them, that they end in misery and
sorrow.

1. As to the nature of them, all the pleasures and enjoyments of sin are mixed
and imperfect. A wicked Man may make a show of mirth and pleasure, but even in
laughter his heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. There
can be no true and sincere pleasure in any sinful and vicious course, tho it be
attended with all the Pomp and Splendour of outward Happiness and Prosperity;
for where ever sin and vice is, there must be guilt; and wherever guilt is,
the mind will be restless and unquiet.

For there are two very troublesome and tormenting passions, which are
naturally consequent upon guilt; Shame and Fear. Shame, arising from the
apprehension of the danger of being discovered; and Fear, from the apprehension
of the danger of being punished: And these do continually haunt the sinner, and
fill him with inward horror and confusion, in his most secret retirements. And
if sin were attended with no other trouble but the guilt of it, a wise Man
would not commit it, if it were for no other reason, but merely for the peace
and quiet of his own mind.

2. The enjoyments of sin, as to the duration of them are but short. Upon this
consideration, Moses set no great price and value upon them, but preferred
affliction and suffering in good company, and in a good cause, before the
temporary enjoyments of sin.

If the enjoyments of this world were perfect in their nature, and had no
mixture of trouble and sorrow in them: Yet this would be a great abatement of
them, that they are of so short and uncertain a continuance. The pleasure of
most sins expires with the act of them; and when that is done, the delight
vanishes.

I cannot deny but there are several worldly advantages to be purchased by sin,
which may perhaps be of a longer continuance; as Riches and Honors, the common
purchase of Covetousness and Ambition, and of that long train of inferior
Vices which attend upon them, and minister unto them; but even these enjoyments
are in their own nature of an uncertain continuance, and much more uncertain
for being purchased by indirect and ill means. But if the enjoyment of these
things were sure to be of the same date with our lives, yet how short a
duration is that compared with Eternity? make the utmust allowance to these
things, that can be; yet we can but enjoy them whilst we are in this world.
When we come into the world of spirits, it will signify nothing to us to have
been rich or great in this world. When we shall stand before that highest
Tribunal, it will not avail us in the least to have been Princes, and great
Men, and Judges on the Earth; the poorest Man that ever lived in this world,
will then be upon equal terms with the bigest of us all.

For all mankind shall then stand upon a level, and those civil distinctions of
rich and poor, of base and honorable, which seem now so considerable, and make
such a glaring difference amongst Men in this world, shall all then be laid
aside, and moral differences shall only take place. All the distinctions which
will then be made, will be betwixt the good and the bad; the righteous and the
wicked; and the difference betwixt a good and bad Man, will be really much
greater than ever it seemed to be, betwixt the highest and meanest persons in
this world.

And if this be so, why should we value the enjoyments of sin at so high a
rate, which at the best are only considerable (and that only in the imagination
of vain Men) during our abode in this world, but bear no price at all in that
Country where we must live for ever: Or if they did, we cannot carry them along
with us. The guilt of them indeed will follow us with a vengance; the injustice
and all the ill arts we have used for the getting or keeping of them,
especially, if at once we have made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.

If we have changed our Religion, or which is much worse, if continuing in the
profession of it, we have betrayed it, and the interest of it, for the gaining
or securing of any of these things; we shall find to our sorrow, that tho the
enjoyments of sin were but for a season, the guilt of it will never leave us,
nor forsake us, but will stick close to us, and make us miserable for ever. But
this belongs to the

III. Thing I proposed to speak to, namely, The final issue, and consequence of
a sinful course, which is misery and sorrow, many times in this world; but most
certainly in the next.

1. In this world, the very best issue and consequence of a sinful course, that
we can imagine, is Repentance: And even this has a great deal of sensible pain
and trouble in it; for it is many times (especially after great sins, and a
long continuance in them,) accompanied with much regret and horror; with deep
and piercing sorrow; with dismal and despairing thoughts of God's mercy; and
with fearful apprehensions of his wrath and vengeance. So that if this were the
worst consequence of sin (which indeed is the best) no Man that considers and
calculates things wisely, would purchase the pleasure of any sin, at the price
of so much anguish and sorrow, as a true and deep repentance will cost him;
especially, since a true repentance, does in many cases oblige Men to the
restitution of that which has been gained by sin, if it has been got by the
injury of another.

And this consideration quite takes away the pleasure and profit of an ill
gotten Estate. Better never to have had it, than to be obliged to refund it. A
wise Man will forbear the most pleasant meats, if he know beforehand that they
will make him deadly sick; and that he shall never be at ease, till he have
brought them up again.

No Man that believes the threatenings of God, and the judgment of another
world, would ever sin, but that he hopes to retrieve all again by repentance.
But it is the greatest folly in the world to commit any sin upon this hope; for
that is to please ones self for the present, in hopes to have more trouble
afterward than the pleasure comes to. But especially, no Man would be guilty
of an act of injustice and oppression, in hopes to repent of it afterward;
because there can be no repentance for such sins without restitution; and it is
perfect madness for a Man to run the hazard of his Soul, to get an Estate, in
hopes of restoring it again; for so he must do that truly repents of such a
sin. But,

2. In the other world, the final issue and consequence of all the pleasures of
sin unrepented of, will certainly be misery and sorrow. How quietly soever a
sinner may pass through this world, or out of it, misery will certainly
overtake him in the next, unspeakable and eternal misery, arising from an
apprehension of the greatest loss, and a sense of the sharpest pain; and those
sadly aggravated by the remembrance of past pleasure, and the despair of future
ease.

From a sad apprehension and melancholy reflection upon his inestimable loss.
In the other world; the sinner shall be eternally separated from God, who is
the fountain of happiness. This is the first part of that miserable sentence
which shall be past upon the wicked; depart from me.

Sinners are not now sensible of the joys of Heaven, and the happiness of that
state, and therefore are not capable of estimating the greatness of such a
loss: But this stupidity and insensibleness of sinners, continues only during
this present state, which affords Men variety of objects and pleasures, to
divert and entertain them: But when they are once entered upon the other world,
they will then have nothing else to take up their thoughts, but the sad
condition, into which by their own wilful negligence and folly, they have
plunged themselves. They shall then, lift up their eyes, and with the rich Man
in the parable, at once see the happiness of others, and feel their own misery
and torment.

But this is not all. Besides the apprehension of so great a loss, they shall
be sensible of the sorest and sharpest pains; and how grievous those shall be,
we may conjecture by what the Scripture says of them in general; That they are
the effects of a mighty displeasure, of Anger and Omnipotence met together, far
greater than can be described by any pains and sufferings which we are
acquainted withal in this world: For who knows the power of Gods anger, and
the utmost of what Omnipotent Justice can do to sinners? It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.

One would think this were misery enough, and needed no frather aggravation;
but yet it has two terrible ones; from the remembrance of past pleasures, and
the despair of any future ease and remedy.

The remembrance of past pleasure makes present sufferings more sharp and
sensible. For as nothing commends pleasure more, and gives a quicker relish to
happiness, than precedent pain and suffering: (for perhaps there is not a
greater pleasure in the world, than in the sudden ease which a Man finds after
a sharp fit of the Stone) so nothing enrageth affliction more, and sets a
keener edg upon misery, than to pass into great pain immediately out of a state
of ease and pleasure. This was the stinging aggravation of the rich Man's
torment, That in his life time he had received his good things, and had faired
so deliciously every day.

But the greatest aggravation of all is, the despair of any future ease and
remedy. The duration of this misery, is set forth to us in Scripture, by such
expressions as do signify the longest and most interminable duration. Depart
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25. and Mark 9. 43. Where the worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And in the Revel. it is said, that the
wicked shall be tormented, day and night, for ever and ever; without
intermission, and without end. And this surely is the perfection of misery, for
a Man to lie under the greatest torments, and to be in despair of ever finding
the least ease.

Let us now compare things together: on the one hand, the sufferings of good
Men, for a good Conscience, and the reward that follows them; and on the other
hand, the enjoyments of sin, with the mischief and misery that attends them,
and will certainly overtake them in this world, or the next: and then we shall
easily discern which of these is to be preferred in a wise Man's choice.

And indeed the choice is so very plain, that a Man must be strangely forsaken
of his reason, and blinded by sense, who does not prefer that course of life,
which will probably make him happier in this world, but most certainly in the
next.

There remains now only the Fourth and last particular to be spoken to; viz.
Supposing this choice to be reasonable, to enquire whence it comes to pass,
that so many make a quite contrary choice. How is it that the greatest part of
mankind are so widely mistaken, as to prefer the temporary enjoyments of sin,
before Conscience and Religion; especially, if it be attended with great
afflictions and sufferings? And of this I shall give you as brief an account as
I can, and so conclude this Discourse.

This wrong choice, generally proceeds from one or both of these two causes;
from want of Faith; or from want of consideration; or of both.

1. One great reason why Men make so imprudent a choice, is unbelief; either
the want of Faith, or the weakness of it. Either Men do not believe the
recompenses of another life, or they are not so firmly persuaded of the reality
of them. If Men do not at all believe these things, there is no foundation for
Religion; for he that comes unto God (that is, he that thinks of being
religious) must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, as the Apostle reasons in the beginning of this Chapter.

But I hope, there are but few that are, or can be Infidels, as to these great
and fundamental principles of Religion. But it is to be feared, that the Faith
of a great many, is but weak and wavering; their Faith is rather negative; they
do not disbelieve these things, but they are not firmly persuaded of them;
their Faith is rather an opinion, than a rooted and well grounded persuasion;
and therefore no wonder; if it be not so strong, and vigorous a principle of
action, and like the Faith of Abraham and Moses, and other worthies mentioned
in this Chapter. For where Faith is in its full strength and vigor, it will
have proportionable effects upon the resolutions and wills of Men: But where it
is but weak, it is of little or no efficacy. And this is the true reason, why
so many forsake Religion, and cleave to this present world; and when it comes
to the push, choose rather to sin, than to suffer; and will rather quit the
truth, than endure persecution for it.

These are they, whom our Savior describes, who receive receive the word with
joy, and endure for a while; but when tribulation and persecution arises
because of the word, presently they are offended: not that they did not believe
the Word; but their Faith had taken no deep root, and therefore it withered.
The weakness and wavering of Men's Faith, makes them unstable and inconstant in
their course; because they are not of one mind, but divided betwixt two
interests, that of this world, and the other; and the double minded man (as St.
James tells us) is unstable in all his ways.

It is generally a true rule; so much wavering as we see in the actions and
lives of Men, so much weakness there is in their Faith; and therefore he that
would know what any Man firmly believes, let him attend to his actions more
than to his professions.

If any Man live so, as no Man that heartily believes the Christian Religion
can live, it is not credible that such a Man does firmly believe the Christian
Religion. He says he does; but there is a greater evidence in the case than
words; there is Testimonium rei, the Man's actions are to the contrary, and
they do best declare the inward sense of the Man. Did Men firmly believe, that
there is a God that governs the world, and that he has appointed a day,
wherein he will judge it in righteousness; and that all mankind shall shortly
appear before him, and give an account of themselves, and all their actions to
him; and that those who have kept the Faith and a good Conscience, and have
lived soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, shall be
unspeakably and eternally happy; but the fearful and unbelieving, those who out
of fear or interest, have deserted the Faith, or lived wicked lives, shall have
their portion in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone; I say, were Men
firmly persuaded of these things, it is hardly credible that any Man should
make a wrong choice, and forsake the ways of Truth and Righteousness, upon any
temptation whatsoever.

Faith, even in temporal matters, is a mighty principle of action, and will
make Men to attempt and undergo strange and difficult things. The Faith of the
Gospel ought to be much more operative and powerful; because the Objects of
Hope and Fear, which it presents to us, are far greater, and more considerable,
than any thing that this world can tempt or terrify us withal.

Would we but by Faith make present to our minds, the invisible things of
another world; the happiness of Heaven, and the terrors of Hell, and were we as
verily persuaded of them, as if they were in our view, how should we despise
all the pleasures and terrors of this world! And with what ease should we
resist and repel all those temptations, which would seduce us from our duty, or
draw us into sin!

A firm and unshaken belief of these things, would effectually remove all those
mountains of difficulty and discouragement, which Men fancy to themselves in
the ways of Religion. To him that believes, all things are possible, and most
things would be easy.

2. Another reason of this wrong choice, is want of consideration; for this
would strengthen our Faith, and make it more vigorous and powerful: And indeed
a Faith which is well rooted and establishould does suppose a wise and deep
consideration of things; and the want of this is a great cause of the fatal
miscarriage of Men; that they do not sit down and consider with themselves
seriously, how much Religion is their interest, and how much it will cost them
to be true to it, and to persevere in it to the end.

We suffer our selves to be governed by sense, and to be transported with
present things; but do not consider our future and lasting interest, and the
whole duration of an immortal Soul. And this is the reason, why so many men are
hurried away by the present and sensible delights of this world; because they
will not take time to think of what will be hereafter.

For it is not to be imagined, but that the Man who has seriously considered
what sin is; the shortness of its pleasure, and the eternity of its punishment;
should resolve to forsake sin, and to live a holy and virtuous life.

To conclude this whole Discourse. If Men did but seriously believe the great
principles of Religion; the Being and the Providence of God; the immortality of
their Souls; the glorious rewards, and the dreadful punishments of another
world; they could not possibly make so imprudent a choice, as we see a great
part of mankind to do; they could not be induced to forsake God and Religion
for any temporal interest and advantage; to renounce the favor of Heaven, and
all their hopes of happiness in another world, for any thing that this world
can afford, nay not for the whole world, if it were offered to them. For as our
Savior reasons in this very case of forsaking our Religion for any temporal
interest, or consideration; what is a man profited if he gain the whole world,
and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

When ever any of us are tempted in this kind; let that solemn declaration of
our Savior and our Judge be continually in our minds; he that confesses me
before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven; but
whosever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in the
glory of his Father, with his holy Angels.

And we have great cause to thank God, to see so many in this day of trial, and
hour of temptation, to adhere with so much resolution and constancy to their
Holy Religion, and to prefer the keeping of Faith, and a good Conscience, to
all earthly considerations and advantages.

And this very thing, that so many hold their Religion so fast, and are so loath
to part with it, gives great hopes that they intend to make good use of it, and
to frame their lives according to the holy rules and precepts of it; which
alone can give us peace whilst we live, and comfort when we come to die; and
after death secure to us the possession of a happiness large as our wishes, and
lasting as our Souls.

To which, God of his Infinite Goodness bring us all, for his mercy's sake, in
Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, World without end. Amen.

A SERMON ON HEB. X. 23.
Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is
faithful that has promised. THE main Scope and design of this Epistle to the
Hebrews, is to persuade the Jews, who were newly converted to Christianity, to
continue steadfast in the profession of that Holy and Excellent Religion which
they had embraced; and not to be removed from it, either by the subtle
insinuations of their Brethren the Jews, who pretended that they were in
possession of the true ancient Religion, and the only true Church of God upon
Earth; or by the terror of Heathen persecution which was so hot against them
at that time. And to this end the Author of this Epistle does by great variety
of arguments demonstrate the excellency of the Christian Religion above the
Jewish dispensation; and shows at large, that in all those respects upon which
the Jews valued themselves and their Religion (as namely upon the account of
their Lawgiver, their Highpriests and their Sacrifices) the Christian Religion
had every way the advantage of them.

And having made this clear, he concludes with an earnest exhortation to them
to continue steadfast in the profession of this excellent Religion, which was
revealed to them by the Son of God, the true propitiatory Sacrifice, and the
great High Priest of their profession, and into which they had solemnly been
initiated and admitted by Baptism; verse. 19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore,
brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by a new
and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to
say, his flesh; and having an high priest over the house of God: Let us draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, (that is, let us sincerly
serve God with a firm persuasion of the Truth and Excellency of this Holy
Religion, into the Profession whereof we were solemnly admitted by Baptism; for
that is undoubtedly the meaning of the following words; having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; the
Water with which our Bodies are washed in Baptism, signifying our spiritual
Regeneration, and the purging of our Consciences from dead Works, to serve the
living God. From all which he concludes, Let us hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering: This refers to that solemn Profession of Faith, which
was made by all Christians at their Baptism, and which is contained in the
ancient Creed of the Christian Church, called by the ancient Fathers, The Rule
of Faith.

Let us hold fast, (...), let us firmly retain; the same with (...). Chap. 4.
14. Seeing then we have a great high priest which is passed into the Heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us take fast hold of our profession. So here in the
Text, the Apostle upon the same Consideration exhorts Christians to retain, or
hold fast, (...), the Confession or Profession of their hope; that is, the Hope
of the Resurrection of the Dead, and everlasting Life, which was the Conclusion
of that Faith or Creed, whereof in Baptism they made a Solemn Profession. Let
us hold fast the profession of our Faith or Hope without wavering; the word is
(...), inflexible, unmovable, steady, and not apt to waver and be shaken by
every Wind of contrary Doctrine, nor by the Blasts and Storms of Persecution.
For he is faithful that has promised. If we continue faithful and steady to
God, he will be faithful to make good all the Promises which he has made to us.

In the words thus explained, there are Two things which I shall distinctly
consider.

I. The Exhortation; Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without
wavering: And

II. The Argument or Encouragement used to en^^^ce it; He is faithful that
promised. so I begin with the

I. The Exhortation, to be constant and steady in the Profession of the
Christian Religion: Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering. In the handling of this, and that we may the better understand the
true meaning of this Exhortation here in the Text, I shall do these two things.

1. I shall show Negatively, wherein this Constancy and Steadiness in the
Profession of the true Religion, does not consist. And here I shall remove one
or two things which are thought by some, to be inconsistent with Constancy and
Steadfastness in Religion.

2. I shall show Positively, what is implied in a Constant and Steady
Profession of the true Religion.

1. I shall show Negatively, what Constancy and Steadfastness in the Profession
of the true Religion does not imply. And there are two things which are thought
by some to be implied, in holding fast the profession of our faith without
wavering.

1. That Men should not take the liberty to examine their Religion, and enquire
into the Grounds and Reasons of it.

2. That men should obstinately refuse to hear any Reasons that can be brought
against the true Religion as they think, which they have once entertained.

1. That Men should not take the liberty to examine their Religion, and to
enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of it. This I think is so far from being
forbidden in this Exhortation; that on the contrary, I doubt not to make it
appear, that a free and impartial Enquiry into the Grounds and Reasons of our
Religion, and a thorough Trial and Examination of them, is one of the best
Means to confirm and establish us in the Profession of it: I mean, that all
Persons that are capable of it, should do it. and that they will find great
benefit and advantage by it. For I do not think that this is a Duty equally and
indifferently incumbent upon all; nor indeed fit and proper for all Persons;
because all are not equally capable of doing it. There are two sorts of Persons
that are in a great measure incapable of doing it.

1. Children.

2. Such grown Persons as are of a very mean and low capacity, and improvement
of Understanding.

Children are not fit to examine, but only to learn and believe what is taught
them by their Parents and Teachers: They are fit to have the fear of God, and
the Principles of the true Religion instilled into them; but they are by no
means fit to discern between a true and false Religion, and to choose for
themselves, and to make a change of their Religion; as has of late been
allowed to them in a Nation not far from us, and by public Edict declared,
that Children at Seven Years Old, are fit to choose and to change their
Religion: Which is the first Law I ever heard of, that allows Children of that
Age to do any act for themselves, that is of Consequence and Importance to
them, for the remaining part of their Lives, and which they shall stand obliged
to perform and make good. They are indeed Baptized, according to the custom
and usage of the Christian Church, in their Infancy; but they do not enter into
this Obligation themselves; but their Sureties undertake for them, that when
they come to Age, they shall take this Promise upon themselves, and confirm and
make it good. But surely, they can do no Act for themselves, and in their own
Name, at that Age, which can be obligatory: They can neither make any Contracts
that shall be valid, nor incur any Debt, nor oblige themselves by any Promise,
nor choose themselves a Guardian, nor do any Act that may bring them under an
Inconvenience, when they shall come at Age. And can we think them of discretion
sufficient at that time, to do a thing of the greatest Moment and Consequence
of all other; and which will concern them to all Eternity; namely, to choose
their Religion? There is indeed one Part of one Religion (which we all know)
which Children at Seven Years of Age are fit (I do not say to judge of, but) to
be as fond of, and to practice to as good purpose, as those of riper Years; and
that is, to worship Images, to tell their Beads, to say their Prayers, and to
be present at the Service of God in an unknown Tongue; and this they are more
likely to choose at that Age, than those who are of riper and more improved
Understandings; and if they do not choose it at that time, it is ten to one,
they will not choose it afterward. I shall say no more of this, but that it is
a very extraordinary Law, and such as perhaps was never thought of before, from
the beginning of the World. Thus much for Children.

As for grown Persons, who are of a very low and mean capacity of
Understanding, and either by reason of the weakness of their Faculties, or
other Disadvantages which they lie under, are in little or no probability of
improving themselves; These are always to be considered as in the condition of
Children, and Learners, and therefore must of necessity, in things which are
not plain and obvious to the meanest Capacities, trust and rely upon the
Judgment of others. And it is really much wiser and safer for them so to do,
than to depend upon their own Judgments, and to lean to their own
Understandings; and such Persons, if they be modest and humble, and pray
earnestly to God for his Assistance and Direction, and are careful to practice
what they know, and to live up to the best Light and Knowledge which they have,
shall not miscarry, merely for want of those farther degrees of Knowledge which
they had no Capacity nor Opportunity to attain; because their Ignorance is
unavoidable, and God will require no more of them than he has given them, and
will not call them to account for the improvement of those Talents, which he
never committed to them. And if they be led into any dangerous Error, by the
negligence or ill conduct of those, under whose Care and Instruction the
Providence of God permitted them to be placed, God will not impute it to them
as a Fault: Because in the Circumstances in which they were, they took the best
and wisest course that they could, to come to the knowledge of the Truth, by
being willing to learn what they could of those, whom they took to be wiser
than themselves.

But for such Persons, who by the maturity of their Age, and by the natural
strength and clearness of their Understandings, or by the due exercise and
improvement of them, are capable of enquiring into, and understanding the
Grounds of their Religion, and discerning the difference betwixt Truth and
Error (I do not mean in unnecessary Points and matters of deepest Learning and
Speculation, but in matters necessary to Salvation) it is certainly very
reasonable, that such Persons should examine their Religion, and understand the
Reasons and Grounds of it.

And this must either be granted to be reasonable; or else every man must
continue in that Religion in which he happens to be fixed by Education, or for
any other Reason to pitch upon, when he comes to Years and makes his free
Choice. For if this be a good Principle, that no Man is to examine his
Religion, but take it as it is, and to believe it, and rest satisfied with it:
Then every Man is to remain in the Religion which he first lights upon, whether
by Choice or the Chance of his Education. For he ought not to change but upon
Reason; and Reason he can have none, unless he be allowed to examine his
Religion and to compare it with others, that by the Comparison he may discern
which is best, and ought in reason to be preferred in his Choice. For to him
that will not, or is not permitted to search into the Grounds of any Religion,
all Religions are alike; as all things are of the same Color, to him that is
always kept in the dark, or if he happens to come into the Light, dares not
open his Eyes, and make use of them to discern the different Colors of things.

But this is evidently and at first sight unreasonable; because at this rate,
every Man that has once entertained an Error, and a false Religion, must
forever continue in it: For if he be not allowed to examine it, he can never
have Reason to change; and to make a change without Reason, is certainly
unreasonable, and mere Vanity and Inconstancy.

And yet for ought I can see, this is the Principle which the Church of Rome
does with great Zeal and Earnestness inculcate upon their People; discouraging
all Doubts and Inquiries about their Religion, as Temptations of the Devil; and
all Examinations of the Grounds and Reasons of their Religion, as an
inclination and dangerous step toward Heresy. For what else can they mean, by
taking the Scriptures out of the hands of the People, and locking them up from
them in an unknown Tongue; by requiring them absolutely to submit their
Judgments, and to resign them up to that which they are pleased to call the
Catholic Church, and Implicitly to believe as She believes, tho they know not
what that is? This is in Truth, to believe as their Priest tells them; for that
is all the teaching Part of the Church, and all the Rule of Faith that the
common People are acquainted with.

And it is not sufficient to say in this matter; that when Men are in the
Truth, and of the right Religion, and in the Bosom of the true Church, they
ought to rest satisfied, and to examine and enquire no farther: For this is
manifestly unreasonable, and that upon these Three accounts.

1. Because this is a plain and shameful begging of the thing in Question; and
that which every Church, and every Religion does almost with equal Confidence
pretend to; That Theirs is the only right Religion, and the only true Church:
And these Pretenses are all alike reasonable to him that never examined the
Grounds of any of them, nor has compared them together. And therefore it is
the vainest thing in the World, for the Church of Rome to pretend, that all
Religions in the World ought to be examined, but Theirs; Because Theirs, and
none else, is the true Religion. For this which they say so confidently of it,
That it is the true Religion, no Man can know till he have examined it, and
searched into the Grounds of it, and has considered the Objections which are
against it: So that it is fond Partiality to say that, Their Religion is not to
be examined by the people that profess it; but that all other Religions ought
to be examined, or rather, because they are different from That which they
presume to be the only true Religion, ought to be condemned at all adventures,
without any farther enquiry. This I say is fond Partiality; because every
Religion and every Church may (for ought that appears to any man that is not
permitted to examine things impartially) say the same for themselves, and with
as much Reason; and if so, then either every Religion ought to permit it self
to be examined; or else no man ought to examine his own Religion whatever it
be; and consequently Jews and Turks, and Heathens, and Heretics, ought all to
continue as they are, and none of them to change; because they cannot
reasonably change, without examining both that Religion which they leave, and
that which they embrace instead of it.

2. Admitting this Pretense were true; that They are the true Church, and have
the true Religion; This is so far from being a Reason why they should not
permit it to be examined, that on the contrary, it is one of the best Reasons
in the World why they should allow it to be examined, and why they may safely
suffer it to be so. They should permit it to be tried; that men may upon good
Reason be satisfied, that it is the true Religion: And they may safely suffer
it to be done; because, if They be sure that the Grounds of their Religion be
firm and good, I am sure, they will be never the worse for being examined and
looked into. But I appeal to every Man's Reason; whether it be not an ill Sign,
that they are not so sure that the Grounds of their Religion are solid and
firm, and such as will abide the Trial; that they are so very loath to have them
searched into and examined? This cannot but tempt a wise Man to suspect, that
their Church is not founded upon a Rock; and that they themselves know
something that is amiss in their Religion, which makes them so loath to have it
tried, and brought to the Touch.

3. It is certain among all Christians, that the Doctrine preached by the
Apostles was the true Faith of Christ; and yet they never forbad the Christians
to examine whether it were so or not: Nay, on the contrary, they frequently
exhort them to try and examine their Religion, and whether that Doctrine which
they had delivered to them was the true Faith of Christ. So St. Paul; 2 Corinthians. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own
selves. And again, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good intimating to us, that in order to the holding fast the Profession of our
Faith, it is requisite to prove and try it. And so likewise St. John's Ep. 1.
4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits whether, they are
of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And he gives a
very notable mark, whereby we may know the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of
Error. The Spirit of Error carries on a worldly Interest and Design; and the
Doctrines of it tend to Secular Power and Greatness; verse. 5. They are of the
world; therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. Acts 17.
11. St. Luke commends it as an argument of a more noble and generous Spirit in
the Beroeans; that they examined the Doctrine which the Apostles preached,
whether it were agreeable to the Scriptures; and this without Disparagement to
their Infallibility; These, says he, were more noble, than those of
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. They were ready to
receive the Word; but not blindly, and with an implicit Faith; but using due
Care to examine the Doctrines which they were taught, and to see if they were
agreeable to that Divine Revelation of the Holy Scriptures, which they had
before received. It seems they were not willing to admit and swallow
Contradictions in their Faith. And we desire no more of the Church of Rome,
than that they would encourage the people to search the Scriptures daily, and
to examine whether their Doctrines be according to them. We would be glad to
hear the Pope and a General Council commend to the People the searching of the
Scriptures; and to try their Definitions of Faith and Decrees of Worship, by
that Rule, to see whether what they have defined and decreed to be believed and
practiced, be agreeable to it; their Worship of Images; their solemn Invocation
of Angels, and of the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints departed; the Sacrament
under one kind only; the public Prayers and Service of God in an unknown
Tongue; the frequent Repetition of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ's Body
and Blood in the Mass. Had the Beroeans been at the Council of Trent and
pleaded their Right to search the Scriptures, whether these things were so; I
doubt they would have been thought very troublesome and impertinent, and would
not have been praised by the Pope and Council for their pains, as they are by
St. Luke.

You see then, upon the whole matter, that it is a very groundless and
suspicious Pretense of the Church of Rome, that because They are Infallibly in
the right, and Theirs is the true Religion, therefore their people must not be
permitted to examine it. The Doctrine of the Apostles was undoubtedly the true
Faith of Christ; and yet they not only permitted the people to examine it, but
exhorted and encouraged them so to do, and commended them for it: And any Man
that has the Spirit of a Man, must abhor to submit to this Slavery, not to be
allowed to examine his Religion, and to enquire freely into the Grounds and
Reasons of it; and would break with any Church in the World upon this single
Point; and would tell them plainly, if your Religion be too good to be
Examined, I doubt it is too bad to be Believed.

If it be said, that the allowing of this Liberty is the way to make people
perpetually doubting and unsettled: I do utterly deny this, and do on the
contrary with good Reason affirm, that it is apt to have the contrary effect;
There being in reason no better way to establish any man in the belief of any
thing, than to let him see that there are very good Grounds and Reasons for
what he believes; which no man can ever see, that is not permitted to examine
whether there be such Reasons or not. So that besides the Reasonablness of the
thing, it is of great benefit and advantage to us. And that upon these Accounts.

1. To arm us against Seducers. He that has examined his Religion, and tried
the Grounds of it, is most able to maintain them, and make them good against
all Assaults that may be made upon us, to move us from our Stedfastness:
Whereas he that has not examined, and consequently does not understand the
Reasons of his Religion, is liable to be tossed to and fro, and to be carried
about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and the cunning
Craftiness of those that lie in wait to deceive. For when he is attempted; he
will either defend his Religion or not: If he undertake the Defense of it,
before he has examined the Grounds of it; he makes himself an easy Prey to
every crafty man that will set upon him; he exposes at once himself to Danger,
and his Religion to Disgrace: If he decline the defense of it; he must be
forced to take Sanctuary in that Ignorant and Obstinate Principle, that because
he is of an Infallible Church, and sure that he is in the right, therefore he
never did nor will examine whether he be so or not. But how is he, or can he be
sure, that he is in the right; if he have no other Reason for it, but his
Confidence, and his being wiser in his own conceit, than Seven men that can
render a Reason? It is a shameful thing in a wise man, who is able to give a
good Reason of all other Actions and parts of his Life, to be able to say
nothing for his Religion, which concerns him more than all the rest.

2. To examine and understand the Grounds of our Religion, will be a good means
(by the assistance of Gods Grace) to keep us constant to it, even under the
fiery Trial. When it comes to this, that a man must suffer for his Religion, he
had need to be well established in the Belief of it; which no man can so well
be, as he that in some good measure understands the Grounds and Reasons of his
Belief. A man would be well assured of the Truth and Goodness of that, for
which he would lay down hi^s Life; otherwise he dies as a Fool dies, he knows
not for what. A man would be loath to set such a Seal to a Blank, I mean, to
that which he has no sufficient Ground and Reason to believe to be true;
which, whether he has or not, no man that has not examined the Grounds of his
Religion can be well assured of. This St. Peter prescribes, as the best
Preparative for suffering for Righteousness sake, the 1st. Ep. of Peter, 3. 14,
15. But if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; And be not afraid of
their terror, neither be troubled: But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts;
(that is, make him the great Object of your Dread and Trust) and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that
is in you.

2. The holding fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, does not
imply, that Men should obstinately refuse to hear any Reason against that
Religion which they have embraced, and think to be the true Religion. As Men
should examine before they choose; so after they have chosen, they should be
ready to be better informed, if better Reason can be offered. No Man ought to
think himself so infallible, as to be privileged from hearing Reason, and from
having his Doctrines and Dictates tried by that Test.

Our Blessed Savior himself, the most Infallible Person that ever was in the
World, and who declared the Truth which he had heard of God, yet He offered
himself and his Doctrine to this Trial. John 8. 46. Which of you convinces me
of sin? that is, of Falsehood and Error? And if I speak the truth, why do ye
not believe me? He was sure he spoke the Truth; and yet for all that, if they
could convince him of Error and Mistake, he was ready to hear any Reason they
could bring to that purpose. Though a Man be never so sure that he is in the
true Religion, and never so resolved to continue constant and steadfast in it;
yet Reason is always to be heard, when it is fairly offered. And as we ought
always to be ready to give an Answer to those who ask a Reason of the Hope and
Faith that is in us; so ought we likewise to be ready to hear the Reasons which
others do fairly offer against our Opinion and Persuasion in Religion, and to
debate the matter with them; that if we be in the right, and they in the wrong,
we may rectify their Mistakes, and instruct them in meekness, if God
peradventure may give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth.

We are not only to examine our Religion, before we peremptorily fix upon it;
but after we are, as we think upon the best Reason, established and settled in
it. Tho we ought not to doubt and waver in our Religion, upon every slight and
trifling Objection that can be brought against it; yet we ought always to have
an Ear open to hear Reason, and consider any thing of Weight and Moment that
can be offered to us about it. For it is a great Disparagement to Truth, and
argues a distrust of the Goodness of our Cause and Religion, to be afraid to
hear what can be said against it: As if Truth were so weak, that in every
Conflict it were in danger to be baffled, and run down, and go by the worst;
and as if the Reasons that could be brought against it, were too hard for it,
and not to be encountered by those Forces which Truth has on its side.

We have that honest Confidence of the Goodness of our Cause and Religion, that
we do not fear what can be said against it: And therefore we do not forbid our
people to examine the Objections of our Adversaries, and to read the best Books
they can write against it. But the Church of Rome are so wise in their
Generation, that they will not permit those of their Communion to hear or read
what can be said against them: Nay, they will not permit the people the use of
the Holy Scriptures, which they, with us, acknowledge to be at least an
Essential Part of the Rule of Faith. They tell their people, that after they
are once of their Church and Religion, they ought not to hear any Reasons
against it; and though they be never so strong, they ought not to entertain any
doubt concerning it; because all doubting is a Temptation of the Devil, and a
Mortal Sin. But surely that Church is not to be heard, which will not hear
Reason; nor that Religion to be much admired, which will not allow those that
have once embraced it, to hear it ever after debated and examined. This is a
very suspicious Business, and argues, that either they have not Truth on their
side; or that Truth is a weak, and pitiful, and sneaking Thing, and not able to
make its party good against Error.

I should now have proceeded in the Second place, to show Positively what is
implied in holding fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; and then
to have considered the Argument and Encouragement hereto, because he is
faithful that promised. But I shall proceed no farther at this time.

A SERMON ON HEB. X. 23.
Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is
faithful that promised. I Have already made entrance into these Words, which I
told you do contain in them,

I. An Exhortation, to hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering.

II. An Argument or Encouragement thereto; because he is Faithful that
promised. If we continue steadfast and faithful to God; we shall find him
faithful to us, in making good all the Promises which he has made to us;
whether of Aid and Support, or of Recompense and Reward of our Fidelity to him.

I have begun to handle the First part of the Text, viz. The Apoostles
Exhortation to Christians to be constant and steady in their Religion: Let us
hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering. The Word (...) which we
render, without wavering, signifies inflexible and unmovable, not apt to waver
and to be shaken with every Wind of contrary Doctrine, nor by the Blasts and
Storms of Persecution. And that we might the better comprehend the full and
true meaning of this Exhortation, I propounded to do these Two things.

1. To show Negatively, wherein this Constancy and Steadiness in the Profession
of the true Religion does not consist. And

2. To show Positively, what is implied and intended here by the Apostle, in
holding fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering.

1. To show Negatively, wherein this Constancy and the Steadiness in the
Profession of the true Religion does not consist. This I spoke to the last Day;
and showed at large, that there are Two things which are not contained and
intended in this Exhortation.

1. That Men should not have the Liberty to examine their Religion, and to
enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of it. Such I mean as are capable of this
examination and enquiry; which some, I showed, are not; as Children, who while
they are in that state, are only fit to learn and believe what is taught them
by their Parents and Teachers: And likewise such grown Persons, as either by
the natural Weakness of their Faculties, or by some great Disadvantage of
Education, are of a very low and mean Capacity and Improvement of
Understanding. These are to be considered as in the condition of Children and
Learners; and therefore must of necessity trust and rely upon the Judgment of
others.

2. This holding fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, does not
imply; that when Men upon examination and enquiry are settled, as they think
and verily believe in the true Religion, they should obstinately refuse to hear
any Reason that can be offered againg them. Both these Principles I showed to
be unreasonable, and Arguments of a bad Cause and Religion.

I shall now proceed to explain the meaning of this Exhortation, To hold fast
the profession of our Faith without wavering, by showing in the

Second place, what it is that is implied in the constant and steady Profession
of the true Faith and Religion; namely, That when upon due search and
examination, we are fully satisfied, that it is the true Religion which we have
embraced, or as St. Peter expresses it, 1st Epistle, 5. 12. That this is the
true Grace of God, wherein we stand; that then we should adhere steadfastly to
it, and hold it fast, and not suffer it to be wrested from us, nor our selves
to be moved from it, by any Pretenses, or Insinuations, or Temptations
whatsoever. For there is a great deal of difference between the Confidence and
Stedfastness of an Ignorant Man, who has never considered Things, and enquired
into the Grounds of them; and the Assurance and Settlement of one, who has
been well instructed in his Religion, and has taken pains to search and
examine to the bottom, the Grounds and Reasons of what he holds, and professes
to believe. The first is mere Wilfulness and Obstinacy. A Man has entertained,
and drank in such Principles of Religion by Education, or has taken them up by
Chance; but he has no Reason for them; and yet however he came by them, he is
resolved to hold them fast, and not to part with them. The other is the
Resolution and Constancy of a Wise Man. He has embraced his Religion upon good
Grounds, and he sees no Reason to alter it; and therefore is resolved to stick
to it, and to hold fast the Profession of it steadfastly to the end. And to this
purpose there are many Exhortations and Cautions scattered up and down the
Writings of the holy Apostles; as that we should be steadfast and unmovable,
established in the Truth, rooted and grounded in the Faith, and that we should
hold fast that which is good, and not suffer our selves to be carried to and
fro with every wind of Doctrine, through the slight of Men, and the cunning
craftiness of those that lie in wait to deceive; that we should not be removed
from him that has called us unto the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel;
that we should stand fast in one Spirit and one Mind, striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel, and be ^n nothing terrifled by our Adversaries; and that,
if occasion be, we should contend earnestly for the Faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints; and here in the Text, That we should hold fast the
profession of our Faith without wavering. For the explaining of this, I shall
do two Things:

1. Consider what it is that we are to hold fast; namely, the profession of our
Faith; And,

2. How we are to hold it fast, or what is implied in holding fast the
profession of our Faith, without wavering.

1. What it is that we are to hold fast; namely, the profession of our Faith;
i. e. of the Christian Faith or Religion: For, I told you before, that this
Profession or Confession of our Faith or Hope (as the word properly signifies)
is an Allusion to that Profession of Faith which was made by all those who were
admitted Members of the Christian Church by Baptism; of which the Apostle makes
mention immediately before the Text, when he says, Let us draw near in full
assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure Water: And then it follows, Let us hold fast the
profession of our Faith without wavering. The Profession of Faith which we made
in our Baptisms, and which by the Ancient Fathers is called the Rule of Faith,
and which is now contained in that which we call the Apostles Creed, and which
is called by St. Paul, Romans 6. 17. the Form of Doctrine which was delivered to
them; i. e. to all Christians; and 2 Timothy 1. 13. the Form of sound Words; Hold
fast, says he, the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith
and Love which is in Christ Jesus; and by St. Jude, The Faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints.

So that it is the first and ancient Faith of the Christian Church, delivered
to them by Christ and his Apostles, which we are here exhorted to hold fast;
the necessary and fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith; and by
consequence all those Truths which have a necessary Connection with those
Articles, and are implied in them, and by plain Consequence are to be deduced
from them. It is not the doubtful and uncertain Traditions of Men, nor the
partial Dictates and Doctrines of any Church, since the Primitive Times, which
are not contained in the Holy Scriptures and the Ancient Creeds of the
Christian Church, but have been since declared and imposed upon the Christian
World, though with never so confident a pretense of Antiquity in the Doctrines,
and of Infallibility in the Proposers of them: These are no part of that Faith
which we are either to profess or to hold fast; because we have no reason to
admit the Pretenses, by virtue whereof those Doctrines or Practices are
imposed; being able to make it good, and having effectually done it, that those
Doctrines are not of Primitive Antiquity; and that the Church which proposes
them, has no more claim to Infallibility, than all other Parts of the
Christian Church, which since the Apostles time is none at all.

In a word; No other Doctrines which are not sufficiently revealed in
Scripture, either in express Terms, or by plain and necessary Consequence; nor
any Rites of Worship, nor Matters of Practice, which are not commanded in
Scripture, are to be esteemed any part of that Faith in Re-Religion, the
Profession whereof the Apostle here Commands all Christians to hold fast
without wavering; much less any Doctrines or Practices, which are repugnant to
the Word of God, and to the Faith and Practice of the first Ages of
Christianity; of which kind I shall have occasion in my following Discourse to
instance in several Particulars. In the mean time I shall only observe, That
that Faith and Religion which we profess, and which by God's Grace we have ever
held fast, is that which has been acknowledged by all Christian Churches in
all Ages, to have been the ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and cannot
(as to any part or tittle of it) be denied to be so, even by the Church of Rome
her self.

I proceed to the

IId Thing which I proposed to consider; namely, how we are to hold fast the
profession of our Faith, or what is implied by the Apostle in this Exhortation,
To hold fast the profession of our Faith, without wavering. And I think these
following Particulars may very well be supposed to be implied in it.

1. That we should hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the
Confidence of Men, without Scripture or Reason to support their Confidence.

2. And much more against the Confidence of Men, contrary to Scripture, and
Reason, and the common Sense of Mankind.

3. Against all the Temptations and Terrors of the World.

4. Against all vain Promises of being put into a safer Condition, and
groundless Hopes of getting to Heaven upon easier terms in another Religion.

5. Against all the cunning Arts and Insinuations of busy and disputing Men,
whose Design it is to unhinge Men from their Religion, and to gain Proselytes
to their own Party and Faction. I shall go over these with as much Clearness
and Brevity as I can.

1. We should hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the Confidence of
Men, without Scripture or Reason to support that Confidence. All Religion is
either Natural or Instituted. The Rule of Natural Religion is the common Reason
of Mankind: The Rule of Instituted Religion is divine Revelation, or the Word
of God; which all Christians before the Council of Trent did agree to be
contained in the Holy Scriptures. So that nothing can pretend to be Religion,
but what can be proved to be so, One or both of those ways; either by
Scripture, or by Reason, or by both. And how confident soever Men may be of
Opinions destitute of this Proof; any Man that understands the Grounds of
Religion, will without any more ado reject them, for want of this proof; and
notwithstanding any pretended Authority or Infallibility of the Church that
imposes them, will have no more Consideration and Regard of them, than of the
confident Dictates and Assertions of any Enthusiast whatsoever; because there
is no reason to have regard to any Man's Confidence, if the Arguments and
Reasons which he brings, bear no proportion to it. We see in Experience that
Confidence is generally ill grounded, and is a kind of Passion in the
Understanding, and is commonly made use of, like Fury and Force, to supply for
the weakness and want of Argument. If a Man can prove what he says by good
Argument; there is no need of Confidence to back and support it. We may at any
time trust a plain and substantial Reason, and leave it to make its own way,
and to bear out its self. But if the man's Reasons and Arguments be not good;
his Confidence adds nothing of real Force to them, in the Opinion of Wise men,
and tends only to its own Confusion. Arguments are like Powder, which will
carry and do execution according to its true strength; and all the rest is but
noise. And generally none are so much to be suspected of Error, or a Design to
deceive, as those that pretend most confidently to Inspiration and
Infallibility: As we see in all sorts of Enthusiasts, who pretend to
Inspiration, although we have nothing but their own word for it; for they work
no Miracles. And all pretense to Inspiration and Infallibility, without
Miracle, whether it be in particular Persons, or in whole Churches, is
Enthusiastical; i. e. a Pretense to Inspiration without any Proof of it.

And therefore St. Paul was not moved by the Boasting and Confidence of the
false Apostles; because they gave no Proof and Evidence of their Divine
Inspiration and Commission, as he had done; for which he appeals to the Sense
of Men, Whether he had not wrought great Miracles; which the false Apostles had
not done, though they had the confidence to give out themselves to be Apostles
as well as he; 2 Cor. 12. 11, 12. I am (says he) become a fool in glorying, ye
have compelled me. And truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in
all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. And Rev. 2. 2. Christ
there commends the Church of Ephesus, because she had tried them, which said
they were Apostles, but were not; and had found them liars. And as we are not
to believe every one that says he is an Apostle, so neither every one that
pretends to be a Successor of the Apostles, and to be endued with the same
Spirit of Infallibility that they were: For these also, when they are tried
whether they be the Successors of the Apostles or not, may be found Liars, And
therefore St. John cautions Christians not to believe every spirit, (that is,
every one that pretends to divine Inspiration and the Spirit of God,) but to
try the Spirits, whether they be of God; because many false Prophets are gone
out into the World, 1 John 4. 1. And therefore the Confidence of Men in this
kind ought not to move us, when their Pretense to Infallibility is destitute of
the proper Proof and Evidence of it; which is a Power of Miracles; and when
their Doctrines and Practices have neither the evidence of Reason or Scripture
on their side.

For instance; That the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches; which is one of the new Articles of Pope Pius the IVth's Creed; and
yet there is not one syllable in Scripture tending to this purpose. And in
Reason it cannot be, that any but that which was the First Christian Church
should be the Mother of all Churches; and that the Church of Rome certainly was
not, and the Church of Jerusalem undoubtedly was.

And then that the Bishop of Rome, as Successor of St. Peter there, is the
Supreme and Universal Pastor of Christ's Church by Divine appointment, as he
assumes to himself; and that it is necessary to Salvation, for every humane
Creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome, as is declared in their Canon Law
by a Constitution of Pope Boniface the VIIIth, which Constitution is confirmed
in the last Lateran Council; of all which there is not the least mention in
Scripture, nor any divine Appointment to that purpose to be found there. And it
is against Reason, that all the World should be obliged to trudge to Rome for
the Decision of Causes and Differences, which in many and the most weighty
Matters are reserved to the Decision of that See, and can be determined
nowhere else. And against Reason likewise it is to found this universal
Supremacy in his being Successor of St. Peter; and to fix it in the Bishop of
Rome, rather than at Antioch; when it is certain, and granted by themselves,
that St. Peter was first Bishop of Antioch, and out of all question that he was
Bishop of Antioch; but not so, that he was Bishop of Rome.

Nor is there any thing in Scripture for the Deliverance of Souls out of
Purgatory by the Prayers and Masses of the Living. The whole Thing is
groundless, and not agreeable to the constant Suppositions of Scripture
concerning a future State. Nor is there any Reason for it, besides that which
is not fit to be given, the Wealth and Profit which it brings in.

The Invocation and Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints
departed, is destitute of all Scripture-warrant or Example, and confessed by
themselves not to have been owned or practiced in the Three first Ages of the
Church, because it looked too like the Heathen Idolatry; which deserves to be
well considered by those, who pretend to derive their whole Religion from
Christ and his Apostles by a continued and uninterrupted Succession. And this
practice is likewise destitute of all color of Reason; unless we be assured,
that they hear our Prayers in all places; which we cannot be, unless they be
present in all places, which they themselves do not believe; or that God does
some way or other reveal and make known to them the Prayers which are made to
them, which we cannot possibly be assured of, but by some Revelation of God to
that purpose; which we nowhere find, nor does the Church of Rome pretend to it.

But I proceed to the

2d Thing; namely, That we should much more hold fast the Profession of our
Faith and Religion, against the Confidence of Men, contrary to Scripture, and
Reason, and the common Sense of Mankind. For these are the chief grounds of
Certainty, which we can have for or against any thing; and if these be clearly
on our side, we ought not to be much moved by the Confidence of Men, concerning
any Doctrines or Practices of Religion, which are plainly contrary to these. If
in Points wherein we have this advantage on our side, we do not hold fast the
Profession of our Religion; our Error and Folly are capable of no excuse. And
this advantage we plainly have in several Points and Controversies betwixt us
and the Church of Rome.

As in the Worship of Images; which is as expressly and clearly forbidden in the
Second Commandment, and that without any Distinction, as any other thing is
forbidden in the whole Bible. And that it is so forbidden in this Commandment,
and that this Commandment is still in force among Christians, was the Universal
Sense of the ancient Christian Church.

Prayers and the Service of God in an unknown Tongue are directly contrary to
the very Nature and End of religious Worship, which ought to be a Reasonable
Service; which it cannot be, if it be not directed by our Understandings, and
accompanied with our Hearts and Affections. But if it be performed in an
unknown Tongue, our Understanding can have no part in it; and if we do not
understand it, it cannot move our Affections. And this likewise is plainly
contrary to Scripture; namely, to a large Discourse of St. Paul's, almost
throughout a whole Chapter, where he purp sely sets himself to show the
Unprofitableness and gross Absurdity of Praying or Celebrating any other Part
of Religious Worship, in an unknown Tongue. If any part of Our Religion had
been half so clearly condemned in Scripture, as this is, (which yet is the
constant and general Practice of the Church of Rome) we must have lain down in
our shame, and confusion would have covered us; and we must either have
rejected the Authority of the Bible, or have renounced that Point of our
Religion, whatever it had been: Though it had been dear to us as our right
Hand, and our right Eye; we must upon such plain Evidence of Scripture against
it, have cut it off, and plucked it out, and cast it from us.

The like may be said of Locking up the Scriptures from the people in an
unknown Tongue; contrary to the Command of the Scriptures themselves, and to
the great End and Design of Almighty God in the Writing and Publishing of them;
and contrary to the perpetual Exhortations and Counsels of all the Ancient
Fathers of the Christian Church for a great many Ages, not one excepted. They
are hardly more frequent, and copious, and earnest in any Argument; than in
persuading People of all Ranks and Conditions, to the constant and careful
Reaing of the Holy Scriptures. And contrary to the Common Reason and Sense of
Mankind. For what should Men be persuaded to be acquainted withal; if not with
That which is the great Instrument of our Salvation? That Book which was
written on purpose to reveal and convey to Men the Knowledge of God, and of his
Will, and their Duty? What should Men be allowed to know; if not That which is
the best and most effectual Means, to direct and bring them to Heaven, or turn
them from Sin, and to preserve them from Eternal Misery? When our Savior would
represent the best and most effectual Means of bringing Men to Happiness, and
saving them from the Eternal Torments of Hell, in the Parable of the Rich Man
and Lazarus; He brings in Abraham, giving the best Advice he could to the Rich
Man who was in Hell, concerning his Brethren that were upon Earth, how they
might prevent their coming into that place of Torment; And he directs them to
the Scriptures, as the best and most effectual Means to that purpose: They have
(says he) Moses and the Prophets: Let them hear them.

Now if in the Church of God among the Jews, the same Course had been taken,
that is now in the Church of Rome; the Rich Man might, and in all Reason ought
to have replied, Nay, Father Abraham; But they have not Moses and the Prophets,
nor are they permitted to Read them in a Language that they can understand; And
therefore this Advice is of no Use to them: And then he might with Reason have
pressed him, as he did, that one might be sent to them from the Dead, to
Testify unto them. But it appears, that Abraham was very positive and
peremptory in this Advice; and that he prefers the Knowledge of the Scriptures,
to any other Way and Means, that could be thought of, and that if this had not
its Effect to persuade Men to Repentance, and to preserve them from Hell, he
did not know any thing else, that was so likely to do it: For he concludes, If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets; neither will they be persuaded the One
rose from the Dead.

And this is the Conclusion of the Parable. Which plainly shows, what was the
main Scope and Design of our Savior in it; namely, to recommend to us the Use
of the Holy Scriptures, as the best and most effectual Means, which the Wisdom
of God has provided for the Salvation of Mankind.

And now any Man would be apt to think, that the declared Judgment of our
Savior in the case, should go a great way, even with the most Infallible
Church in the World. However, this we must say, that it is in truth a very hard
case, to which the Church of Rome has reduced Men; that it will neither allow
them Salvation out of their Church, nor the best and most effectual Means of
Salvation, when they are in it. I might say much more upon this Head; but this
I hope may be sufficient.

The next Instance shall be in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which is
contrary to the Scriptures; which after Consecration so frequently call, the
Elements Bread and Wine; and which, without Reason or Necessity, puts an absurd
and impossible Sense upon those words of our Savior, This is my Body; which do
no more prove Transubstantiation than those words, This Cup is the New
Testament, do prove that the material Cup which was used in the Sacrament, was
substantially changed into the New Testament; And no more, than those Texts
which affirm God to have Eyes, and Ears, and Hands, do prove that he really
has so. But besides the Contrariety of this Doctrine to Scripture, nothing can
be more repugnant to Reason. It is so big with Contradictions, and so surfeited
of Impossibilities, that it would be Endless to reckon them up. And besides all
this, it plainly contradicts the clear and constant Evidence of Four of our
Five Senses; which whoever contradicts, undermines the Foundation of all
Certainty.

And then the Communion in one kind is plainly contrary to our Savior's
Institution of the Sacrament in both kinds; as they themselves acknowledge. And
therefore the Council of Constance being sensible of this, was forced to Decree
it with an express Non obstante to the Institution of Christ, and the Practice
of the Apostles and the Primitive Church. And their Doctrine of Concomitancy
(as if the Blood were in the Flesh, and together with it) will not help the
matter: Because in the Sacrament Christ's Body is represented as broken, and
pierced, and exhausted, and drained of its Blood; and his Blood is represented
as shed and poured out; so that one Kind can by no means contain and exhibit
both.

The next Instance is, the Repetition of Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice in the
Mass, so often as That is celebrated: Against all Reason; because the Sacrifice
of Christ, once offered upon the Cross, was a full and perfect Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World; and therefore ought not, because it needs not, to
be again repeated for that End, in any manner whatsoever. And it is directly
contrary to the main Scope of a great part of this Epistle to the Hebrews,
which shows the Excellency of the Gospel above the Law in this respect, That
the Expiatory Sacrifice of the Gospel was offered once for all; whereas the
Sacrifices of the Law were perpetually repeated. Chap. 7. 27. Speaking of
Christ; who needs not daily, as those Highpriests, to offer up Sacrifices;
first for his own Sins, and then for the Peoples: for this he did once, when he
offered up himself. Chap. 9. 26. But once in the End of the World has he
appeared, to take away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself: And as it is appointed
for all Men once to dye; so Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many.
And Chap. 10. 10. By the which Will we are sanctified, through the Offering of
the Body of Jesus Christ once for all: And Verse the 12. But this Man, after he
had offered one Sacrifice for Sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God.
And Verse the 14. For by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. There cannot be plainer Texts for any thing in the Bible, than that
this Propitiatory Sacrifice was never to be repeated.

And whereas they say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is an unbloody Sacrifice:
This, instead of bringing them off, does but entangle the Matter more. For if
Blood be offered in the Sacrifice of the Mass, how is it an unbloody Sacrifice?
What can be more bloody than Blood? And if Blood be not offered; how is it
Propitiatory? Since the Apostle lays it down for a Certain Rule, That without
shedding of Blood, there is no Remission of Sins: i. e. There can be no
Propitiation for the Sins of the Living or the Dead, which the Church of Rome
affirms there is.

I might have added one or two Instances more; and then should have proceeded
to show, in the Third place, That we are to hold fast the Profession of our
Faith without wavering, against all the Temtations and Terrors of the World;
which is more especially and principally here intended by the Apostle in this
Exhortation.

But I shall proceed no farther at present.

A SERMON ON HEB. X. 23.
Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is
faithful that promised. IN these words, I have told you, are contained

I. An Exhortation, to hold fast the profession of our faith, or hope, without
wavering.

II. An Argument or Encouragement thereto; because he is faithful that
promised. I am yet upon the first of these; the Exhortation to Christians, to
be Constant and Steady in the Profession of their Religion; Let us hold fast
the profession of our Faith without wavering. And that we might the better
comprehend the true and full meaning of this Exhortation, I showed,

1. Negatively, what is not meant and intended by it. And I mentioned these two
Particulars.

1. The Apostle does not hereby intend, that those who are capable of enquiring
into, and examining the Grounds of their Religion, should not have the Liberty
to do it. Nor,

2. That when upon due Enquiry and Examination, Men are settled, as they think
and verily believe, in the true Faith and Religion, they should obstinately
refuse to hear any Reason that can be offered against their present Persuasion.
Both these I showed to be unreasonable, and Arguments of a bad Cause and
Religion: And therefore neither of them can be intended by the Apostle in this
Exhortation.

2. I proceeded Positively to explain the meaning of this Exhortation. And to
this purpose I proposed,

1. To consider what it is, that we are to hold fast, viz. the Confession or
Profession of our Faith. The ancient Christian Faith, of which every Christian
makes Profession in his Baptism: For of That the Apostle here speaks, as
appears by the Context; not the doubtful and uncertain Traditions of Men, nor
the imperious Dictates and Doctrines of any Church, not contained in the Holy
Scriptures, imposed upon the Christian Church; tho with never so confident a
pretense of the Antiquity of the Doctrines proposed, or of the Infallibility of
the Proposers of them. And then I proceeded in the

2. Place, to show how we are to hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering. And I mentioned these following Particulars, as probably implied in
the Apostles Exhortation.

1. That we should hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the
Confidence of Men, without Scripture or Reason to support their Confidence.

2. And much more against the Confidence of Men, against Scripture and Reason,
and the common Sense of Mankind.

3. Against all the Temptations and Terrors of the World.

4. Against all vain Promises of being put into a safer condition, and
groundless Hopes of getting to Heaven upon easier Terms, in another Religion.

5. Against all the cunning Arts and Insinuations of busiy and disputing Men,
whose design it is to unhinge Men from their Religion, and to gain Proselytes
to their Party and Faction.

1. We are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the Confidence of
Men, without Scripture or Reason to support their Confidence. And of this I
gave several Instances. As in the Pretense of the Church of Rome to
Infallibility, without any Proof or Evidence of it, either by Scripture or
Miracles: I mean such Miracles, as are sufficiently attested. For as for their
Legends, since the wisest among themselves give no credit to them, I hope, they
do not expect that We should believe them, or be moved by them. And then their
Pretense that the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches;
which is now made an Article of their Creed. And that the Bishop of Rome, as
Successor of Saint Peter there, is by Divine Appointment the Supreme and
Universal Pastor of Christ's Church. And that it is necessary to Salvation, for
every humane Creature to be subject to him. And lastly, their Invocation and
Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and Saints departed; without any Warrant or
Example of any such thing, either in Scripture, or in the practice of the first
Ages of the Christian Religion; and without sufficient Ground to believe that
they hear the Prayers which are put up to them.

2. Much more are we to hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the
Confidence of Men, contrary to Scripture and Reason and the common Sense of
Mankind. And here I instanced in the Worship of Images; the Locking up of the
Scriptures from the People, and celebrating the public Prayers and Service of
God in an unknown Tongue; in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; their
Communion in one kind; and their daily repetition, in the Sacrifice of the
Mass, of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ; which was offered once for all,
and is of Eternal Virtue and Efficacy, and therefore ought not, because it
needs not, like Jewish Sacrifices under the Law* to be repeated.

To these Instances, which I have already spoken to, I shall add one or two
more; as namely, That to the due Administration of the Sacraments, an Intention
in the Minister at least to do what the Church does, is requisite. This is
expressly defined, and under an Anathema upon all that shall say otherwise, by
the Council of Trent, Sess. the Seventh, Can. 11th; which is to make the
Validity and Virtue of the Sacraments, to depend upon the Intention of the
Priest or Minister. So that if in the Administration of Baptism, he do not
intend to Baptize the Party he pretends to Baptize, then it is no Baptism; and
consequently the Person Baptized is not made a Member of Christ's Church; nor
is any Grace or special Benefit conferred upon him; nor is he a Christian. So
likewise in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, If the Priest do not intend to
Consecrate the Host, then is it no Sacrament; and they that receive it, receive
no benefit by it; and (which according to their Opinion is a dreadful
Consequence) by the words of Consecration, there is no change made of the
Elements into the Body and Blood of Christ; and consequently they that give
Adoration to the Sacrament in such cases, Worship Bread and Wine, for God;
which is Idolatry. And so likewise in their Sacrament of Penance, though the
Priest pronounce the words of Absolution; yet if he do not intend to absolve
the Penitent; though he be never so truly penitent, and God on his part is
ready to forgive him; yet if the Priest do not intend to do so, there is
nothing done, and the Man is still in his Sin. So likewise in Ordination,
(which is another of their Sacraments) if the Bishop do not intend to Ordain
the Man; he is no Priest, and all that he does as a Priest afterward, either
in Administration of Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or the Absolution of
Penitents, all is vain and of no effect. Nay, in Marriage, (which they will
needs have to be a Sacrament too) if the Intention of the Priest be wanting;
there is nothing done, the Contract is nulled, and they that are so Married do
really live in Adultery; though they do not know it, nor have any suspicion of
it.

Now this is contrary to Scripture and the whole Tenure of the Gospel, which
promises the benefit and efficacy of the Sacraments, to all those that perform
the Conditions of the Covenant which are required on their parts, and declares
forgiveness of Sins to those who confess them to God, and truly repent of them.

And there is not the least intimation given in the Bible, that the Virtue and
Efficacy of the Sacraments does depend upon the Intention of him that
administers them; or that the Forgiveness of sins is suspended upon the
Intention or Absolution of the Priest; but only upon the sincere Resolution of
the Penitent. And surely nothing can be more absurd, and contrary to Reason,
than that when Men have performed all the Conditions which the Gospel requires;
yet they should notwithstanding this be deprived of all the Blessings and
Benefits which God has promised, and intends to confer upon them; because the
Priest has not the same Intention. So that when a Man has done all he can to
work out his own Salvation, he shall be never the nearer; only for want of That
which is wholly out of his Power; the right Intention of the Priest.

Besides, that after all their Boasts of the safe Condition of Men in Their
Church, and the most certain and infallible means of Salvation to be had in it;
this one Principle (that the Intention of the Priest is necessary to the
Validity and Virtue of the Sacraments) puts the Salvation of Men upon the
greatest Hazard and Uncertainty; and such as it is impossible for any Man
either to discover or prevent, unless he had some certain way to know the Heart
and Intention of the Priest. For upon these terms, who can know whether any Man
be a Priest, and really ordained; or not? Nay, whether he be a Christian, and
have been truly baptized; or not? and consequently whether any of his
Admistrations be valid, and we have any Benefit and Advantage by them? Because
all this depends upon the knowledge of that, which we neither do nor can know.

So that when a Man has conscientiously done all that God requires of any Man,
to make him capable of Salvation; yet without any Fault of his, the want of
Intention in an idle-minded Man may frustrate all: And though the Man have been
baptized, and do truly believe the Gospel, and has sincerely repented of his
sins, and lived a most Holy Life; yet all this may signify nothing, and after
all he may be no Christian; because his Baptism was invalid: And all the
Promises of God to the means of Salvation which his Goodness and Wisdom has
prescribed, may be of no Efficacy; if the Priest do not intend in the
Administration of the Sacraments to do that which God and the Church intend.

Now if this be true; there is certainly no Church in the World, in which the
Salvation of Men runs so many hazards; and yet all this hazard and uncertainty
has its rise, from a Scholastical Point, which is directly contrary to all the
Notions of Mankind concerning the Goodness of God, and to the clear Reason of
the thing, and to the constant Tenor of the Gospel; and which was never
asserted by any of the ancient Fathers; much less defined by any Council before
that of Trent: So that it is a Doctrine new and needless, and in the necessary
consequences of it unreasonable and absurd to the utmost degree.

The last Instance I shall mention, is their Rule of Faith. The Rule of Faith
universally received and acknowledged by the Christian Church in all Ages,
before the Council of Trent, was the Word of God, contained in the Canonical
Books of Holy Scripture; which were therefore by the Church called Canonical,
because they were the Rule of Faith and Manners, of the Doctrines to be
believed, and the Duties to be practiced by all Christians. But when the
Errors and Corruptions of the Romish Church were grown to the highth, and the
Pope and his Council at Trent were resolved not to Retrench and Reform them,
they saw it necessary to enlarge and lengthen out their Rule; because the
ancient Rule of the Holy Scriptures would by no means reach several of the
Doctrines and Practices of that Church, which they were resolved to maintain
and make good by one means or other: As namely, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; of Purgatory; and of the Seven Sacracraments: and the
practice of the Worship of Saints, and Images; of the Scriptures, and the
Service of God in an unknown Tongue; of Indulgences; and the Communion in one
kind: and several other superstitious Practices in use among them.

Now to enlarge their Rule to the best advantage for the Justification of these
Doctrines and Practices, they took these two ways.

1. They have added to the Canonical Books of the Old Testament which were
received by the Jewish Church (to whom were committed the Oracles of God) I say
to these they have added several Apocryphal Books, not warranted by Divine
Inspiration, because they were written after Prophecy and Divine Inspiration
was ceased in the Jewish Church; Malachi being the last of their Prophets,
according to the general Tradition of that Church. But because the addition of
these Books did not make a Rule of Faith and Practice large enough for their
purpose; in imitation of the Jews, in the time of the greatest Confusion and
Degeneracy of that Church, they added in the

Second Place to their Books of Scripture, which they call the written Word, an
unwritten Word which they call Oral Tradition from Christ and his Apostles;
which they declare to be of equal Authority with the Holy Scriptures
themselves; and that it ought to be received with the same Pious Veneration and
Affection: Of which Traditions, They being the Keepers and Judges, they may
extend them to what they please, and having them in their own Breasts, they may
declare whatever they have a mind to, to have been a constant and universal
Tradition of their Church; tho it is evident to common Sense, that nothing can
be more uncertain, and more liable to Alteration and Mistake, than Tradition,
at the distance of so many Ages, brought down by word of mouth, without
writing, and passing through so many hands. He that can think these to be of
equal Certainty and Authority with what is delivered by Writing, and brought
down by Books, undertakes the defense of a strange Paradox. viz. That general
Rumor and Report of Things said and done 1500 Years ago, is of equal Authority
and Credit with a Record, and a written History.

By which proceeding of the Council of Trent concerning the Rule of Faith and
Practice; it is very evident, that they had no mind to bring their Faith to the
Ancient Rule, the Holy Scriptures. That they knew could not be done; and
therefore they were resolved to fit their Rule to their Faith. And this
Foundation being laid in their first Decree, all the rest would afterward go
on very smoothly. For do but give Men the making of their Rule, and they can
make good any thing by it. And accordingly the Council of Trent having thus
fixed and fitted a Rule to their own purpose; in the Conclusion of that Decree,
they give the World fair warning, upon what Grounds, and in what Ways they
intend to proceed in their following Decrees of Practice, and Definitions of
Faith. Omnes itaque intelligant, quo ordine and via ipsa Synodus post jactum
fidei confessionis fundamentum sit progressura, etc. Be it known therefore to
all men, in what Order and Way the Synod, after having laid this Foundation of
the Confession of Faith, will proceed; and what Testimonies and Proofs she
chiefly intends to make use of, for the Confirmation of Doctrines, and
Reformation of Manners in the Church. And no doubt all Men do see very plainly,
to what purpose this Foundation is laid of so large a Rule of Faith. And this
being admitted, how easy is it for them to confirm and prove whatever
Doctrines and Practices they have a mind to establish?

But if this be a new, and another Foundation, than That which the Great Author
and Founder of our Religion, has laid and built his Church upon, ( viz.) the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; it is no matter what they build upon
it. And if they go about to prove any thing by the new parts of this Rule; by
the Apocryphal Books which they have added to the ancient Canon of the
Scriptures, brought down to us by the general Tradition of the Christian
Church; and by their pretended unwritten Traditions: we do with Reason reject
this kind of Proof, and desire them first to prove their Rule, before they
pretend to prove any thing by it: For we protest against this Rule, as never
declared and owned by the Christian Church, nor proceeded upon by the ancient
Fathers of the Church, nor by any Council whatsoever, before the Council of
Trent.

In vain then does the Church of Rome vaunt it self of the Antiquity of their
Faith and Religion; when the very Foundation and Rule of it is but of
Yesterday; a new thing, never before known or heard of in the Christian World:
Whereas the Foundation and Rule of Our Religion is the Word of God, contained
in the Holy Scriptures; to which Christians in all Ages have appealed, as the
only Rule of Faith and Life.

I proceed now to the

3. Thing I proposed, viz. that we are to hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering, against all the Temptations and Terrors of the World. And
this seems more especially and principally to be here intended by the Apostle
in this Exhortation.

I shall first speak of the Temptations of the World. And they are chiefly
these Two; the Temptation of Fashion and Example: And of worldly Interest and
Advantage.

1. Of Fashion and Example. This in Truth and Reality is no strong Argument;
and yet in Experience and Effect it is often found to be very powerful. It is
frequently seen, that this has many times too great an Influence upon weak and
foolish Minds. Men are apt to be carried down with the Stream, and to follow a
Multitude in that which is evil. But more especially Men are prone to be swayed
by great Examples; and to bend themselves to such an Obsequiousness to their
Superiors and Betters, that in compliance with them, they are ready not only
to change their Affection to Persons and Things, as They do; but even their
Judgment also; and that in the greatest and weightest Matters, even in Matters
of Religion, and the great concernments of another World. But this surely is an
Argument of a poor and mean Spirit, and of a weak Understanding, which leans
upon the Judgment of another, and is in truth the lowest degree of Servility,
that a reasonable Creature can stoop to; and even beneath That of a Slave, who
in the midst of his Chains and Fetters does still retain the Freedom of his
Mind and Judgment.

But I need not to urge this upon considerate Persons, who know better how to
value their Duty and Obligation to God, than to be tempted to do any thing
contrary thereto, merely in compliance with Fashion and Example. There are some
Things in Religion so very plain, that a wise and good Man would stand alone in
the Belief and Practice of them, and not be moved in the least by the contrary
Example of the whole World. It was a brave Resolution of Joshua; though all Men
should forsake the God of Israel, and run aside to other Gods, yet he would not
do it, Joshua 24. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord; choose you
this day whom you will serve: But as for me and my House, we will serve the
Lord. It was well resolved of Peter, if he had not been too confident of his
own Strength, when he said to our Savior, Though all Men forsake thee, yet
will not I.

2. Another sort of Temptation, and which is commonly more Powerful than
Example, is worldly Interest and Advantage. This is a mighty Bait to a great
Part of Mankind, and apt to work very strongly upon the Necessities of some,
and upon the Covetousness and Ambition of others. Some Men are tempted by
Necessity, which many times makes them do ugly and reproachful Things, and like
Esau, for a Morsel of Meat to sell their Birthright, and Blessing.
Covetousness tempts others to be of that Religion which gives them the prospect
of the greatest Earthly Advantage, either for the increasing or securing of
their Estates. When they find that they cannot serve God and Mammon; they will
forsake the one, and cleave to the other. This was one of the great Temptations
to many in the Primitive Times, and a frequent Cause of Apostasy from the
Faith; an eager Desire of Riches, and too great a Value for them; as St. Paul
observes, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. But they that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and
a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in
Destruction and Perdition. For the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil; which
while some have coveted after, they have erred, or been seduced from the Faith,
and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. This was the Temptation which
drew off Demas from his Religion; as St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas
has forsaken me, having loved this present World.

Ambition, is likewise a great Temptation to proud and aspiring Minds, and
makes many Men false to their Religion, when they find it a hinderance to their
Preferment; and they are easily persuaded, that That is the best Religion,
which is attended with the greatest worldly Advantages, and will raise them to
the highest Dignity. The Devil understood very well the Force of this
Temptation, when he set upon our Savior; and therefore reserved it for the
last Assault. He showed him all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of
them; and said to him, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me. And when he saw this would not prevail, he gave him over in
despair, and left him. But though this be a very dazzling Temptation; yet there
are Considerations of that Weight to be set over against it, from the Nature of
Religion, and the infinite Concernment of it to our immortal Souls, as is
sufficient to quench this fiery Dart of the Devil, and to put all the
Temptations of this World out of Countenance, and to render all the Riches and
Glory of it, in comparison of the Eternal Happiness and Misery of the other
World but as the very small Dust upon the Balance. What Temptation of this
World can stand against that Argument of our Savior, if it be seriously
weighed and considered; What is a Man profited; if he gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? If we
would consider Things impartially, and weigh them in a just and equal Balance;
the Things which concern our Bodies, and this present Life, are of no
Consideration, in comparison of the great and vast Concernments of our immortal
Souls, and the happy or miserable Condition of our Bodies and Souls to all
Eternity.

And Religion is a Matter of this vast Concernment; and therefore not to be
bargained away and parted with by us for the greatest Things this World can
offer. There is no greater Sign of a sordid Spirit, than to put a high Value
upon Things of little Worth; and no greater Mark of Folly, than to make an
unequal Bargain, to part with Things of greatest Price for a slender and
trifling Consideration: As if a Man of great Fortune and Estate, should sell
the Inheritance of it for a Picture; which when he has it, will not perhaps
yield so much as will maintain him for one Year. The Folly is so much the
greater, in Things of infinitely greater Value; as for a Man to quit God and
Religion, to sell the Truth and his Soul, and to part with his Everlasting
Inheritance, for a convenient Service, for a good Customer, and some present
Advantage in his Trade and Profession, or indeed for any Condition which the
foolish Language of this World cal's a high Place, or a great Preferment. The
Things which these Men part with upon these cheap Terms, God, and his Truth,
and Religion, are to those who understand themselves, and the just Value of
their Immortal Souls, Things of inestimable Worth, and not to be parted with by
a considerate Man, for any Price that this World can bid. And those who are to
be bought out of their Religion, upon such low Terms, and so easily parted from
it, it is much to be feared that they have little or no Religion to hold fast.

2. As we are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering,
against the Temptations and Allurements of this World; so likewise against the
Terrors of it.

Fear is a Passion of great force; and, if Men be not very resolute and
constant, will be apt to stagger them, and to move them from their
stedfastness. And therefore when the Case of Suffering and Persecution for the
Truth happens, we had need to hold fast the Profession of our Faith. Our
Savior in the Parable of the Sower tells us, that there were many that heard
the Word, and with joy received it: but when Persecution and Tribulation arose
because of the Word, presently they were offended.

And though, blessed be God, this be not now our Case; yet there was a Time
when it was the general Case of Christians, in the first beginning of
Christianity, and for several Ages after, though with some Intermission and
Intervals of Ease. It was then a general Rule, and the common Expectation of
Christians, That through many Tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom of
God; and that if any Man will live Godly in Christ Jesus, he must suffer
Persecution. And in several Ages since those Primitive Times, the sincere
Professors of Religion have, in diverse places, been exposed to most grievous
Sufferings and Persecutions for the Truth. And even at this day, in several
Places, the faithful Servants of God are exercised with the sharpest and sorest
Trials that perhaps were ever heard of in any Age; and for the sake of God, and
the constant Profession of his true Religion, are tormented and killed all the
day long, and are accounted as Sheep for the slaughter. It is Their hard Lot to
be called to these cruel and bitter Sufferings; and Our happy Opportunity to be
called upon for their Relief; Those of them, I mean, that have escaped that
terrible Storm and Tempest, and have taken Refuge and Sanctuary here among us,
and out of His Majesty's great Humanity and Goodness are by his Public Letters
recommended to the Charity of the whole Nation, by the Name of Distressed
Protestants.

Let us consider how much easier Our Lot and Our Duty is, than Theirs; as much
as it is easier to compassionate the Sufferings, and to relieve the Distresses
of Others, than to be such Sufferers, and in such Distress Our Selves. Let us
make Their Case our Own; and then we our selves will be the best Judges, how it
is fit for us to demean our selves toward them, and to what degree we ought to
extend our Charity and Compassion to them. Let us put on their Case and
Circumstances; and suppose that We were the Sufferers, and had fled to Them for
Refuge: the same Pity and Commiseration, the same tender Regard and
Consideration of our sad Case, the same liberal and effectual Relief that we
should desire and expect, and be glad to have shown and afforded to our selves;
let us give to them; and then I am sure they will want no fitting Comfort and
Support from us.

We enjoy (blessed be the Goodness of God to us) great Peace and Plenty, and
Freedom from Evil and Suffering: And surely one of the best Means, to have
these Blessings continued to us, and our Tranquillity prolonged, is, to consider
and relieve those who want the Blessings which we enjoy; and the readiest way
to provoke God to deprive us of these Blessings, is, to shut up the Bowels of
our Compassion from our Distressed Brethren. God can easily change the Scene,
and make our Sufferings, if not in the same kind, yet in one kind or other
equal to theirs; and then we shall remember the Afflictions of Joseph, and say
as his Brethren did, when they fell into Trouble, We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefore is this Distress come upon us.

God alone knows what Storms the Devil may yet raise in the World, before the
End of it: And therefore it concerns all Christians, in all Times and Places,
who have taken upon them the Profession of Christ's Religion, to consider well
beforehand, and to calculate the Dangers and Sufferings it may expose them to,
and to arm our selves with Resolution and Patience against the fiercest
Assaults of Temptation; considering the Shortness of all Temporal Afflictions
and Sufferings, in comparison of the Eternal and Glorious Reward of them; and
the Lightness of them too, in comparison of the endless and intolerable
Torments of another World; to which every Man exposes himself, who forsakes
God, and renounceth his Truth, and wounds his Conscience, to avoid Temporal
Sufferings.

And though Fear in many Cases, especially if it be of Death and extreme
Suffering, be a great Excuse for several Actions; because it may, Cadere in
constantem virum, happen to a resolute Man: Yet in this case, of Renouncing our
Religion (unless it be very sudden and surprising, out of which a Man recovers
himself when he comes to himself (as St. Peter did) or the Suffering be so
extreme, as to put a Man besides himself for the time, so as to make him say or
do any thing;) I say in this case of Renouncing God and his Truth, God will not
admit Fear for a just excuse of our Apostasy; which, if it be unrepented of,
(and the Scripture speaks of Repentance in that case as very difficult) will be
our Ruin. And the Reason is; because God has given us such fair Warning of it,
that we may be prepared for it, in the Resolution of our Minds: And we enter
into Religion upon these Terms, with a professed Expectation of Suffering, and
a firm Purpose to lay down our Lives for the Truth, if God shall call us to it.
If any Man will be my Disciple, says our Lord, let him deny himself, and take
up his Cross and follow me: And again, He that loves Life it self more than
me, is not worthy of me: And if any Man be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in
this unfaithful Generation, of him will I be ashamed before my Father and the
Holy Angels.

And therefore to master and subdue this Fear, our Savior has propounded
great Objects of Terror to us, and a Danger infinitely more to be dreaded,
which every Man runs himself wilfully upon, who shall quit the Profession of
his Religion, to avoid Temporal Sufferings; Luke 12. 4, 5. Fear not them that
can kill the Body, but after that have nothing that they can do: But I will
tell you whom you shall fear. Fear him, who after he has killed, can destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell: Yea, I say unto you, Fear him. And to this dreadful
Hazard every Man exposes himself, who, for the Fear of Men, ventures thus to
offend God. These are the Fearful and Unbelievers spoken of by St. John, Who
shall have their Portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the second Death.

Thus you see how we are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith without
wavering, against all Temptations and Terrors of this World. I should now have
proceeded to the next Particular; namely, that we are to hold fast the
Profession of our Faith, against all vain Promises of being put into a safer
Condition, and groundless Hopes of getting to Heaven upon easier Terms, in some
other Church and Religion.

But this I shall not now enter upon.

A SERMON ON HEB. X. 23.
Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised. IN these Words, I have told you, are contained these
Two Parts:

I. An Exhortation, To hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering.

II. An Argument or Encouragement thereto; Because he is faithful that has
promised. I am yet upon the

First of these, the Exhortation to Christians, to be Constant and Steady in
the Profession of their Religion; Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith
without wavering. And that we might the better comprehend the true and full
meaning of this Exhortation, I showed,

I. Negatively, what is not meant and intended by it: And I mentioned these Two
Particulars:

1. The Apostle does not hereby intend, that those who are capable of enquiring
into, and examining the Grounds and Reasons of their Religion, should not have
the liberty to do it. Nor,

2. That when upon due Enquiry and Examination, Men are settled, as they think
and verily believe, in the True Faith and Religion; they should obstinately
refuse to hear any Reason that can be offered against their present Persuasion;
for Reason when it is fairly offered is always to be heard. I proceeded in the

Second Place, Positively to explain the Meaning of this Exhortation: And to
this purpose I proposed to consider,

1. What it is that we are to hold fast; viz. the Confession or Profession of
our Faith: The Ancient Christian Faith which every Christian makes Profession
of in his Baptism; Not the Doubtful and Uncertain Traditions of Men, nor the
Imperious Dictates and Doctrines of any Church (which are not contained in the
Holy Scriptures) imposed upon the Christian World, though with never so
confident a Pretense of the Antiquity of the Doctrines, or of the Infallibility
of the Proposers of them. And then I proceeded, in the

Second Place, to show how we are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith
without wavering: And I mentioned these following Particulars, as probably
implied and comprehended in the Apostles Exhortation.

1. That we should hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the
Confidence of Men, without Scripture or Reason to support that Confidence.

2. And much more against the Confidence of Men, contrary to plain Scripture,
and Reason, and the common Sense of Mankind; under both which Heads I gave
several Instances of Doctrines and Practices imposed with great Confidence upon
the World, some without, and others plainly against Scripture, and Reason, and
the common Sense of Mankind.

3. Against all the Temptations and and Terrors of the World; the Temptations
of Fashion and Example, and of worldly Interest and Advantage; and against the
Terrors of Persecution and Suffering for the Truth. Thus far I have gone. I
shall now proceed to the Two other Particulars which remain to be spoken to.

4. We are to hold fast the profession of our Faith, against all vain Promises
of being put into a safer Condition, and groundless Hopes of getting to Heaven
upon easier Terms, in some other Church and Religion. God has plainly declared
to us in the holy Scriptures, upon what Terms and Conditions we may obtain
Eternal Life and Happiness, and what will certainly exclude us from it; That
except we repent, (i. e.) without true Contrition for our Sins, and forsaking
of them, we shall perish: That without Holiness no man shall see the Lord: That
no Fornicator, or Adulterer, or Idolater, or Covetous Person, nor any one that
lives in the practice of such sins, shall have any Inheritance in the Kingdom
of God or Christ. There is as great and unpassable a Gulf fixed between Heaven
and a wicked Man; as there is betwixt Heaven and Hell. And when Men have done
all they can to debauch and corrupt the Christian Doctrine, it is impossible to
reconcile a wicked Life with any reasonable and well-grounded Hopes of
Happiness in another World. No Church has that Privilege, to save a Man upon
any other Terms, than those which our Blessed Savior has declared in his holy
Gospel. All Religions are equal in this; That a bad Man can be Saved in none of
them.

The Church of Rome pretends their Church and Religion to be the only safe and
sure way to Salvation; and yet, if their Doctrine be true, concerning the
Intention of the Priest, (and if it be not, they are much to blame in making it
an Article of their Faith) I say, if it be true, that the Intention of the
Priest is necessary to the Validity and Virtue of the Sacraments; then there is
no Religion in the World, that runs the Salvation of Men upon more and greater
Hazards and Uncertainties, and such as by no Care and Diligence of Man in
working out his own Salvation, are to be avoided and prevented.

As for the easier Terms of Salvation which they offer to Men, they signify
nothing, if they be not able to make them good; which no Man can reasonably
believe they can do, that has read the Bible, and does in any good measure
understand the Nature of God, and the Design of Religion. For Instance; That
after the long Course of a most lewd and flagitious Life, a Man may be
reconciled to God, and have his Sins forgiven at the last Gasp, upon Confession
of them to the Priest, with that imperfect degree of Contrition for them, which
they call Attrition, together with the Absolution of the Priest.

Now Attrition is a Trouble for Sin, merely for fear of the Punishment of it.
And this, together with Confession, and the Absolution of the Priest, without
any Hatred of Sin for the Evil and Contrariety of it to the holy Nature and Law
of God, and without the least Spark of Love to God, will do the Sinner's
business, and put him into a state of Grace and Salvation, without any other
Grace or Disposition for Salvation, but only the Fear of Hell and Damnation.
This, I confess, is easy; but the great Difficulty is, to believe it to be
true. And certainly, no man that ever seriously considered the Nature of God
and Religion, can ever be persuaded to build the Hopes of his Salvation upon
such a Quick-sand. The Absolution of all the Priests in the World will not
procure the Forgiveness of God for any Man, that is not disposed for his Mercy
by such a Repentance as the Gospel requires; which I am sure is very different
from that which is required by the Council of Trent.

They that offer Heaven to Men upon so very large and loose Terms, give great
Cause to suspect, that they will never make good their Offer; the Terms are so
unreasonably cheap and easy, that there must be some Fraud and False Dealing.
And on the other hand, nothing ought to recommend our Religion more to a wise
and considerate Man; than that the Terms of Salvation which we propose to Men,
viz. Faith, and Repentance, and a sincere Obedience to the Precepts of the
Gospel, manifested in the Tenure of a Holy and Virtuous Life, are not only
perfectly agreeable to the plain and constant Declaration of Holy Scripture;
but do likewise naturally tend to engage Men most effectually to a good Life,
and thereby to make them meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. And therefore every body ought to be afraid of a Religion,
which makes such lavish Offers of Salvation, and to take heed how he ventures
his Soul upon them. For if, after all the Hopes that are given of Salvation
upon such and such Terms, the Sinner do really miscarry and miss of Heaven; it
is but very ill Comfort to him, to be put into a Fools Paradise, for a Minute
or two before he leaves the World, and the next Moment after to find himself in
the place of Torments. I proceed to the

5. And Last Particular I mentioned, as implied in the Exhortation here in the
Text, viz. That we hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering,
against all the cunning Arts and Insinuations of busy and disputing Men, whose
Design it is to unhinge Men from their Religion, and to gain Proselytes to
their Party and Faction. To this purpose there are several Cautions given by
our Blessed Savior and his Apostles. Matthew. 24. 4. Take heed that no man
deceive you; for many shall come in my Name, and shall deceive many. Ephesians. 4.
14. That ye henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men: (...) (the Word
signifies the Cunning of Gamesters at Dice;) by the slight of Men, and the
cunning Craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive. And Chap. 5. 6. Let no
man deceive you with vain Words. Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain Deceit; that is, by Sophistry and vain Reasoning,
under a pretense of Philosophy. Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about with diverse
and strange Doctrines. 2 Pet. 3. 17. Beware lest you also, being led away with
the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. And this Caution is
enforced by an express Prediction of a great Apostasy which should happen in
the Christian Church, by which many should be seduced, by pretense of Miracles,
and by several Arts of Deceit and Falsehood. This Apostasy St. Paul expressly
foretells, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3. We beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither
by Spirit (that is, by pretense to Inspiration) nor by Word (or Message) nor by
Letter as from us, as that the Day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you
by any means; for that Day shall not come, except there come a falling away,
and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition. And after a particular
Description of him, he adds, v. 9. Whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and in all deceitfulness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish. From all which he concludes, v. 15.
Therefore, Brethren, stand fast.

The particular nature and kind of this Apostasy the same Apostle describes
more fully, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall apostatize from the Faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, (i. e. under a
great Pretense of Sanctity, spreading their pernicious Errors) forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. This is a very lively and pat
Description of that great Apostasy in the Christian Church, which began in the
Western Part of it, and has spread it self far and wide. For there the Spirit
of Error and Falsehood has prevailed, under an Hypocritical Pretense of their
being the only True Church and True Christians in the World: There Marriage,
and several sorts of Meat, are forbidden to several Ranks and Orders of Men.
All the Difficulty is, what is here meant by Doctrines of Devils; and these
certainly can be no other than Doctrines tending to Idolatry, which the
Scripture every where does in a particular manner ascribe to the Devil, as the
Inventer and great Promoter of it. And this is very much confirmed by what we
find added in some ancient Greek Copies in this Text, which runs thus: In the
latter times some shall apostatize from the Faith; for they shall worship the
Dead, as some also in Israel worshipped. And then it follows, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. So that the particular kind of
Idolatry, into which some part of the Christian Church should apostatize, is
here pointed at: That they should worship Souls departed, or the Spirits of
dead Men; which was part of the Heathen Idolatry, into which the People of
Israel did frequently relapse. So that the Spirit of God does here foretell such
an Apostasy in some part of the Christian Church as the People of Israel were
guilty of, in falling into the Heathen Idolatry. They shall be Worshipers of
the Dead, as the Israelites also were.

And this is the great and dangerous Seduction which the Christians are so much
cautioned against in the New Testament, and charged to hold fast the profession
of the Faith against the cunning Arts and Insinuations of seducing Spirits; not
but (as I said before) that we are always to have an Ear open to Reason, and to
be ready to hearken and to yield to That, whenever it is fairly proposed: But
to be overreached and rooked out of one's Religion, by little Sophistical Arts
and Tricks, is Childish and silly. After we are, upon due Trial and Examination
of the Grounds of our Religion, settled and established in it, we ought not to
suffer our selves to be removed from it, by the groundless Pretenses of
Confident People to Infallibility, and to be practiced upon by Cunning Men, who
lie at catch to make Proselytes to their Party. This is to be like Children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine.

And we ought to be the more careful of our selves; because there never was any
time, wherein seducing Spirits were more bold and busy to pervert Men from the
Truth. Against These we should hold. fast our Religion, as a Man would do his
Money in a Crowd. It passes in the World for a great Mark of Folly, when a Man
and his Money are soon parted: But it is a sign of much greater Folly, for a
Man easily to quit his Religion; especially to be caught by some such gross
Methods, as the Seducers I am speaking of commonly use, and which lie so very
open to Suspicion; such as ill-designing Men are wont to practice upon a young
Heir, when they have insinuated themselves into his Company, to make a Prey of
him. They charge him to tell no body in what Company he has been; not to ask
the Counsel and Advice of his Friends concerning what they have been persuading
him to; because they, for their own Interest, will be sure to dissuade him from
it. Just thus do these Seducers practice upon weak People. They charge them not
to acquaint their Minister, with whom they have been, nor what Discourse they
have had about Religion, nor what Books have been put into their Hands; because
then, all their kind Design and Intention toward them will be defeated. But
above all, they must be sure to read no Books on the other side, because they
are no competent Judges of Points of Faith; and this reading on both sides will
rather confound, than clear their Understandings. They tell them, that they
have stated the matter truly, and would not for all the World deceive them; and
they may easily perceive, by their earnest Application to them, that nothing
but Charity, and a passionate desire of the Salvation of their Souls, makes
them take all these Pains with them. But this is so gross a way of proceeding,
that any Man of common understanding must needs discern by this kind Treatment,
that these Men can have no honest Design upon them.

To come then to a more particular Consideration of the Arts and Methods which
they use (I mean particularly those of the Church of Rome) in making Proselytes
to their Religion: As,

1. In allowing them to be very competent and sufficient Judges for themselves,
in the Choice of their Church and Religion, (that is, which is the True Church
and Religion, in which alone Salvation is to be had) and yet telling them at
the same time, that they are utterly incapable of judging of particular
Doctrines, and Points of Faith and Practice; but for these, they must rely upon
the Judgment of an Infallible Church, when they are in it; otherwise they will
certainly run into damnable Errors and Mistakes about these things.

And they must of necessity allow them to be sufficient Judges for themselves
in the Choice of their Religion; as will be evident, by considering in what
Method they proceed with their intended Proselyte.

They propose to him to change his Church and his Religion, because he is in
the wrong; and they will show him a better, and such a one as is the only True
one, and in which alone Salvation is to be had. To persuade him hereto, they
offer him some Reasons and Arguments, or give him Books to read, containing
Arguments to move him to make this Change, to satisfy him of the
Reasonableness, and to convince him of the Necessity of it.

Now by this way of proceeding (and they can take no other) they do, whether
they will or no, make the Person, whom they are endeavoring to convert, a
Judge for himself, which Church and Religion is best; that which they would
have him embrace and come over to, or that which they would persuade him to
forsake. For to what end else do they offer him Reasons and Arguments to
persuade him to leave our Church, and to come over to theirs; but that he may
consider the Force and Weight of them; and having considered them, may judge
whether they be of force sufficient to overruled him to make this Change? So
that as unwilling as they are to make particular Persons judge for themselves
about Points of Faith, and about the Sense of Scripture confirming those Points
(because this is to leave every Man to his own private Spirit and Fancy, and
giddy Brain) yet they are compelled by Necessity, and against their own
Principles, to allow a Man, in this case of choosing his Religion, to be a Judge
of the Reasons and Arguments which they offer to induce him thereto. So that,
whether they will or no, they must permit him to be a Judge for himself for
this once, but not to make a Practice of it, or to pretend this Privilege ever
after: For in acknowledgment of this great Favor, of being permitted to judge
for himself this once, (which they do unwillingly grant him, and upon mere
Necessity) he is for ever after to resign up his Judgment to the Church. And
tho this Liberty be allowed pro hac vice, and properly to serve a turn, i. e.
in order to the changing of his Religion; yet he is to understand, that he is
no fit and competent Judge of particular Points of Faith; these he must all
learn from the True Church when he is in it, and take them upon her Authority;
and in so doing he shall do very prudently, because She is infallible, and
cannot be deceived; but He may.

But is there any Sense in all this, that a Man should be very fit and able to
judge of that which they esteem the main and fundamental Point of all, namely,
which is the True Church and Religion; and of the Reasons and Arguments whereby
they pretend to demonstrate it; and of the true Meaning of those Texts of
Scripture, whereby they pretend to prove theirs to be the only True Church: and
yet should be wholly unable to judge of particular Points of Faith; or of the
True Sense of any Texts of Scripture that can be produced for the Proof of
those Points?

Is it so very prudent, in all the particular Points of Faith, for a Man to
rely upon the Judgment of the Church, because She is infallible; and not to
trust his own Judgment about them, because He is fallible, and may be deceived?
And is it prudent likewise for this Man to trust his own Judgment in the main
Business of all; namely, Which is the true Church and Religion; concerning
which he is as fallible in his Judgment, and as liable to be deceived, as in
the Particular Points? And if he be mistaken in the main Point, they must grant
his Mistake to be fatal; because his Sincerity, as to all the rest, depends
upon it. This is a great Mystery and Riddle; that every particular Man should
have so sufficient a Judgment as to this main and fundamental Business, Which
is the True Church and Religion; and should have no Judgment at all about
particular Points, fit to be trusted and relied upon! As if there were a
certain Judgment and Prudence, quoad hoc; and as if all Men's Understandings
were so framed, as to be very judicious and discerning in this main Point of
Religion; but to be weak, and dangerous, and blind, as to all particular
Points: Or, as if a Man might have a very good Judgment, and be fit to be
trusted and relied upon, before he come into their Church; but from the very
moment he enters into it, his Judgment were quite lost and good for nothing:
For this in effect and by interpretation they say, when they allow a Man to be
very able to judge which is the true Church and Religion; but so soon as he
has discovered and embraced that, to have no Judgment of his own afterward of
any Point of Religion whatsoever; and a very tempting Argument it is to any Man
that has Judgment, to enter into that Church.

2. Another Art they use with their intended Proselyte, in order to his making
a right choice of his Religion, is to caution him, to hear and read only the
Arguments and Books which are on one side. But now admitting their designed
Proselyte to be just such a Judge, and so far as they will allow him to be, and
no farther, viz. Which is the true Church; but to have no Fitness and Ability
at all to judge of particular Points of Faith; yet methinks they put a very odd
Condition, and untoward Restraint upon this Judge, in telling him, (as they
certainly use to do those whom they would pervert) That he must have no
Discourse, nor read any Books, but only on that side which they would gain him
to; because that is the way to perplex and confound him, so that he shall never
be able to come to a clear Judgment and Resolution in the Matter. But will any
Man admit this way of proceeding in a Temporal Case? This is just as if in a
Cause of the greatest consequence, the Council on one side should go about to
persuade the Judge, that it is only fit to hear what he has to say in the
Case; that he will open it very plainly, and state the Matter in difference of
clearly and impartially, and bring such strong Reasons and Proofs for what he
says, that he shall not need to hear any thing on the other side, but may
proceed to Judgment without any more ado: But if when the matter is thus laid
before him so plainly, and is even ripe for Judgment, he will trouble himself
needlessly to hear, the other side; this will cast him back where they first
began, and bring the Matter to an endless wrangling, and so confound and puzzle
his Understanding, that he shall never be able to pass any clear Judgment in
the Cause.

What think we would a Judge say to such a bold and senseless Pleader? The Case
is the same, and the Absurdity every whit as gross and palpable, in pressing
any Man to make a Judgment in a Matter which infinitely more concerns him, upon
hearing only the Reasons and Arguments on one side.

3. Another Art which they use in making Proselytes, is to possess them, that
there is but One thing that they are mainly concerned to enquire into, and that
is this; Since there is but one true Catholic Church of Christ upon Earth, out
of which there is no Salvation to be had; Which that True Church is; And when
they have found that out, that will teach them in a most Infallible way the
True Faith and Religion, and all things that are necessary to be believed or
done by them, in order to their Salvation; so that they have nothing to do, but
to satisfy themselves in this single Enquiry; Which is the True Catholic
Church of Christ? This is the Vnum necessarium, the one thing necessary; and
when they have found out this, and are satisfied about it, they need to enquire
no farther; this Church will fully instruct and satisfy them in all other
things. And this I cannot deny to be a very Artificial way of proceeding, and
to serve their purpose very well; for they have these two great Advantages by
it.

1. That it makes the work short, and saves them a great deal of labor, by
bringing the whole Business to one single Enquiry: and when they have gained
this Point, that this single Question is all that they need to be satisfied in;
then they have nothing to do, but to ply and puzzle the Man with their Motives
of Credibility, and Marks of the true Church; and to show, as well as they can,
how these Marks agree to Their Church, and are all to be found in it, and in no
other; and to set out to the best advantage the Glorious Privileges of Their
Church, the Miraculous things that have been and are still daily done in it,
and the innumerable multitude of their Saints and Martyrs: and if these General
Things take and sink into them, their work is in effect done.

2. Another great Advantage they have by it, is, That by bringing them to this
Method, they divert and keep them off from the many Objects against their
Church and Religion, namely, the Errors and Corruptions which we charge them
withal. For this is the thing they are afraid of, and will by no means be
brought to; to vindicate and make good their Innovations in Faith and Practice,
so plainly in many things contrary to Scripture, and to the Faith and Practice
of the Primitive Church; as the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, of Purgatory,
the Popes Supremacy, of the Infallibility of their Church, of their Seven
Sacraments Instituted by Christ, and of the Intention of the Priest being
necessary to the Validity and Virtue of the Sacraments: and then several of
their Practices; as of the Worship of Images, of the Invocation of Angels and
Saints, of the Service of God and the Scriptures in an Unknown Tongue, and the
Communion in one Kind; and several other things, so plainly contrary to the
Scriptures, and the Practice and Usage of the Primitive Church, that almost the
meanest Capacity may easily be made sensible and convinced of it. These are
sore places, which they desire not to have touched, and therefore they use all
possible Artifice, to keep Men at a distance from them; partly because the
particular discussion of them is tedious, and it requires more than ordinary
Skill, to say any thing that is tenable for them, and so to paint and varnish
them over, as to hide the Corruptions and Deformities of them; but chiefly,
because they are conscious to themselves, that as in all these Points they are
upon the Defensive, so they are also upon very great Disadvantages; and
therefore to avoid, if it be possible, being troubled with them, they have
devised this shorter, and easier, and more convenient way of making Proselytes.

Not that they are always able to keep themselves thus within their Trenches;
but are sometimes, whether they will or no, drawn out to Encounter some of
these Objections: but they rid themselves of them as soon, and as dexterously
as they can, by telling those that make them, that they will hereafter give
them full Satisfaction to all these Matters, when they are gotten over the
first and main Enquiry; Which is the true Church? For if they can keep them to
this Point, and gain them to it, they can deal with them more easily in the
rest; for when they can once swallow this Principle, That the Church of Rome is
the One True Catholic Church, and consequently, as they have told them all
along, Infallible; this Infallibility of the Church once entertained, will
cover a multitude of particular Errors and Mistakes; and it will very much help
to cure the weakness and defects of some particular Doctrines and Practices,
and at least to silence and overruled all Objections against them. So that the
benefit and advantage of this Method is visibly and at first sight very great;
and therefore no wonder they are so steady and constant to it, and do so
obstinately insist upon it. But how convenient soever it be to them; it is, I
am sure, very unreasonable in it self; and that upon these Accounts.

1. Because the True Church does not constitute and make the True Christian
Faith and Doctrine; but it is the True Christian Faith and Doctrine, the
Profession whereof makes the True Church; and therefore in Reason and Order of
Nature, the first Enquiry must be; What is the True Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, which by him was delivered to the Apostles, and by them published and
made known to the World, and by their Writings Transmitted and Conveyed down to
us? And this being found, every Society of Christians which holds this
Doctrine, is a True Part of the Catholic Church; and all the Christians
throughout the World that agree in this Doctrine, are the One True Catholic
Church.

2. The Enquiry about the True Church can have no Issue, even according to
their own way of proceeding, without a due Examination of the particular
Doctrines and Practices of that Church, the Communion whereof they would
persuade a Man to embrace. We will admit at present this to be the first
Enquiry; Which is the True Church? Let us now see in what way they manage this,
to gain Men over to their Church. They tell them, that the Church of Rome is
the One True Catholic Church of Christ. The truth of this Assertion we will
particularly examine afterward, when we come to consider the next step of
their Method, in dealing with their Converts. At present I shall only take
notice in the General, what way they take to prove this Assertion; namely, That
the Church of Rome is the One True Catholic Church; and that is, by the Notes
and Marks of the True Church, which they call their Motives of Credibility;
because by these they design to persuade them, that the Church of Rome is the
One True Catholic Church. I shall not now reckon up all the Notes and Marks
which they give of the True Church; but only observe, that one of their
Principal Marks of the True Church is this; That the Faith and Doctrine of it
be agreeable to the Doctrine of the Primitive and Apostolic Church, ( i. e.)
to the Doctrine delivered by our Savior and his Apostles: And this Bellarmine
makes one of the Marks of the True Church. And they must unavoidably make it
so; because the True Faith and Doctrine of Christ, is that which indeed
Constitutes the True Church. But if this be an Essential Mark of the True
Church; then no Man can possibly know the Church of Rome to be the True Church,
till he have examined the particular Doctrines and Practices of it, and the
Agreement of them with the Primitive Doctrine and Practice of Christianity; and
this necessarily draws on and engages them in a dispute of the particular
Points and Differences betwixt us; which is the very thing they would avoid by
this Method, and which I have now plainly showed they cannot do; because they
cannot possibly prove their Church to be the True Church, without showing the
Conformity of their Doctrines and Practices, to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Primitive and Apostolic Church; and this will give them work enough, and
will, whether they will or no, draw them out of their Hold and Fastness; which
is to amuse People with a general Enquiry, Which is the true Church; without
descending to the Examination of their particular Doctrines and Practices. But
this they must of necessity come to, before they can prove by the Notes and
Marks of the True Church, that theirs is the True Church.

And this is a Demonstration, that their Method of Satisfaction, as it is
Unnatural and Unreasonable, so it cannot serve the purpose they aim at by it;
which is, to divert Men from the Examination of the particular Points in
Difference between the Church of Rome and Us, and to gain them over to them by
a wile and trick; because the very Method they take to prove themselves to be
the True Catholic Church, will enforce them to justify all their particular
Doctrines and Practices, before they can finish this Proof.

And here we fix our foot; That the single Question and Point, upon which they
would put the whole Issue of the Matter, cannot possibly be brought to any
reasonable Issue, without a particular Discussion and Examination of the Points
in Difference betwixt Their Church and Ours: and when they can make out these
to be agreeable to the Primitive Doctrine and Practice of the Christian Church;
we have reason to be satisfied, that the Church of Rome is a Church, in the
Communion whereof a Man may be safe: But till that be made out; they have done
nothing to persuade any Man that understands himself, that it is safe, much
less necessary to be of their Communion. But if particular Points must be
discussed and cleared, before a Man can be satisfied in the Enquiry after the
True Church; then they must allow their intended Convert to be a Judge likewise
of particular Points; and if he be sufficient for that too, before he comes
into their Church, I do not see of what use the Infallibility of the Church
will be to him, when he is in it.

A SERMON, ON HEB. X. 23.
Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is
faithful that promised. I Have already made a considerable Progress in my
Discourse upon these Words; in which I told you, there is an Exhortation to
hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering: and an Argument or
Encouragement thereto; because he is faithful that promised. I am yet upon the
First of these, the Exhortation to hold fast the profession of our Faith
without wavering; by which I told you the Apostle does not intend, that those
who are capable of examining the Grounds and Reasons of their Religion, should
not have the Liberty to do it: nor that* when upon due Enquiry they are, as
they verily believe, established in the true Faith and Religion; they should
obstinately refuse to hear any Reason that is fairly offered against their
present Persuasion.

And then I proceeded to show positively,

First, What it is that we are here exhorted to hold fast, (viz.) The
Confession or Profession of our Faith; the ancient Christian Faith, of which
every Christian makes Profession in his Baptism. For it is of that the Apostle
here speaks, as appears plainly by the Context.

Secondly, How we are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith. And of this I
gave Account in these following Particulars.

1. We should hold fast the Profession of our Faith, against the Confidence of
Men, without Scripture or Reason to support that Confidence.

2. And much more against the Confidence of Men, contrary to plain Scripture
and Reason, and the common Sense of Mankind; of which I gave you particular
Instances.

3. Against all the Temptations and Terrors of the World.

4. Against all vain Promises of being put into a safer Condition, and
groundless Hopes of getting to Heaven upon easier Terms, in some other Church
and Religion. I am now upon the

5. And Last Particular I mentioned, namely, That we are to hold fast the
Profession of our Faith without wavering, against all the cunning Arts and
Insinuations of busy and disputing Men, whose Design it is to unhinge Men from
their Religion, and to make Proselytes to their Party and Faction. I have
already mentioned some of the Arts which they use, (I mean particularly them of
the Church of Rome) in making Proselytes to their Religion; and I have shown
the Absurdity and Unreasonableness of them. As,

First, In allowing Men to be very competent and sufficient Judges for
themselves, in the Choice of their Religion; ( i. e. which is the True Church
and Religion in which alone Salvation is to be had) and yet telling them at the
same time, that they are utterly incapable of judging of particular Doctrines
and Points of Faith. As for these, they must rely upon the Judgment of an
Infallible Church; and if they do not, they will certainly run into damnable
Errors and Mistakes.

And they must of necessity allow them the first, a sufficient Ability to judge
for themselves in the Choice of their Religion: Otherwise in vain do they offer
them Arguments to persuade them to Theirs; if they cannot judge of the Force of
them. But now, after this, to deny them all Ability to judge of particular
Doctrines and Points of Faith, is a very absurd and inconsistent Pretense.

Secondly, Another Art they use, in order to their making a right Choice of
their Religion, is earnestly to persuade them to hear and read only the
Arguments and Books on Their side: Which is just as if one should go about to
persuade a Judge, in order to the better understanding and clearer Decision of
a Cause, to hear only the Council on one side.

Thirdly, They tell them, that the only thing they are to enquire into, is,
which is the True Church, the one Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, out
of which there is no Salvation; and when they have found that, they are to rely
upon the Authority of that Church, which is Infallible, for all other things.
And this Method they wisely take, to avoid particular Disputes about the
Innovations and Errors which we charge them withal. But I have shown at large,
that this cannot be the First Enquiry: Because it is not the true Church, that
makes the true Christian Faith and Doctrine; but the Profession of the true
Christian Faith and Doctrine, which makes the true Church.

Besides, their way of proving Their Church to be the only true Church, being
by the Marks and Properties of the true Church, of which the Chief is, The
Conformity of their Doctrines and Practices with the Primitive and Apostolical
Church; this unavoidably draws on an Examination of their particular Doctrines
and Practices, whether they be conformable to those of the Primitive and
Apostolical Church, before their great Enquiry, Which is the True Church, can
be brought to any Issue; which it is plain it can never be, without entering
into the Ocean of particular Disputes, which they desire above all things to
avoid. So that they are never the nearer by this Method; they can neither
shorten their Work by it, nor keep off the Examination of their particular
Errors and Corruptions; which are a very sore place, and they cannot endure we
should touch it.

I shall now proceed to discover some other Arts and Methods which they use in
seducing People to Their Church and Religion, and shall be as brief in them as
I can.

Fourthly, They pretend, that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church, ( i.
e.) the Visible Society of all Christians, united to the Bishop of Rome, as the
Supreme Pastor and Visible Head of Christ's Church upon Earth: from whence it
clearly follows, That it is necessary to all Christians to join themselves to
the Communion of the Roman Church; otherwise they cannot be Members of the
Catholic Church of Christ, out of which there is no Salvation.

We grant the Consequence, That if the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, it
is necessary to be of that Communion; because out of the Catholic Church there
is ordinarily no Salvation to be had. But how do they prove, that the Roman
Church is the Catholic Church? They would fain have us so civil, as to take
this for granted: because if we do not; they do not well know how to go about
to prove it. And indeed, some things are obstinate, and will not be proved
without so much Trouble and Difficulty, that it is better to let them alone;
and by the confident Assertion of them, by Importunity, and by any other fair
means, to get them believed, without Proof of this stubborn sort of
Propositions, which will admit of no Proof. This is one, That a Part is the
Whole; or, which is all one, Th^^ the Roman Church is the Catholic Church. For
that it is but a Part of the Christian Church, and not the best Part neither,
but perhaps the very worst and most corrupt of all the rest, is no difficult
matter to prove, and has been often done. But now to prove the Church of Rome
to be the Catholic Church; that is, the whole Society of all True Christians
in the World; these following Particulars ought to be clearly shown and made
out.

1. A plain Constitution of our Savior, whereby St. Peter and his Successors
at Rome are made the Supreme Head and Pastors of the whole Christian Church.
For St. Peter first. Can they show any such Constitution in the Gospel, or can
they produce the least Proof and Evidence out of the History of the Acts and
the Epistles of the Apostles, that St. Peter was acknowledged for such by the
rest of the Apostles? Nay, is there not clear evidence there to the contrary,
that in the first Council of the Christian Church at Jerusalem, St. James the
Bishop of Jerusalem was, if not Superior, at least equal to him? Does St. Paul
acknowledge any Superiority of St. Peter over him? Nay, does he not upon several
occasions declare himself equal to the chiefest Apostles, even to St. Peter
himself? And is this Consistent with a plain Constitution of our Lord's,
making St. Peter Supreme Head and Pastor of the Christian Church?

But suppose this to have been so; where does it appear, by any Constitution of
our Savior, that this Authority was derived to his Successors? And if it were;
why to his Successors at Rome, rather than at Antioch, where he was first, and
unquestionably Bishop? They must acknowledge, that when he was Bishop of
Antioch, he was the Supreme Head and Pastor of the whole Christian Church; and
then the Style must have been, the Antiochian Catholic Church, as it is now
the Roman Catholic. But do they find any footsteps of such a Style in
Ecclesiastical History?

2. To make good this Proposition, That the Roman Church is the Catholic
Church; they are in consequence obliged to affirm and believe, That the
Churches of Asia, which were Excommunicated by the Bishops of Rome, for not
keeping Easter as They did; and the Churches of Asia and Africa, who were
Excommunicated by the same Bishop, upon the Point of Rebaptizing Heretics;
that all these, by being turned out of the Communion of the Roman Church, were
also Cut off from the Catholic Church, and from a possibility of Salvation.
This the Church of Rome themselves will not affirm; and yet, if to be cast out
of the Communion of the Roman and the Catholic Church be all one, they must
affirm it.

3. In consequence of this Proposition, That the Church of Rome is the
Catholic Church, they ought to hold, that all Baptism out of the Communion of
Their Church is void and of none effect. For if it be good; then it makes the
Persons baptized, Members of the Catholic Church; and then those that are out
of the Communion of the Roman Church, may be true Members of the Catholic
Church; and then the Roman and the Catholic Church are not all one. But the
Church of Rome holds the Baptism of Heretics, and of those that are out of the
Communion of Their Church, to be good; which is a Demonstration, that the Roman
Church neither is the Catholic Church; nor if she believe consistently, can
she think her self to be so.

4. In consequence of this Proposition, all the Christians in the World, which
do not yield Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and acknowledge his Supremacy,
are no true parts of the Catholic Church, nor in a possibility of Salvation.
And this does not only exclude those of the Reformed Religion from being
Members of the Catholic Church; but the Greeks, and the Eastern Churches; ( i.
e.) Four of the Five Patriarchal Churches of the Christian World; which taken
together, are really greater than those in Communion with the Church of Rome.
And this the Church of Rome does affirm, concerning all those Churches and
Christians, which refuse Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, that they are out of
the Communion of the Catholic Church, and a capacity of Salvation. But surely
it is not possible, that the True Catholic Church of Christ can have so little
Charity as this comes to; and to a wise Man there needs no other Demonstration
than this, That the Church of Rome is so far from being the Whole Christian
Church, that it is a very Arrogant and Uncharitable Part of it.

Fifthly and Lastly; In consequence of the Truth of this Proposition, and of
the Importance of it to the Salvation of Souls, and to the Peace and Unity of
the Christian Church, they ought to produce express Mention of the Roman
Catholic Church, in the Ancient Creeds of the Christian Church. For if this
Proposition, That the Roman Church is the Catholic, be true; it was always so,
and always of the greatest Importance to the Salvation of Men, and the Peace
and Unity of the Christian Church: and if it were so, and always believed to be
so, by the Christian Church, as they pretend; What reason can be imagined, why
the Ancient Christian Church should never say so, nor put an Article of such
Consequence and Importance in express Words in their Creeds; nor why they
should not have used the Style of Roman Catholic, as familiarly then, as they
do now in the Roman Church? A plain Evidence that this is a new Style which
they use, when they give themselves the Title of the Roman Catholic Church;
and that the Ancient Christian Church knew better, than to call one Part of the
Catholic Church the Whole. I am sure, that AEneas Sylvius (who was afterward
Pope Pius the Second) says, that before the Council of Nice, little respect was
had to the Roman Church. But how does this consist with their present Pretense,
that the Roman Church is, and always has been the Catholic Church; and that
the Bishop of Rome is by Christ's appointment, the Supreme Pastor, and Visible
Head of the whole Christian Church? Is it possible that this should be believed
in the Christian Church before the Council of Nice; and yet little respect to
be had at that time to the Roman Church? This indeed was said by AEneas
Sylvius, before he sat in the Infallible Chair; but is never the less true for
that.

5ly. The next step of their Method is, That the Roman Church is Infallible;
and by this means They have a certain remedy against Heresy, and a Judge of
Controversies, from which there is no Appeal, which We want in Our Church. And
this is a Glorious Privilege indeed, if they could prove that they had it, and
that it would be so certain a remedy against Heresy, and give a final Decision
to all Controversies. But there is not one tittle of all this, of which they
are able to give any tenable Proof: For,

1. All the pretense for their Infallibility relyes upon the truth of the
former Proposition, That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church, and That
they say is Infallible: And I have already shown, that That Proposition is not
only destitute of any good Proof, but is as evidently false, as that a Part of
a thing is the Whole.

2. But supposing it were true, That the Roman Church were the Catholic
Church; yet it is neither evident in it self, nor can be proved by them, that
the Catholic Church of every Age is Infallible, in deciding all Controversies
of Religion. It is granted by all Christians, that our Savior and his Apostles
were Infallible, in the delivery of the Christian Doctrine; and they proved
their Infallibility by Miracles; and this was necessary at first for the
Security of our Faith: but this Doctrine being once Delivered and Transmitted
down to us in the Holy Scriptures, Written by the Evangelists and Apostles, who
were Infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost; we have now a certain and
Infallible Rule of Faith and Practice, which, with the assistance and
instruction of those Guides and Pastors which Christ has appointed in his
Church, is sufficiently plain in all things necessary. And as there is no
evidence of the Continuance of Infallibility in the Guides and Pastors of the
Church, in the Ages which followed the Apostles; because Miracles are long
since ceased: so there is no need of the Continuance of it, for the
Preservation of the True Faith and Religion; because God has sufficiently
provided for that, by that Infallible Rule of Faith and Manners which he has
left to his Church in the Holy Scriptures, which are every way sufficient and
able to make both Pastors and People wise unto Salvation.

3. As for a certain Remedy against Heresy, it is certain God never intended
there should be any; no more than he has provided a certain Remedy against Sin
and Vice; which surely is every whit as contrary to the Christian Religion, and
therefore as fit to be provided against, as Heresy: But it is certain in
Experience, that God has provided no certain and effectual Remedy against Sin
and Vice; for which I can give no other reason, but that God does that which He
thinks best and fittest, and not what We are apt to think to be so. Besides
that Infallibility is not a certain Remedy against Heresy. The Apostles were
certainly Infallible; and yet they could neither prevent nor extinguish
Heresy; which never more abounded than in the Apostles Times. And Saint Paul
expressly tells us, 1 Cor. 1. 19. That there must be Heresies; that they which
are approved may be made manifest. And St. Peter, the 2 Epist. 2. 1. That there
should be false Teachers among Christians, who should privily bring in damnable
Heresies; and that many should follow their pernicious ways. But now if there
must be Heresies; either the Church must not be Infallible, or Infallibility in
the Church is no certain Remedy against them.

I proceed to the next Step they make viz.

6ly. That Christ has always a Visible Church upon Earth; and that They can
show a Church, which from the time of Christ and his Apostles, has always made
a Visible Profession of the same Doctrines and Practices which are now believed
and practiced in the Church of Rome; but that We can show no Visible Church,
that from the time of Christ and his Apostles, has always opposed the Church
of Rome in, those Doctrines and Practices which we now revile and find fault
with in their Church.

That Christ has always had, and ever shall have to the end of the World, a
Visible Church, Professing and Practicing his True Faith and Religion, is
agreed on both sides: But We say, that he has no where promised, that This
shall be free from all Errors and Corruptions in Faith and Practice. This the
Churches Planted by the Apostles themselves were not, even in Their times, and
during Their abode amongst them; and yet they were true parts of the Christian
Catholic Church. In the following Ages, Errors and Corruptions and
Superstitions did by degrees creep in and grow up, in several parts of the
Church; as St. Austin, and others of the Fathers complain of their Times. Since
that several Famous Parts of the Christian Church, both in Asia and Africa,
have not only been greatly corrupted, but have Apostatized from the Faith; so
that in many Places there are hardly any Footsteps of Christianity among them.
But yet still Christ has had in all these Ages a Visible Church upon Earth;
though perhaps no Part of it at all times free from some Errors and Corruptions;
and in several Parts of it, great Corruptions both in Faith and Practice; and
in none I think more and longer, than in the Church of Rome, for all she boasts
her self like Old Babylon, Isa. 47. 7, 8. That she is a Lady for ever; and says
in her heart, I am, and none else besides me; And like the Church of Laodicea,
Revel. 3. 17. which said, I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of
nothing; When the Spirit of God says, that she was wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked; and knew it not.

Thus the Church of Rome boasts; that She has in all Ages been the True
Visible Church of Christ (and none besides her) free from all Errors in
Doctrine, and Corruptions in Practice; and that from the Age of Christ and his
Apostles, she has always professed the same Doctrines and Practices which she
does at this day. Can any thing be more shameless than this? Did they always
believe Transubstantiation? Let their Pope Gelasius speak for them; who
expressly denies, that in the Sacrament there is any Substantial change of the
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. Was this always an Article of
their Faith, and necessary to be believed by all Christians? Let Scotus, and
several other of their Schoolmen and Learned Writers speak for them. Was
Purgatory always believed in the Roman Church, as it is now defined in the
Council of Trent? Let several of their Learned Men speak. In what Father, in
what Council before that of Trent, do they find Christ to have Instituted just
Seven Sacraments, neither more nor less? And for Practices in their Religion,
they themselves will not say, that in the Ancient Christian Church the
Scriptures were withheld from the People, and locked up in an Unknown Tongue;
and that the Public Service of God, the Prayers and Lessons were Read, and the
Sacraments Celebrated, in an Unknown Tongue; and that the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper was given to the People only in one Kind. Where do they find in
Holy Scripture, or in the Doctrine and Practice of the Ancient Christian
Church, any Command or Example for the Worship of Images; for the Invocation of
Saints and Angels and the Blessed Virgin; which do now make a great part of
their Religion? Nay, is not the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and of the Ancient
Fathers plainly against all these Practices? With what face then can it be
said, That the Church of Rome has made a constant Visible Profession of the
same Faith and Practice in all Ages, from the time of Christ and his Apostles?
Or would the primitive Church of Rome, if it should now visit the Earth again,
own the present Church of Rome to be the same in all Matters of Faith and
practice, that it was when they left it?

And whereas they demand of Us, to show a Visible Church from the time of
Christ and his Apostles, that has always opposed the Church of Rome, in those
points of Doctrine and Practice which we Object to them; what can be more
impertinent than this Demand? When they know that in all these Points we charge
them with Innovations in Matters of Faith and Practice, and say that those
things came in by degrees, several Ages after the Apostles time, some sooner,
some later; as we are able to make good, and have done it. And would they have
us show them a Visible Church, that opposed these Errors and Corruptions in
their Church, before ever they appeared? This we do not pretend to show. And
supposing they had not been at all opposed, when they appeared, nor a long time
after, not till the Reformation; yet if they be Errors and Corruptions of the
Christian Doctrine, and contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and to the Faith and
Practice of the Primitive Church; there is no Prescription against Truth. It Is
never too late, for any Church to reject those Errors and Corruptions, and to
reform it self from them.

The bottom of all this Matter is, they would have us to show them a Society of
Christians, that in all Ages has preserved it self free from all such Errors
and Corruptions as we charge them withal; or else we deny the Perpetual
Visibility of the Catholic Church. No such matter. We say the Church of Christ
has always been Visible in every Age since Christ's time; and that the several
Societies of Christians, professing the Christian Doctrine and Laws of Christ,
have made up the Catholic Church; some parts whereof have in several Ages
fallen into great Errors and Corruptions; and no part of the Catholic, into
more and greater, than the Church of Rome. So that it requires the utmost of
our Charity to think that they are a true, tho a very unsound and corrupt Part
of the Catholic Church of Christ.

We acknowledge likewise, that We were once involved in the like Degeneracy;
but by the mercy of God, and pious care and prudence of those that were in
Authority, are happily rescued out of it: and though we were not out of the
Catholic Church before; yet since our Reformation from the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, we are in it upon better Terms, and are a
much sounder Part of it; and I hope, by the Mercy and Goodness of God, we shall
for ever continue so.

So that to the Perpetual Visibility of Christ's Church, it is not necessary,
that the whole Christian Church, or indeed that any Part of it should be free
from all Errors and Corruptions. Even the Churches planted by the Apostles in
the Primitive Times were not so. St. Paul reproves several Doctrines and
Practices in the Church of Corinth, and of Colosse, and of Galatia; and the
Spirit of God, several Things in the Seven Churches of Asia: and yet all these
were true Parts and Members of the Catholic Church of Christ, notwithstanding
these Faults and Errors; because they all agreed in the Main and Essential
Doctrines of Christianity. And when more and greater Corruptions grew upon the
Church, or any part of it; the greater reason and need there was of a
Reformation. And as every particular Person has a right to reform any thing
that he finds amiss in himself, so far as concerns himself; so much more every
National Church has a Power within it self, to reform it self from all Errors
and Corruptions, and by the Sanction of the Catholic Authority to confirm that
Reformation; which is our Case here in England. And whatever part of the
Church, how great and eminent soever, excludes from her Communion such a
National Church, for reforming her self from plain Errors and Corruptions,
clearly condemned by the Word of God, and by the Doctrine and Practice of the
Primitive Christian Church, is undoubtedly Guilty of Schism. And this is the
Truth of the Case between us and the Church of Rome. And no blind talk about a
Perpetual Visible Church can render Us guilty of Schism, for making a Real
Reformation; or acquit Them of it, for casting us out of their Communion for
that Cause.

7. And Lastly, (to mention no more) they pretend, that we delude the People,
by laying too much stress upon Scripture, and making it the only Rule of Faith
and Manners: whereas Scripture and Tradition together make up the entire Rule
of Faith; and not Scripture Interpreted by every Man's private Fancy, but by
Tradition carefully preserved in the Church. So that it ought to be no wonder,
if several of their Doctrines and Practices cannot be so clearly made out by
Scripture, or perhaps seem contrary to it, as it may be expounded by a private
Spirit, but not as Interpreted by the Tradition of the Church, which can only
give the true Sense of Scripture. And therefore they are to understand, that
several of those Doctrines and Practices, which we Object against, are most
clearly proved by the Tradition of their Church, which is of equal Authority
with Scripture.

In this Objection of theirs, which they design for the Cover of all their
Errors and Corruptions, there are several things distinctly to be considered,
which I shall do as briefly as I can.

First, Whereas it is suggested, That We delude the People, by laying too much
stress upon the Scriptures, (which certainly we cannot well do, if it be the
Word of God) it ought to be considered, whether They do not delude and abuse
them infinitely more, in keeping the Scriptures from them, and not suffering
them to see That, which they cannot deny to be at least a considerable Part of
the Rule of Christian Doctrine and Practice. Does it not by this dealing of
theirs appear very suspicious, that they are extremely afraid that the People
should examine their Doctrine and Practice by this Rule? For what other Reason
can they have to conceal it from them?

Secondly, Whereas they affirm, that Scripture alone is not the Rule of
Christian Faith and Practice; but that Scripture, and Oral Tradition preserved
in the Church, and delivered down from hand to hand, makes up the entire Rule:
I would fain know whence they learned this new Doctrine of the Rule of Faith? I
know that the Council of Trent declares it for the Rule they intend to proceed
upon and make use of, for the Confirmation and Proof of their following
Determinations and Decrees. But did any of the ancient Councils of the
Christian Church lay down this Rule, and proceed upon it? Did not Constantine
the Emperor, at the opening of the First General Council, lay the Bible before
them, as the only Rule, according to which they were to proceed; and this with
the Approbation of all those Holy Fathers that were assembled in that Council?
And did not following Councils proceed upon the same Rule? Do any of the
ancient Fathers ever mention any Rule of Christian Faith and Practice, besides
the Holy Scriptures, and the ancient Creed; which, because it is an Abridgment
of the necessary Articles of Christian Faith contained in the Holy Scriptures,
is by them frequently called the Rule of Faith? Do not the same Fathers
frequently and expressly say, That the Scriptures are a perfect Rule, and that
all things are plainly contained in them, which concern Faith and Life; and
that whatever cannot be proved by Testimony of Scripture, is to be rejected?
All this I am sure I can make good, by innumerable express Testimonies of the
ancient Fathers, which are well known to those that are versed in them. By what
Authority then has the Council of Trent set up this new Rule, unknown to the
Christian Church for 1500 Years? and who gave them this Authority? The plain
truth is, the necessity of it, for the Defense of the Errors and Corruptions
which they had embraced, and were resolved not to part with, forced them to
lengthen out the Rule; the old Rule of the Holy Scriptures being too short for
their purpose.

Thirdly, Whereas they pretend, that Holy Scripture, as expounded by a private
Spirit, may not seem so favorable to some of their Doctrines and Practices;
yet, as interpreted by Tradition, which can only give the true Sense of
Scripture, it agrees very well with them: I suppose they mean, that whereas a
private Spirit would be apt to understand some Texts of Scripture, as if People
were to search and read the Scripture; Tradition interprets those Texts in a
quite other Sense, that People are not to be permitted to read the Holy
Scriptures. A private Spirit would be apt to understand St. Paul's Discourse,
in the 14th of the 1st to the Corinthians, to be against Celebrating Prayer and
the Service of God in an unknown Tongue, as being contrary to Edification, and
indeed to common Sense: For he says, If one should come, and find them speaking
and praying in an unknown Tongue; will they not say, Ye are mad? But now
Tradition, which only knows how to give the true Sense, can reconcile this
Discourse of St. Paul very easily with the Practice of the Church of Rome in
this matter. And so likewise the Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians, with
the Worship of Angels; and the Epistle to the Hebrews, with offering the
Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass a Thousand times every Day. And to
give but one Instance more; Whereas a Man by his private Spirit would be very
apt to understand the Second Commandment to forbid all Worship of Images;
Tradition discovers the meaning of this Commandment to be, that due Veneration
is to be given to them. So that at this rate of interpreting Scripture by
Tradition, it is impossible to fix any Objection from Scripture, upon any
Doctrine or Practice which they have a mind to maintain.

Fourthly, Whereas they pretend the Tradition of their Church, delivered from
the Mouth of Christ, or dictated by the Holy Spirit, and brought down to them,
and preserved by continnal Succession in the Church, to be of equal Authority
with the Word of God; for so the Council of Trent says, That the Holy Synod
does receive and venerate these Traditions, with equal pious Affection and
Reverence, as they do the written Word of God: This we must declare against, as
unreasonable in it self, to make Tradition, conveyed by Word of Mouth from one
to another, through so many Ages, and liable to so many Mistakes and
Miscarriages, to be, at the distance of 1500 Years, of equal Certainty and
Authority with the Holy Scriptures, carefully preserved and transmitted down to
us; because this (as I said before) is to make common Rumor and Report of equal
Authority and Certainty with a written Record. And not only so; but hereby they
make the Scriptures an imperfect Rule; contrary to the declared Judgment of the
ancient Fathers and Councils of the Christian Church; and so, in truth, they
set up a new Rule of Faith, whereby they change the Christian Religion. For a
new Rule of Faith and Religion makes a new Faith and Religion. This we charge
the Church of Rome with, and do challenge them to show this new Rule of Faith,
before the Council of Trent; and consequently, where their Religion was before
that Council; to show a Religion, consisting of all those Articles, which are
defined by the Council of Trent as necessary to Salvation, and established upon
this new Rule, professed by any Christian Church in the World before that time.
And as they have pitched upon a new Rule of Faith; so it is easy to see to
what End. For take Pope Pius IV. his Creed, and we may see where the Old and
New Religion parts; even at the end of the Twelve Articles of the Aplostles
Creed, which was the ancient Christian Faith; to which are added in Pope Pius
his Creed Twelve Articles more, defined in the Council of Trent, and supported
only by Tradition. So that as the Scripture answers for the Twelve old
Articles, which are plainly contained there; so Tradition is to answer for the
Twelve new ones. And therefore the matter was calculated very exactly, when
they make Tradition just of equal Authority with the Scriptures; because as
many Articles of Their Faith were to be made good by it, and rely upon it, as
those which are proved by the Authority of Scripture. But that Tradition is of
equal Authority with the Scriptures, we have nothing in the whole World for it,
but the bare Assertion of the Council of Trent.

I should now have added some other Considerations, tending to confirm and
establish us in our Religion, against the Pretenses and Insinuations of
Seducing Spirits: But I shall proceed no farther at present.

The Tenth Sermon, as numbered, follows.

THere is a mistake in Numbering of these Sermons. The Tenth should be called
the Ninth, and so on to the end. For there are but Fifteen Sermons in this
Volume, and should be no more.

A SERMON.
HEB. X. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, for
he is faithful that has promised.
THESE words contain an Exhortation to hold fast the Profession of our Faith
without wavering, and an Argument or Encouragement thereto, because he is
faithful that has promised. By the Exhortation to hold fast the Profession of
our Faith without wavering, is not meant, that those who are capable of
examining the Grounds and Reasons of their Religion should blindly hold it fast
against the best Reasons that can be offered; because upon these terms, every
Man must continue in the Religion in which he happens to be fixed by Education,
or an ill choice, be his Religion true or false; without Examining and looking
into it, whether it be right or wrong; for till a Man examines, every Man
thinks his Religion right. That which the Apostle here exhorts Christians to
hold fast, is the Ancient Faith, of which all Christians make a solemn
profession in their Baptism; as plainly appears from the context. And this
Profession of our Faith, we are to hold in the following instances, which I
shall but briefly mention, without enlarging upon them.

1. We are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith against the Confidence of
Men, without Scripture or Reason to support that Confidence.

2. And much more, against the Confidence of Men contrary to plain Scripture
and Reason, and to the common Sense of Mankind.

3. Against all the Temptations and Terrors of the World, against the
Temptations of Fashion and Example, and of Worldly Interest and Advantage, and
against all Terrors and Sufferings of Persecution.

4. Against all vain promises of being put into a safer condition, and
groundless hopes of getting to Heaven upon easier terms than the Gospel has
proposed, in some other Church and Religion.

Lastly, We are to hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering,
against all the cunning Arts and Insinuations of busy and disputing Men, whose
design it is to unhinge Men from their Religion, and to make Proselytes to
their Party and Faction.

But without entering into these particulars, I shall in order to Establishment
in the Reformed Religion which we profess, in opposition to the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, apply my self at this time, to make a short
comparison betwixt the Religion which we profess, and that of the Church of
Rome: That we may discern on which side the advantage of Truth lies; and in
making this comparison, I shall insist upon Three things, which will bring the
matter to an issue, and are, I think, sufficient to determine every sober and
considerate Man, which of these he ought in Reason, and with regard to the
safety of his Soul, to embrace: And they are these.

I. That we govern our Belief and Practice in matters of Religion, by the true
ancient Rule of Christianity, the Word of God contained in the Holy Scriptures:
But the Church of Rome, for the maintenance of their Errors and Corruptions,
have been forced to devise a new Rule, never owned by the Primitive Church, nor
by the Ancient Fathers and Councils of it.

II. That the Doctrines and Practices in difference betwixt us and the Church
of Rome, are either contrary to this Rule, or destitute of the Warrant and
Authority of it, and are plain Additions to the ancient Christianity, and
Corruptions of it.

III. That our Religion has many clear Advantages of that of the Church of
Rome, not only very considerable in themselves, but very obvious and
discernable to an ordinary capacity, upon the first proposal of them. I shall
be as brief in these as I can.

I. That we govern our belief and Practice in matters of Religion, by the true
ancient Rule of Christianity, the Word of God contained in the Holy Scriptures:
But the Church of Rome, for the maintaining of their Errors and Corruptions,
have been forced to devise a new Rule, never owned by the Primitive Church, nor
by the Ancient Councils and Fathers of it; That is, they have joined with the
Word of God contained in the Holy Scriptures, the unwritten Traditions of their
Church, concerning several points of their Faith and Practice; which they
acknowledge cannot be proved from Scripture, and these they call the unwritten
Word of God; and the Council of Trent has decreed them to be of equal
Authority with the Holy Scriptures; and that they do receive and venerate them
with the same pious Affection and Reverence; and all this, contrary to the
express declaration and unanimous consent of all the Ancient Councils and
Fathers of the Christian Church, (as I have already shown); and this never
declared to be a point of Faith, till it was decreed, (not much above a Hundred
Years ago) in the Council of Trent; and this surely, if any thing, is a Matter
of great consequence, to presume to alter the Ancient Rule of Christian
Doctrine and Practice, and to enlarge it, and add to it, at their pleasure. But
the Church of Rome having made so great a change in the Doctrine and Practice
of Christianity, it became consequently necessary to make a change of the Rule:
And therefore with great Reason did the Council of Trent take this into
consideration in the first place, and put it in the front of their Decrees,
because it was to be the foundation and main proof of the following Definitions
of Faith, and Decrees of Practice, for which, without this new Rule, there had
been no color.

II. The Doctrines and Practices in difference betwixt us, and the Church of
Rome, are either contrary to the true Rule, or destitute of the Warrant and
Authority of it; and plain Additions to the Ancient Christianity, and
Corruptions of it; the Truth of this will best appear, by instancing in some of
the principal Doctrines and Practices in difference betwixt us.

As for their two great Fundamental Doctrines, of the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome over all the Christians in the world, and the Infallibility of their
Church, there is not one word in Scripture concerning these Privileges; nay it
is little less than a demonstration that they have no such Privileges, that
St. Paul in a long Epistle to the Church of Rome takes no notice of them; That
the Church of Rome either then was, or was to be soon after, the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches, which is now grown to be an Article of Faith in the
Church of Rome; and yet it is hardly to be imagined, that he could have omitted
to take notice of such remarkable Privileges of their Bishops and Church,
above any in the world, had he known they had belonged to them. So that in all
probability he was ignorant of those mighty Prerogatives of the Church of Rome,
otherwise it cannot be, but that he would have written with more deference and
submission to this Seat of Infallibility, and Center of Unity; he would
certainly have paid a greater Respect to this Mother and Mistress of all
Churches, where the Head of the Church, and Vicar of Christ either was already
seated, or by the appointment of Christ was designed for ever to fix his Throne
and establish his Residence; but there is not one word, or the least intimation
of any such thing throughout this whole Epistle, nor in any other part of the
New Testament.

Besides, that both these pretended Priledges are omitted, by plain Fact and
Evidence of things themselves, their Supremacy, in that the far greatest part
of the Christian Church, neither is at this day, nor can be shown by the
Records of any Age, ever to have been subject to the Bishop of Rome, or to have
acknowledged his Authority and Jurisdiction over them, and the Infallibility of
the Pope, whether with or without a General Council, (about which they still
differ) though Infallibility was devised on purpose, to determine all
differences: I say, this Infallibility, wherever it is pretended to be, is
plainly confuted by the contradictory Definitions of several Popes and
Councils; for if they have contradicted one another, (as is plain, beyond all
contradiction, in several instances) then there must of necessity be an Error
on one side; and there can be no so certain demonstration, that any one is
infallible, as evident Error and Mistake is of the contrary.

Next, their concealing both the Rule of Religion and the Practice of it, in
the Worship and Service of God, from the People, in an unknown Tongue; and
their administering the Communion to the People in one kind only, contrary to
clear Scripture and the plain Institution of our Blessed Savior; and then
their Worship of Images, and Invocation of Angels and Saints, and the Blessed
Virgin, in the same Solemn manner, and for the same Blessings and Benefits
which we beg of God himself, contrary to the express Word of God, which
commands us to Worship the Lord our God; and to serve him only; and which
declares, that as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator between
God and Man, Christ Jesus; but one Mediator not only of Redemption, but of
Intercession too; for the Apostle there speaks of a Mediator of Intercession,
by whom only we are to offer up our Prayers, which are to be put up to God
only, and which expressly forbids Men to worship any Image or likeness: And the
Learned Men of their own Church acknowledge, that there is neither Precept nor
Example for these Practices in Scripture, and that they were not used in the
Christian Church for several Ages; and this acknowledgment we think very
considerable, since so great a part of their Religion, especially as it is
practiced among the People, is contained in these points; for the Service of
God in an Unknown Tongue, and withholding the Scriptures from the People, they
do not pretend so much as One Testimony of any Father for the first 600 Years,
and nothing certainly can be more unreasonable in it self, than to deny People
the best means of knowing the Will of God, and not to permit them to understand
what is done in the public Worship of God, and what Prayers are put up to him
in the Church.

The two great Doctrines of Transubstantiation and Purgatory are acknowledged
by many of their own Learned Writers, to have no certain Foundation in
Scripture; and that there are seven Sacraments of the Christian Religion, though
it be now made an Article of Faith by the Council of Trent, is a thing which
cannot be shown in any Council or Father for above a Thousand Years after
Christ. And we find no mention of this Number of the Sacraments, till the Age
of Peter Lombard the Father of the Schoolmen.

That the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, though that
also be one of the new Articles of Pope Pius the IV. his Creed, which their
Priests are by a Solemn Oath obliged to believe and teach, yet is it most
evidently false: That she is not the Mother of all Churches is plain, because
Jerusalem was certainly so, for there certainly was the first Christian Church,
and from thence all the Christian Churches in the World derive themselves; that
she is not, (though she fain would be) the Mistress of all Churches, is as
evident, because the greatest part of the Christian Church does at this day,
and always did, deny that she has any Authority or Supremacy over them. Now
these are the principal matters in difference betwixt us, and if these Points,
and a few more, be pared off from Popery, that which remains of their Religion,
is the same with ours, that is, the true Ancient Christianity.

III. I shall show that our Religion has many clear advantages of theirs, not
only very considerable in themselves, but very obvious and discernable to an
ordinary capacity, upon the very first proposal of them; as,

1. That our Religion agrees perfectly with the Scriptures, and all points both
of our Belief and Practice, esteemed by us as necessary to Salvation, are there
contained, even our Enemies themselves being Judges. We Worship the Lord our
God, and him only do we serve. We do not fall down before Images and Worship
them, we address all our Prayers to God alone, by the only Mediation and
Intercession of his Son Jesus Christ; as he himself has given us Commandment,
and as St. Paul does plainly direct, giving us this plain and Substantial
Reason for it, Because as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus.

The public Worship and Service of God is performed by us in a Language which
we understand, according to St. Paul's express Order and Direction, and the
universal Practice of the ancient Church, and the Nature and Reason of the
thing it self: We administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both kinds,
according to our Savior's Example and plain Institution; and the continual
Practice of all the Christian Churches in the World, for above a Thousand Years.

2. We believe nothing as necessary to Salvation, but what has been owned in
all Ages to be the Christian Doctrine, and is acknowleged so to be by the
Church of Rome it self; and we receive the whole Faith of the Primitive
Christian Church, ( viz.) What ever is contained in the Apostles Creed, and in
the Explications of that in the Creeds of the Four first General Councills. By
which it plainly appears, that all points of Faith in difference betwixt us and
the Church of Rome, are mere Innovations and plain Additions to the ancient
Christian Faith. But all that we believe, is acknowledged by them to be
undoubtedly the ancient Christian Faith.

3. There is nothing wanting in our Church and Religion, whether in Matter of
Faith or Practice, which either the Scripture makes necessary to Salvation, or
was so esteemed by the Christian Church for the first Five Hundred Years; and
we trust, that what was sufficient for the Salvation of Christians in the best
Ages of Christianity for Five Hundred Years together, may be so still; and we
are very well content to venture our Salvation upon the same terms that they
did.

4. Our Religion is not only free from all Idolatrous Worship, but even from
all Suspicion and probable Charge of any such thing; but this the Church of
Rome is not, as is acknowledged by her most Learned Champions, and as no Man of
Ingenuity can deny; And the Reason which the Learned Men give, why the Worship
of Images, and the Invocation of Angels and Saints departed were not practiced
in the Primitive Church, for the first Three Hundred Years, is a plain
acknowledgment that these Practices are very liable to the Suspicion of
Idolatry; for they say, that the Christians did then forbear those Practices,
because they seemed to come too near to the Pagan Idolatry, and lest the
Heathen should have taken occasion to have justified themselves, if these
things had been practiced among Christians; and they cannot now be Ignorant,
what Scandal they give by these Practices both to the Jews and Turks, and how
much they alienate them from Christianity by this Scandal; nor can they choose
but be sensible, upon how great disadvantage they are in defending these
Practices from the Charge of Idolatry; and that by all their blind
Distinctions, with which they raise such a Cloud and Dust, they can hardly make
any plausible and tolerable Defense of themselves from this Charge: Insomuch,
that to secure their own People from discerning their Guilt in this Matter,
they have been put upon that shameful shift of leaving out the Second
Commandment in their common Catechisms and Manuals, lest the People, seeing so
plain a Law of God against so common a Practice of their Church, should upon
that Discovery have broken off from them.

5. Nor is our Religion incumbered with such an endless number of superstitious
and troublesome Observances, as theirs infiintely is, even beyond the Number of
the Jewish Ceremonies, to the great Burden and Scandal of the Christian
Religion, and the diverting of Men's Minds from the spiritual part of Religion,
and the more weighty and necessary Duties of the Christian Life; so that, in
truth, a devout Pastor is so taken up with the external Rites and little
Observances of his Religion, that he has little or no time to make himself a
good Man, and to cultivate and improve his Mind in true Piety and Virtue.

6. Our Religion is evidently more Charitable to all Christians that differ
from us, and particularly to them, who, by their Uncharitableness to us, have
done as much as is possible to discharge and damp our Charity toward them. And
Charity, as it is one of the most essential Marks of a true Christian, so it is
likewise the best Mark and Ornament of a true Church; and of all things that
can be thought of, methinks the want of Charity in any Church should be a
Motive to no Man to fall in love with it, and to be fond of its Communion.

7. Our Religion does not clash and interfere with any of the great Moral
Duties, to which all Mankind stand obliged by the Law and Light of Nature; as
Fidelity, Mercy and Truth: We do not teach Men to break Faith with Heretics or
Infidels, nor to destroy and extirpate those who differ from us, with Fire and
Sword: No such thing as Equivocation or Mental Reservation, or any other
Artificial way of Falsehood, is either taught or maintained, either by the
Doctrine or by the Casuists of our Church.

8. Our Religion and all the Doctrines of it are perfectly consistent with the
Peace of Civil Government, and the Welfare of Humane Society: We neither exempt
the Clergy from Subjection to the Civil Powers, nor absolve Subjects upon any
pretense whatsoever from allegiance to their Princes; both which Points, the
necessity of the one, and the lawfulness of the other, have been taught and
stiffly maintained in the Church of Rome, not only by private Doctors, but by
Popes and General Councils.

9. The Doctrines of our Religion, are perfectly free from all Suspicion of a
Worldly Interest and Design, whereas the greatest part of the erroneous
Doctrines with which we charge the Church of Rome, are plainly calculated to
promote the end of Worldly Greatness and Dominion.

The Pope's Kingdom is plainly of this World; and the Doctrines and Maxims of
it, like so many Servants, are ready upon all occasion to fight for him. For
most of them do plainly tend, either to the Establishment and Enlargment of his
Authority; or to the Magnifying of the Priests, and the giving them a perfect
power over the Conscienees of the People, and the keeping them in a slavish
subjection and blind obedience to them. And to this purpose do plainly tend the
Doctrines of exempting the Clergy from the Secular Power and Jurisdiction; the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation; for it must needs make the Priest a great Man
in the Opinion of the People, to believe that he can make God, as they love to
express it, without all Reason and Reverence. Of the like tendency is the
Communicating of the Laity only in one kind, thereby making it the sole
Privilege of the Priest to receive the Sacrament in both. The withholding the
Scripture from the People, and celebrating the Service of God in an unknown
Tongue. The Doctrine of an implicit Faith, and absolute Resignation of their
Judgments to their Teachers. These do all directly tend to keep the People in
ignorance, and to bring them to a blind Obedience, to the dictates of their
Teachers: So likewise the Necessity of the intention of the Priests, to the
saving Virtue and Efficacy of the Sacraments; by which Doctrine, the People do
upon the matter depend as much upon the good will of the Priest, as upon the
Mercy of God for their Salvation: but above all, their Doctrine of the
Necessity of Auricular and private Confession, of all Mortal Sins committed
after Baptism, with all the Circumstances of them to the Priest; and this not
only for the ease and direction of their Consciences, but as a necessary
condition of having their Sins pardoned and forgiven by God: By which means
they make themselves Masters of all the Secrets of the People, and keep them in
awe by the knowledge of their faults, Scire volunt secreta Domus atque inde
timeri. Or else their Doctrines tend to filthy lucre, and the enriching of
their Church. As their Doctrines of Purgatory and Indulgences, and their
Prayers and Masses for the dead, and many more Doctrines and Practices of the
like kind plainly do.

10. Our Religion is free from all disingenuous and dishonest Arts of
maintaining and supporting it self; such are clipping of ancient Authors, nay
and even the Authors and Writers of their own Church; when they speak too
freely of any Point: as may be seen in their Indices Expurgatorii which much
against their wills have been brought to light. To which I shall only add these
Three gross Forgeries, which lie all at their doors, and they cannot deny them
to be so.

1. The pretended Canon of the Council of Nice in the case of Appeals, between
the Church of Rome and the African Church. Upon which they insisted a great
while very confidently, till at last they were convinced by Authentic Copies
of the Canons of that Council.

2. Constantine's Donation to the Pope, which they kept a great stir with, till
the Forgery of it was discovered.

3. The Decretal Epistles of the Ancient Popes; a large Volume of Forgeries,
compiled by Isidore Mercator, to countenance the Usurpations of the Bishop of
Rome, and of which the Church of Rome made great use for several Ages, and
pertinaciously defended the Authority of them, till the Learned Men of their
own Church have at last been forced for very shame to disclaim them, and to
confess the Imposture of them: A like instance whereto, is not I hope to be
shown in any Christian Church. This is that which St. Paul calls (...), the
slight of Men; such as Gamesters use at Dice; for to allege false and forged
Authors in this case, is to play with false Dice, when the Salvation of Men's
Souls lie at stake.

11. Our Religion has this mighty advantage, that it does not decline Trial
and Examination, which to any Man of ingenuity must needs appear a very good
Sign of an honest Cause; but if any Church be shy of having her Religion
Examined, and her Doctrines and Practices brought into the open light, this
gives just ground of Suspicion that she has some distrust of them; for Truth
does not seek corners, nor shun the light. Our Savior has told us who they
are that love darkness rather than light, viz. they whose deeds are Evil; for
every one, says he, that does Evil, hates the light; neither comes he to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved and made manifest. There needs no more
to render a Religion suspected to a wise Man, than to see those who profess it,
and make such proud boasts of the Truth and Goodness of it, so fearful that it
should be examined and looked into, and that their People should take the
liberty to hear and read what can be said against it.

12. We persuade Men to our Reliligion by Human and Christian ways, such as our
Savior and his Apostles used, by urging Men with the Authority of God, and
with Arguments fetched from another World. The promise of Eternal Life and
Happiness, and the threatening of Eternal death and Misery, which are the proper
Arguments of Religion, and which alone are fitted to work upon the Minds and
Consciences of Men; the terror and torture of death may make Men Hypocrites,
and awe them to profess with their Mouths what they do not believe in their
Hearts; but this is no proper means of converting the Soul, and convincing the
Minds and Consciences of Men; and these violent and cruel ways cannot be denied
to have been Practiced in the Church of Rome, and set on foot by the Authority
of Councils, and greatly countenanced and encouraged by Popes themselves:
Witness the many Croisades for the extirpation of Heretics, the standing
Cruelties of their Inquisition, their occasional Massacres and Persecutions, of
which we have fresh Instances in every Age.

But these Methods of Conversion are a certain Sign that they either disturst
the Truth and Goodness of their Cause, or else that they think Truth and the
Arguments for it are of no force, when Dragoons are their Ratio ultima, the
last Reason which their Cause relies upon; and the best and most effectual it
can afford.

Again, we hold no Doctrines in defiance of the Senses of all Mankind; such as
is that of Transubstantiation, which is now declared in the Church of Rome to
be a Necessary Article of Faith, so that a Man cannot be of that Religion,
unless he will renounce his Senses, and believe against the clear Verdict of
them in a plain sensible matter; but after this, I do not understand how a Man
can believe any thing, because by this very thing he destroys and takes away
the Foundation of all Certainty; if any Man forbid me to believe what I see, I
forbid him to believe any thing upon better and surer Evidence. St. Paul says,
that Faith comes by hearing; but if I cannot rely upon the certainty of Sense,
then the means whereby Faith is conveyed, is uncertain; and we may say, as St.
Paul does in another case, Then is our Preaching vain, and your Faith also is
vain.

Lastly, (To mention no more particulars) as to several things used and
Practiced in the Church of Rome, we are on the much safer side, if we should
happen to be mistaken about them; than they are, if they should be mistaken;
for it is certainly Lawful to read the Scriptures, and Lawful to permit to the
People the use of the Scriptures in a known Tongue: Otherwise we must condemn
the Apostles and the Primitive Church for allowing this Liberty. It is
certainly Lawful to have the public Prayers and Service of God celebrated in a
Language which all that join in it can understand. It is certainly Lawful to
administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to the People in both kinds,
otherwise the Christian Church would not have done it for a Thousand Years. It
is certainly Lawful, not to Worship Images, not to pray to Angels, or Saints,
or the Blessed Virgin, otherwise the Primitive Church would not have forborne
these Practices for Three Hundred Years, as is acknowledged by those of the
Church of Rome.

Suppose a Man should pray to God only, and offer up all his Prayers to him
only by Jesus Christ, without making mention of any other Mediator or
Intercessor with God for us, relying herein upon what the Apostle says
concerning our High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, Heb. 7 25. That he is able to
save them to the utmost, who come unto God by him, (i. e.) by his Mediation and
Intercession, since he ever lives to make Intercession for them; might not a
Man reasonably hope to obtain of God all the Blessings he stands in need of, by
Addressing himself only to him, in the Name and by the Intercession of that one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus? Nay, why may not a Man
reasonably think, that this is both a shorter and more effectual way to obtain
our requests, than by turning our selves to the Angels and Saints, and
importuning them to solicit God for us; especially if we should order the
matter so, as to make ten times more frequent Addresses to these, than we do to
God and our Blessed Savior, and in comparison of the other, to neglect these;
we cannot certainly think any more able to help us and do us good, than the
great God of Heaven and Earth, the God (as St. Paul styles him) that hears
Prayers, and therefore unto him should all flesh come. We cannot certainly
think any Intercessor so powerful and prevalent with God, as his only and
dearly beloved Son, offering up our Prayers to God in Heaven, by virtue of that
most acceptable and invaluable Sacrifice, which he offered to him on Earth; we
cannot surely think, that there is so much Goodness any where as in God, that
in any of the Angels or Saints, or even in the Blessed Mother of our Lord,
there is more Mercy and Compassion for Sinners and a tenderer sense of our
Infirmities, than in the Son of God. Who is at the right hand of his Father, to
appear in the Presence of God for us; we are sure that God always hears the
Petitions which we put up to him, and so does the Son of God, by whom we put
them up to the Father, because he also is God blessed for evermore. But we are
not sure that the Angels and Saints hear our Prayers, because we are sure that
they are neither Omniscient nor Omnipresent, and we are not sure, nor probably
certain, that our Prayers are made known to them any other way; there being no
Revelation of God to that purpose; we are sure that God has declared himself
to be a jealous God, and that he will not give his Honor to another; and we
are not sure but that Prayer is part of the Honor which is due to God alone;
and if it were not, we can hardly think but that God should be so far from
being pleased, with our making so frequent use of those other Mediators and
Intercessors, and from granting our desires the sooner upon that account: That
on the contrary we have reason to think, he should be highly offended; when he
himself is ready to receive all our Petitions, and has appointed a great
Mediator to that purpose, to see more Addresses made to, and by the Angels and
Saints, and Blessed Virgin, than to himself by his Blessed Son; and to see the
Worship of himself almost jostled out, by the Devotion of People to Saints and
Angels, and the Blessed Mother of our Lord; a thing which he never Commanded,
and which so far as appears by Scripture, never came into his mind. I have been
the longer upon this matter, to show how unreasonable and needless at the best,
this more than half part of the Religion of the Church of Rome is; and how
safely it may be let alone.

But now on the other hand, if they be mistaken in these things, as we can
demonstrate from Scripture they are, the danger is infinitely great on that
side, for then they oppose an Institution of Christ, who appointed the
Sacrament to be received in both kinds; and they involve themselves in a great
danger of the guilt of Idolatry, and our common Christianity in the scandal and
reproach of it. And this without any necessity, since God has required none of
these things at our hands; and after all the bustle which has been made about
them, the utmost they pretend (which yet they are not able to make good) is,
that these things may Lawfully be done, and at the same time they cannot deny,
but that if the Church had not enjoined them they might Lawfully be let alone;
and can any thing be more unreasonable, than so pertinaciously to insist upon
things so hard (I might say) impossible to be defended or excused, and which by
their own acknowledgment are of no great weight and necessity; in which we are
certainly safe in not doing them, if they should prove Lawful; but if they do
not prove so, they are in a most dangerous condition; so that here is certain
safety on the one hand, and the danger of damnation on the other; which is as
great odds as is possible.

And they must not tell us that they are in no danger, because they are
infallible, and cannot be mistaken; they must prove that point a great deal
better than they have yet done, before it can signify any thing either to our
Satisfaction or their Safety.

I might have insisted more largely upon each of these Particulars, any one of
which is of weight to incline a Man to that Religion, which has such an
advantage on its side, but all of them together makes so Powerful an Argument
to an unprejudiced Person, as must almost irresistably determine his choice,
for most of the Particulars are so evident, that they cannot, upon the very
mention and proposal of them, be denied to be clear Advantages on our side.

And now, to use the words of St. Peter, I testify unto you, that this is the
true grace of God wherein ye stand, that the Reformed Religion which we
profess, and which by the goodness of God is by Law established in this Nation,
is the true Ancient Christianity, the Faith which was at first delivered to the
Saints, and which is conveyed down to us in the Writings of the Apostles and
the Evangelists of our Lord and Savior: Remember therefore how you have
received and heard, and hold fast, for he is Faithful that has promised, which
is the Second part of the Text; the encouragement which the Apostle gives us to
hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; he is Faithful that
has promised to give us his Holy Spirit to lead us into all Truth, to
stablish, strengthen, and settle us in the Profession of it, to support and
comfort us under all Trials and Temptations, and to seal us up to the day of
Redemption, and he is faithful that has promised to reward our constancy and
fidelity to him and his Truth, with a Crown of everlasting life and Glory.
Wherefore my beloved Brethren be ye steadfast and unmovable, and always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord; for he is faithful that has promised; and let us
provoke one another to Charity and Good Works, which are the great Ornament and
Glory of any Religion, and so much the more, because the day approaches in
which God will judge the belief and lives of Men by Jesus Christ, not according
to the imperious and uncharitable dictates of any Church, but according to the
Gospel of his Son. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and
Glory now and for ever.

Now the God of Peace which brought again from the Dead the great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you Perfect in
every good word and work; working in you that which is pleasing in his Sight.
And the peace of God which passes all understanding keep your Hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

A SERMON.
2 COR. V. 7. For we walk by Faith, not by Sight.
IN the latter part of the former Chapter, the Apostle declares what it was
that was the great support of Christians, under the Persecutions and Sufferings
which befell them; viz. the Assurance of a Blessed Resurrection to another life,
Verse 14. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us
also by Jesus; for which cause, says he, verse 16. we faint not, but though
our outward Man perish, our inward Man is renewed day by day; that is, though
our Bodies, by Reason of the Hardships and Sufferings which we undergo, are
continually decaying and declining; yet our Minds grow every day more healthful
and vigorous, and gain new strength and resolution, by contemplating the Glory
and Reward of another World, and as it were feeding upon them by Faith; for our
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory; whilst we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen.

And he resumes the same Argument again at the beginning of this Chapter: for
we know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; that is,
we are firmly persuaded, that when we die, we shall but exchange these Earthly
and Perishing Bodies, these Houses of Clay, for a Heavenly Mansion, which will
never decay nor come to ruin: from whence he concludes, Verse 6. Therefore we
are always confident, (...), therefore what ever happens to us, we are always
of good courage, and see no reason to be afraid of Death; knowing that whilst
we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; that is, since our
continuance in the Body is to our disadvantage, and while we live we are absent
from our Happiness; and when we die, we shall then enter upon the Possession of
it. That which gives us this confidence and good courage, is our Faith; for
though we be not actually possessed of this Happiness which we speak of, yet we
have a firm persuasion of the reality of it, which is enough to support our
Spirits and keep up our Courage under all afflictions and adversities
whatsoever, Verse 7. for we walk by Faith, not by Sight.

These words come in by way of Parenthesis, in which the Apostle declares in
general, what is the swaying and governing Principle of a Christian life; not
only in case of persecution and affliction, but under all events, and in every
condition of Humane life; and that is, Faith; in opposition to Sight and
present Enjoyment: we walk by Faith, and not by Sight. We walk by Faith; what
ever Principle sways and governs a Man's life and actions, he is said to walk
and live by it. And as here a Christian is said to walk by Faith, so elsewhere
the just is said to live by Faith. Faith is the Principle which animates all
his resolutions and actions.

And not by Sight. The word is, (...), which signifies the thing it self in
present view and possession, in opposition to a firm persuasion of things
future and invisible. Sight is the thing in Hand, and Faith the thing only in
Hope and Expectation. Sight is a clear view and apprehension of things present
and near to us; Faith an obscure discovery and apprehension of things at a
distance: So the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a Glass
darkly; this is Faith; but then face to face, this is present sight, as one Man
sees another face to face; and thus likewise the same Apostle distinguishes
betwixt Hope and Sight, Romans 8. 24. 25. Hope that is seen, is not Hope; for
what a Man sees, why does he yet Hope for it? but if we Hope for that which we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Sight is possession and
enjoyment, Faith is the firm persuasion and expectation of a thing; and this
the Apostle tells us was the governing principle of a Christian's life; for we
walk by Faith, and not by Sight; from which words I shall observe these Three
things.

I. That Faith is the Governing Principle, and that which bears the great sway
in the Life and Actions of a Christian; we walk by Faith; that is, we Order and
Govern our Lives in the Power and Virtue of this Principle.

II. Faith is a degree of assent inferior to that of Sense. This is
sufficient-intimated in the opposition betwixt Faith and Sight. He had said
before, that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord;
and gives this as a Reason and Proof of our absence from the Lord, for we walk
by Faith, and not by Sight; that is, whilst we are in the Body, we do not see
and enjoy, but believe and expect; if we were present with the Lord, then Faith
would cease, and be turned into Sight; but though we have not that assurance of
another world, which we shall have when we come to see and enjoy these things,
yet we are firmly persuaded of them.

III. Notwithstanding Faith be an inferior degree of Assurance, yet it is a
Principle of sufficient power to govern our Lives; we walk by Faith; it is such
an Assurance as has an influence upon our Lives.

I. That Faith is the Governing Principle, and that which bears the great sway
in the Life and Actions of a Christian. We walk by Faith; that is, we Order and
Govern our Lives in the Power and Virtue of this Principle: A Christian's Life
consists in obedience to the will of God; that is, in a readiness to do what he
commands, and in a willingness to suffer what he calls us to; and the great
Arguments and Encouragements hereto, are such things as are the Objects of
Faith, and not of Sense; such things as are absent and future, and not present
and in possession; for Instance, the Belief of an invisible God, of a secret
Power and Providence, that Orders and Governs all things, that can bless or
blast us, and all our Designs and Undertakings, according as we demean our
selves toward him, and endeavor to approve our selves to him; the Persuasion
of a secret aid and influence always ready at hand, to keep us from Evil, and
to strengthen and assist us to that which is good; more especially the firm
Belief, and expectation of the Happiness of Heaven, and the glorious Rewards of
another world, which though they be now at a distance, and invisible to us, yet
being grounded upon the Promise of God that cannot lie, shall certainly be made
good.

And this Faith, this firm Persuasion of absent and invisible things, the
Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, was the great Principle of the Piety and
Virtue of good Men from the beginning of the World. This he calls, Chapter 11.
verse 1. the (...), or the confident expectation of things hoped for, and the
proof or evidence of things not seen, viz. a firm persuasion of the Being and
Providence of God, and of the Truth and Faithfulness of his Promises. Such was
the Faith of Abel, he believed that there was a God, and that he was a rewarder
of those that faithfully serve him: Such was the Faith of Noah, who being
warned of God, of things at a great distance, and not seen as yet,
notwithstanding believed the Divine Prediction concerning the Flood, and
prepared an Ark: Such also was the Faith of Abraham, concerning a numerous
Posterity by Isaac, and the Inheritance of the Land of Canaan; and such
likewise was the Faith of Moses, he did as firmly believe the invisible God,
and the recompense of reward, as if he had beheld them with his eyes.

And of this Recompense of Reward, we Christians have a much clearer
revelation, and much greater assurance, than former Ages and Generations had;
and the firm belief and persuasion of this, is the great Motive and Argument to
a Holy life: The hope which is set before us, of obtaining the Happiness, and
the fear of incurring the Misery, of another world. This made the Primitive
Christians, with so much patience to bear the Sufferings and Persecutions, with
so much constancy to venture upon the dangers and inconveniences which the
love of God and Religion exposed them to.

Under the former Dispensation of the Law, tho good Men received good hopes of
the Rewards of another life, yet these things were but obscurely revealed to
them, and the great inducements of Obedience were Temporal Rewards and
Punishments; the promises of long life, and peace, and plenty, and prosperity,
in that good Land which God had given them, and the threatenings of War, and
Famine, and Pestilence, and being delivered into Captivity. But now, under the
Gospel, Life and Immortality are brought to light; and the great Arguments that
bear sway with Christians, are the Promises of Everlasting Life, and the
Threatenings of Eternal Misery; and the firm Belief and Persuasion of these, is
now the great Principle that governs the Lives and Actions of good Men; for
what will not Men do, that are really persuaded, that as they do demean
themselves in this World, it will fare with them in the other? That the Wicked
shall go into everlasting Punishment, and the Righteous into Life Eternal. I
proceed to the

II. Observation, namely; That Faith is a Degree of Assent, inferior to that
of Sense. This is intimated in the Opposition betwixt Faith and Sight; We walk
by Faith, and not by Sight; that is, we believe these things, and are
confidently persuaded of the truth of them, tho we never saw them; and
consequently cannot possibly have that Degree of Assurance concerning the Joys
of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, which those have who enjoy the One and
endure the Other.

There are different Degrees of Assurance concerning things, arising from the
different Degrees of Evidence we have for them: The highest Degree of Evidence
we have for any thing, is our own Sense and Experience; and this is so firm and
strong, that it is not to be shaken by the utmost Pretense of a Rational
Demonstration; Men will trust their own Senses and Experience, against any
subtilty of Reason whatsoever: But there are inferior degrees of Assurance
concerning things, as the Testimony and Authority of Persons every way
credible; and this Assurance we have in this state concerning the things of
another World, we believe with great Reason, that we have the Testimony of God
concerning them, which is the highest kind of Evidence in it self; and we have
all the reasonable assurance we can desire, that God has testified these
things, and this is the utmost assurance which things future and at a distance
are capable of.

But yet it is an unreasonable obstinacy to deny, that this falls very much
short of that degree of assurance which those Persons have concerning these
things, who are now in the other World, and have the Sense and Experience of
these things; and this is not only intimated here in the Text, in the
Opposition of Faith and Sight, but is plainly expressed in other Texts of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. We know now but in part, but when that which is
perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. That degree of
knowledge and assurance which we have in this Life is very imperfect, in
comparison to what we shall have hereafter, and Verse 12. We now see as through
a Glass darkly, (...), as in a Riddle, in which there is always a great deal of
Obscurity; all which Expressions are certainly intended by way of abatement and
diminution to the certainty of Faith; because it is plain, that by that which
is in part or imperfect, the Apostle means Faith and Hope, which he tells us
shall cease, when that which is perfect, meaning Vision and Sight, is come: We
see likewise in Experience, that the Faith and Hope of the best Christians in
this Life is accompanied with doubting concerning these things, and all
doubting is a degree of uncertainty; but those blessed Souls who are entered
upon the Possession of Glory and Happiness; and those miserable Wretches who
lie groaning under the Wrath of God and the Severity of his Justice, cannot
possibly, if they would, have any doubt concerning the Truth and Reality of
these things.

But however contentious Men may dispute against common Sense, this is so plain
a Truth, that I will not labor in the farther Proof of it; nor indeed is it
reasonable, while we are in this state, to expect that degree of assurance
concerning the Rewards and Punishments of another Life, which the sight and
sensible experience of them would give us; and that upon these Two Accounts;

1. Because our present state will not admit it; and,

2. If it would, it is not reasonable we should have it.

1. Our present state will not admit it; for while we are in this World, it is
not possible we should have that sensible Experiment and Trial how things are
in the other. The things of the other World are remote from us, and far out of
our Sight, and we cannot have any experimental knowledge of them, till we our
selves enter into that state. Those who are already past into it know how
things are; those happy Souls who live in the reviving presence of God, and are
possessed of those joys which we cannot now conceive, understand these things in
another manner, and have a more perfect assurance concerning them, than it is
possible for any Man to have in this World; and those wretched and miserable
Spirits who feel the vengeance of God, and are plunged into the Horrors of
Eternal Darkness, do believe upon irresistible evidence, and have other kind of
Convictions of the Reality of that state, and the insupportable Misery of it,
than any Man is capable of in this World.

2. If our present state would admit of this high degree of assurance; it is
not fit and reasonable that we should have it; such an over-powering evidence
would quite take away the virtue of Faith, and much lessen that of Obedience.
Put the case that every Man, some considerable time before his departure out of
this Life, were permitted to visit the other World, to assure him how things
are there, to view the Mansions of the Blessed, and to survey the dark and
loathsome Prisons of the Damned, to hear the lamentable outcrys of Miserable
and Despairing Souls, and to see the inconceivable Anguish and Torments they
are in; after this, what virtue would it be in any Man to believe these things?
He that had been there and seen them, could not dis-believe them if he would:
Faith in this case would not be virtue, but necessity; and therefore it is
observable, that our Savior does not Pronounce them Blessed, who believed his
Resurrection, upon the forcible evidence of their own Senses, but, Blessed are
they that have not seen, and yet have believed. They might be Happy in the
Effects of that Faith, but there is not praise, no reward belongs to that Faith
which is wrought in Man by so violent and irresistible an evidence. It was the
great commendation of Abraham's Faith, that against hope he believed in hope,
he believed the promise of God concerning a thing in it self very improbable;
but it is no commendation at all to believe the things which we have seen,
because they admit of no manner of dispute; no Objection can be offered to
shake our assent, unless we will run to the extremity of Skepticism; for if we
will believe any thing at all, we must yield to the Evidence of Sense: This
does so violently enforce our assent, that there can be no Virtue in such a
Faith.

And as this would take away the Virtue of Faith, so it would very much lessen
that of our Obedience. It is hardly to be imagined, that any Man who had seen
the Blessed condition of good Men in another World, and been an Eyewitness of
the intolerable Torments of Sinners, should ever after be tempted knowingly to
do any thing that would deprive him of that Happiness, or bring him into that
place of Torment: Such a sight could not choose but affect a Man as long as he
lived; and leave such impressions upon his mind, of the indispensable necessity
of a Holy life, and of the infinite danger of a wicked course, that we might
sooner believe that all the Men in the World should conspire to kill one
another; than that such a Man, by consenting to any deliberate Act of Sin
should wilfully throw himself into those flames: No, his Mind would be
continually haunted with those Furies he had seen Tormenting Sinners in another
World, and the fearful Shrieks and Outcries of Miserable Souls, would be
perpetually ringing in his Ears; and the Man would have so lively and terrible
an imagination of the danger he was running himself upon, that no Temptation
would be strong enough to conquer his fears, and to make him careless of his
life and actions, after he had once seen how fearful a thing it was to fall
into the hands of the living God: So that in this case, the Reason of Men's
obedience would be so violent, that the virtue of it must be very little; for
what praise is due to any Man, not to do those things which none but a perfect
mad Man would do? For certainly that Man must be besides himself, that could by
any Temptation be seduced to live a wicked life, after he had seen the state of
good and bad Men in the other World; the glorious Rewards of Holiness and
Virtue, and the dismal event of a vicious and sinful course: God has designed
this Life for the Trial of our Virtue, and the exercise of our obedience, but
there would hardly be any place for this, if there were a free and easy
passage for us into the other World, to see the true state of things there.
What argument would it be of any Man's virtue to forbear sinning, after he had
been in Hell, and seen the miserable end of Sinners? But I proceed to the

III. And Last Observation; namely, That notwithstanding Faith be an inferior
degree of Assent, yet it is a Principle of sufficient force and power to Govern
our lives; we walk by Faith. Now, that the belief of any thing may have its
Effect upon us, it is requisite that we be satisfied of these Two things.

1. Of the Certainty and of the great Concernment of the thing; for if the
thing be altogether uncertain, it will not move us at all, we shall do nothing
toward the obtaining of it, if it be good; nor for the avoiding and preventing
of it, if it be evil; and if we are certain of the thing, yet if we apprehend
it to be of no great Moment and Concernment, we shall be apt to slight it, as
not worth our regard; but the Rewards and Punishments of another world, which
the Gospel propounds to our Faith, are fitted to work upon our Minds; both upon
account of the Certainty and Concernment of them. For,

1. We have sufficient Assurance of the Truth of these things, as much as we
are well capable of in this state. Concerning things future and at a distance,
we have the dictates of our Reason arguing us into this Persuasion, from the
consideration of the Justice of the Divine Providence, and from the promiscuous
and unequal Administration of things in this world; from whence wise men in all
ages have been apt to conclude, that there will be another state of things
after this life, wherein rewards and punishments shall be equally distributed.
We have the general consent of Mankind in this matter: and to assure us, that
these Reasonings are true, we have a most credible Revelation of these things,
God having sent his Son from Heaven to declare it to us, and given us a
sensible demonstration of the thing, in his Resurrection from the dead, and his
visible Aseension into Heaven; so that there is no kind of evidence wanting,
that the thing is capable of, but only our own sense and experience of these
things, of which we are not capable in this present state. And there is no
Objection against all this, but what will bring all things into uncertainty,
which do not come under our Senses, and which we our selves have not seen.

Nor is there any considerable Interest to hinder Men from the Belief of these
things, or to make them hesitate about them; for as for the other World, if at
last there should prove to be no such thing, our Condition after Death will be
the same with the Condition of those who disbelieve these things; because all
will be extinguished by Death: but if things fall out otherwise (as most
undoubtedly they will) and our Souls after this Life do pass into a State of
Everlasting Happiness or Misery, then our great Interest plainly lies, in
preparing our selves for this State; and there is no other way to secure the
great Concernments of another World, but by believing those things to be true,
and governing all the Actions of our Lives by this Belief. For as for the
Interests of this Life, they are but short and transitory, and consequently of
no Consideration in comparison of the things which are Eternal; and yet (as I
have often told you) setting aside the case of Persecution for Religion, there
is no real Interest of this World, but it may be as well promoted and pursued
to as great Advantage, nay, usually, to a far greater, by him that believes
these things, and lives accordingly, than by any other Person: For the Belief
of the Rewards and Punishments of another World is the greatest Motive and
Encouragement to Virtue; and as all Vice is naturally attended with some
temporal Inconvenience, so the Practice of all Christian Virtues does in its
own Nature tend both to the Welfare of Particular Persons, and to the Peace and
Prosperity of Mankind.

But that which ought to weigh very much with us, is, That we have abundantly
more Assurance of the Recompense of another World, than we have of many things
in this World, which yet have a greater Influence upon our Actions, and govern
the Lives of the most prudent and considerate Men. Men generally hazard their
Lives and Estates upon Terms of greater Uncertainty, than the Assurance which
we have of another World. Men venture to take Physic upon probable Grounds of
the Integrity and Skill of their Physician, and yet the want of either of these
may hazard their Lives; and Men take Physic upon greater Odds; for it
certainly causes Pain and Sickness, and does but uncertainly procure and
recover Health; the Patient is sure to be made sick, but not certain to be made
well; and yet the Danger of being worse, if not of dying, on the one Hand, and
the Hope of Success and Recovery on the other, make this Hazard and Trouble
reasonable. Men venture their whole Estates to Places which they never saw; and
that there are such Places, they have only the concurrent Testimony and
Agreement of Men; nay, perhaps, have only spoken with them that have spoken
with those that have been there. No Merchant ever insisted upon the Evidence of
a Miracle to be wrought, to satisfy him that there were such Places as the
East and West Indies, before he would venture to Trade thither: And yet this
Assurance God has been pleased to give the World of a state beyond the Grave,
and of a blessed Immortality in another Life.

Now what can be the Reason that so slender Evidence, so small a degree of
Assurance will serve to encourage Men to seek after the things of this World
with great Care and Industry; and yet a great deal more will not suffice to put
them effectually upon looking after the great Concernments of another World,
which are infinitely more considerable? No other Reason of this can be given,
but that Men are partial in their Affections toward these things. It is plain
they have not the same Love for God and Religion which they have for this
World, and the Advantages of it; and therefore it is, that a less degree of
Assurance will engage them to seek after the one, than the other; and yet the
Reason is much stronger on the other side: For the greater the Benefit and Good
is, which is offered to us, we should be the more eager to seek after it, and
should be content to venture upon less Probability. Upon excessive Odds, a Man
would venture upon very small Hopes; for a mighty Advantage, a Man would be
content to run a great Hazard of his Labor and Pains upon little Assurance:
Where a Man's Life is concerned, every Suspicion of Danger will make a Man
careful to avoid it: And will nothing affright Men from Hell, unless God carry
them thither, and show them the place of Torments, and the Flames of that Fire
which shall never be quenched?

I do not speak this, as if these things had not abundant Evidence; I have
shown that they have; but to convince Men, how unreasonable and cruelly partial
they are about the Concernments of their Souls, and their Eternal Happiness.

2. Supposing these things to be real and certain, they are of infinite
Concernment to us: For what can concern us more, than that Eternal and
Unchangeable State in which we must be fixed and abide for ever? If so vast a
Concern will not move us, and have no Influence upon the Government of our
Lives and Actions, we do not deserve the Name of Reasonable Creatures. What
Consideration can be set before Men, who are not touched with the Sense of so
great an Interest, as that of our Happy or Miserable Being to all Eternity? Can
we be so solicitous and careful about the Concernment of a few Days; and is it
nothing to us what becomes of us for ever? Are we so tenderly concerned to
avoid Poverty and Disgrace, Persecution and Suffering in this World; and shall
we not much more flee from the wrath which is to come, and endeavor to escape
the damnation of Hell? Are the slight and transitory Enjoyments of this World
worth so much Thought and Care? And is an Eternal Inheritance in the Heavens
not worth the looking after? As there is no Proportion, betwixt the things
which are Temporal and the things which are Eternal, so we ought in all Reason,
to be infinitely more concerned for the One than for the Other.

The proper Inference from all this Discourse is, That we would endeavor, to
strengthen in our selves this great Principle of a Christian Life, the Belief
of another World, by representing to our selves all those Arguments and
Considerations which may confirm us in this Persuasion. The more reasonable our
Faith is, and the surer grounds it is built upon; the more firm it will abide,
when it comes to the trial, against all the impressions of temptations and
assaults of Persecution: If our Faith of another World be only a strong
imagination of these things, so soon as tribulation arises, it will wither;
because it has no root in it self: Upon this account the Apostle so often
exhorts Christians, to endeavor to be established in the Truth, to be rooted
and grounded in the Faith, that when Persecution comes, they may continue
steadfast and unmovable. The firmness of our Belief will have a great influence
upon our Lives; if we be steadfast and unmovable in our persuasion of these
things, we shall be abundant in the work of the Lord. The Apostle joins these
together, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Steadfast and unmovable, in what? In
the belief of a blessed Resurrection; which the more firmly any Man believes,
the more active and industrious will he be in the Work and Service of God.

And that our Faith may have a constant and powerful influence upon our Lives,
we should frequently revolve in our Minds the thoughts of another World, and of
that vast Eternity which we shall shortly launch into. The great disadvantage
of the Arguments fetched from another world, is this, That these things are at a
distance from us, and not sensible to us, and therefore we are not apt to be so
affected with them: Present and sensible things weigh down all other
Considerations. And therefore to balance this disadvantage, we should often
have these Thoughts in our Minds, and inculcate upon our selves the certainty
of these things, and the infinite concernment of them: we should reason thus
with our selves; if these things be true, and will certainly be, why should
they not be to me, as if they were actually present? Why should not I always
live, as if Heaven were open to my view, and I saw Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, with Crowns of Glory in his hands, ready to be set upon the Heads
of all those who continue faithful and obedient to him? And why should I not be
as much afraid to commit any Sin, as if Hell were naked before me, and I saw
the astonishing Miseries of the Damned?

Thus we should, by frequent Meditation, represent these great things to our
selves, and bring them nearer to our Minds, and oppose to the present
temptations of Sense, the great and endless Happiness and Misery of the other
World. And if we would but thus exercise our selves about the things which are
not seen, and make Eternity familiar to our selves, by a frequent Meditation of
it, we should be very little moved with present and sensible things; we should
walk and live by Faith, as the Men of the World do by Sense, and be more
serious and earnest in the Pursuit of our great and everlasting Interest, than
they are in the pursuit of Sensual Enjoyments, and should make it the great
Business of this present and temporal Life, to secure a Future and Eternal
Happiness.

A SERMON, On HEB. X. 38.
But if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him. THE great
Design of this Epistle, (whoever was the Author of it, which I shall not now
enquire into) is plainly this, to confirm the Jews, who were but newly
converted to Christanity, in the steadfast Profession of that Faith, which they
had embraced, and to arm them against that Temptation, which Christians were
then exposed to, viz. the fierce and cruel Persecutions, which threatened those
of that Profession.

And to this purpose, he represents to them, the excellency of that Religion,
above any other former Revelation, that God had made of himself to the World;
both in respect of the Author and Revealer of it, who was the Son of God, and
in respect of the Revelatition it self; which, as it contains better, and more
perfect Directions of a good Life, so likewise more powerful and effectual
Motives thereto, better Promises, and more terible Threatenings, than were
annexed to the Observation of the Jewish Law, or clearly and certainly
discoverable by the Light of Nature. From these Considerations, he earnestly
persuades them, all along throughout this Epistle, to continue constant in the
Profession of this Faith, and not to suffer themselves to be frighted out of it
by the Terror of Persecution; Chap. 2. V. 1. Therefore we ought to give the
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, left at any time we should
let them slip; and Chap. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left
us, of entering into his rest, any of you should come short of it, and verse 23.
of this Chapter, Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith, without
wavering; and to encourage them to constancy, he sets before them, the Glorious
Rewards and Recompenses of the Gospel; Verse 35. Cast not away therefore your
Confidence, (...), your free and open Profession of Christianity, which has
great Recompense of Reward.

And then on the other hand, to deter them from Apostasy from this Profession,
he represents to them the horrible danger of it, here in the Text, But if any
man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him.

I shall briefly explain the Words, and then prosecute that which I mainly
intended in them; if any Man draw back, (...): These Words, with the foregoing,
are cited out of the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap. 2. Verse 3, 4. and they are cited
by the Apostle, according to the Translation of the LXX. which differs somewhat
from the Hebrew; and the difference arises from the various readings of the
Hebrew Word, which is rendered by the LXX. to draw back; but by the change of a
Letter signifies to be lifted up, as we render it in the Prophet; but however
that be, the Apostle follows the Translation of the LXX. and accommodates it to
his Purpose. (...), if any Man draw back; the Word signifies to keep back, to
withdraw, to sneak and slink away out of fear, to fail, or faint in any
Enterprise: And thus this Word is rendered in the New Testament, Acts 20. 20.
(...), I did not withold, or keep back any thing that was profitable for you;
and so it is said of St. Peter, Gal. 2. 12. (...), he slunk away, or withdrew
himself, fearing them of the Circumcision; and the Hebrew Word, which is here
rendered by the LXX. to draw back, is elsewhere rendered by (...), which is to
fail or faint; from all which it appears, that by drawing back, the Apostle
here means, Men's quitting their Profession of Christianity, and slinking out of
it, for fear of suffering for it.

My Soul shall have no Pleasure in him: These Words are plainly a (...), and
less is said than is meant; for the meaning is, that God will be extremely
displeased with them, and punish them very severely. The like Figure to this,
you have Psalm. 5. 4. Thou art not a God that have pleasure in Wickedness, which
in the next Verse is explained, by his hatred and detestation of those who are
guilty of it, Thou hate all the workers of iniquity. So that the plain sense
of the words is this, that Apostasy from the profession of God's true
Religion, is a thing highly provoking to him, and will be most severely punished
by him.

In speaking to this Argument, I shall consider these four things.

I. The Nature of this sin of Apostasy from Religion.

II. The several steps and degrees of it.

III. The heinousness of it.

IV. The great danger of it, and the terrible punishment it exposes men to.
And when I have spoken to these, I shall conclude all with a short Exhortation,
to hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering.

I. We will consider the Nature of this sin of Apostasy from Religion; and it
consists in forsaking or renouncing the Profession of Religion, whether it be
by an open declaration in words, or a virtual declaration of it by our actions;
for it comes all to one in the sight of God, and the different manner of doing
it, does not alter the nature of the thing: He indeed that renounceth Religion,
by an open declaration in words, offers the greatest and boldest defiance to
it; but he is likewise an Apostate, who silently withdraws himself from the
profession of it, who quits it for his interest, or for fear disowns it, and
sneaks out of the Profession of it, and forsakes the Communion of those who own
it. Thus Demas was an Apostate, in quitting Christianity for some worldly
interest. Demas has forsaken us, having loved this present world, says St.
Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And those whom our Savior describes, Mat. 13. 20, 21. who
received the word into stony ground, were Apostates out of fear, they heard the
word, and with joy received it, but having no root in themselves, they endured
but for a while, and when tribulation and persecution arises because of the
word, presently they fall off.

And there is likewise a partial Apostasy from Christianity, when some
Fundamental Article of it is denied, whereby in effect and by consequence, the
whole Christian Faith is overthrown. Of this Hymeneus and Philetus were guilty,
of whom the Apostle says, that they erred concerning the truth, saying that tbe
Resurrection was past already, and thereby overthrew the faith of some, 2 Timothy
2. 17, 18. That is, they turned the Resurrection into an Allegory, and did
thereby really destroy a most Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion.

So that to make a man an Apostate, it is not necessary that a man should
solemnly renounce his Baptism, and declare Christianity to be false; there are
several other ways whereby a man may bring himself under this guilt; as by a
silent quitting of his Religion, and withdrawing himself from the Communion of
all that profess it; by denying an Essential Doctrine of Christianity; by
undermining the great End and Design of it, by teaching Doctrines which
directly tend to encourage Men in impenitence, and a wicked course of life,
nay, to Authorize all manner of impiety and vice, in telling Men that whatever
they do they cannot Sin; for which, the Primitive Christians did look upon the
Gnostics, as no better than Apostates from Christianity; and tho they retained
the Name of Christians, yet not to be truly and really so. And there is
likewise a partial Apostasy from the Christan Religion; of which I shall speak
under the

II. Head I proposed; which was, to consider the several sorts and degrees of
Apostasy. The highest of all, is the renouncing and forsaking of Christianity,
or of some Essential part of it, which is a virtual Apostafie from it. But
there are several tendencies toward this, which they who are guilty of, are in
some degree guilty of this Sin. As

1. Indifferency in Religion, and want of all sort of Concernment for it: when
a Man, tho he never quitted his Religion, yet is so little concerned for it,
that a very small Occasion or Temptation would make him do it; he is contented
to be reckoned in the number of those who profess it, so long as it is the
Fashion, and he finds no great Inconvenience by it; but is so indifferent in
his Mind about it, ( like Gallio, who minded none of those things) that he can
turn himself into any other Shape, when his Interest requires it; so that tho
he never actually deserted it, yet he is 2 kind of Apostate, in the preparation
and disposition of his Mind: And to such Persons, that Title which Solomon
gives to some, may fitly enough be applied, they are Backsliders in Heart.

2. Another tendency to this Sin, and a great degree of it, is withdrawing from
the Public Marks and Testimonies of the Profession of Religion, by forsaking
the Assemblies of Christians for the Worship and Service of God; to withdraw
our selves from those, for fear of Danger or Suffering, is a kind of Denial of
our Religion. And this was the case of some in the Apostles time, when
Persecution grew hot, and the open Profession of Christianity dangerous; to
avoid this Danger, many appeared not in the Assemblies of Christians, for fear
of being observed and brought into trouble for it. This the Apostle taxes some
for, in this Chapter, and speaks of it as a letting go our Profession, and a
kind of deserting of Christianity, v. 23, 35. Let us hold fast the Profession
of our Faith without wavering, not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is: He does not say they had quitted their
Profession, but they had but a loose hold of it, and were silently stealing
away from it.

3. A light temper of Mind, which easily receives Impressions from those who
lie in wait to deceive, and seduce Men from the Truth. When Men are not well
rooted and established in Religion, they are apt to be inveigled by the crafty
Insinuations of Seducers, to be moved with every wind of Doctrine, and to be
easily shaken in Mind, by every trifling piece of Sophistry, that is
confidently obtruded upon them for a weighty Argument.

Now this is a temper of Mind which disposes Men to Apostasy, and renders
them an easy Prey to every one that takes a Pleasure and a Pride in making
Proselytes. It is true indeed, a Man should always have a Mind ready to
entertain Truth, when it is fairly proposed to him; but the main things of
Religion are so plainly revealed, and lie so obvious to every ordinary
capacity, that every Man may discern them; and when he has once entertained
them, ought to be steadfast and unmovable in them, and not suffer himself to be
whiffled out of them, by any insignificant noise about the Infallibility of a
Visible Church; much less ought he to be moved by any Man's uncharitableness
and positiveness, in damning all that are not of his Mind.

There are some things so very plain, not only in Scripture, but to the common
Reason of Mankind, that no subtilty of Discourse, no pretended Authority, or
even Infallibility of any Church, ought to stagger us in the least about them;
as that we ought not, or cannot believe any thing in direct contradiction to
Sense and Reason; that the People ought to Read and Study the Holy Scriptures,
and to serve God and pray to him in a Language which they understand; that they
ought to receive the Sacrament as our Savior instituted and appointed it, that
is, in both kinds; that it can neither be our Duty, nor Lawful to do that which
God has forbidden; as he has done the Worship of Images in the Second
Commandment, as plainly as words can do it. Upon any one of these Points, a Man
would fix his foot, and stand alone against the whole World.

4. Another Degree of Apostasy is, a departure from the Purity of the
Christian Doctrine and Worship, in a gross and notorious manner. This is a
partial, tho not a total Apostasy from the Christian Religion; and there have
been, and still are some in the World, who are justly Charged with this degree
of Apostasy from Religion; namely such, as tho they retain and profess the
Belief of all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and Worship the only true
God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ; yet have greatly perverted the
Christian Religion, by superinducing, and adding new Articles of Faith, and
gross Corruptions, and Superstitions in Worship, and imposing upon Men the
Belief and Practice of these, as necessary to Salvation. And St. Paul is my
Warrant for this Censure, who charge those who added to the Christian
Religion, the Necessity of Circumcision, and observing the Law of Moses, and
thereby perverted the Gospel of Christ, as guilty in some degree of Apostasy
from Christianity; for he calls it, preaching another Gospel, Gal. 1. 7, 8.
There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ; but tho
we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel to you, than that which we
have preached, let him be accursed. And those who were seduced by these
Teachers, he charge them with having in some sort quitted the Gospel of
Christ, and embraced another Gospel, V. 6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed
from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: So that
they who thus pervert and corrupt the Christian Doctrine or Worship, are
plainly guilty of a partial Apostasy from Christianity; and they who quit the
purity of the Christian Doctrine and Worship, and go over to the Communion of
those who have thus perverted Christianity, are in a most dangerous state, and
in the Judgment of St. Paul, are in some sort removed unto another Gospel. I
shall now proceed, in the

III. Place, to consider the Heinousness of this Sin. And it will appear to be
very Heinous, if we consider, what an affront it is to God, and how great a
contempt of him; when God has revealed his will to Mankind, and sent no less
Person than his own Son out of his own Bosom to do it, and has given such
Testimonies to him from Heaven, by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost; when he has transmitted down to us, so Faithful a
Record of this Revelation, and of the Miracles wrought to confirm it, in the
Books of the Holy Scriptures, and when we our selves have so often declared our
firm belief of this Revelation; yet after all this to fall from it, and deny
it, or any part of it, or to embrace Doctrines and Practices plainly contrary
to it: This certainly cannot be done without the greatest affront and contempt
of the Testimonies of God himself; for it is in effect, and by interpretation,
to declare, that either we do not believe what God says, or that we do not fear
what he can do. So St. John tells us, 1 Ep. 5. 10. He that believes not God,
has made him a Liar, because he believes not the record which God has given
of his Son.

And all along in this Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apostle sets himself to
aggravate this Sin; calling it an Evil Heart of unbelief, to depart from the
living God, Chapter 3 12. And he frequently calls it so, (...), and by way of
eminency, as being of all Sins the greatest and most heinous. Chapter 10. 26. If we
sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth. That the
Apostle here speaks of the Sin of Apostasy, is plain from the whole scope of
his discourse; for having exhorted them before, v. 23. to hold fast the
Profession of their Faith without wavering, not forsaking the assembling of
themselves together, he immediately adds, for if we sin wilfully, after we
have received the knowledge of the Truth; that is, if we fall off from
Christianity, after we have embraced it. And, Chapter 12 1. let us lay aside every
weight, and the sin which so easily besets us; that is, the great Sin of
Apostasy from Religion; to which they were then so strongly tempted by that
fierce Persecution which attended it; and therefore he adds, let us run with
patience the race which is set before us; that is, let us arm our selves with
patience against the Sufferings we are like to meet with in our Christian
course. To oppose the Truth, and resist the clear Evidence of it, is a great
Sin, and Men are justly condemned for it. John 3. 19. This is the condemnation,
that light is come into the World, and men loved darkness rather than light.
But to desert the Truth, after we have been convinced of it, to fall off from
the Profession of it, after we have embraced it; is a much greater Sin.
Opposition to the Truth, may proceed in a great measure from ignorance and
prejudice, which is a great extenuation; and therefore St. Paul tells us, that
after all his violent Persecution of Christianity, he found Mercy, because he
did it ignorantly and in unbelief. To revolt from the Truth, after we have made
profession of it; after we have known the way of righteousness, to turn from
the holy commandment; this is the great aggravation. The Apostle makes
wilfulness, an usual ingredient into the Sin of Apostasy, if we sin wilfully,
after we have received the knowledge of the Truth.

And as this Sin is one of the greatest affronts to God, so it is the highest
and most effectual disparagement of Religion; for it is not so much considered,
what the Enemies of Religion speak against it, because they speak evil of the
things which they know not, and of which they have had no Trial and Experience;
but he that falls off from Religion, after he has made profession of it,
declares to the World, that he has tried it, and dislikes it; and pretends to
leave it, because he has not found that Truth and Goodness in it which he
expected; and upon long experience of it, sees reason to prefer another
Religion before it: So that nothing can be more despiteful to Religion than
this, and more likely to bring it into contempt; and therefore the Apostle ( v.
29. of this Chapter) calls it a trampling under foot the Son of God, and making
the Blood of the Covenant a profane thing, and offering despite to the Spirit
of Grace: for we cannot put a greater Scorn upon the Son of God, who revealed
this Doctrine to the World; nor upon his Blood, which was shed to confirm and
seal the Truth of it; and upon the Holy Ghost, who came down in miraculous
Gifts, to give Testimony to it; than notwithstanding all this, to renounce this
Doctrine, and to forsake this Religion. But we shall yet farther see the
heinousness of this Sin, in the terrible Punishment it exposes Men to; which
was the

IV. And Last thing I proposed to consider. And this is represented to us in a
most terrible manner, not only in this Epistle, but in other Places of
Scripture. This Sin is placed in the highest rank of pardonable Sins, and next
to the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which our Savior declares to be absolutely
unpardonable. And indeed the Scripture speaks very doubtfully of the
pardonableness of this Sin, as being near akin to that against the Holy Ghost,
being said to be an Offering despite to the Spirit of Grace. In the 6th Chapter
of this Epistle, V. 4, 5, 6. the Apostle speaks in a very severe manner,
concerning the state of those, who had apostatized from Christianity, after the
solemn Profession of it in Baptism, it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened (that is baptized) and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, (that is
Regeneration) and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, (that is, have been
instructed in the Christan Religion, and endowed with the miraculous Powers of
the Gospel-Age, (for the Jews used to call the Age of the Messiah, Seculum
Futurum, or the World to come) it is impossible for those to be renewed again
unto repentance; where the least we can understand, by impossible, is, that it
is extremely difficult; for so the word impossible is sometimes used; as when
our Savior says, it is impossible for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And, Chapter 10. 26. the Apostle speaking of the same thing, says, if we
sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains
no more Sacrifice for sins; that is, they who renounce Christianity, since they
reject the only way of expiation, there remains no more Sacrifice for their
Sins.

St. Peter likewise expresses himself very severely concerning this sort of
Persons, 2 Epist. 2. 20, 21. For if after they have escaped the Pollutions of
the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; (that
is, after they have been brought from Heathenism to Christianity) they are
entangled therein again, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning. He seems loath to say, how sad the Condition of such Persons is,
but this he tells them, that it is much worse than when they were Heathens
before; and he gives the Reason, for it had been better for them, not to have
known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
Holy Commandment delivered unto them. And St. John calls this Sin of Apostasy,
the Sin unto Death; and tho he do not forbid Christians to pray for them that
are guilty of it; yet he will not say, that they should pray for them. 1 Epist.
5. 16. If any Man see his Brother sin a Sin, which is not unto Death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him Life, for them that sin not unto Death; there is a
sin unto Death, I do not say, that he shall pray for it. Now that by this sin
unto Death, the Apostle means Apostasy from the Christian Religion to
Idolatry, is most probable from what follows, Verse 18. we know that whosoever
is born of God sins not, (that is this Sin unto Death) but he that is
begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not, (that is,
he is preserved from Idolatry, unto which the Devil had seduced so great a part
of Mankind) and we know that we are of God, and the whole World, (...), is
under the dominion of that wicked one; ( viz. the Devil, whom the Scripture
elsewhere calls the God of this World;) and we know that the Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true,
(that is, has brought us from the Worship of false Gods, to the knowledge and
Worship of the true God) and then he concludes, little Children, keep your
selves from Idols; which caution has no manner of dependence upon what went
before, unless we understand the Sin unto Death, in this Sense; and it is the
more probable, that it is so to be understood, because Apostasy is so often in
this Epistle to the Hebrews, called the Sin, by way of Eminency, as it is here,
by St. John, whosoever is born of God sins not.

So that at the very best, the Scripture speaks doubtfully of the pardon of
this sin; however, that the punishment of it, unrepented of, shall be very
dreadful. It seems to be mildly expressed here in the Text, If any man draw back,
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: But it is the more severe for being
expressed so mildly, according to the intention of the Figure here used; and
therefore in the next words, this expression of Gods taking no pleasure in such
Persons, is explained by their utter Ruin and Perdition; But we are not of them
that draw back unto Perdition. And in several parts of this Epistle, there are
very severe passages to this purpose; Chapter 2. 2, 3. If the word spoken by
Angels, was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?
And Chapter 10. 26, 27. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversary: he that despised Moses law, dyed without mercy, under two or three
witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, that has trodden under foot the Son of God! etc. For we know him who
has said, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, says the Lord: And again, The
Lord shall judge his People; it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God. What can be more severe and terrible than these expressions?

I will mention but one Text more, and that is Rev. 21. 8. where in the
Catalogue of great Sinners, those who Apostatize from Religion, out of fear, do
lead the Van; He that overcomes shall inherit all things, (which is elsewhere
in this Book expressed, by continuing faithful unto the Death.) He that
overcomes, shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son; but the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. The fearful,
and unbelievers, and liars; that is, they who out of fear relapse into
infidelity, and abide not in the Truth, shall be reckoned in the first rank of
Offenders, and be punished accordingly.

And thus I have done with the Four things I propounded to speak to, from these
words; the Nature of Apostasy; the several steps and degrees of it; the
heinous Nature of this Sin; the danger of it, and the terrible punishment in
exposes Men to.

And is there any need now, to exhort men to hold fast the profession of Faith,
when the danger of drawing back is so evident, and so terrible? or is there any
reason and occasion for it? Certainly there is no great danger amongst us, of
Men's Apostatizing from Christianity, and turning Jews, or Turks, or Heathens; I
do not think there is; but yet for all that, we are not free from the danger of
Apostasy; there is great danger, not of Men's Apostatizing from one Religion to
another, but from Religion to Infidelity, and Atheism; and of this worst kind
of Apostasy of all other, I wish the Age we live in, had not afforded us too
many instances. It is greatly to be lamented, that among those who have professed
Christianity, any should be found, that should make it their endeavor to
undermine the great Principles of all Religion; the Belief of a God, and his
Providence; and of the Immortality of the Souls of Men; and a state of Rewards
and Punishments after this Life; and to bring the most serious matters in the
World into contempt, and to turn them into jest and raillery; this is not only
a Renouncing of Christianity, the Religion which God has revealed, but even of
the Religion which is born with us, and the Principles and Notions which God
has planted in every Man's Mind; this is an Impiety of the First Magnitude,
and not to be mentioned without grief and horror; and this, it is to be feared,
has had a great hand in those great Calamities which our eyes have seen; and I
pray God, it do not draw down still more and greater Judgments upon this
Nation: But I hope there are none here that need to be cautioned against this
horrible impiety, and highest degree of Apostasy from the living God; that
which People are much more in danger of, is Apostasy from the Purity of the
Christian Doctrine and Worship, so happily recovered by a regular Reformation,
and established amongst us, by all the Authority that Laws, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, can give it; and which in Truth is no other than the Ancient and
Primitive Christianity; I say, a defection from this, to those gross Errors and
Superstitions, which the Reformation had paired off, and freed us from. I do
not say, that this is a total Apostasy from Christianity; but it is a partial
Apostasy and Defection, and a very dangerous one; and that those, who after
they have received the knowledge of the truth, fall off from it, into those
Errors and Corruptions, are highely guilty before God, and their condition
certainly worse, and more dangerous, than of those who where brought up in
those Errors and Superstitions, and never knew better; for there are terrible
threatenings in Scripture against those, who fall away from the Truth, which
they once embraced, and were convinced of; If we sin wilfully, after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, etc. and if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him.

God considers every Man's Advantages and Opportunities of Knowledge, and their
Disadvantages likewise, and makes all reasonable Allowances for them; and for
Men to continue in the Errors they have been always brought up in; or, which
comes much to one, in Errors which they were led into by Principles early
infused into them, before they were in any measure competent Judges of those
matters; I say, for such Persons to continue in these Errors, and to oppose and
reject the contrary Truths, against which, by their Education, they have
received so strong and violent a Prejudice, this may be in a great degree
excusable, and find Pardon with God, upon a general Repentance for all Sins,
both known and unknown; and cannot be reasonably charged with the Guilt of this
great Sin of Apostasy. But not to abide in the Truth, after we have
entertained and professed it, having sufficient Means and Advantages of knowing
it, has no Excuse.

I would not be rash in condemning Particular Persons of any Society or
Communion of Christians, provided they be sincerely devout, and just, and
sober, to the best of their Knowledge: I had much rather leave them to God,
whose mercies are great, than to pass an uncharitable Censure upon them, as to
their Eternal State and Condition: But the Case is far otherwise, where the
Oportunities of Knowledge are afforded to Men, and men love darkness rather
than light; for they who have the Means and Advantages of knowing their
Master's will, are answerable to God, as if they had known it; because if they
had not been grossly negligent, and wanting to themselves, they might have known
it.

And this I fear is the Case of the generality of those, who have been bred up
to years of Consideration and Choice in the Reformed Religion, and forsake it;
because they do it without sufficient Reason, and there are invincible
Objections against it: They do it without sufficient Reason; because every one
amongst us knows, or may know, upon very little Enquiry, that we hold all the
Articles of the Faith, which are contained in the Ancient Creeds of the
Christian Church, and into which all Christians are baptized; that we inculcate
upon Men the Necessity of a Good Life, and of sincere Repentance, and perfect
Contrition for our Sins, such as is followed with real Reformation and
Amendment of our Lives; and that without this, no Man can be saved by any
Device whatsoever.

Now what Reason can any Man have, to question whether he may be saved in that
Faith which saved the first Christians, and by believing the Twelve Articles of
the Apostles Creed, tho he cannot swallow the Twelve Articles which are added
to it in the Creed of Pope Pius IV. every one of which, besides many and great
Corruptions and Superstitions in Worship, are so many and invincible Objections
against the Communion of the Roman Church, as I could particularly show, if it
had not been already done, in so many learned Treatises upon this Argument.
What is there then, that should move any reasonable Man to forsake the
Communion of our Church, and to quit the Reformed Religion?

There are Three things chiefly with which they endeavor to amuse and affright
weaker Minds.

1. A great Noise of Infallibility, which they tell us, is so excellent a means
to determine and put an end to all Differences. To which I shall at present
only object this Prejudice; That there are not wider and hotter Differences
among us, about any thing whatsoever, than are amongst them about this
admirable means of ending all Differences, as, where this Infallibility is
feated, that Men may know how to have recourse to it, for the ending of
Differences.

2. They endeavor to fright Men with the danger of Schism. But every Man
knows, that the Guilt of Schism lies at their Door, who impose sinful Articles
of Communion; and not upon them, who for fear of sinning against God, cannot
submit to those Articles; which we have done, and are still ready to make good,
to be the Case betwixt us and the Church of Rome. But,

3. The terrible Engine of all, is, their positive and confident damning of all
that live and die out of the Communion of their Church. This I have fully
spoken to upon another Occasion, and therefore shall only say at present, that
every Man ought to have better Thoughts of God, than to believe, that he, who
delighteh not in the death of sinners, and would have all men to be saved and
come to the knowledge of the truth, will confirm the Sentence of such
uncharitable Men, as take upon them to condemn Men for those things, for which
our Savior in his Gospel condemns no Man. And of all things in the World, one
would think, that the Uncharitableness of any Church, should be an Argument to
no Man, to run into its Communion.

I shall conclude with the Apostle's Exhortation, ver. 23. of this Chapter, Let
us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, and provoke one
another to charity and good works; and so much the more, because the Day
approaches, in which God will judge the faith and lives of men, by Jesus
Christ, according to his Gospel.

A SERMON, ON MATTHEW. XVI. 24.
Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. THEN said Jesus to his
Disciples, That is, upon Occasion of his former Discourse with them, wherein he
had acquainted them with his approaching Passion, that he must shortly go up to
Jerusalem, and there suffer many things of the Elders and Chief Priests and
Scribes, and at last be put to Death by them; then said Jesus unto his
Disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me.

If any man will come after me, or follow me; that is, If any man will be my
Disciple, and undertake the Profession of my Religion; If any man choose and
resolve to be a Christian; he must be so upon these Terms; he must deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me: He must follow me in Self-denial
and Suffering.

In the handling of these Words, I shall do these Four things.

I. I shall consider the way and method which our Savior uses in making
Proselytes, and gaining Men over to his Religion: He offers no manner of Force
and Violence to compel them to the Profession of his Religion; but fairly
offers it to their Consideration and Choice, and tells them plainly upon what
terms they must be his Disciples; and if they be contented and resolved to
submit to these Terms, well; if not, it is in vain to follow him any longer;
for they cannot be his Disciples.

II. I shall endeavor to explain this Duty of Self-denial, expressed in these
Words, Let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.

III. I shall consider the strict and indispensible Obligation of it, whenever
we are called to it, Without this we cannot be Christ's Disciples; if any man
will come after me, or be my Disciple, let him deny himself.

IV. I shall endeavor to vindicate the reasonableness of this Precept, of
self-denial and suffering for Christ, which at first appearance may seem to be
so very harsh and difficult; and I shall go over these Particulars as briefly
as I can.

I. We will consider the way and method which our Savior here uses in making
Proselytes, and gaining men over to his Religion; he offers no manner of force
and violence to compel men to the profession of his Religion, but fairly
proposes it to their Consideration and Choice, telling them plainly upon what
terms they must be his Disciples; if they like them, and are content, and
resolved to submit to them, well; he is willing to receive them, and own them
for his Disciples; if not, it is in vain to follow him any longer: For they
cannot be his Disciples. As on the one hand, he offers them no worldly
Preferment and Advantage, to entice them into his Religion, and to tempt them
outwardly to profess what they do not inwardly believe; so on the other hand,
he does not hale and drag them by force, and awe them by the terrors of
torture and death to sign the Christian Faith, though most undoubtedly true; and
to confess with their mouths, and subscribe with their hands, what they do not
believe in their hearts. He did not obtrude his Sacraments upon them, and
plunge them into the water to Baptize them, whether they would or no, and
thrust the Sacrament of Bread into their mouths; as if men might be Worthy
Receivers of that Blessed Sacrament, whether they receive it willingly or no.

Our Blessed Savior, the Author and Founder of our Religion, made use of none
of these ways of violence, so contrary to the nature of man, and of all
Religion, and especially of Christianity, and fitted only to make men
Hypocrites, but not Converts; he only says, If any man will be my Disciple; he
uses no Arguments, but such as are Spiritual, and proper to work upon the
Minds and Consciences of Men: For as his Kingdom was not of this world, so
neither are the Motives and Arguments to induce Men to be his subjects, taken
from this world; but from the endless Rewards and Punishments of another. The
weapons which he made use of, to subdue Men to the obedience of Faith, are not
carnal; and yet they were mighty through God, to conquer the obstinacy and
infidelity of men. This great and infallible Teacher, who certainly came from
God, all that he does, is to propose his Religion to Men, with such Evidence,
and such Arguments, as are proper to convince Men of the Truth and Goodness of
it; and to persuade Men to embrace it; and he acquaints them likewise with all
the worldly Disadvantages of it, and the hazards and sufferings that would
attend it; and now, if upon full consideration, they will make his Religion
their free Choice, and become his Disciples, he is willing to receive them; if
they will not, he understands the nature of Religion better, than to go about
to force it upon Men, whether they will or no.

II. I shall endeavor to explain this Duty or Precept of self-denial, expressed
in these words, Let him deny himself, and take up his cross. These are
difficult Terms; for a Man to deny himself, and take up his own Cross; that is,
willingly to submit to all those Sufferings which the malice of Men may inflict
for the sake of Christ and his Religion. For this Expression, of taking up
one's Cross, is a plain Allusion to the Roman Custom, which was this; That he
that was condemned to be Crucified, was to take his Cross upon his Shoulders,
and to carry it to the place of Execution; this the Jews made our Savior to
do, as we read, Joh. 19. 17. till that being ready to faint under it and lest
he should die away before he was nailed to the Cross, they compelled Simon of
Cyrene to carry it for him, as is declared by the other Evangelists; and yet he
tells them, they that will be his Disciples must follow him, bearing their own
Cross; that is, being ready (if God call them to it) to submit to the like
sufferings for Him and his Truth, which he was shortly to undergo for the
Truth, and for their sakes.

But tho these terms seem very hard; yet they are not unreasonable; as I shall
show in the conclusion of this Discourse. Some indeed have made them so by
extending this self-denial too far, attending more to the latitude of the
Words, than to the meaning and scope of our Savior's Discourse: For there is
no doubt, but that there are a great many things, which may properly enough be
called self-denial, which yet our Savior never intended to oblige Christians
to. It is, no doubt, great self-denial, for a Man, without any Necessity, to
deny himself the necessary Supports of Life, for a Man to starve and make away
himself. But no Man certainly ever imagined, that our Savior ever intended by
this Precept, to enjoin this kind of self-denial.

It is plain then, that there is no Reason nor Necessity to extend this Precept
of our Savior, concerning self-denial, to every thing that may properly enough
be called by that name; and therefore this Precept must be limited by the plain
scope and intendment of our Savior's Discourse; and no Man can argue thus;
such a thing is self-denial, therefore our Savior requires it of his
Disciples: For our Savior does not here require all kinds of self-denial; but
limits it, by his Discourse, to one certain kind, beyond which, self-denial is
no Duty by virtue of this Text; and therefore, for our clearer understanding of
this Precept of self-denial, I shall do these two things:

1. Remove some sorts of self-denial, which are instanced in by some, as
intended in this Precept.

2. I shall show what kind of self-denial that is, which our Savior here
intends.

1. There are several things brought under this Precept of self-denial, which
were never intended by our Savior. I shall instance in Two or Three things,
which are most frequently insisted upon, and some of them by very devout and
well-meaning Men; as, that in matters of Faith, We should deny and renounce our
own Senses and our Reason; nay, that we should be content to renounce our own
Eternal Happiness, and be willing to be damned for the Glory of God and the
Good of our Brethren: But all these are so apparently and grossly unreasonable,
that it is a Wonder that any one should ever take them for Instances of that
self-denial which our Savior requires; especially considering, that in all his
Discourse of self-denial, he does not so much as glance at any of these
Instances, or any thing like to them.

1. Some comprehend under self-denial, the denying and renouncing our own
Senses in matters of Faith: and if this could be made out to be intended by our
Savior in this Precept, we needed not dispute any of the other Instances. For
he that renounceth the certainty of Sense, so as not to believe what he sees,
may after this renounce and deny any thing. For the Evidence of Sense is more
clear and unquestionable than that of Faith; as the Scripture frequently
intimates; as John 20. 29. where our Savior reproves Thomas, for refusing to
believe his Resurrection, upon any less Evidence than that of Sense; Because
thou have seen, thou have believed: Blessed are they which have not seen, and
yet have believed. Which plainly supposes the Evidence of Sense to be the
highest and clearest degree of Evidence. So likewise that of St. Paul, 2 Cor.
5. 7. We walk by Faith, and not by Sight: Where the Evidence of Faith, as that
which is more imperfect and obscure, is opposed to that of Sight, as more clear
and certain. So that to believe any Article of Faith, in contradiction to the
clear Evidence of Sense, is contrary to the very Nature of Assent; which always
yields to the greatest and clearest Evidence.

Besides that, our Belief of Religion is at last resolved into the certainty of
Sense; so that by renouncing that, we destroy and undermine the very Foundation
of our Faith. One of the plainest and principal Proofs of the Being of God
(which is the first and Fundamental Article of all Religion) relies upon the
certainty of Sense; namely, the Frame of this visible World; by the
Contemplation whereof, we are led to the acknowledgment of the invisible Author
of it. So St. Paul tells us, Romans 1. 20. That the invisible things of God, from
the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
which are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead.

And the great external Evidence of the Christian Religion, I mean Miracles, is
at last resolved into the certainty of Sense, without which, we can have no
assurance that any Miracle was wrought for the confirmation of it.

And the knowledge likewise of the Christian Faith, is conveyed to us by our
Senses; the Evidence whereof, if it be uncertain, takes away all certainty of
Faith. How shall they believe, (says St. Paul, Romans 10. 14.) How shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not Heard? And ver. 17. So then Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So that to deny and renounce our
Senses in matters of Faith, is to take away the main Pillar and Foundation of
it.

2. Others, almost with equal absurdity, would comprehend under our Savior's
Precept of Self-denial, the denying and renouncing of our Reason in matters of
Faith: and this is Self-denial with a witness, for a Man to deny his own
reason; for it is to deny himself to be a Man. This surely is a very great
mistake, and tho the ground of it may be innocent; yet the consequence of it,
and the Discourses upon it, are very absurd.

The Ground of the mistake is this, Men think they deny their own Reason, when
they assent to the Revelation of God in such things, as their own Reason could
neither have discovered, nor is able to give the reason of: whereas in this
case, a Man is so far from denying his own Reason, that he does that which is
most agreeable to it. For what more reasonable than to believe whatever we are
sufficiently assured is revealed to us by God, who can neither be deceived
himself, nor deceive us?

But though the Ground of this mistake may be innocent, yet the Consequences of
it are most absurd and dangerous. For if we are to renounce our Reason in
matters of Faith, then are we bound to believe without Reason, which no Man can
do; or if he could, then Faith would be unreasonable, and Infidelity
reasonable. So that this Instance likewise of Self-denial, to renounce and deny
our own Reason, as it is no where expressed, so it cannot reasonably be thought
to be intended by our Savior in this Precept.

3. Nor does this Precept of Self-denial require Men to be content to renounce
their own Eternal Happiness, and to be willing to be Damned for the Glory of
God, and the good of their Brethren. If this were the meaning of this Precept,
we might justly say, as the Disciples did to our Savior, in another Case, This
is a hard saying, and who can hear it? The very thought of this, is enough to
make Humane Nature to tremble at its very foundation. For the deepest Principle
that God has planted in our Nature, is the desire of our own Preservation and
Happiness; and into this the Force of all Laws, and the Reason of all our Duty
is at last resolved.

From whence it plainly follows, that it can be no Man's Duty in any case to
renounce his own Happiness, and to be content to be for Ever Miserable; because
if once this be made a Duty, there will be no Argument left, to persuade any
Man to it. For the most powerful Arguments, that God ever used, to persuade Men
to any thing, are the Promise of Eternal Happiness, and the Terror of
Everlasting Torments: But if this were a Man's Duty, to be content to be
Miserable for Ever, neither of these Arguments would be of force sufficient to
persuade a Man to it.

The first of these, namely the Promise of Eternal Happiness, could signify
nothing to him that is to be Eternally Miserable; because if he be to be so, it
is impossible that he should ever have the benefit of that Promise: and the
threatening of Eternal Misery, could be no Argument in this Case; because the
Duty is just as difficult, as the Argument is powerful, and no Man can be moved
to submit to any thing that is grievous and terrible, but by something that is
more terrible; for if it be not, it is the same thing, whether he submit to it,
or not; and then no Man can be content, to be Eternally Miserable, only for the
fear of being so; for this would be for a Man to run himself upon that very
inconvenience which he is so much afraid of; and it is madness for a Man to die
for fear of death. Quis novus hic furor est, ne moriare, mori?

By this it plainly appears, how unreasonable it is to imagine, that by this
Precept of Self-denial, our Savior should require Men to renounce Everlasting
Happiness, and to be content to be Miserable for Ever, upon any account
whatsoever; because this were to suppose, that God has imposed that upon us as
a Duty, to oblige us whereto there can be no Argument offered, that can be
powerful enough. As for the Glory of God, which is pretended to be the Reason,
it is an impossible Supposition; because it cannot be for the Glory of God, to
make a Creature for Ever Miserable, that shall not by his Wilful Obstinacy and
Impenitence deserve to be so.

But this is only cast in to add weight. The other Reason of the Good and
Salvation of our Brethren, is the only Consideration for which there is any
manner of color from Scripture; and two Instances are alleged to this
purpose, of two very Excellent Persons, that seem to have desired this, and to
have submitted to it; and therefore it is not so unreasonable as we would make
it, that our Savior should enjoin it as a Duty. The Instances alleged are
these. Moses desired of God that he might be blotted out of the Book of Life,
rather than the People of Israel, whom he had Conducted and Governed so long,
should be destroyed: And in the New Testament St. Paul tells us, That he could
wish, that himself were accursed from Christ, for his Brethren; so earnest a
desire had he of their Salvation.

But neither of these Instances are of force sufficient to overthrow the
Reasons of my former Discourse; for the desire of Moses amounts only to a
submission to a Temporal death, that his Nation might be saved from a Temporal
ruin.

For the Expression of blotting out of the Book of Life, is of the same
importance with those Phrases so frequently used in the Old Testament, of
blotting out from the face of the Earth, and blotting out one's name from under
Heaven; which signify no more than Temporal death and destruction; and then
Moses's Wish was reasonable and generous, and signifies no more, but that he
was willing, if God pleased, to die to save the Nation.

As for St. Paul's Wish, of being accursed from Christ, it is plainly an
Hyperbolical Expression of his great Affection to his Countrymen the Jews, and
his Zeal for their Salvation, which was so great, that if it had been a thing
reasonable and lawful, he could have wished the greatest Evil to himself for
their sakes; and therefore it is observable, that it is not a positive and
absolute wish, but expressed in the usual form of ushering in an Hyperbole; I
could wish, just as we are wont to say, when we would express a thing to the
hight, which is not fit, nor intended to be done by us; I could wish so or so;
I could even afford to do this or that; which kind of speeches, no Man takes
for a strict and precise Declaration of our minds, but for a figurative
expression of a great Passion.

And thus I have done with the first thing I proposed for the Explication of
this Precept, or Duty of Self-denial; which was to remove some sorts of
Self-denial, which by some are frequently instanced in, as intended by our
Savior in this Precept. I proceed now to the

Second thing I proposed; which is to declare positively, what that Self-denial
is, which our Savior here intends; and it is plainly this, and nothing but
this; that we should be willing to part with all Earthly Comforts and
Conveniences, to quit all our Temporal Interests and Enjoyments, and even Life
it self, for the sake of Christ and his Religion. This our Savior means, by
denying our selves; and then (which is much the same with the other) that we
should be willing to bear any Temporal inconvenience and suffering, upon the
same account. This is to take up our Cross and follow him.

And that this is the full meaning of these two Phrases, of denying our selves,
and taking up our Cross, will clearly appear, by considering the particular
Instances, which our Savior gives of this Self-denial, when ever he has
occasion to speak of it; by which you will plainly see, that these expressions
amount to no more than I have said. Even here in the Text, after our Savior
had told his Disciples, that he that would come after him, must deny himself,
and take up his Cross; It follows immediately, for whosoever will save his life
shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it. You
see here, that he instanceth in parting with our lives for him, as the highest
piece of Self-denial, which he requires. And he himself elsewhere tells us,
that greater love than this has no man, than that a man lay down his life for
his friend. Elsewhere he instanceth in quitting our nearest Relations for his
sake; Luke 14. 26, 27. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life
also, he cannot be my Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his Cross and come
after me, he cannot be my Disciple.

Which expressions, of hating Father, and Mother, and other Relations, and even
Life it self, are not to be understood Rigorously, and in an absolute Sense,
but Comparatively; for it is an Hebrew manner of speech, to express that
Absolutely, which is meant only Comparatively; and so our Savior explains
himself, in a parallel Text to this; Matthew. 10. 37, 38. He that loves father
or mother, more than me, is not worthy of me: he that loves son or daughter,
more than me, is not worthy of me: And he that takes not his Cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. In another place, our Savior
instanceth in quitting our Estates for his sake, Matthew. 19. 29. Every one that
shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands, for my names sake; by all which it appears, that this
Self-denial which our Savior here requires of his Disciples, is to be extended
no farther, than to a readiness and willingness, when ever God shall call us to
it, to quit all our Temporal Interests and Enjoyments, and even Life it self,
(the dearest of all other) and to submit to any Temporal inconvenience and
suffering for his sake. And thus much for the Explication of the Precept here
in the Text. I proceed in the

Third Place, to consider the strict and indispensible Obligation of this
Precept of Self-denial, and suffering for Christ, and his Truth, rather than to
forsake and renounce them. If any man will come after me, or be my Disciple,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me; that is, upon these
Terms, he must be my Disciple, in this manner he must follow me; and in the
Text I mentioned before, he declares again, that he that is not ready to quit
all his Relations and even Life it self, for his sake, is not worthy of him,
and cannot be his Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come
after me, cannot be my Disciple; so that we cannot be the Disciples of Christ,
nor be worthy to be called by his Name; if we be not ready thus to deny our
selves for his sake: And not only so; but if for fear of the Cross, or of any
temporal sufferings, we should renounce, and deny him; he threatens to deny us
before his Father which is in Heaven, (i. e.) to deprive us of Eternal Life,
and to Sentence us to Everlasting Misery. Matthew. 10. 32. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my father which is in Heaven:
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father
which is in Heaven: And Mark 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of
Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy
Angels; that is, when he comes to Judge the World, they shall not be able to
stand in that Judgment; for that by his being ashamed of them, is meant, that
they shall be condemned by him, is plain from what goes before, V. 26, 27. What
shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? and then it follows,
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words.

But because some have had the Confidence to tell the World, that our Savior
does not require thus much of Christians; but all that he obliges us to, is to
believe in him in our Hearts, but not to make any outward Profession of his
Religion, when the Magistrate forbids it, and we are in danger of suffering for
it: I shall therefore briefly examine what is pretended for so strange an
Assertion, and so directly contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, and to
the express Words of our Savior.

The Author of the Book called the Leviathan, tells us, That we are not only
not bound to confess Christ, but we are obliged to deny him, in case the
Magistrate require us so to do. His Words are these: What if the Sovereign
forbid us to believe in Christ? He answers, Such forbidding is of no effect,
because Belief and Unbelief never follows Men's Commands. But what (says he) if
we be commanded by our lawful Prince to say with our Tongues, we believe not;
must we obey such Commands? To this he answers, That Profession with the Tongue
is but an External thing, and no more than any other Gesture, whereby we
signify our Obedience, and wherein a Christian, holding firmly in his Heart
the Faith of Christ, has the same Liberty which the Prophet Elisha allowed to
Naaman. But what then (says he) shall I answer to our Savior, saying,
Whosoever denies me before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is in
Heaven. His Answer is, This we may say, that whatsoever a Subject is compelled
to in obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own Mind, but
the Law of his Country, the Action is not his, but his Sovereign's; nor is it
he that in this Case denies Christ before Men, but his Governor, and the Laws
of his Country.

But can any Man, that in good earnest pays any degree of Reverence to our
Blessed Savior and his Religion, think to baffle such plain Words by so
frivolous an Answer? There is no Man doubts, but if the Magistrate should
command Men to deny Christ, he would be guilty of a great Sin in so doing; but
if we must obey God rather than Men, and every Man must give an account of
himself to God; how will this excuse him that denies Christ, or breaks any
other Commandment of God, upon the Command of the Magistrate? And to put the
matter out of all doubt, that our Savior forbids all that will be his
Disciples, upon pain of Damnation, to deny him, tho the Magistrate should
command them to do so, it is very observable, that in that very place, where he
speaks of confessing or denying him before Men, he puts this very Case, of
their being brought before Kings and Governors for confessing him, Matthew. 10.
17. Beware (says he) of Men, for they will deliver you up to the Council, and
they will scourge you in their Synagogues; and ye shall be brought before
Governors and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles. But what Testimony would this be against them, if Christians were
bound to deny Christ at their Command?

But our Savior goes on, and tells them how they ought to demean themselves,
when they were brought before Kings and Governors, v. 19. But when they shall
deliver you up, take ye no thought, how, or what ye shall speak; for it shall
be given you in that very hour what ye shall speak. But what need of any such
extraordinary Assistance in the case, if they had nothing to do, but to deny
him, when they were required by the Magistrate to do it? And then (proceeding
in the same Discourse) he bids them, v. 28. Not to fear them that can kill the
Body, and after that have no more that they can do; that is, not to deny him,
for fear of any Temporal Punishment or Suffering the Magistrate could inflict
upon them; but to fear and obey him, who can destroy Body and Soul in Hell. And
upon this Discourse our Savior concludes, v. 32, 33. Whosoever therefore shall
confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in
Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in Heaven. And now can any thing be plainer, than that our
Savior requires his Disciples to make Confession of him before Kings and
Governors, and not to deny him for fear of any thing which they can do to
them? But let us enquire a little farther, and see how the Apostles, who
received this Precept from our Savior himself, did understand it. Acts 4. 14.
we find Peter and John summoned before the Jewish Magistrates, who strictly
commanded them, not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus. But Peter
and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God,
to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye. And when they still
persisted in their course, notwithstanding the Command of the Magistrate, and
were called again before the Council, Chapter 5. 28. And the High Priest asked
them, saying, Did we not straightly command you, that you should not teach in
this Name? and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine: They return
them again the same Answer, v. 29. Then Peter and the other Apostles answered
and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.

And let any Man now judge, whether our Savior did not oblige Men to confess
him even before Magistrates, and to obey him rather than Men. And indeed, how
can any Man in reason think, that the great King and Governor of the World
should invest any Man with a Power to control his Authority, and to oblige Men
to disobey and renounce him, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree judgment?
This is a thing so unreasonable, that it can hardly be imagined, that any thing
but downright Malice against God and Religion could prompt any Man to advance
such an Assertion.

I should now have proceeded to the Fourth and Last Particular, which I
proposed to speak to; namely, To vindicate the reasonableness of this Precept
of Self-denial and Suffering for Christ, which at first Appearance may seem to
be so very harsh and difficult. But this, together with the Application of this
Discourse, shall be reserved to another Opportunity.

A SERMON, ON MATTHEW. XVI. 24.
Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. THEN said Jesus unto his
Disciples; that is, upon Occasion of his former Discourse with them, concerning
his approaching Passion, and that he must shortly go up to Jerusalem, and there
suffer many things of the Elders and Chief Priests and Scribes, and at last be
put to Death by them; Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come
after me; that is, If any Man will be my Disciple, and undertake the Profession
of my Religion, he must do it upon these Terms of Self-denial and Suffering.

In the handling of these Words, I proceeded in this Method.

First, I considered the way which our Savior here uses in making Proselytes,
and gaining Men over to his Religion. He offers no manner of Force and Violence
to compel Men to the Profession of it, but fairly proposes it to their
Consideration and Choice; telling them plainly upon what Terms they must be his
Disciples; if they like them, and be resolved to submit to them, well; if not,
it is in vain to follow him any longer; for they cannot be his Disciples. And to
use any other way than this to gain Men over to Religion, is contrary both to
the Nature of Man, who is a Reasonable Creature; and to the Nature of Religion,
which, if it be not our Free Choice, cannot be Religion.

Secondly, I explained his Duty or Precept of Self-denial, expressed in these
Words, Let him deny himself, and take up his Cross; which Phrase, of taking up
one's Cross, is an Allusion to the Roman Custom, which was, That the Malefactor
that was to be Crucified, was to take up his Cross upon his Shoulders, and to
carry it to the Place of Execution.

Now for our clearer understanding of this Precept of Self-denial, I told you,
that it is not to be extended to every thing that may properly be called by
that Name, but to be limited by the plain Scope and Intendment of our Savior's
Discourse; and therefore I did in the

First Place remove several things which are instanced in by some, as intended
and required by this Precept. As,

1. That we should deny and renounce our own Sense in matters of Faith. But
this I showed to be absurd and impossible; because if we do not believe what we
see, or will believe contrary to what we see, we destroy all Certainty, there
being no greater than that of Sense: Besides, that the Evidence of Faith being
less clear and certain than that of Sense, it is contrary to the Nature of
Assent, which is always swayed and born down by the greatest and clearest
Evidence. So that we cannot assent to any thing in plain Contradiction to the
Evidence of Sense.

2. Others would comprehend under this Precept, the denying of our Reason in
matters of Faith; which is in the next degree of Absurdity to the other;
because no Man can believe any thing, but upon some Reason or other; and to
believe without any Reason, or against Reason, is to make Faith unreasonable,
and Infidelity reasonable.

3. Others pretend, that by virtue of this Precept, Men ought to be content to
renounce their own Eternal Happiness, and to be Miserable for Ever, for the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of their Brethren. But this I showed cannot be
a Duty, for this plain Reason; because if it were, there is no Argument left
powerful enough to persuade a Man to it. And as for the two Scripture Instances
alleged to this purpose; Moses his Wish, of being blotted out of the Book of
Life for the People of Israel, signifies no more than a Temporal Death; and St.
Paul's, of being accursed from Christ for his Brethren, is only an hyperbolical
Expression of his great Passion and Zeal for the Salvation of his Countrymen;
as is evident from the Form of the Expression; such as is commonly used to
usher in an Hyperbole; I could wish. And in the

Second Place, I showed positively, That the plain meaning of this Precept of
Self-denial is this, and nothing but this; That we should be willing to part
with all our Temporal Interests and Enjoyments, and even Life it self, for the
sake of Christ and his Religion. This is to deny our selves. And then, that we
should be willing to bear any temporal Inconvenience and Suffering upon the
same Account. This is to take up our Cross. And this I showed from the
Instances which our Savior gives of Self-denial, whenever he had occasion to
discourse of it.

Thirdly, I considered the strict and indispensable Obligation of this Precept
of Self-denial, rather than to forsake Christ and his Religion. Without this
Disposition and Resolution of Mind we cannot be his Disciples; And if we deny
him before Men; he will also deny us before his Father which is in Heaven. And
this Confession of Him and his Truth we are to make before Kings and
Governors, and notwithstanding their Commands to the contrary, which are of no
Force against the Laws and Commands of God.

Thus far I have gone. There remains only the

IV. And Last Particular, which I proposed to speak to; viz. To vindicate the
Reasonableness of this Self-denial and Suffering for Christ, which at first
appearance may seem to be so very difficult. And this Precept cannot be thought
unreasonable, if we take into Consideration these Three Things.

I. That He who requires this of us, has Himself given us the greatest Example
of Self-denial that ever was. The greatest in it self, in that he denied
himself more, and suffered more grievous things, than it is possible for any of
us to do: And such an Example, as in the Circumstances of it, is most apt and
powerful to engage and oblige us to the imitation of it; because all his
Self-denial and Sufferings were for our sakes.

II. If we consider, That he has promised all needful Supplies of his Grace, to
enable us to the Discharge of this difficult Duty of Self-denial and Suffering,
and to support and comfort us therein.

III. He has assured us of a Glorious Reward of all our Sufferings and
Selfdenial, beyond the Proportion of them, both in the Degree and Duration of
it. I shall go over these as briefly as I can.

I. If we consider, That He who requires us thus to deny our selves for him,
has given us the greatest Example of Self-denial that ever was. Our Savior
knowing how unwelcome this Doctrine of Self-denial and Suffering must needs be
to his Disciples, and how hardly this Precept would go down with them; to
sweeten it a little, and take off the harshness of it, and to prepare their
Minds the better for it, he tells them first of his own Sufferings; that by
that means he might, in some measure, reconcile their Minds to it, when they
saw that he required nothing of them, but what he was ready to undergo Himself,
and to give them the Example of it. And upon this Occasion it was, that our
Savior acquaints them with the hard and difficult Terms upon which they must
be his Disciples. V. 21. The Evangelist tells us, that Jesus began to show unto
his Disciples; how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of
the Elders, and Chief-Priests, and Scribes, and be killed. Then said Jesus unto
his Disciples; that is, immediately upon this Discourse of his own Sufferings,
as the fittest time for it, he takes the Opportunity to tell them plainly of
their own Sufferings; and that unless they were prepared and resolved to deny
themselves so far, as to suffer all manner of Persecution for his sake and the
Profession of his Religion; they could not be his Disciples. If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me; that
is, let him reckon and resolve upon following that Example of Self-denial and
Suffering, in which I will go before him. Now the Consideration of this Example
of Self-denial and Suffering, which our Savior has given us, has great force
in it to reconcile us to this difficult Duty, and to show the Reasonableness of
it.

1. That He who requires us thus to deny our selves, has Himself in his own
Person, given us the greatest Example of self-denial that ever was. And,

2. Such an Example, as, in all the Circumstances of it, is most apt and
powerful to engage and oblige us to the imitation of it; because all his
Self-denial and Sufferings were for our sakes.

1. He who requires us thus to deny our selves, has Himself in his own Person
given us the greatest Example of Self-denial that ever was; in that he denied
himself more, and suffered more grievous things, than any of us can do. He bore
the insupportable Load of all the Sins of all Mankind, and of the Wrath and
Vengeance due to them. Never was sorrow like to his sorrow, wherewith the Lord
afflicted him in the day of his fierce anger. He was despised and rejected of
men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; his visage was marred more
than any man's, and his form more than the sons of men. (i. e.) He underwent
more Affliction, and had more Contempt poured upon him, than ever was upon any
of the Sons of Men; and yet he endured all this with incredible Patience and
Meekness, with the greatest Evenness and Constancy of Mind, and with the most
perfect Submission and Resignation of himself to the Will of God, that can be
imagined.

Such an Example as this should be of great force to animate us with the like
Courage and Resolution, in lesser Dangers and Difficulties. To see the Captain
of our Salvation going before us, and leading us on so bravely, and made
perfect by greater sufferings than we can ever be called to, or are any ways
able to undergo, is no small Argument and Encouragement to us, to take up our
Cross and follow him. The Consideration of the unknown Sufferings of the Son of
God, so great as we cannot well conceive of them, should make all the
Afflictions and Sufferings that can befall us, not only tolerable, but easy to
us. Upon this Consideration it is, that the Apostle animates Christians to
Patience in their Christian Course, notwithstanding all the Hardships and
Sufferings that attended it; Heb. 12. 2. Let us run with patience the race
which is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, who endured the Cross, and despised the Shame. For consider him, who
endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye also be weary
and faint in your minds.

And this Example is more Powerful for our Encouragement, because therein we
see the World conquered to our Hands, and all the Terrors and Temptations of
it baffled and subdued, and thereby a cheap and easy Victory over it obtained
for us. By this Consideration, our Savior endeavors to inspire his Disciples
with Cheerfulness and Courage in this great Conflict; John 16. 33. In the world
ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.

2. This Example of our Savior, is such, as in all the Circumstances of it, is
most apt and powerful to engage and oblige us to the Imitation of it; because
all his Self-denial and Sufferings were for our sakes, in Pity and Kindness to
us, and wholly for our Benefit and Advantage. We are apt to have their Example
in great regard, from whom we have received great Kindness and mighty Benefits.
This Pattern of Self-denial and Suffering, which our Religion proposes to us,
is the Example of One, whom we have Reason to Esteem, and Love, and Imitate,
above any Person in the World. It Is the Example of our Lord and Master, of our
Sovereign and our Savior, of the Founder of our Religion, and of the Author
and Finisher of our Faith: And surely such an Example must needs carry
Authority with it, and command our Imitation. It Is the Example of our best
Friend, and greatest Benefactor; of Him, who laid down his Life for us, and
sealed his Love to us with his dearest Blood; and, even when we were bitter
Enemies to him, did, and suffered more for us, than any Man ever did for his
best Friend. If we should be reduced to Poverty and Want, let us consider Him;
Who being Lord of all, had not where to lay his head; who being rich, for our
sakes became poor; that we through his poverty might be made rich. If it should
be our lot to be persecuted for righteousness sake, and exercised with
Sufferings and Reproaches; Let us look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, who endured the Cross, and despised the shame for our sakes. In a
Word, can we be discontented at any Condition, or decline it in a good Cause;
when we consider how Contented the Son of God was, in the meanest and most
destitute; how Meek and Patient in the most afflicted and suffering Condition;
how he welcomed all Events, and was so perfectly resigned to the Will of his
Heavenly Father, that whatever pleased God, pleased him?

And surely in no Case is Example more necessary than in this, to engage and
encourage us in the discharge of so difficult a Duty, so contrary to the bent
and inclination of Flesh and Blood. A bare Precept of Self-denial, and a
peremptory Command to sacrifice our own Wills, our Ease, our Pleasure, our
Reputation, yea and Life it self, to the Glory of God, and the Maintenance of
his Truth, would have sounded very harsh and severe, had not the Practice of
all this been mollified and sweetened by a Pattern of so much advantage; by One
who in all these respects denied himself, much more than it is possible for us
to do; by One who might have insisted upon a greater Right; who abased himself,
and stooped from a greater Hight and Dignity; who was not forced into a
condition of Meanness and Poverty, but chose it for our sakes; who submitted to
Suffering, tho he had never deserved it. Here is an Example that has all the
Argument, and all the Encouragement that can be, to the imitation of it.

Such an Example is of greater force and authority than any Precept or Law can
be: So that well might our Lord, thus going before us, command us to follow
him, and say, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross and follow me. For if He thus denied himself, well may We, who have
much less to deny, but much more Cause and Reason to do it. He did it
voluntarily, and of choice; but it is our Duty. He did it for our sakes; we do
it for our own. His own Goodness moved him to deny himself for us; but
Gratitude obliges us to deny our selves in any thing for him. We did not in
the least deserve any thing from him; but he has wholly merited all this, and
infinitely more from us. So that such an Example as this is, in all the
Circumstances of it, cannot but be very powerful and effectual, to oblige us to
the Imitation of it. But the Reasonableness of this Precept will yet farther
appear, if we consider in the

Third place, That God has promised to all Sincere Christians all needful
Supplies of his Grace, to enable them to the discharge of this difficult Duty
of Self-denial, and to support and comfort them therein. For the Spirit of
Christ dwells in all Christians, and the same Glorious Power that raised up
Jesus from the Dead, works mightily in them that believe; Ephesians. 1. 19. That ye
may know (says St. Paul, speaking in general to all Christians) what is the
exceeding greatness of his Power to usward, who believe, according to the
working of his mighty Power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from
the dead. Of our selves we are very weak, and the Temptations and Terrors of
the world very powerful; but there is a Principle residing in every true
Christian, able to bear us up against the World, and the power of all its
Temptations. Whatsoever is born of God (says St. John) overcomes the world;
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. Ye are of
God, little children, and have overcome; because greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the world.

And this Grace and Strength was afforded to the first Christians in a most
Extraordinary manner, for their Comfort and Support under Sufferings: So that
they were strengthened with all Might, according to God's glorious Power, unto
all long-suffering with joyfulness; as St. Paul prays for the Colossians, Chapter
1. 11. And these Consolations of the Spirit of God, this Joy in the Holy Ghost,
was not peculiarly appropriated to the first times of Christianity; but is
still afforded to all sincere Christians, in such degree as is necessary, and
convenient for them. And whenever God exercises Good Men, with trials more
than humane, and such Sufferings as are beyond the ordinary rate of humane
Strength and Patience to bear, he has promised to endue them with more than
humane Courage and Resolution. So St. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.
13. He is faithful that has promised, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above what ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it. And why should we be daunted at any Suffering;
if God be pleased to increase our Strength, in proportion to the Sharpness of
our Sufferings?

And Blessed be God, many of our persecuted Brethren at this day have
remarkably found this comfortable Assistance and Support; tho many likewise
have fallen through fear and weakness; as it also hapen'd in the Primitive
times. But where ever this Promise is not made good, it is (as I have formerly
said) by reason of some Fault and Failing on our part. Either Men were not
Sincere in the profession of the Truth, and then no wonder, If when Tribulation
and Persecution arises, because of the Word, they are offended and fall off:
Or else they were too Confident to themselves, and did not seek God's Grace and
Assistance, and rely upon it as they ought; and thereupon God has left them
to themselves (as he did Peter) to convince them of their own Frailty and rash
Confidence; and yet even in that case, when there is Truth and Sincerity at the
bottom, there is no Reason to doubt, but that the Goodness of God is such, as
by some means or other to give to such persons (as he did to Peter) the
opportunity of recovering themselves by Repentance, and a more steadfast
Resolution afterward.

4. If we consider, in the last place, that our Savior has assured us of a
Glorious and Eternal Reward of all our Self-denial and Sufferings for him; a
Reward Infinitely beyond the proportion of our Sufferings, both in the Degree
and Duration of it. Now the clear discovery of this is peculiarly owing to the
Christian Religion, and the appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
who has abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to light by the
Gospel.

And as our Blessed Savior has assured us of this Blessed State of Good Men
in another World; so has he likewise assured us, that greater Degrees of this
Happiness shall be the Portion of Those who suffer for Him and his Truth: Mat.
5. 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
Names sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven.
And nothing surely can be more Reasonable, than to part with things of Small
Value, for things infinitely Greater and more Considerable; to forego the
Transient Pleasures and Enjoyments, and the Imperfect Felicities of this World,
for the Solid, and Perfect, and Perpetual Happiness of a Better Life; and to
exchange a Short and Miserable Life, for Eternal Life and Blessedness; in a
word, to be content to be driven Home; to be banished out of this World into our
own Native Country; and to be violently thrust out of this Vale of Tears, into
those Regions of Bliss, where are Joys unspeakable and full of Glory.

This Consideration St. Paul tells us supported the Primitive Christians, under
their sharpest and heaviest Sufferings, 2 Cor. 4. 16. For this cause (says he)
we faint not, because our light affliction which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; whilst we look not at
the things which are seen, but the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. So
that our Sufferings bear no more Proportion to the Reward of them, than Finite
does to Infinite, than Temporal to Eternal; between which there is no
Proportion.

All that now remains, is to draw some useful Inferences from what has been
Discoursed, concerning this great and difficult Duty of Self-denial for the
sake of Christ and his Religion; and they shall be these following.

1. To acknowledge the great Goodness of God to us, that all these Laws and
Commands, even the Hardest and Severest of them, are so reasonable.

God as he is our Maker, and gave us our Beings, has an Entire and Sovereign
Right over us; and by virtue of that Right, might have imposed very Hard things
upon us, and this without the giving Account to us of any of his matters, and
without propounding any Reward to us, so vastly disproportionable to our
Obedience to him. But in giving Laws to us, he has not made use of this Right.
The most Severe and Rigorous Commands of the Gospel are such, that we shall be
infinitely Gainers by our Obedience to them. If we deny our selves any thing in
this World for Christ and his Religion, we shall, in the next, be considered
for it to the Utmost; not only far beyond what it can Deserve, but beyond what
we can Conceive or Imagine: For this perishing Life, and the transitory Trifles
and Enjoyments of it, we shall, receive a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, an
uncorruptible Crown which fades not away, Eternal in the Heavens. For these
are Faithful Sayings, and we shall Infallibly find them true; That if we suffer
with Christ, we shall also reign with him; if we be persecuted for
righteousness sake, great shall be our reward in Heaven; if we part with our
Temporal Life, we shall be made Partakers of Eternal Life. He that is firmly
persuaded of the Happiness of the next World, and believes the Glory which
shall then be revealed, has no Reason to be so much offended at the Sufferings
of this Present time; so long as he knows and believes, that these Light
afflictions which are but for a Moment, will work for him a for more Exceeding
and Eternal Weight of Glory.

2. Seeing this is required of every Christian, to be always in a Preparation
and Disposition of Mind to deny our selves, and to take up our Cross; if we do
in good earnest resolve to be Christians, we ought to fit down and consider
well with our selves, what our Religion will cost us, and whether we be content
to come up to the Price of it. If we value any thing in this World, above
Christ and his Truth, we are not worthy of him. If it come to this, that we
must either renounce Him and his Religion, or quit our temporal Interests; if
we be not ready to forego these, nay, and to part even with Life it self,
rather than to forsake Him and his Truth; we are not worthy of him. These are
the Terms of our Christianity, and therefore we are required in Baptism
solemnly to renounce the World: And our Savior, from this very Consideration,
infers, That all who take upon them the Profession of his Religion, should
consider seriously beforehand, and count the cost of it; Luke 14. 28. Which of
you, (says he) intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Or what King going to war
with another King, does not sit down and consult, whether with 10000 he be able
to meet him that comes against him with 20000. So likewise, whosoever he be
that forsakes not all he has, cannot be my Disciple. You see the Terms upon
which we are Christians; we must always be prepared in the Resolution of our
Minds, to deny our selves, and take up our Cross, tho we are not Actually put
upon this Trial.

3. What has been said, is matter of great Comfort and Encouragement to all
those who deny themselves, and suffer upon so good an Account; of whom, God
knows, there are too great a Number at this Day, in several parts of the World:
Some under actual Sufferings, such as cannot but move Compassion and Horror in
all that hear of them: Others, who are fled hither, and into other Countries,
for Refuge and Shelter from one of the sharpest Persecutions that perhaps ever
was, if all the Circumstances of it be duly considered. But not to enlarge upon
so unpleasant a Theme, they who suffer for the Truth and Righteousness sake,
have all the Comfort and Encouragement, that the best Example, and the greatest
and most glorious Promises of God can give. They have the best Example in their
view; Jesus the Author and Finisher of their Faith, who endured the Cross, and
despised the Shame. So that how great and terrible soever their Sufferings be,
they do but tread in the Steps of the Son of God, and of the best and holiest
Man that ever was; and He who is their great Example in Suffering, will
likewise be their Support, and their exceeding great Reward.

So that tho Suffering for Christ be accounted great Self-denial, and he is
graciously pleased so to accept it; because in denying things Present and
Sensible, for things Future and Invisible, we do not only declare our Affection
to him, but our great Faith and Confidence in him, by showing that we rely upon
his Word, and venture all upon the Security which he offers us in another
World; yet according to a right Estimate of things, and to those who walk by
Faith and not by Sight, this which we call Self-denial, is, in truth and
reality, but a more commendable sort of Self-love; because we do herein most
effectually consult, and secure, and advance our own Happiness.

4. And Lastly, Since God has been pleased for so long a time to excuse us
from this hardest part of Self-denial, let us not grudge to deny our selves in
lesser Matters, for the sake of his Truth and Religion; to miss a good Place,
or to quit it upon that account; much less let us think much to renounce our
Vices, and to thwart our evil Inclinations for his sake. As Naaman's Servant
said to him, concerning the means prescribed by the Prophet for his Cure; If he
had bid thee do some Great thing, would thou not have done it? How much
more, when he has only said, Wash and be clean: So since God imposes no
harder Terms upon us, than Repentance and Reformation of our Lives, we should
gladly and thankfully submit to them. This, I know, is difficult to some, to
mortify their earthly Members, to crucify the flesh, with the affections and
lusts of it; it is like cutting off a right Hand, and plucking out a right Eye.

Some are so strongly addicted to their Lusts and Vices, that they could with
more ease despise Life, in many cases, than thus Deny themselves: But in Truth,
there is no more of Self-denial in it, than a Man denies himself when he is
mortally Sick and Wounded, in being content to be Cured, and willing to be
Well. This is not at all to our Temporal Prejudice and Inconvenience, and it
directly conduces to our Eternal Happiness; for there is no Man that lives a
holy and virtuous Life, and in Obedience to the Laws of God, that can lightly
receive any Prejudice by it in this World. Since God does not call us to
Suffer, we should Do so much the more for him. Since he does not put us to
testify our Love to him, by laying down our Lives for him, we should show it
by a greater Care to keep his Commandments.

God was pleased to exercise the first Christians with great Sufferings, and to
try their Love and Constancy to him and his Truth, in a very Extraordinary
manner; by Severity and Contempt, by the spoiling of their Goods, and the loss
of all things; by bonds and imprisonments; by cruel mockings and scourgings; by
the extremity of torments, and by resisting even unto blood; by being killed
for his sake all the day long, and appointed as Sheep for the slaughter. God
was pleased to make their way to Heaven very sharp and painful, and to hedge it
in as it were with thorns on every side; so that they could not, but through
many tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus we ought all to be in a Readiness and Resolution to submit to this Duty,
if God should think fit at any time of our Lives to call us to it. But if he be
pleased to excuse us from it, and to let this Cup pass from us, (which may
lawfully be our earnest Prayer to God, since we have so good a Pattern for it)
there will be another Duty incumbent upon us, which will take up the whole Man,
and the whole time of our Life, and that is to serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives.

A SERMON, PREACHED At Whitehall, before the Family, Nov. 1. 1686.
HEB. XI. 13. And confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth.
The whole Verse runs thus: These all died in Faith, not having received the
Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth.

THE Apostle having declared at the latter end of the foregoing Chapter, that
Faith is the great Principle whereby Good Men are acted, and whereby they are
supported under all the Evils and Sufferings of this Life, Verse 38. Now the
Just shall live by Faith; In this Chapter he makes it his main business, to set
forth to us at large the Force and Power of Faith; and to this Purpose, he
first tells us what kind of Faith he means; viz. a firm Persuasion of things
not Present and Visible to Sense, but Invisible and Future; Ver. 1. Now Faith
(says he) is the confident expectation of things hoped for, and the evidence
of things not seen. Faith represents to us the Reality of things which are
Invisible to Sense, as the Existence of God and his Providence; and of things
which are at a great distance from us, as the Future State of Rewards and
Punishments in another World.

And then he proceeds to show, by particular and famous Instances, that the
firm Belief and Persuasion of these things, was the great Principle of the
Piety and Virtue of the Saints and and Good Men in all Ages of the World; by
this Abel, and Enoch, and Noah; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; Joseph and Moses, and
all the Famous Heroes of the Old Testament obtained a good Report, and pleased
God, and did all those eminent Acts of Obedience and Self-denial which are
recorded of them. They believed the Being of God, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. They dreaded his Threatenings, and relied upon
his Promises of Future and Invisible Good things. They lived and died in a full
Persuasion and Confidence of the Truth of them; tho they did not live to see
them actually fulfilled and accomplished. All these (says he, speaking of those
Eminent Saints which he had instanced in before) All these died in Faith, not
having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded
of them, and embraced them. This is spoken with a more particular regard to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; to whom the Promises of the Conquest and Possession
of a Fruitful Land were made, and of a Numerous Offspring; among whom should be
the Messiah, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed.

These Promises they did not live to see accomplished and made good in their
Days; but they heartily believed them, and rejoiced in the Hope and Expectation
of them, as if they had embraced them in their Arms, and been put into the
actual Possession of them: And they confessed, that they were Pilgrims and
Strangers in the Earth.

This Saying and Acknowledgment more particularly and immediately refers to
those Sayings of the Patriarchs Abraham and Jacob, which we find recorded, Genesis
23. 4. where Abraham says to the Sons of Heth, I am a Stranger and a Sojourner
with you; And Genesis 47. 9. where Jacob says to Pharaoh, The days of the years of
my Pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of
the years of my Life been. These Good Men were Strangers and Sojourners in a
Land, which was promised to be theirs afterward. They dwelt in it themselves
as Strangers, but were in expectation that it would one day become the
Inheritance of their Posterity.

Now in this, as by a Type and Shadow, the Apostle represents to us the
Condition of Good Men, while they are passing through this World. They are
Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth; they travel up and down the World for a
time, as the Patriarchs did in the Land of Canaan; but are in expectation of a
better and more settled Condition hereafter; they desire a better Country, that
is, an Heavenly, says the Apostle at the 16 verse. of this Chapter.

That which I design from these words, is to represent to us our Present
Condition in this World; and to awaken us to a due Sense and serious
Consideration of it. It is the same Condition, that all the Saints and Holy Men
that are gone before us were in, in this World; and every one of us may say
with David, Psalm. 39. 12. I am a Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner, as all my
Fathers were. It is a Condition very troublesome and very unsettled, such as
that of Pilgrims and Strangers uses to be. This we must all acknowledge, if we
judge rightly of our present State and Condition. They confessed, that they
were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; but yet it was not without the Hope
and Expectation of a better and happier Condition in Reversion. So it follows
just after; They that say such things, (that is, that confess themselves to be
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth) declare plainly, that they seek a Country.
This bore up the Patriarchs under all the Evils and Troubles of their
Pilgrimage; that they expected an Inheritance, and a quiet and settled
Possession of that Good Land which God had promised to them. Answerably to
which, Good Men do expect, after the few and evil days of their Pilgrimage in
this World are over, a Blessed Inheritance in a better Country; that is, an
Heavenly; and with blessed Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, They look for a
City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God; as it is said of
that Good Patriarch at the tenth Verse of this Chapter.

It is very frequent, not only in Scripture, but in other Authors, to represent
our Condition in this World, by that of Pilgrims, and Sojourners in a foreign
Country: For the Mind which is the Man, and our Immortal Souls, which are by
far the most Noble and Excellent part of our selves, are the Natives of Heaven,
and but Pilgrims and Strangers here in the Earth; and when the days of our
Pilgrimage shall be over, are designed to return to that Heavenly Country from
which they came, and to which they belong. And therefore the Apostle tells us,
Phil. 3. 20. that Christians have relation to Heaven, as their Native place and
Country. (...), Our conversation is in Heaven, so we render the words; but they
properly signify, that Christians are Members of that City and Society which
is above; and tho they converse at present here below, while they are passing
through this World, yet Heaven is the Country to which they do belong, and
whither they are continually tending; Seeds ubi fata quietas ostendunt, where a
quiet Habitation, and a perpetual Rest, is designed and prepared for them. This
acknowledgment David makes concerning himself, and all the People of God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. For we are Strangers before thee, and Sojourners, as were all
our Fathers. Our Days on the Earth are as a Shadow, and there is none abiding.
So likewise St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Pass the time of your Sojourning here in
fear; And Chap. 2. v. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and
Pilgrims abstain from fleshly Lusts.

And not only the inspired Writers of Holy Scripture, but Heathen Authors, do
frequently make use of this Allusion. Plato tells us, it was a common saying,
and almost in every Man's Mouth, (...), the Life of Man is a kind of
Pilgrimage. And Tully, in his Excellent Discourse de Senectute, (concerning Old
Age) brings in Cato describing our passage out of this World, not as a
departure from our Home, but like a Man leaving his Inn, in which he has
Lodged for a Night or two, ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio, non
tanquam ex domo, commorandi enim natura Diversorium nobis non habitandi dedit:
When I leave this World (says he) I look upon my self as departing out of an
Inn, and not as quitting mine own Home and Habitation; Nature having assigned
this World to us as a place to Sojourn, but not to Dwell in. Which is the same
with what the Apostle says in the Text, concerning the Patriarchs, they
confessed that they were Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth; and concerning
all Christians, Chap. 13. 14. Here we have no continuing City, but we seek one
to come.

But I do not intend to follow the Metaphor too close, and to vex and torture
it, by pursuing all those little Parallels and Similitudes, which a Lively
Fancy might make or find, betwixt the Condition of Strangers and Pilgrims, and
the Life of Man during his Abode and Passage through this World. I will insist
only upon Two things, which seem plainly to be designed and intended by this
Metaphor; and they are these:

1. That our Condition in this World is very troublesome and unsettled: They
confessed, that they were Strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth.

2. It implies a tendency to a Future Settling, and the Hopes and Expectation
of a happier Condition, into which we shall enter when we go out of this World.
For so it follows in the very next Words after the Text; They confessed that
they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; For they that say such things,
declare plainly, that they seek a Country. They that say such things; that is,
they that acknowledge themselves to have lived in such a restless and uncertain
Condition in this World, traveling from one place to another, as the
Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did, and yet pretend to be persuaded of
the Goodness of God, and the Faithfulness of his Promise, in which he solemnly
declared himself to be their God, do hereby plainly show, that they expect some
happier Condition hereafter, wherein that great Promise of God will be made
good to them to the full.

And these are two very weighty and useful Considerations; That we should both
understand our present Condition in this World, and our future Hope and
Expectation after our departure out of it, that so we may demean our selves
suitably to both these Conditions; both as it is fit for those who look upon
themselves as Pilgrims and Sojourners in this World, and likewise, as it
becomes those who seek and expect a better Country, and hope to be made
Partakers of a blessed Immortality in another World. I shall briefly speak to
both these; and then show what Effect and Influence the serious Meditation of
these Two Points ought to have upon every one of us.

1. That our Condition in this World is very troublesome and unsettled. This I
take to be principally intended in the Metaphor of Strangers and Pilgrims. Such
was the Life of the Patriarchs, which is here spoken of in the Text; they had
no constant Abode and fixed Habitation, but were continually wandering from one
Kingdom and Country to another; in which Travels they were exposed to a great
many Hazards and Dangers, Afflictions and Miseries, Affronts and Injuries, as
we read at large in the History of their Travels in the Old Testament. And such
is our Condition in this World; it is often troublesome, and always uncertain
and unsettled.

It Is often very troublesome. Not to insist upon the weak Condition of Infancy
and Childhood, the helplesness of that State, and insufficiency of it for its
own Preservation, and the Supply of its natural Wants and Necessities: Not to
mention the dangerous Vanity and desperate Folly of Youth, nor the Infirmities
and Contempts, the many tedious and wearisom Days and Nights that Old Age is
commonly grieved and afflicted withal, to that degree, as to make Life not only
unpleasant, but almost an intolerable Burden to us.

Not to dwell upon these, which yet take up and possess a great Share and
Portion of our Lives: If we look upon Man in his best State, we shall find him,
as David has long since pronounced on him, to be altogether Vanity. We need
not go a Pilgrimage, and travel into remote Countries, to make Life more
troublesome and uneasy. In what part of the World soever we are (even that
which we improperly call our own Home and Native Country) we shall meet with
Trouble and Inconvenience enough to convince us, that we are but Strangers in
it. More especially good Men are peculiarly liable to a great many Evils and
Sufferings upon account of their Piety and Virtue. They are not of the World
(as our Blessed Savior tells his Disciples, John 15. 19.) and because they are
not of the world, therefore the world hates them, and takes all opportunities
and occasions to vex and persecute them in one kind or other; either by doing
all manner of Evil to them, or by speaking all manner of Evil of them.

But suppose we escape Trouble upon this account; there are abundance of common
and natural Inconveniences, which render Human Life very uneasy. For either we
must live alone, or in the Company and Society of others: One of these two is
necessary and unavoidable. Suppose we would live alone; How few are there that
can enjoy themselves tolerably alone for any considerable time? For though
there be a great deal too much of Self-love in Mankind, and Men are generally
extremely fond of themselves; yet I know not how it happens, (tho so it is)
that very few Men in the World care for their own Company, or can endure, for
any considerable time, to converse only with themselves; nay, for the most
part, they are sooner glutted with themselves, and surfeited of their own
Conversation, than of the worst Company they can meet with; a shrewd Sign, as
one would think, that they know something worse by themselves than of any body
else, or at least they know it more certainly. It is a wise and deep Saying of
Aristotle, whoever affects to be alone, must be (...), either a God or a Wild
Beast; either he must be sufficient for himself, and want nothing; or of so
wild and savage a Disposition, as to destroy every thing that is weaker, and to
run away from every thing that is stronger than himself. Now Man is neither
good enough to be contented and satisfied with himself, nor bad enough to hate
and avoid every body else, and therefore he must enter into Society, and keep
Company with other Men.

And if we go abroad into the World, and try the Conversation of Men, it cannot
but grieve us to see a great many things, which yet we must see every Day; the
Censoriousness, and Uncharitableness, and Insincerity of Men one toward
another; to see with what Kindness they will treat one another to the Face, and
how hardly they will use them behind their Backs. If there were nothing else,
this one naughty Quality, so common and reigning among Mankind, were enough to
make an honest and true-hearted Man, one that loves Plainness and Sincerity, to
be heartily sick of the World, and glad to steal off the Stage; where there is
nothing native and sincere, but all personated and acted; where the
Conversation of a great part of Men is all designing and insidious, full of
Flattery and Flashood, of good Words and ill Offices: One speaks peaceably to
his Neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he lies in wait, as it is in
the Prophet, Jer. 9. 8. And when a Man has done all the good turns he can, and
endeavored to oblige every Man, and not only to live inoffensively, but
exemplarily; he is fairly dealt withal, and comes off upon good Terms, if he
can but escape the ill Words of Men for doing well, and obtain a Pardon for
those things which truly deserve Praise.

But setting aside these, and the like melancholy Considerations; when we are
in the Health and Vigor of our Age, when our Blood is warm, and our Spirits
quick, and the Humor of our Body not yet turned and sowred by great
Disappointments, and grievous Losses of our Estates, or nearest Friends and
Relations, by a long Course of Afflictions, by many cross Events and calamitous
Accidents; yet we are continually liable to all these; and the perpetual Fear
and Danger of them is no small Trouble and Uneasiness to our Minds, and does in
a great measure rob us of the Comfort, and eat out the Pleasure and Sweetness
of all our Enjoyments; and, by degrees, the Evils we fear overtake us; and as
one Affliction and Trouble goes on, another succeeds in the place of it, like
Job's Messengers, whose bad Tidings and Reports of calamitous Accidents came so
thick upon him, that they overtook one another.

If we have a plentiful Fortune, we are apt to abuse it to Intemperance and
Luxury; and this naturally breeds Bodily Pains and Diseases, which take away
all the Comfort and Enjoyment of a great Estate. If we have Health, it may be
we are afflicted with Losses, or deprived of Friends, or crossed in our
Interests and Designs; and one thing or other happens to impede and interrupt
the Contentment and Happiness of our Lives. Sometimes an unexpected Storm, or
some other sudden Calamity, sweepeth away, in an instant, all that which with
so much Industry and Care we have been gathering many Years. Or if an Estate
stand firm, our Children are taken away, to whose Comfort and Advantage all the
Pains and Endeavors of our Lives were devoted. Or if none of these happen, (as
it is very rare to escape most, or some of them) yet for a Demonstration to us
that God intended this World to be uneasy, to convince us that a perfect state
of Happiness is not to be had here below; we often see in Experience, that
those who seem to be in a Condition as happy as this World can put them into,
by the greatest Accommodations toward it, are yet as far, or farther from
Happiness, as those who are destitute of most of those things wherein the
greatest Felicity of this World is thought to consist. Many times it so
happens, that they who have all the Furniture and Requisites, all the Materials
and Ingredients of a Worldly Felicity at their Command, and in their Power, yet
have not the Skill and Ability out of all these to frame a happy Condition of
Life to themselves. They have Health, and Friends, and Reputation, and Estate
in abundance, and all outward Accommodations that Heart can wish; and yet in
the midst of all these Circumstances of outward Felicity, they are uneasy in
their Minds, and as the Wise Man expresses it, In their sufficiency they are
in streights, and are as it were surfeited even of Happiness it self, and do so
fantastically and unaccountably nauseate the good Condition they are in, that
tho they want nothing to make them Happy, yet they cannot think themselves so;
though they have nothing in the World to molest and disgust them, yet they can
make a shift to create as much trouble to themselves, out of nothing, as they
who have the real and substantial Causes of Discontent.

Which plainly shows, That we are not to look for Happiness here; it is not to
be found in this Land of the Living; and after our Enquiries after it, we shall
see sufficient Reason to take up Solomon's Conclusion, That all is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit; which is much the same with that Aphorism of David his
Father, which I mentioned before, That Man in his best estate is altogether
vanity.

But what Happiness soever our Condition in this World is capable of, it is most
assuredly full of Uncertainty and Unsettlement; we cannot enjoy it long, and
every moment we are in danger of being deprived of it. Whatever degree of
Earthly Felicity we are possessed of, we have no Security that it shall
continue. There is nothing in this World, but, when we are as sure of it as
this World can make us, may be taken away from us by a thousand Accidents. But
suppose it to abide and continue; we our selves shall be taken away from it. We
must die, and in that very Day all our Enjoyments and Hopes, as to this World,
will perish with us; for here is no Abiding Place, we have no continuing City:
So that it is vain to design a Happiness to our selves in this World, when we
are not to stay in it, but only travel and pass through it.

And this is the First; Our Condition in this World is very troublesome and
unsettled.

2. Our Condition in this World being a state of Pilgrimage, does imply a
tendency to a future Settlement, and the Hopes and Expectation of a happier
Condition hereafter. And so the Apostle reasons immediately after the Text;
they confessed that they were Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth; for they
that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country; that is, they
who acknowledge themselves to be Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth, and yet
withal profess to be persuaded of the Goodness of God, and the Fidelity of his
Promise, do plainly declare, that they seek another Country. This is spoken of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who acknowledged themselves to be Strangers and
Pilgrims in the Earth; and thereby declared, that they sought another Country.
Now, says the Apostle, this cannot be the Country from whence they first came,
Vr of the Chaldees, v. 15. And truly, if they had been mindful of that Country
from whence they came out, they might have had an opportunity of returning
thither. And therefore he concludes, that the Country which they sought was a
better Country than any in this World. V. 16. But now they desire a better
Country; that is, an Heavenly: Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their
God; for he has prepared for them a City. This plainly refers to that famous
Declaration or Promise of God to the Patriarchs of being their God; I am the
God of Abraham, the God of (...), the God of Jacob. Now certainly this Promise
of God did signify some very great Blessing and Advantage to those faithful
Servants of God above others. This was not made good to them in this World; for
they confessed, that they were Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth. Where then
is the Blessing spoken of and signified by the great Words of that Promise,
that God was their God? They met with no such Condition in this World, as was
answerable to the greatness of that Promise. From hence the Apostle argues,
that they had a firm Persuasion of a future Happiness; For they that say such
things, declare plainly, that they seek a better Country; that is, an Heavenly.
Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, since he has prepared for
them a City. And tho the Promise of God to Abraham did immediately design the
Land of Canaan, and the earthly Jerusalem; yet the Apostle extends it to that
which was typified by it; viz. an Heavenly Country, the Jerusalem which is
above, which, at the 10th Verse of this Chapter, is called a City, which has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. And now, seeing God had designed
and prepared so great a Happiness for them in another World, well might he be
called their God, notwithstanding that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth; that is, Tho the full Meaning and Importance of this Promise was not
made good to them in this World, yet it was accomplished to the full in the
Happiness which was designed for them in another Life. And God need not be
ashamed to be called their God; implying, that if nothing had been meant by it
beyond this World, this Promise, of God's being their God, would have fallen
shamefully short of what it seemed to import. And this I conceive to be the
true Reason, why our Savior lays so much Weight upon this Promise, as to pitch
upon it for the Proof of the Resurrection; that is, of a future state of
Happiness in another World.

There are many Considerations apt to persuade Good Men of another Life after
this: As, That Mankind is generally possessed with this Hope and Persuasion;
and that the more wise and virtuous Men have been, the more plainly have they
apprehended the Hopes of Immortality, and the better have they been contented
to leave this World; as if, seeing farther than other Men, they had a clearer
Prospect of the Happiness they were entering upon: But above all, that God has
made our Condition in this World so troublesome and unsettled, as if he had
designed on purpose to make us seek for Happiness elsewhere, and to elevate and
raise our Minds to the Hopes and Expectation of a Condition better and more
durable, than any is to be met with in this World; which, considering the
Goodness of God, and his gracious Providence and Care of Good Men, is a thing
of it self extremely credible.

Having thus, as briefly as I could, dispatched the Two Particulars which I
propounded to speak to for the Explication of the Text; I should now show what
Influence these Considerations ought to have upon our Lives and Practice.

And if this be our Condition in this World, and these our Hopes and
Expectations as to another Life; if we be Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth;
and look for a better Country, that is, an Heavenly; this ought to have a great
Influence upon us in these following respects, which I shall at present but
very briefly mention.

1. Let us entangle and incumber our selves as little as we can in this our
Pilgrimage; let us not engage our Affections too far in the Pleasures and
Advantages of this World; for we are not to continue and settle in it, but to
pass through it. A little will serve for our Passage and Accommodation in this
Journey; and beyond that, why should we so earnestly covet and seek more?

2. If we be Pilgrims and Strangers; then it concerns us to behave our selves
blamelesly and inoffensively, remembering, that the Eyes of People are upon us,
and that those among whom we live will be very curious and observant of our
Manners and Carriage.

3. Let us be cheerful and patient under the Troubles and Afflictions of this
present Life. They who are in a strange Country, must expect to encounter many
Injuries and Affronts, and to be put to great Difficulties and Hazards, which
we should endeavor to bear with that Cheerfulness, as Men that are upon a
Journey use to bear foul Ways and bad Weather, and inconvenient Lodging and
Accomodations.

4. The Consideration of our present Condition and future Hopes should set us
above the Fondness of Life, and the slavish Fear of Death. For our Minds will
never be raised to their true Pitch and Hight, till we have in some good
measure conquered these two Passions, and made them subject to our Reason. As
for this present Life, and the Enjoyments of it, What do we see in them, that
should make us so strangely to dote upon them? Quae Miseri lucis tam dira
cupido? This World, at the best, is but a very indifferent Place; and he is the
wisest Man that bears himself toward it with the most indifferent Affection;
that is always willing to leave it, and yet patient to stay in it as long as
God pleases.

5. We should always prefer our Duty and a good Conscience before all the
World; because it is in truth more valuable, if our Souls be Immortal, and do
survive in another World. For (as our Savior argues) What is a man profited,
if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? And thus St. Paul reasoned with himself, from the Belief
of a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust. For this cause (says he) I exercise
my self always to have a Conscience void of offense both toward God and toward
Man.

Lastly, If we be Sojourners and Travelers, we should often think of our End,
and carefully mind the Way to it. Our End is Everlasting Happiness; and the Way
to it is a constant and sincere and universal Obedience to the Commandments of
God. When the Young Man in the Gospel enquired of our Savior the way to
Eternal Happiness, saying, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may
inherit Eternal Life? His Answer to him was, If thou will enter into Life, keep
the Commandments. We may easily mistake our way; For strait is the Gate, and
narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and few there be that find it. Therefore
we should often pray to God, as David does, Psalm 119. 19. I am a Stranger in
the Earth, hide not thy Commandments from me. And Psalm 139. 23, 24. Search me,
O God, and know my Heart; try me, and know my Thoughts; and see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the Way Everlasting.

A SERMON, On HEB. XI. 13.
And confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth. The whole
Verse runs thus: These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but
having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they, etc.

I Have lately in this Place (upon a particular Day and Occasion) begun to
handle these Words: I shall briefly give you the Heads of what has been
already delivered, and proceed to what remains. And that which I designed from
this Text, was, To represent to us our present Condition in this World, and to
awaken us to a due Sense and Consideration of it. It is the same Condition that
all the Saints and Holy Men that have gone before us were in, in this World;
and we may all of us say with David, Psalm. 39. 12. I am a Stranger with Thee,
and a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were.

It is very frequent, not only in Scripture, but in other Authors, to represent
our Condition in this World, by that of Pilgrims and Sojourners in a far
Country. For the Mind, which is the Man, and our Immortal Souls, which are, by
far, the most noble and excellent Part of our selves, are the Natives of
Heaven, and but Pilgrims and Strangers here on the Earth; and when the Days of
our Pilgrimage shall be accomplished, are designed to return to that Heavenly
Country from which they came, and to which they belong. And for the Explication
of this Metaphor, I insisted only upon Two Things, which seem plainly to be
designed and intended by it.

1. That our Condition in this World is very troublesome and unsettled; They
confessed, that they were Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth.

II. It implies a tendency to a future Settlement, and the Hopes and
Expectation of a happier Condition, into which we shall enter when we go out of
this World.

And these I told you are Two very Weighty and Useful Considerations; That we
should both understand our present Condition in this World, and our future
Hopes and Expectation after our Departure out of it; that so we may demean our
selves suitably to both these Conditions; both as is fit for those who look on
themselves as Pilgrims and Sojourners in this World; and likewise, as it
becomes those who seek and expect a better Country, and hope to be Partakers of
a Blessed Immortality in another World.

I. That our Condition in this World is very Troublesome and Unsettled; and this
is principally intended by the Metaphor of Pilgrims and Strangers. Such was the
Life of the Patriarchs here spoken of in the Text; they had no constant Abode
and fixed Habitation, but were continually wandering from one Kingdom and
Country to another; in which Travels they were exposed to a great many Dangers
and Sufferings, Affronts and Injuries; as we read at large in the History of
their Travels in the Old Testament. And such is our Condition in this World; it
is often Troublesome, and always Uncertain, and Unsettled: So that whatever
Degree of Worldly Felicity any Man is possessed of, he has no Security that it
shall continue for one Moment.

II. Our condition in this World being a State of Pilgrimage, it implies a
Tendency to a Future Settlement, and the Hopes and Expectation of a Happier
Condition, into which we shall enter so soon as we leave this World. For so it
follows immediately after the Text; They confessed that they were Pilgrims and
Strangers on the Earth; For they that say such things, declare plainly that
they seek a Country. They that say such things; that is, They that acknowledge
themselves to have lived in such a Restless and Uncertain Condition in this
World, Traveling from one Place to another, as the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob did; and yet pretend to be persuaded of the Goodness of God, and the
faithfulness of his Promise; in which He so solemnly declares Himself to be
their God; do hereby plainly show, that they expect some Happier Condition
hereafter, wherein that Great Promise of God, will be made good to them to the
full. So that He need not be ashamed to have been called their God.

Having handled at large these Two Particulars, I come now to show what
Influence the Consideration of them ought to have upon our Lives and Practices.
And if this be our Condition in this World, and these our Hopes and
Expectations, as to another Life: If we be Pilgrims and Strangers in the Earth,
and look for a better Country, that is, an Heavenly; this ought to have a great
Influence upon us in these following Respects, which I did but briefly mention
before; but shall now Prosecute and Press more largely.

I. Let us Entangle and Incumber our selves as little as we can in this our
Pilgrimage: Let us not Engage our Affections too far in the Pleasures and
Advantages of this World, because we are not to stay in it, but to pass through
it. Upon this Consideration the Apostle St. Peter does so earnestly exhort
Christians to preserve themselves from fleshly Lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly
Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly
Lusts, which war against the Soul. The gratifying of our inordinate Lusts, and
our Carnal and Sensual Inclinations, is directly opposite both to the Nature of
our Immortal Spirits, and to their great Design and Business in this World.
Fleshly Lusts do not only pollute and defile, but even quench and extinguish
our Diviner part, and do work the ruin and destruction of it; they sink our
Affections into the Mud and Filth of this World, and do entangle and detain
them there. In a word, they do wholly indispose and unfit us for that Pure and
Spiritual, and Divine Life, which alone can qualify us for our Heavenly
Country and Inheritance. And therefore while our Souls are Sojourning in this
World, we should abstain from them, and preserve our selves Unspotted and
Untainted by them, as being altogether unuseful, and perfectly contrary to the
Laws and Manners of our Heavenly Country. If we wallow in brutish and filthy
Lusts, as we pass through this World; our Native Country, when our Souls think
to return to it, will reject us and cast us out: when we come to Heaven's Gate,
and knock there, expecting to be admitted, and shall cry, Lord, Lord, open unto
us; He will bid us to depart from Him, because we have been workers of
iniquity. Nothing that is unclean can enter into Heaven. He who is to receive
us into those Blessed Mansions, has declared it to be his Immutable
Resolution, and Decree, that without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord. And
therefore, as ever we hope to see God, in that Happy and Blissful State, we
must Cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect
Holiness in the Fear of God; that having rendered our selves as like Him as we
can in this World, we may be capable of the Blessed Sight and Enjoyment of Him
in the other.

And as for the Advantages of this World, let us not pursue them too eagerly.
We may take the Conveniences which fairly offer themselves to us, and be
content to want what we cannot Honestly have, and without going out of the way
of our Duty; considering that we are Travelers, and that a little will serve
for our Passage and Accommodation in our Pilgrimage. And beyond that why should
we so earnestly covet more, and trouble our selves for that which is not
necessary to our Journey? Why should we at any time deal unjustly, to attain
any of this World's Goods? They will stand us in stead for so little a while,
that we can have no temptation to injure or oppress any Man, to break the Peace
of our Consciences, and to wound our Souls, for the attaining of them. If the
Providence of God offer them to us, and bring them to our hands, in the use of
Honest Diligence, and Lawful Means; as we are not to refuse them, so neither
are we to set our Hearts upon them, nor to suffer our Affections to be
entangled in them.

The wisest Use we can make of them, will be, to do like those who traffic in
Foreign Parts, to consign our Estates into our own Native Country, to send our
Treasures before us into the other World, that we may have the Benefit of them
when we come there. And this we may do by Alms and Charity. Whatever we spend
upon the Flesh, we leave behind us, and it will turn to no account to us in our
own Country; but whatever we lay out for the Relief of the Poor, is so much
Treasure laid out and secured to our selves, against another day. So our
Blessed Savior assures us, Luke 12. 33. That giving of Alms is providing for
our selves Bags that wax not old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not.

II. If We be Pilgrims and Strangers; then it concerns us to behave our selves
with great Caution, and to live blamelesly and inoffensively; remembering that
the Eyes of People are upon us, and that those among whom we Sojourn, will be
very prying, and curious, and narrow Observers of our Manners and Carriage.
They that are in a strange Country, are not wont to take that Liberty and
Freedom, which the Natives of the place may do, but to keep a perpetual Guard
upon themselves, knowing how strictly they are observed; and that they live
among those who bear no Good Will to them; and that every Bad Thing we do,
reflects upon our Nation, and is a Reproach to the Country to which we belong.
Ye are not of the World; (says our Lord) if ye were of the World, the World
would love its own: but ye are not of the World; therefore the World hates
you. Upon this account the Apostle charge Christians to be Harmless, and
Blameless, and as it becomes the Sons of God to be, in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Nation, among whom we should shame as Lights. The same Argument
St. Peter uses, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. I beseech, you as Pilgrims and Strangers, to
abstain from fleshly lusts, having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles;
that is, Considering that you are among Strangers and Enemies, and therefore
ought to be very careful to bring no Scandal upon your Holy Profession, among
those who will be ready to take all advantages against you. Particularly, we
who pretend to the same Heavenly Country, must be kind to one another; and
whilst we live among Strangers, have no Quarrels amongst our Selves. In a
Strange Country, it uses to be a Mighty Endearment of Men to one another, that
they are of the same Country, and Fellow Citizens; and this alone is commonly
sufficient to unite their Affections, and to link their Interests together. But
how little of this is to be seen among Christians? how shamefully do they
Quarrel among themselves, in the midst of Enemies and Strangers! as if they had
no Relation to one another; and never expected to meet at last in the same
Country, and there to live together for ever.

III. Let us be as Patient and Cheerful as we can, under all the Troubles and
Afflictions which we meet with in this Life. They who are in Strange Countries
must expect to encounter many Injuries and Affronts, and to be put to great
Difficulties and Hardships. Those which are lighter and more tolerable, we must
bear with Cheerfulness. Upon a Journey Men use to put on all the Pleasantness
they can, and to make Sport of all the Inconveniences of the Ways and Weather,
and little cross Accidents that befall them: And thus, if we had but the Art
and Wisdom to do it, many of the lesser Inconveniences of Humane Life might
well enough be played off, and made matter rather of Mirth and Diversion, than
of Melancholy and serious Trouble.

But there are some Evils and Calamities of Humane Life, that are too heavy and
serious to be Jested withal, and require the greatest Consideration, and a very
great degree of Patience to Support us under them, and enable us to bear them
Decently; as the Loss of Friends and dearest Relations; as the Loss of an Only
Son, grown up to be well fixed and settled in a Virtuous Course, and promising
all the Comfort to his Parents that they themselves can wish: These certainly
are some of the Greatest Evils of this World, and hardest to be born. For Men
may pretend what they will to Philosophy and Contempt of the World, and of the
Perishing Comforts and Enjoyments of it; to the Extirpation of their Passions,
and an Insensibility of these things, which the weaker and undisciplined part
of Mankind keep such a Wailing and Lamentation about: but when all is done,
Nature has framed us as we are, and has planted in our Nature strong
Inclinations and Affections to our Friends and Relations; and these Affections
are as naturally moved upon such Occasions, and pluck every String of our
Hearts as violently, as extreme Hunger and Thirst do gnaw upon our Stomachs.

And therefore it is foolish for any Man to pretend to love things mightily,
and to rejoice greatly in the Enjoyment of them; and yet to be so easily
contented to lose them, and to be parted from them. This is to separate things
which Nature has strongly linked together. Whatever we mightily love, does
thereby in some sort become part of our Selves; and it cannot hand loose to us,
to be separated and divorced from us without Trouble; no more than a Limb that
is vitally and by strong Ligaments united to the Body, can be dropped off when we
please, or rent from the Body without Pain. And whoever pretends to have a
mighty Affection for any thing, and yet at the same time does pretend that he
can contentedly, and without any great Sense or Signification of Pain, bear the
Loss of it, does not talk like a Philosopher, but like an Hypocrite; and under
a grave Pretense of being a Wise, is in truth, an Ill-natured Man. For most
certainly, in proportion to our Love of any thing, will be our Trouble and
Grief for the Loss of it.

So that under these great and heavier Strokes, we had need both of Faith and
Patience. And indeed, nothing but the firm Belief of a better Country, that is,
an Heavenly, another Life after this, and a blessed Immortality in another
World, is sufficient to support a Man in the few and evil Days of his
Pilgrimage, and to sustain his Spirit under the great Evils and Calamities of
this Life. But This fully answers all, That the Afflictions and Sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be
revealed in us. Nay, that if we bear these Afflictions patiently, and with a
due Submission to the Will of God, (especially our Sufferings for his Truth and
Cause) it will certainly increase our Happiness in the other World, and work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

IV. The Consideration of our Present Condition and of our Future Hopes, should
set us above the Fondness of Life, and the slavish Fears of Death. For our
Minds will never be raised to their true pitch and hight, till we have in some
good measure conquered these two Passions, and made them subject to our Reason.

As for this present Life, and the Enjoyments of it; What is it that we see in
them that should make us so strangely to dote upon them? Quae lucis miseris tam
dira cupido! This World at the best is but a very Indifferent place, and he is
the wisest Man that bears himself toward it with the most Indifferent Mind and
Affection; that is always willing to leave it, and yet patient to stay in it as
long as God pleases. And as for Death, though the Dread of it be natural, yet
why should the Terrors of it be so very surprising and amazing to us; after we
have considered, that to a good and pious Soul, it is no other but the Gate of
Heaven, and an Entrance into Eternal Life? We are apt to wonder to see a Man
undaunted at the approach of Death, and to be not only contented, but cheerful,
at the Thoughts of his Departure out of this World, this Sink of Sin, and Vale
of Misery and Sorrow. Whereas, if all things be duly considered, it is a
greater Wonder that Men are so patient to Live, and that they are not glad of
any fair Excuse and Opportunity of getting out of this strange Country, and
retiring Home, and of ridding themselves of the Troubles and Inconveniences of
Life. For, considering the numerous Troubles and Calamities we are liable to in
a long Pilgrimage, there are really but Three Considerations, that I can
readily think of, that can make this World, and our present Condition in it, in
any good measure tolerable to a wise Man; viz. That God governs the World; That
we are not always to stay in it; That there is a Happiness designed and
reserved for us in another place, which will abundantly recompense and make
amends to us for all the Troubles and Sufferings of this Life.

And yet it is strange to see how fast most Men cling to Life, and that even in
Old Age; how they catch at every Twig that may but hold them up a little while;
and how fondly they hanker after a miserable Life, when there is nothing more
of Pleasure to be enjoyed, nothing more of Satisfaction to be expected and
hoped for in it. When they are just putting in to the Port, and, one would
think, should rejoice at their very Hearts that they see Land; yet how glad
would they be then of any cross Wind, that would carry them back into the Sea
again? As if they loved to be tossed, and were fond of Storms and Tempests.

Nay, the very best of us, even after we have made that acknowledgment of
David; I am a Stranger and a Sojourner with thee, as all my Fathers were; are
apt with him to be still importuning God for a little longer Life; O spare me a
little, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more. And
when God has granted us this Request, then we would be spared yet a little
longer.

But let us remember, that God did not design us to continue always in this
World; and that he has on purpose made it so uneasy to us, to make us willing
to leave it; and that so long as we linger here below, we are detained from our
Happiness; While we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. This
Consideration made St. Paul so desirous to be dissolved, because he knew that
when his Earthly House of this Tabernacle was dissolved, he should have a much
better Habitation, a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in
the Heavens. This was that which made him so full of Joy and Triumph, at the
Thoughts of his leaving the World. 2 Timothy 4. 6. I am now ready (says he) to be
offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good
Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall
give me in that day.

Nay, the Consideration of this (tho but obscurely apprehended by them) did
raise the Spirits of the wiser and better Heathen, and fill them with great Joy
and Comfort at the Thoughts of their Dissolution. With what Constancy and
Evenness of Mind did Socrates receive the Sentence of Death? And with what
excellent Discourse did he entertain his Friends just before he drank off the
Fatal Cup, and after he had taken it down, whilst Death was gradually seizing
upon him? One can hardly, without a very sensible Transport, read Cato's
Discourse concerning his Death, as it is represented by Tully in his Book of
Old Age. I am (says he) transported with a Desire of seeing my Forefathers,
those Excellent Persons of whom I have Heard, and Read, and Written; and now I
am going to them, I would not willingly be drawn back into this World again;
Quod si quis Deus mihi largiatur, ut ex hac aetate repuerascam, and in cunis
vagiam, valde recusem. If some God would offer me, at this Age, to be a Child
again, and to cry in the Cradle, I would earnestly refuse it, and upon no terms
accept it. And now that my Race is almost run, and my Course just finished, how
loath should I be to be brought back, and made to begin again? For what
Advantage is there in Life? Nay rather, what Labor and Trouble is there not in
it? But let the Benefit of it be what it will, there is certainly some Measure
of Life as well as of other things, and Men ought to know when they have enough
of it. O praeclarum diem, cum in illud animorum consilium caetumque
proficiscar, and cum ex hac turba and colluvione discedam. O Blessed and
Glorious Day, when I shall go to that great Council and Assembly of Spirits,
and have got out of this Tumult and Sink. And if a Heathen, who had but some
obscure Glimmerings of another Life, and of the Blessed State of departed
Souls, could speak thus cheerfully of Death; how much more may We, who have a
clear and undoubted Revelation of these things, and to whom Life and
Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel.

V. We should always prefer our Duty and the keeping of a good Conscience,
before all the World: because it it is in truth infinitely more valuable, if so
be our Souls be immortal, and do survive in another World, and we must there
give a strict Account of all the Actions done by us in this Life, and receive
the Sentence of Eternal Happiness or Misery, according to the things done in
the Body, whether they be Good, or whether they be Evil. For as our Savior
argues concerning the case of denying him and his Truth, to avoid temporal
Suffering and Death; What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? When
we are tempted by temporal Interest and Advantage, or by the Fear of present
Loss and Suffering, to deny or dissemble our Religion, to do any thing that is
sinful in any kind, and contrary to our Duty and Conscience; let us ask our
selves; What will be the Profit and Advantage of it? What, if for fear of Men,
and what they can do to me, I incur the Wrath and Displeasure of Almighty God?
This is infinitely more to be dreaded; and these Frowns are a thousand times
more terrible, than the bitterest Wrath and cruelest Malice of Men. What, if to
preserve this frail and mortal Body, I shall evidently hazard the Loss of my
Immortal Soul; and to escape a Temporal Inconvenience, I forfeit Everlasting
Happiness, and plunge my self into Eternal Misery and Ruin? Would not this be
a wild Bargain, and a mad Exchange, for any Temporal Gain and Advantage, to
lose the things that are Eternal? And for the pleasing of our selves for a
little while, to make our selves miserable for ever?

If we confess our selves to be Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, and are
persuaded of the Promises of God concerning an Heavenly Country, where we hope
to arrive after the few and evil days of our Pilgrimage are over; let us not,
by complying with the Humors of Strangers, and the vicious Customs and
Practices of an Evil World, bar our selves of our Hopes, and banish our selves
from that happy Place, to which we all profess we are going.

We pretend to be traveling toward Heaven: but if we make shipwreck of Faith
and a good Conscience; we destroy our own Hopes of ever arriving at that happy
Port. We do not live up to our Expectation of a future Happiness, if the unseen
Glories of another World do not raise us above all the Temptations and Terrors
of Sense. Our Faith and Hope have not their due and proper Influence upon us;
if they do not govern our Lives and Actions, and make us steadfast in the
Profession of our Holy Religion, and in the Conscientious Practice of it. St.
Paul reasoned himself into this Holy Resolution, from the Hopes of a blessed
Resurrection. Acts 24. 15, 16. I have Hope, says he, toward God, that there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust: (...), For
this cause therefore, I exercise my self always to have a Conscience void of
Offense, toward God and toward Men.

VI. And Lastly, If we be Sojourners and Travelers in this World; we should
often think of our End, and carefully mind the Way to it. Our End is
Everlasting Happiness; and the direct Way to it is by a constant and sincere
and universal Obedience to the Laws and Commandments of God: And this in it
self is so plain a way, that a sincere and honest Man can hardly err in it. And
therefore we must not suffer our selves to be led and trained out of it, upon
any Pretense whatsoever; not by the Wildfire of pretended Illuminations and
Enthusiasms; nor by the confident Pretense of an Infallible Guide, that will
needs show us another way, and persuade us to follow him blindfold in it. Let
us not quit the Infallible Rule of God's Word, to follow any Guide whatsoever.
If an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Doctrine and Way to
Heaven, let him be accursed. He who is the Way, and the Truth, and the Life,
when he was consulted with about the Way to Eternal Happiness, knew no other
but this. For when the Young Man asked him; Good Master, what good thing shall
I do, that I may inherit Eternal Life? His Answer was, If thou will enter into
Life, keep the Commandments. It Is true indeed, that by reason of our corrupt
Inclinations within, and powerful Temptations without, this Way (especially at
our first setting out) is rugged and difficult. So our Lord has forewarned us,
telling us, That strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to
Life, and that there be few that find it. Therefore we should strive to enter
in, take great Care and Pains to discern the Right Way, and to overcome the
Difficulties of our first Entrance into it; and should often pray to God, as
David did, Psalm 119. 19. I am a Stranger in the Earth, hide not thy
Commandments from me; And Psalm 139. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my
Heart; try me, and know my Thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me;
and lead me in the Way Everlasting.

Thus, if we would always have our End in our Eye; it would both be a Direction
to us in our Way, and an Encouragement to quicken our Pace in it; there being
no more powerful Motive to a good Life, than to be assured, that if we have our
Fruit unto Holiness, our End shall be Everlasting Life.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. l. 26. r. Complement. p. 28. l. 6. r. Nathanael. p. 63. l. 20. after
so dele,. p. 78. l. 19. r. Providence. p. 80. l. 4. r. (...). p. 88. l. 11.
after Comparison put,. p. 97. l. 26. r. farther. p. 98. l. 16. r. fared. p.
104. l. 15. r. established. p. 110. l. ult. dele (. p. 130. l. 15. r. slight.
p. 142. l. 13. r. against. p. 292. l. 1. r. infinitely. p. 295. l. 18. after
Confession dele,. p. 298. l. 24. after World put;. l. ult. after Men put a Full
Point. p. 299. l. 21. r. distrust. p. 303. l. 9. after God put;. l. 11. after
us put a Full Point. p. 313. l. 8. r. sufficiently. p. 426. l. 7. r. goes off.

BOOKS Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR. THOMAS TENISON, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, his Sermon concerning
Discretion in giving Alms. 1668.

-- His Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons. 1689.

-- His Sermon of doing Good to Posterity, before Their Majesty's. 1690.

-- His Sermon concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's Service, before the
Queen: Feb. 15. 1690.

-- His Sermon of the Folly of Atheism, before the Queen: Feb. 22. 1690.

-- His Sermon preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Clergy-mens Sons:
December. 3. 1691.

-- His Sermon concerning the Celestial Body of a Christian, before the Queen,
on Easter Day. 1694.

-- His Sermon concerning Holy Resolution, before the King at Kensington:
December. 30. 1694 on Psalm. 119. 106.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of the Queen, in the Abby-Church in Westminster:
March 5. 1694/5.

Dr. BVRNET, Lord Bishop of Sarum, his Discourse of the Pastoral Care. 8vo.

-- His Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum:
Concerning, I. The Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death
of Christ. III. The Infallibility and Authority of the Church. IV. The
Obligations to continue in the Communion of the Church. 8vo. 1694.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Archbishop Tillotson. 1694.

-- His Sermon Preached before the King at St. James's Chapel, on the 10th of
February, 1694/5 being the first Sunday in Lent, on 2 Cor. 6. 1.

Dr. PATRICK (now Lord Bishop of Ely) his Hearts-Ease; or, a Remedy against all
Troubles: With a Consolatory Discourse, particularly directed to those who have
lost their Friends and Relations. To which is added two Papers, printed in the
time of the late Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695.

-- His Answer to a Book spread abroad by the Romish Priests, Entitled [ The
Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel:] wherein the true Doctrine of the Church of
England, and many Texts of the Holy Scripture are faithfully explained. 8vo.
1692.

-- His Eight several occasional Sermons since the Revolution. 4to.

-- His Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 8vo.

A Vindication of their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of deprived
Bishops: In a Letter occasioned by Dr. B -- 's refusal of the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells. 4to.

Rushworth's Historical Collections. The Third Part, in Two Volumes. Containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the Parliament, Nov.
3. 1640. to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular Account of the
Rise and Progress of the Civil War, to that Period. Fol. 1692.

The Letters of the Reverend Father Paul, Counselor of State to the most
Serene Republic of Venice, and Author of the Excellent History of the Council
of Trent. 1693.

An Impartial History of the late Wars of Ireland. In Two Parts. From the time
that Duke Schomberg landed with an Army in that Kingdom, to the 23d of March
1692. when their Majesty's Proclamation was published, declaring the War to be
ended. Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most important Places
of Action. Written by George Story, an Eyewitness of the most remarkable
Passages. 4to. 1693.

Dr. John Conant's Sermons, Published by Dr. Williams, 1693. 8vo.

Of the Government of the Thoughts. The Second Edition. By Geo. Tully, Sub-Dean
of York. 8vo. 1694.

Origo Legum: Or, A Treatise of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power;
as also of their great Variety; and why some Laws are immutable, and some not,
but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended, or abrogated. In Seven
Books. By George Dawson. Fol. 1694.

A brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the
Common Prayer; in Answer to a Book, entitled. [ A Brief Discourse of the
Unlawfulness of Common-Prayer-Worship.] By John Williams, D. D. 4to. 1694.

A true Representation of the absurd and mischievous Principles of the Sect
commonly known by the Name of Muggletonians. 4to. 1694.

Memoirs of the most Reverend THOMAS CRANMER, Archbishop of Canterbury: Wherein
the History of the Church, and the Reformation of it, during the Primacy of the
said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular Matters relating
thereunto, now first published. In Three Books. Collected chiefly from Records,
Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original Manuscripts. By John Strype,
M. A. Fol. 1694.

A Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Genesis. By the Right Reverend
Father in God, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely. 4to: 1695.

The History of the Troubles and Trial of the Most Reverend Father in God
WILLIAM LAVD Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Wrote by himself, during his
Imprisonment in the Tower. To which is prefixed the Diary of his own Life,
faithfully and entirely published from the Original Copy. And subjoyned a
Supplement to the preceding History; the Archbishop's Last Will: His Large
Answer to the Lord Says Speech concerning Liturgies: His Annual Accounts of
his Province delivered to the King, and some other Things relating to the
History. Published by Henry Wharton, Chaplain to Archbishop Sancroft. Fol.

The Possibility and Expediency and Necessity of Divine Revelation. A Sermon
preached at St. Martin's in the Fields, January 7. 1694/5. at the beginning of
the Lecture for the ensuing Year, Founded by the Honorable Rob. Boil Esquire by
John Williams, D. D.

-- The Certainty of Divine Revelation, being his Second Sermon preached at the
said Lecture, Feb. 4. 1695.

-- His Vindication of the Sermons of his Grace John Archbishop of Canterbury,
concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, and of the Lord
Bishop of Worcester's Sermon on the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, from the
Exceptions of a late Socinian Book, Entitled, [ Considerations on the
Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity.] To which is annexed a Letter from
the Lord Bishop of Sarum, to the Author of the said Vindication, on the same
Subject. 1695. 4to.

Historia de Episcopis and Decanis Londinensibus necnon de Episcopis and
Decanis Assavensibus a prima utriusque fundatione ad Annum MDXL. Accessit*
Appendix instrumentorum quorundam insignium duplex. Autore Henrico Whartono, A.
M. 8vo. 1695.

An Essay on the Memory of the late QUEEN. By Gilbert Bishop of Sarum. 8vo.

Advertisement.
THere will be published several Sermons and Discourses of the most Reverend
Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by order of his
Administratrix, faithfully transcribed from his own Papers, by Dr. Ralph Barker
Chaplain to his Grace. Which are disposed of to Richard Chiswell and his
Assigns. If any Person Print any others (except those published in the Author's
Lifetime) they are to be looked upon as Spurious and False: And the Publishers
will be proceeded against according to Law.


