A TREATISE OF RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT WITH Reflections upon the Cause and Cure
of Englands late distempers and present dangers.

THE ARGUMENT Whether Protestancy be less dangerous to the soul, or more
advantageous to the State, then the Roman Catholic Religion?

THE CONCLUSION That Piety and Policy are mistaken in promoting Protestancy,
and persecuting Popery by penal and Sanguinary statuts.

Permissu Superiorum. An: Dom: M.DC.LXX.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE THE DVKE OF BVQVINGHAM etc.
May it please your Grace.
THE inconsiderat censures of half witted Critiks have canonized the custom of
dedicating books to great persons; at least they have so extenuated the crime,
that I despair not to obtain your Graces Pardon for my presumption of prefixing
your name to this Treatise, without your consent or knowledge. But if the
general custom be not a lawful excuse for my ambitious solicitation of your
Graces patronage, I must transfer the fault from my self the Author, and lay it
on the Argument of my book, which is so proper for a person of your Graces high
birth, profound judgment, and public trust, thus without violence to the work;
it could hardly be offered to any other: The Argument, My Lord, of this Book, is
Liberty of Conscience, which is the most reasonable o^ all liberties; it is the
spiritual birthright of our souls, and the only human prerogative that cannot
be forced or forfeited. Though our selves be slaves, our thoughts are free, and
so much our own, that none but the searcher of hearts can know them. God
himself does not use violence: against our opin^^ns; when he commands us ^o
change them, he does not compel us by rigor and penalties, but convinces us
by reason and miracles.

My Lord, Princes are called Gods in the Scripture, and therefore ought to
imitat divin per^^^tions. How much your Grace does excel in this perfection of
being avers from compelling men's Consciences, is so notorious, that any man may
without flattery (the common vice of Epistles Dedicatory) publish and print
your virtues. In this one of patronizing Liberty of Conscience, are so many
comprehended, that did I undertake to enumerat* and explain them, this short
Epistle must have bin a vast volum: Its an eminent part of Religion to propagat
and persuade it by reason: Its Charity, to consider and commi^erat other men's
capacitys, how capricious soever (...) prudence to proportion the laws to
tender Consciences. On the contrary, the zeal of persecution, is but a Cloa^ of
ambition for men of one persuasion to exclude all other^ from places of profit,
trust, and honor, whereof the Zealots would never be thought worthy, if such (as
the penal laws exclude) did conform to the Church of England. And when any one
does become a conformist, none is more sorry for his Conversion then they that
pretended to design and effect it by persecution; because the number of
Proselits does diminish the profit, and destroy the projects they had of
begging Recusants fines and forfeitures. Your Genious and generosity, My Lord,
are so much above these base, and destructive ways, that you are become the
refuge of all persons afflicted for their Conscience. To be popular upon this
score, and to be the patron of so numerous and conscientious a party, as it is
the effect of your Wisdom and virtue, so it is a just cause for your Prudent
Prince to confide in your Ministry, and to countenance your popularity.

I do acknowledge, My Lord, that in some districts of the Church of Rome, men
are punished for their Conscience or contumacy, by a Court of Justice, called
the Inquisition. How worthy the Inquisition is of imitation, I leave to the
Judgment of others: But this I do maintain in my book, that our penal and
Sanguinary statuts are much more severe and unreasonable then the Canon law,
whereupon the Inquisitors Sentences are grounded. 1. Because the Canons against
Innovators of Religion, are almost as ancient as Constantin the first Christian
Emperor. 2. They seemed so conscientious and convenient to all his Catholic
Successors, and other Sovereigns, that they have incorporated into the laws of
their Dominions, the Canons, whereby the Inquisitors are directed to punish
heresies, or pretended reformations of Religion; and therefore the first
Protestant Reformers in England durst not publish their doctrine until these
statuts against heretics had bin repeald by Act of Parliament 1. Edu. 6.3. the
Inquisitors pretend not to act by human commission against men's opinions; they
proceed as spiritual Pastors, and the Apostles Successors, and therefore
endeavor to reduce the obstinat Nonconformists by producing thousands of
learned and lawful witnesses to prove, that the Roman faith is built upon the
very same Apostolical revelations reasons and miracles, whereby the primitive
Church and the Catholic world had bin converted from Paganism to Christianity.
But our English penal and Sanguinary statuts punish men for adhering to the
ancient and authentic Religion of Christendom, and for not embracing a new
interpretation of Scripture, for which there is no credible testimony, or
proof, that it is the Apostolical; neither is there as much as a pretense of
any miracles to confirm Protestancy, or that monstrous Shee-supremacy, which
was imposed upon men, only to make An Bullens daughter Queen of England, and to
exclude the right heirs and now reigning family from the Crown.

Notwithstanding this great disparity, My Lord, between the severity of the
Inquisition, and of our penal statuts, J wish both equally excluded from this
Monarchy; and that no compulsion be used against Conscience, but that every one
be left to choos his own Religion, according to his capacity; it being likely
that none will have a greater care of saving any man's soul, then himself, who
is more concerned therein, then any other, whether Prince, Parliament, or
Pastor. That God may inspire into every soul that one faith without which none
is saved, ought to be the only common prayer imposed upon us; for that by this
uniformity of prayer every man is left to his own Inquisition, which is much
more agreeable to our genious then that of Spain; and more likely to make us
agree amongst our selves, then any penal or Sanguinary statuts; all which I
humbly submit to your Graces Judgment, begging your Pardon for this trouble,
and your protection for this Treatise.

Your Graces most obedient and most humble servant JOHN WILSON.

THE PREFACE.
THE end which most Authors propose to themselves in writing Prefaces, is, to
incline m^n to read their books: but the books are now so many, and of such
groat busks, that even the Prefaces are not perused. Notwithstanding this
superfluity and surfeit of books, I have ventured to add this one to the
number, not without hopes that the Title will invite men to read the Preface,
and perhaps the Preface may persuade them to read the Book. For, Religion and
Government, being the two things wherein mankind is most concerned (the one
being the ground of everlasting happiness, the other of temporal prosperity)
and I having undertaken to direct men to the best Religion, (whereof depends the
best Government) the Conscience of some, and the curiosity of others will
furnish me with Readers. Some Raylers I must expect* to have, because I
endeavor to demonstrat that the Crown may lawfully seize on the Church
Revenues; but I am content to b^^^ld at, so the commonwealth be not rallied out
of so necessary a support.

And least J should be thought too partial ^o my own Religion, I desire but a
tol^ration for it, as I do for all other Christian profession^ albeit to obtain
this toleration for the Catholic I am forced to compare it with the
protestant, and to prove th^^ no Religion is so conscientious, or so convenient
as the Roman. The truth of this may ^^^ily be discerned by a Comit^e of the
layty, if publik conferences of Religion be permitt^d in English; And truly
(...) Scriptures are permitted to be read and interpreted by every English lay
man, J se^ not why the layty may not judge of Controversies, and confer^^ces of
Religion; and according (...) they find the interpretations of every
Congregation consistent with the word of God, grant or not grant liberty of
Conscience.

There are few who (...) often heard how pressingly a^^ ^ertinently some of the
wisest members of Parliament have spoke for Liberty of Conscience in the late
sessions; how they made it appear, that our decay of trade, and our fall of
rents (whereof Merchants and Landlords do so much complain) is wholly occasioned
by the severity of our laws against Recusants, and nonconformists; for, what
credit or security can Merchants or Tradesmen have in England, when their stock
and substance, may be legaly confiscated, whenever they refuse to take an
oath, or frequent a Church, contrary to their conscience? what commerce or
correspondence can we expect from beyond the Seas, when he that this day is an
able Banquier amongst us, to morrow must turn Bankrupt, if he will not
contrefait himself a Conformist. The Tenants Cattle and Corn may be seized upon
(and by consequence the Landlord deprived of his Revenue) whenever a
ceremonious Parson, or an officious Churchwarden, or a malicious neigbor will
inform, that they come not to the common Prayer, or Communion; so that the
Nonconformists being two parts of England, in a few years two parts of the
Kingdom will be destroyed.

If our penal statuts against Non-conformists, did make this Monarchy as
peaceable as they make it poor, perhaps some Politicians might think it
advisable to continue them. But seeing it is impossible to govern an
empoverish't multitude without a standing Army (which England will hardly
brook) and that Religion persecuted makes Rebellion plausible, all
disinteressed persons may with reason admire, that the Bishops themselves do
not Press and pray for liberty of conscience. For, though they should be so
short-sighted as not to foresee future inconveniences, yet they cannot be so
insensible as to forget the former effects of persecution. And they will find
great difficulty in persuading even the most devoted to their own calling, that
the same cause will not produce in 70. the same effects we have felt since 40.
If they imagine that their spiritual censures will prevail against the temporal
power of a discontented multitude, they must maintain (contrary to late
experience) that God will work Miracles to support the Church of England
against Presbyterian sectaries. As for the Kings restoration I confess it
looks like a Miracle, but why our English Bish^ps should attribut so great a
blessing rather to Gods will of countenancing their strange caracter, then to
his will of continuing lawful Monarchy, or of manifesting the late Kings
innocence, or of rewarding the constancy, and of relieving the indignity of the
Cavaleer party, can never be understood by any that knows the grounds of our
Protestant Episcopacy, and how it was raised by Q. Elizabeth rather to exclude
the succession of the Stevards from the Crown, then to establish a succession
of true Bishops in the Church. There is much more reason to think that his
Majesty's restoration was decreed by God in order to the performance of his
Declaration at Breda for liberty of conscience, then in order to the
nonperformance of so public and solemn a promise.

And albeit I cannot say that our desired peace will be so absolutely secured by
liberty of conscience in England, as it is in other Countries by the Tenets and
uniformity of the Roman Religion: yet is it manifest, that persecution for
promoting Prelatick Protestancy will rather increas our confusions, then work
our conversion; not only because the non-conformists, are the more numerous
party, and by consequence can hardly be forced to obey laws against their
Consceince; but also because it is confessed by the very Prelaticks, that
Christians may be saved though they do not conform to the Church of England;
nay they must grant, that such as do conform to its doctrine and discipline, may
be damned for so doing, because it is a fallible (and by consequence for ought
they or any one knows a falls) Church. That a Church believed by the members
thereof to be infallible, and the only way of salvation, does persecute such as
revolt from its faith and obedience is thought by some a rational (though by me
a rigorous) practice: but that the Church of England, whereof it is a
fundamental Article, that the whole visible Church, or all Christian
Congregations (and by consequence it self) has erred, or may err in doctrine,
should persecute such as revolt from it, or men of a contrary persuasion, for
having a stronger faith, grounded upon Christ's promis of never forsaking us,
and a better opinion of Gods providence, and of their own Churches doctrine,
seems not agreeable to the rules of the Ghospel, nor of human prudence. For,
whether the Protestants sectaries persuasion of their own private spirits
infallibility, or the Roman Catholics belief of their general Counsels
infallibility, be true or falls, the Church of England will never be able to
persuade or prove, that any Christians ought to be persecuted by penal and
sanguinary statuts, for not exchanging that assurance of Divine faith which
themselves are persuaded they have, for a bare Prelatick probability of the
same faith; or for a confessed possibility of being mistaken in the doctrine of
salvation. Seeing therefore of two evils the least ought to be chosen, and that
if liberty of conscience be an evil, it is a less one then persecution, because
it will cause less dangers and disturbances in the Nations, then laws which
force the Prelatick probability, and uniformity: It seems to be against the
rules as well of piety as of policy, to continue the penal and sanguinary
statuts in favor of the confessedly fallible Church of England.

And when I plead for liberty of conscience in England for Presbyterians and
Fanatics, I hope it will not be ill taken that I beg the same freedom and
favor for Roman Catholics, especially if I prove (as I have undertaken) that
our principles are not only more ^ound in point of Christiatity, but more safe
in order to the government, then any others. And though it be a common and true
saying, that the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men, and by consequence,
not so fit to prescribe rules for governing as wordlings that are not Divines,
or as wranglers that are Lawyers; yet I humbly conceive that when the
misfortunes of a government proceed not from want of judgment or resolution in
the Council, but from want of faith, or (which is the same) from an
acknowledged uncertainty of faith in the Church, Catholic Divines (seeing we
are unanimous in matters of Christian belief and do persuade the best part of
Christendom that our Church is infallible in the same; and if heard, we doubt
not to prevail with these British Nations also to credit us in that important
point, however improbable, it may seem to them at first sight) I hope this
supposed, we Catholic Divines may without offense pretend to be better able to
show and salve the spiritual sore of this state, then any Protestant Statists
or schoolmen, who want sufficient unity, and assurance of faith in themselves,
to make their cure and care credible to others.

Seeing therefore the foundation not only of Christian Religion, but of a
peaceable government, does consist in a firm persuasion of the people governed,
that the doctrine professed and established by Law is infallible* and of Divine
inspiration, not of human invention; and by consequence that the decrees and
determinations of the State (which in all Governments ought to be proportioned
to the doctrine of its Church) are lawful, and intended for the common good;
not designs, or devices to fool the multitude, feed the ministry, or favor the
sovereign; and that not only evidence of falsehood, but uncertainty of truth, in
matters of Christianity, must needs render the Church and State that profess
such an uncertainty, so weak and contemptible, that the subjection to either
cannot be otherwise secured then by the force and fear of a standing Army; and
that such a subjection does savor more of a Turkish slavery then f^^a Christian
Society, or of a civil subordination to public authority, and (therefore) is
the cause of continual discontents, and frequent rebellions; and that no Church
but the Roman Catholic, does as much as pretend, or can persuade, its own
infallibility in matters of Religion; seeing I say, all this is manifest by
reason, and our woeful late experiences, I question not but that the Parliament
will be pleased to take in good part this humble proposal of saving our souls;
and of settling this state, by the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, and by
the Revenues of the Protestant Prelatick Clergy; especially if the corruptions
of Scripture, and falsifications of Counsels and Fathers, wherewith I do charge
that Clergy (and whereby alone they maintain their Protestancy) be clearly
demonstrated in this Treatise, and patiently heard in a public Trial.

It Is now above a Century of years since the great Statsmen of England have
employed their wit and industry, in devising how to setle Monarchy upon
Protestancy; but (under favor) we Catholic Divines do show (and all
Protestants may suspect by the success) that in so great an affair they have
proceeded like unskillful Architects, that busy themselves altogether in
proportioning and adorning the superstructures, without inquiring into the
strength and solidity of the foundation: They mistook sand for stone, falls
translations for true Scripture, a lay ministry for a lawful Clergy, a
temporal sovereignty for a spiritual supremacy: They laid for the first stone
of their New fabrik, a sworn spiritual rebellion (the oath of supremacy)
against the chief Prelat and common Father of all Christendom S. Peter's
Successor. No marvail then if this fundation yielded, and the whole fabrik fell
to the ground in our late distempers; for, by an evident parity of reason it
must be concluded, that it is as lawful for Protestants to depose Kings, as
Popes, by virtue of their private and arbitrary interpretations of scripture. If
notwithstanding the legal and long possession or prescription, of a suprem
spiritual superiority, the Bishop of Rome may (by the principles and
prerogative of Protestancy) be reformed, and reduced to be only Patriarck of
the West, or a private Bishop; what temporal soveraignity can be absolute or
secure among Protestants? The same arguments, the same texts of Scripture, the
same spirit, the same interpretations of God's Word, that Luther, Calvin,
Cranmer and all other Protestants objected against the Popes supreme spiritual
authority, did the Presbyterians, and other Protestants press (by an
unanswerable parallel) against the late King's temporal Sovereignty. Wherefore it
is much to be feared that notwithstanding the extraordinary prudence of our
government, we shall be frequently involved in as great troubles and dangers,
as formerly; and that the private spirit, and English Scripture (interpreted by
Protestants) will prevail against lawful Monarchy, whenever the like
circumstances do concur; viz. a Zealous Parliament, a mild King, a covetous
Clergy, a stubborn people, and resolute Rogues to lead them, and declare to the
Multitude their own strength, as well as the fundamental principles and
privileges of all Protestant Reformations.

In Catholic Commonwealths all these circumstances do meet (the principles of
Protestancy only excepted) and yet the Catholic subjects remain immovable in
their obedience in regard of the credit and authority of their Church and
Clergy, which in private confessions, and public exhortations continualy
inculcat, how inconsistant any private or arbitrary interpretation of Scripture
(and by consequence any pretext of superiority over the Sovereign) is, with the
Christianity and obsequiousnes of Catholic faith; and how principal a part it
is of that ^aith to believe not only that the Church is infallible in its
doctrine, but also that temporal Sovereigns are Gods Vice-regents, and absolut
in their government, and therefore as such, ought to be revered, and obeyed. And
when (by reason of heavy taxes, or other such accidents) the fire of sedition
sometimes breaks forth among Catholics, it is (generally speaking) suddenly
quenched by the authority and severity of the Clergies Censures against the
Authors, or by the devotion and reverence which even the most Irreverent of our
profession exhibit to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, that is shown (upon
such emergencies) to the mutinous people, which (notwithstanding their fury and
madness) immediately fall down to adore their God and Redeemer; and for respect
of him (whom they believe to be realy present) are appeased or at least give
ear to their Pastors reasons and exhortations, with more patience and better
success then any Protestant people in the like occasions. Wherefore though we
Catholics should grant (as we neither do, nor can) that the Protestant or
Prelatick reformation is as safe a way to Heaven, as the Roman Religion, yet
methinks such Protestants as desire to live peaceably, or govern prosperously,
ought to prefer Popery before Protestancy.

That K. Henry 8. in the heat and height of an amourous passion was so blinded,
that (to satisfy his carnal lust) he assumed and annexed a spiritual supremacy
to a temporal Crown may be attributed to the fondness and fancies of love. That
a Babe (K. Edward 6.) was taken with such a babble as that same supremacy, may
be imputed to the tenderness of his age, and to the imprudence of his Uncle and
Protector Somerset, who by promoting that Oath, and the Protestant reformation,
put the Kingdom into a Babylonical confusion. That Dudley Duke of
Northvmberland (seeing the Church and state so confounded) did ground a title
for the Lady Jane Gray, and for his own son to the Crown, upon the principles
and Zeal of Protestancy, is but the ordinary practice of Politians; that the
Lady Elizabeth did re^^ive her Fathers supremacy and the Protestant
reformation, whereby alone she could pretend to be legitimat (against two acts
of Parliament never yet repeald) is not so blameable in her, as in them that
but four years before, had by an unanimous vote in both Houses declared An
Bullens marriage void, and that same supremacy, and Protestancy to be heresy.
That K. James did pardon and promote his mothers murderers, and conform
himself to that Religion whereby she and himself had bin so long excluded from
their right, was great clemency, or a cuning compliance, without which he covld
hardly have compassed his ends, and restored the line of the Stenarts to the
British Empire. That K. Charles 1. did endeavor by Ordinances and Laws to
restrain and reduce the variety of Protestant opinions (grounded upon the
liberty of interpreting Scripture) to some kind of uniformity, and
subordination to Princes and Prelates, had bin an act of great prudence if it
had not shaken and shock't the very fundation of all Protestant Reformations,
that consists in an arbitrary interpretation of the obscure Texts of Scripture,
from which foundation and fountain necessarily flows the privilege of
denying obedience to all civil and Ecclesiastical authority that commands any
thing contrary to those interpretations of Scripture, whereby every private
person, or any leading men of the Protestant Congregations will be pleased to
direct themselves, or guide others. That the Zealous and precise sort of
Protestants did convene, and covenant against the King and Bishops, for
endeavoring to deprive them of this their Evangelical liberty of the
Reformation, was but a natural result of the same fundamental principle of
Protestancy. That Oliver Cromwell by counterfaiting Zeal and piety, and by
humoring the private spirits and interpretations of Protestant Sectaries, did
ruin his King, and raise himself from a mean subject, to be absolut Sovereign,
needs not to be enumerated among the casualties, or favors of fortun, there
being not any thing more feasible then to dethrone a Protestant Monarch by his
own Religion; because it is nothing but an arbitrary interpretation of
Scripture, and by consequence gives such a latitud for justifying rebellion
upon the score of refining the reformation by a new sense of Scripture, that
every Protestant (without violating the principles, but rather sticking to the
prerogative of Protestancy) may embrace any more pleasing and popular sense of
the Text, however so prejudicial it prove to his lawful Sovereign, or however
contrary it be to the sense of Scripture established by law, or by acts of
uniformity.

But, that notwithstanding so many warnings and wars as we have had, so great
and grave a Council as the Parliament of England, should think fit to continue
the same vnsuccessfull course of settling Monarchy, the same statuts whereby Q.
Elizabeth excluded the right heirs and now reigning family, the same
fundamental Tenet of the Reformation whereby every subject is made interpreter
of Scripture, and by consequence Judge of his Sovereign, and of the Government
(which must be subordinat to Scripture) is not only to me, but to the Christian
world, the cause of greatest admiration. And because every Religion has some
incomprehensible mysteries, I will number this among those of Protestancy; but
withal must beg pardon for thinking that it is rather against, then above
reason; for, to grant the principle, whereupon the independency or Sovereignty
of every Protestant subject is grounded; and yet to make Acts of Parliament (in
favor of the Church of England) against the same subjects independency, or
Sovereignty, is a kind of contradiction. So discerning a people as the English,
can hardly be hindered from seeing the manifest connection that is between the
Protestant subjects liberty of interpreting Scripture, and the not submitting
their judgments, or actions to any human laws or Government, if contrary to
their own interpretations. And so Religious and scrupulous a people as they
are, will not be easily persuaded, that an Act of Parliament is sufficient to
dispense with their obligation and inclination of sticking to that fundamental
Tenet of Protestancy.

I confess that in some Countries (as in France) the Protestant people are now
kept in so great subjection, that they dare not go so far as the principles of
Protestancy lead; and in other more Northern Climats, they are of so dull and
peaceable a constitution, that they want either curiosity to examine, or courage
to assert the privileges of the reformation; and therefore are apt to submit
their Judgments (by an implicit faith) to the opinions of Luther, or Calvin, or
of their own Clergy. But with us, where every one thinks his own spirit as
divin, and his Judgment as good, as that of Luther, or Calvin, or of the
Bishops; where the stoutness and stubborness of our nature makes us venture
upon any thing whether sacred or profane, where every Peasant is warranted by
the law, to question the prerogative of his Prince, in such a Country I say,
and in such a constitution of the Government, it is not to be expected, that
men will be less contentious in the Church, then they are in the Courts; nor
content with less then with that supremacy of judicature allowed by the
principles of Protestancy to be the spiritual-birth-right of every Protestant
subject.

These are some of the inconveniences whereunto the government is liable by the
principles and profession of Protestancy; and though I humbly conceive that
nothing but liberty of conscience can content so many dissenting parties, yet I
am of opinion that before such a liberty be granted, some previous conferences
concerning Religion, (like that of Hampton Court in K. James his reign) be
allowed, but without excluding from those Conferences Papists, or any party
that will offer to give reason for their Religion. For, as to accept of a Bill
of comprehension before men examine the consequences and qualifications of the
Religions comprehended may breed greater confusion; so to except any Christian
Religion from being examined, does argue that in our Conferences we consult not
conscience. But it is to be feared, that education and interest (the two
greatest prejudices not only against truth, but against the examination thereof)
will make the Bishops and their Bigots avers from any conferences of Religion,
whereby their title to the churchs-livings may be questioned. They will pretend
and preach, that it is against the rules as well of piety as of policy to
inquire into the truth of doctrine, or into the right of possession, after 100.
years prescription; But they do not consider, or at least would not have others
consider, that the Roman Catholics prescriptio^ of 1000. years in England, and
our Prelates legal possession of lands for the same space of years, was not
judged by Q. Elizabeth's Bishops, or Parliaments, a sufficient Plea against the
pretensions of the Crown to the Church revenues, notwithstanding the Church
(then) was thought to be infallible in doctrine; and the revenues thereof were
first intended for, and annexed to the Prelates and preachers of the same Roman
Catholic doctrine and Church. Now, if the Protestant Bishops think that the
Catholic Bishops were legally and lawfully dispossessed of their revenues, and
their Doctrine legaly and lawfully condemned, and changed by Luther, Calvin,
Cranmer, or the Prelaticks interpretation of Scripture, confirmed by Act of
Parliament; how can they imagine to make the world believe that it is now either
a sin or sacrilege, to be dispossessed themselves of the Church revenues, by
an Act of Parliament, confirming as probable an interpretation of Scripture as
theirs, or as that of Luther, or Calvin is; especially seeing they confess their
doctrine fallible, and that the revenues were never intended (by those that gave
them) for preaching or promoting any kind of Protestancy? Doubtless this
incoherency, and their backwardness in reasoning of Religion, will render their
Zeal for the Church revenues, as much suspected, as their forwardnes in
persecuting tender Consciences, has renderd their persons odious.

And that there may be no ground for them to work upon, nor to doubt of the
Roman Catholic Clergy's loyalty and sincerity in petitioning, and pressing for
public conferences of Religion, it will be found (I doubt not) in case any
such security be desired, or valued, that we shall as readily now, as in Queen
Mary's reign, resign all the right we can pretend to the revenues of the
Church, and (as then) bestow them upon the Crown, for the use and ease of our
Country. By this it may appear, that we have no design, but the duty of
subjects, or the devotion of Christians, in desiring that the Protestant
Clergys title be examined: But they deterr the illiterat layty from this
necessary scrutiny, by often repeating the word Sacrilege, without declaring
its signification. We know (and so do they) that it has bin the ancient
practice of God's Church, to contribut with all that is Sacred (without the
least fear or scruple of Sacrilege) to the maintenance of the State, when the
layty is so much empoveris'ht with wars and taxes, as we are both in England
and Ireland. We see that in all Catholic Countries the Clergy does imitat the
example of the ancient Church in the same practice. Why our English Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters, ought to be exempted from so reasonable and general a
custom, unless it be that they are burthend with wives and Children, I do not
understand. But sure their having wives and Children can neither ^make their
revenues more Sacred, nor their Contributions more Sacrilege, on cases of
public necessity. As a ^ompetency of maintenance for themselves, and for their
Childrens education and application to some honest Trades, is an act of
Charity; so to apply the rest of the Church revenues to publik uses, for
soldiers, and seamen, and to the payment of the Crown debts, is not against
Christianity.

In the conclusion of this Preface I must endeavor to excuse the bulk of my
book, and the positivenes of my Assertions. For the first, I could hardly draw
into a narrower compass so transcendent a subject; and yet I have placed in the
end of this Treatise an Index, wherein the substance of the whole book is
contained; to the end every one may find out with ease any point he has a mind
to read. As to the positivenes of my assertions, most of them being articles of
my faith, or deductions from my Creed, I could not but utter them in the Tone
of our infallible Church. But because I speak to Protestants that condemn our
infallibility, I attempt to demonstrat, their censure against the same is as
rash, as they fancy our belief is ridiculous. J must also ingenuously confess,
that it is part of my design, to diminish the authority of the Protestant and
Prelatick writers; but seeing my arguments are taken out of their own writings,
and are no other then their wilful and undeniable falsifications of Scripture
and Fathers, I hope none that detests so horrid a crime, will condemn my
Censure, or defend their credit. Whether I have bin faithful in setting down
their falsifications, I must submit to the Judgment of my Readers, as also beg
pardon for intermedling with so much of government as necessarily depends of
Religion, and ought to be proportioned thereunto; our Protestant Statesmen, will
not only pardon, but protect me, when they reflect upon the impossibility there
is of regulating the motions, or appeasing the mutinies of a body politik, by a
faith so uncertain as that of the fallible Church of England; or by a rule of
Religion so applicable to rebellion, as the letter of Scripture is, when left
to every private man's arbitrary interpretation.

THE TABLE.
Part I. Of the Beginning, Progress and Principles in general: And of the
Prelatick Church of England in Particular. HOw necessary a rational Religion is
for a Peacable Government. Page 1. Wherein the Reasonableness of Religion
Consists, Page 8. How dangerous it is for a Temporal Sovereign to pretend to a
Spiritual Jurisdiction over his Subjects. Page 10. The Grounds of Peace, Piety,
and Policy. Page 10. The Catholic World ever acknowledged the Bishop of Rome's
Spiritual Jurisdiction over all Christians. Page 11. The same Religion which
St. Gregory the great held, was by St. Augustine taught to our Ancestors. Page
19. Of the Author and beginning of Protestancy, and of Luther's Disputation and
Familiarity with the Devil. Page 22. How weakly Protestants Excuse Luther's
Conference with the Devil. Page 29. The Mass, a Visible and True Sacrifie,
proved by the Councils and Doctors of the Church. Page 36. The Sacrifice of the
Mass offered for the Dead. Page 37. Of the Principles and Propagation of
Protestancy. Page 39. The Fundamental Principles of Protestancy. Page 43.
Protestants affirm, that if a man have an Act of Faith, sin does not hurt him.
Page 46. Protestants affirm that all Christians, Men and Women, are Priests by
Baptism. Page 50. Of the Protestant Church of England in K. H. VIII's Reign
Page 53. Henry the VIII. weary of Queen Catharine. Page 53. Anne Bullen's
Incest and Leudness. Page 54. Henry the VIII's Tyranny. Page 56. Tyndal's
Translation of the Bible abolished. Page 59. Of the English Religion and
Reformers in K. Edw. VI's days. Page 60. The first Reformers of the Prelatick
Protestant Church of England. Page 62. Cranmer a mere Cotemporiser, and of no
Religion at all. Page 63. Who framed the 39 Articles. Page 64. Of the 39
Articles of the Church of England. Page 67. Protestant Bishops well pleased to
see themselves Religiously Worshipped. Page 70. Protestants though they have
changed their Form of Ordination yet cannot have a true Clergy, till they
change also the Character of the Ordainers. Page 80. Of the Effects immediately
produced by the 39 Articles. Page 82. Dudely Earl of Warwick's Endeavors to
have his Son to Reign after K. Edw. His Marrying him to the Lady Jane Gray.
Page 83. Queen Mary's Troubles. Page 84. The Roman Catholics willing
Resignation of the Church Livings to the Crown. Page 86. An Act of Parliament
in the first year of Q. Mary concerning the fraud and force of K. Henry the
VIII's unlawful Divorce from Q. Catharine. Page 88. Other Effects of
Protestancy, after it was revived in England by Q. Elizabeth to exclude the
Royal Family of the Stewards from the Crown. And of the Nullity of her Clergies
Character and Jurisdiction. Page 95. Decreed in Parliament that any Natural
Issue of Q. Elizabeth's Body should enjoy the Crown after her Death, and so the
Line of Stewards to be Excluded. Page 100. Reasons why Q. Elizabeth in her 44
years Reign could not make her Prelatick Clergy and Religion acceptable. Page
103 How Injurious Protestancy has been to the Royal Family of the Stewards,
and how Zealous they have been in promoting the same. Page 109. K. James the I.
declared that Catholics, and their Religion had no Hand in Gunpowder Treason.
Page 112. Of K. Charles the First. Page 112.
Part. 2. Of the Inconsistency of Protestant Principles with Christian Piety
and Peaceable Government. THe foundation whereon all Reformations are built.
Page 117. The Protestant evasion of the clearness of Scripture against Roman
Catholic Doctrine, and also of the Invisibility of their own Church, Confuted:
And the Incredibility of the supposed Change and Apostasy, proved by the
difference of the Roman Catholic and Protestant Principles. Page 121
Protestants mistaken in the Canon of the Scripture maintained by the Church of
England, and by Dr. Cousins Bishop of Duresin. Page 131. Dr. Couzins Exceptions
and Falsifications against the Council of Trent's Authority answered. Page 137.
New Definitions, are not New Articles of Faith. Page 141. Protestants so grossly
mistaken in their Letter and Translation of Scriptures, that they cannot have
any Certainty of Faith. And are forced at length (by their Principles) to
question the Truth of Scriptures, and of them who writ the Canonical Books
thereof. Page 149. Particular Instances of Protestant Corruptions in the
English Bible. Page 157. Protestant Interpretation is not the true Sense of
Script. Page 163. Protestants Mistaken in the Ministry and Mission of their
Clergy, in the Miracles of their Church, in the Sanctity and Honesty of their
Reformers. Page 168. Calvin's Miracle. Page 180. Beza's Lasciviousness: He
prefers his Boy Andibertus before his Girl Candida. Page 181. Protestants
mistaken in the application of the Prophesies of Scripture concerning the
Conversion of the Kings and Nations of the Gentiles from Paganism to
Christianity, foretold as an Infallible Mark of the True Church, and whereof
the Protestant is deprived. Page 183. Calvin sends Ministers to Convert Gallia
Antartica from Heathenism: And what success they had. Page 190. Protestants
mistaken in the consistency of their Justifying Faith, with Justice, or Civil
Government. Page 193. The Protestant Doctrine of Justifying Faith most
dangerous and Damnable. Page 198. Protestants mistaken in the consistency of
Christian Faith, Humility, Charity, Peace either in Church or State, with their
making Scriptures, as interpreted by private Persons, or Fallible Synods, or
fancied General Councils (composed of all Dissenting Christian Churches) the
Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies in Religion. How every Protestant is
a Pope, and how much also they are overseen in making the 39 Articles, or the
Oath of Supremacy, a distinctive Sign of Loyalty to our Protestant Kings. Page
207. How the Fundamental Principles of Protestancy maturely examined and
strictly followed, have led the most Learned Protestants of the World to
Judaisme, Atheism, Arianisme, and Mahometanisme, etc. Page 222. The Protestant
Churches of Poland, Hungary and Transylvania, deny the Mystery of the Blessed
Trinity. Page 230. How the Indifferency, or rather Inclination of Protestancy
to all kind of Infidelity is further demonstrated by the Prelatick Doctrine,
and distinction of Fundamental and Not Fundamental Articles of Faith. The
design of their fundamental distinction laid open. The Roman Catholic, the
sole Catholic Church, And how it has the Authority of Judging all Controversy
of Religion. Page 233. The Roman Catholic Church is a Competent and Impartial
Judge of Controversies of Religion. Page 241. Of the Justice and Legality of
our Roman Censures against Protestancy. Page 242. All Christians were never
Judges of Religion, one Party always submitted to the Judgment of the Other
that was in Obedience to, and in Communion with St. Peter's Successor the Bishop
of Rome. Page 247. Gods Veracity is denied by Protestancy, and by the Prelatick
Distinction and Doctrine of Fundamental, and not Fundamental Articles of Faith.
Page 251. Protestancy is Heresy. Page 254. Protestancy contradicts Gods
Veracity. Page 255. The Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church in Matters
of Faith, proved against Protestants. Page 256. The Protestant Doctrine of
Fundamentals Confuted. Page 257. The same further demonstrated and proved, that
neither the Protestant Faith, nor the Faith lately Asserted in a Book called,
Sure footing in Christianity, is Christian Belief. Page 260. The Resolution of
Protestant Faith. Page 262. The Infallibility of the Church proved by Gods
Veracity Page 268. Heresy Explained by Rebellion. Page 269. The
Unreasonableness of them who pretend a private Spirit, and refuse to submit to
the Authority of the Church, for want of Clearer Evidence than the Roman
Catholics has of Gods Authority. Page 269. Reasons for Liberty of Conscience:
And how much both Piety and Policy is mistaken in making Prelatick Protestancy
the Religion of the State, by continuing and pressing the Sanguinary and Penal
Statutes against the Roman Catholic Faith; and the Act of Uniformity against
Sectaries. Page 271. Queen Marys and the Inquisitions Severity against
Protestancy, can be no President, or excuse for the Statutes against Popery.
Page 283.
Part 3. Containing a plain Discovery of the Protestant Clergys Frauds, and
Falsifications, whereby alone their Doctrine is supported and made Credible.
The Conscience and Convenience of Restoring or Tolerating the Roman Catholic
Religion, Demonstrated. THat either the Learned Protestants, or Roman Catholic
Clergy are Cheats, and how every Illiterate Protestant may easily discern by
which of the two Clergies he is Cheated: And therefore is obliged under pain of
Damnation to examine so near a concern: And to renounce the Doctrine and
Communion of that Church wherein he is Cheated. Page 287. With what Impudency
and Hypocrisy Bishop Jewel and other Prelatick Writers began to maintain the
Protestancy of the Church of England. And how they were blamed for appealing to
Antiquity by some of their own Brethren. Page 293. A Strange Expression of Mr.
Hooker in favor of Bishop Jewel. Page 294. The Centurists and other Learned
Protestants Confess that the Councils and Fathers Defended Worship of Images
Transubstantion, Purgatory, etc. Page 295. How particularly the Protestant
Clergy is Charged with Frauds and Falsifications in maintaining their Religion.
Page 298. There can be no Reason to suspect the sincerity of the Roman
Catholic Clergy in Matters of Religion: And that Protestancy cannot be
maintained otherwise then by Impostures: Whereof there are such Evidences, that
to give the Protestant Clergy any Credit in matters of Religion, is a
sufficient Cause of Damnation. Page 300. Of Edward VI's Protestant and
Prelatick Clergys Frauds, Falsifications, and Forms of Ordination; their
Hypocrisy, Incontinency, Atheism, etc. And whether it be fit to term them, and
others like them Cheats, when they are Convicted of wilful false dealing in
matters of Religion. Page 303. Of Thomas Cranmer, his Birth, Marriages,
Treasons Cheats, Heresies, etc. And of Latimer and Ridley. Page 304. Of
Hooper's, Rogers, Poynet, Bale and Coverdale's Hypocrisy and Impiety. Page 312.
A Prophesy of Rogers's. Page 314. John Bale's account of his Education, and how
he scarp'd out, the Cursed Character of the Horrible Beast by Marrying a Nun,
etc. Page 315. Of Coverdale and his Bible. Page 317. A Discourse between Dr,
Martin and the Archbishop [Cranmer] related by Fox. Page 320 Of the Protestant
Clergy in Q. Mary's Reign, the same that afterward founded Q. Elizabeth's
Church. Their Frauds, Factions, Cheats, and Changes of the English Protestant
Religion, during their Exile in Germany. Page 326 Abominable frauds, amd wilful
falsifications of the Protestant Clergy in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, to maintain
their Doctrine, set forth under the name of an Apology, and Defense of the
Church of England. Page 332 The Protestant Clergy Convicted of falsehood in
their Apology concerning Communion under one kind. Page 334 How Jewel and the
Church of England make the very same Holy Fathers they appealed to in other
matters, wicked Heretics, because they condemned Priests Marriage. Page 337
Bishop Jewel and his Associates wickedness in charging Cardinal Hosins, and all
Catholics, with a contempt of Holy Scripture, against their own knowledge
after they had been admonished of the Imposture. Page 338 Falsifications and
Frauds against the Bishop of Rom's Supremacy. Page 341 Frauds and fond Devises
of the Protestant Clergy of England to deny and discredit the Sacrifice of the
Mass. Page 343 Prelatick Falsifications and Corruptions of Scripture, to make
the Pope Antichrist, And Succession of Bishops a Mark of the Beast. Page 346
Prelatick Falsifications, to prove that Popes may and have Decreed Heresy. Page
348 Prelatick Falsifications, to prove that Popes have insulted over Kings.
Page 350 Prelatick Falsifications, to prove that St. Augustine the Apostle of
our English Saxons, was an Hypocrite, and no Saint, as also to dicredit
Catholic Writers. Page 351 Of the Protestant Clergy's Frauds, and
Falsifications of Scriptures, and alterations of their XXXIX Articles of
Religion, to make the People believe that they have true Priests and Bishops in
the Church of England. Page 352 An Advertisement to the Reader concerning
Bishop Jewel. Page 357 Examples of Learned Protestants converted to the Roman
Catholic Religion, by observing the Frauds, and Falsehoods of the Apology of
Jewel, and of the Protestant Clergy, for the Prelatick Church of England. Page
359 Frauds, Follies, and Falsifications of John Fox his Acts and Monuments, and
of his Magdeburian Masters in their Centuries, the little Sincerity of the
English Church and Clergy in countenancing such false Dealing. Page 362 John
Fox his Revelation. Page 368 The Foxian Calendar. Page 371 Wilful
Falsifications committed by John Fox, in his Acts and Monuments. Page 374 Dr.
Chark's Falsification of St. Augustine, and how he excuses Luther's Doctrine of
the Lawfulness of Adultery and Incest. Page 379 Falsifications of Cranmer, and
Peter Martyr, against Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass. Page
381 How some Protestant Writers in Q. Elizabeth's time, seeing their Fellows
were proved Falsifiers, waved the Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers, and yet
the other continued their former course of falsifying both Fathers and
Councils. Page 384 Falsifications and Frauds of the Prelatick English Clergy to
maintain Protestancy, since the beginning of King James's Reign.
THeir Corruptions of Scripture (for maintaining their Character) continued in
the Bible, though commanded by King James, it should be reviewed and corrected.
Page 391 Dr. Abbot and Dr. Smith, Bishops of Canterbury and Gloucester,
corrupted the Translation of Scripture, which had been sincerely performed by
Sir Henry Savill. Page 397 Of Dean Walsingham's Search into Matters of Religion
before his Change to the Catholic: How he repaired to King James as to the
Head of the Church, for a Resolution of his Doubts; who remitted him to the
Lord of Canterbury, and he to other Men; and how after finding no Satisfaction,
he betook himself to the Reading of Catholic and Protestant Authors, for
discerning on what side was the true and false Dealing. Page 403 Dean
Walsingham's Doubts and Difficulties in Reading the Catholic Book. Page 406
The Substance of Dean Walsingham's Memorial to the K. Page 409 Dean
Walsingham's Appearance before the Archbishop of Canterbury at the
Councel-Table. Page 410 His Appearance before him at Lambeth. Page 414. His
third and fourth Appearance before him. Page 416 How loath the Protestant
Clergy is, that the King or Great Persons should examine their Doctrine, or way
of defending it. Page 417 What Cheating and Unconscionable ways were taken to
frighten Dean Walsingham from examining of the Truth. Page 417 What pretty
Books the Archbishop of Canterbury commended to Dean Walsingham to inform him
of the Truth; They proved after Examination, Rediculous Libels. Page 420 Dean
Walsingham's Address Mr. Rolfe, Commissary of St. Albans: and of his Conference
with Dr. Downham, etc. Page 421 What foolish Answers the most Learned
Protestants are forced to give to Catholic Arguments. Page 422 Mr. Walsingham
found no satisfaction in the Answer to the Defense of the Sensure. Page 425 Mr.
Walsingham's last Appearance before my Lord of Canterbury and his Doctors. Page
427 How the Archbishop and his Assembly of Divines, refused to confer Dean
Walsingham's Notes of Mr. Bell's Corruptions with the Fathers Quoted,
notwithstanding the Books were in their presence. Page 428 Reflections upon Mr.
Walsingham's Relation. Page 431 A brief Relation of a Trial held in France
about Religion, whereof the Lord Chancellor of France was Moderator. Page 437 A
Copy of a Letter Written by a Person of Quality about this Conference. Page 441
K. Hen. IV's Letter to the Duke of Espernon, upon the same Subject. Page 441
The Authors falcify'd, and therefore the Sentence given against Plesses. Page
442 Protestant Falsifications to persuade that the Roman Catholic Doctrine is
inconsistant with the Sovereignty and safety of Kings, and with civil Society
between Catholics and Protestants. Page 443 Bishop Mortons Falsifications
about the Lawfulness of killing a Tyrant. Page 444 Bishop Mortons Falsification
of Catholics against the Sovereignty of Princes; and how he excuses himself by
saying he received it from the Archbishop of Canterbury. Page 445 Mortons
Answer, in which see an Imposture continued against Catholics, by the whole
Convocation of the Protestant Clergy, in their Synod held Anno 1603. Page 546
The Protestant Falsification to persuade that the Canon Law, does warrant
deposition of Kings by the Pope. Page 447 A Protestant Falsification to
persuade that Catholics may cheat any Excommunicated Persons of their Lawful
Debts. Page 449 Bishop Mortons Falsification to persuade that Catholics hold
it Lawful to Murder and Massacre Protestants. Page 451 Bishop Morton's
Falsification to Assert the Kings Supremacy Page 453 Ten Falsifications set
down together by Bishop Morton to prove that we hold that Popes cannot be
deposed, nor be Heretics. Page 457 Primate Bramhalls Falsification, to prove
that Popes may and have Decreed Heretical Doctrines. Page 458 It is proved by
Reasons and Examples, that no Religion is so little dangerous to the
Sovereignty and safety of Kings, or so Advantageous to the Peace and Prosperity
of Subjects, as the Roman Catholics; notwithstanding the Doctrine of the Pope's
Supremacy. Page 459 Protestants cannot clear their Religion from their Doctrine
and danger of Deposing Sovereigns, and Disposing of their Kingdoms. Page 470
That Protestants could never prove any of the wilful falsifications wherewith
they charge Roman Catholic Writers, but themselves are convicted of that Crime
wheresoever they Attempted to make good their charge against us. Page 473
Bellarmin accused by Sutcliff of Falsifying the General Council of Chalcedon in
favor of the Popes Supremacy. Page 474 How Protestants are Convicted by
Bellarmin of holding twenty ancient condemned Heresies, and how Sutcliff and
Bishop Morton to clear them of six only (fourteen seems they confess) do
falsify the Fathers and Catholic Authors about worshipping of Images. Page
476 Two Pelagian Heresies imputed to Protestants, and how they falsify to clear
themselves of the One, and say nothing of the other Page 477 Two Novatian
Heresies Imputed to Protestants, the one answered with Silence, the other with
Falsifying. Page 478. The Manichean Heresy against Freewill, Imputed to
Protestants, and how pitifully Answered by Bishop Morton. Page 479. How Bishop
Morton Answers to Bellarmin's Imputation of Arianisme unto Protestants. Page
479. How Morton Falsifies and Abuses Bellarmine, who Imputes the denial of
Christ's Real Presence in the Sacrament to Protestants. Page 480. Falsifications
Objected against Cardinal Baronius by Mr. Sutcliff, Page 483. Calumnies and
Falsifications of Luther, Calvin, Archbishop Laud, and Primate Usher to
Discredit Catholic Religion against their own Knowledge and Conscience. Page
487. Of Calvin's Calumnies against Catholics and their Doctrine. Page 488
Frauds, Falsifications and Calumnies of Primate Usher against the Real Presence
and Transubstantiation. Page 491. Usher's Falsifications against Confession.
Page 492. His Falsifications against Absolution of Sins. Page 493. Against
Purgatory. Page 494 Against Worshipping Saints and their Relics. Page 496
Against Prayer to Saints. Page 499
Of Archbishop Laud's Frauds and Falsifications.
HOw unsincerely Bishop Laud would fain Excuse the Modern Greek Heresy
concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost. Page 502 How Bishop Laud Abuses
St. Augustine, to make Protestants believe that General Councils may Err,
against Scripture and evident Reason. Page 504 Vicentius Lirinensis abused by
Laud to prove the Fallibility of the Church, etc. Page 507 How Bishop Laud
falsifies Occham to infringe St. Augustin's Authority, concerning the
Infallibility of the Church in succeeding Ages, as well as in that of the
Apostles: And is forced by his Error to resolve the Prelatick Faith into the
Light of Scripture, and the private Spirit of Phanaticks; which he Paliats
under the Name of Grace, and thereby Warrants all Rebellions against Church and
State, Page 509 Diverse Frauds and Falsifications of Bishop Laud, to defend that
Protestants are not Schismatics. Page 512 Whether it be Piety or Policy to
permit the Protestant Clergy of these three Kingdoms to enjoy the Church
Revenues, for maintaining (by such Frauds and Falsifications as hitherto have
been alleged) the Doctrine of the Church of England, which also they
acknowledge to be fallible, and by consequence (for all they know) false: And
h^re the said Revenues may be Conscientiously applied to the Use and Ease of
the People, without any danger of Sacrilege, or any Disturbance to the
Government, if a public Trial of both Clergies, Sinc^rity be allowed, and
Liberty of Conscience granted. Page 521 The same further demonstrated, and how
by Liberty of Conscience; or by Tolerating the Roman Catholic Religion by Act
of Parliament, the British Monarchy will become the most considerable of all
Christendom, Peaceable at Home, and recover its Right Abroad. How evidently it
is the mutual Interest of Spain and England to be in a perpetual League against
France; and how Advantageous it is for Spain to put Flanders into English
Hands. Page 534 The King's Right to France. Page 544 My Lord of Clarendin's
Policy Censured by all Wise Men. Page 548.

Part 4. The Roman Catholic Religion in every particular wherein it differs
from the Protestant, confirmed by undeniable Miracles. THat such Miracles as
are approved by the Roman Catholic Church in the Canonization of Saints, are
true Miracles; and the Doctrine which they Confirm cannot be rejected, without
denying or doubting of Gods Veracity; and how every Protestant does see true
Miracles, though he does not reflect upon them, in Confirmation of the Roman
Catholic Faith. Page 553 The Miracle of St. Januarius of Naples. Page 555 The
Famous and undeniable Miracle of St. Francis Xaverius wrought on the Person of
Marcello Mastrillo. Page 556 Antichrist's Miracles are not Credible, if
compared with Ours. Page 561 Of Visible Miracles seen, though not observed by
every Protestant, in Confirmation of the Roman Catholic Faith: The difference
between true and false Miracles. Page 562 Of True Miracles related in the
Ecclesiastical History by men of greatest Authority in every Age, to confirm
the particular Mysteries of our Catholic Faith; and that sense of Scripture
wherein Roman Catholics differ from Protestants. Page 566 Of Miracles related
by St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen, etc. in Confirmation of
Transubstantiation, Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Communion under one Kind and Purgatory. Page 567 Primate Usher's
Falsification to discredit two Miracles, Page 569 How Protestants falsify and
corrupt the very Statutes and Law Books. Page 572 Miracles for the Mass. Page
573. Miracles for Purgatory. Page 573 Miracles to Confirm the Worship and
Virtue of the Sign of the Cross. Page 576 Miracles in confirmation of the
Catholic Worship of Images Page 581* The Protestant Distinction of Civil and
Religious Worship misapplied by Ministers to delude their Flocks. Page 585
Miracles related by St. Augustine, St. Ambrose, etc. in confirmation of Praying
to Saints, and Worshipping of their Relics, etc. Page 587 A Miracle to confirm
the Worship and Devotion of the Mother of God. Page 589 Miracles of Holy Water.
Page 592 Miracles for the Sacrament of Confirmation. Page 595 A Miracle of the
Sacrament of Extream-Unction Page 597 Miracles of the Sacrament of Confession.
Page 598 The Obstinacy of Protestants in Rejecting and Corrupting the Ancient
Fathers, and a notable Corruption and Impudence of Calvin. Page 602 Fox his
Miracles how Ridiculous. Page 604 The Conclusion; in which is a Parallel
between Mahometanism and Protestancy. Page 605

The Absence of the Author; and the Compositor's not understanding English,
have occasioned many Faults: The Author is not Conscious of others, than what
are here Rectified: However, if either through Mistake of the Pen, or Press, in
such a multitude of Quotations, any thing happen to be found amiss; the Candid
Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen.
PAge 2 preface l. 26 for Indignity, r. Indigency p. 7 preface l. 27 for
Receiver. Revive, p. 4 l. 9. for revered r. reverenced, p. 5 l. 24 for Show r.
Serem, p. 6 l. 24 for wrought r. touched, p. 8 l. 16 for defyning r. defying, p.
11 l. 24 omitted ( after de Regno Christi) cap. 7 p. 66 p* 12 l ^. omitted
(after Sardis, Can. 7 p. 16 l. 2 and 4 for Henaias r. Xenaias, p. 18 l. 29 for
Holladiam r. Helladiam, p. 24 l. 32 omitted the Letter of Direction ( m) p. 25
l. 32 for 443 r. 223, p. 26 l. 3 for de missa angu, r. de Missa privata fol.
228. p. 27 l. 4 for wart r. wait, p 27 l. 9 for ofter r. offer, p. 28 l 22 for
338, 334 r. 338, 340. p. 34 l. 27 for in loc. crm. r. in loc. com. p. 36 l. 28
cap. 20 r. cap. 21. p 37 l. 27 Aug. cit 16 r. Aug. cit. lib. 16 c. 2^. p. 39 l.
10 for now Doctrine r. new Doctrine, p. 43 l. 8 for art r. Act, p. 45 l 26 for
but the straight r. but both the straight, P. 46 l. 10 for 52 r. 50 in the same
line for 54 r. 53, p. 47 the last line, for dicant r. dicunt; p. 48 l. 5 for
cap 42 r. fol. 90, p. 48 l 7 for pr^inde modulatur r proinde suo Abitrio
modulatur, p. 48 l 8 for suo arbitrio composuit, and^. deniquae inspecte, r.
suo arbitrio ea composuit etc. denique penitus inspecte, p 48 l 16 for de
^ri^it r. de Tainit. fol. 89, Edit. Paris 1605, p 52 l 18 for cap. 10 art 13. r
cap. 10. art. 13. To. 2. fol. 103, p, 56 l. 2 r. for all r. a p. 63 l. 22 for
when r. then, p 65 l. 28 for 1366 r. 1367, p. 67 l. 1 for Considered r.
Consider's, p 67 l. 1^ omitted the word by, p. 68 l. 18 for four r. three p. 69
l 8 for three r. four p. 69 l. 25 for the 22 r. the 21 p. 73 l. 32 and a little
r. but a little, p. 75 l. 29 Sermon. 34 r. Sermon. 32 p. 77 Marg 22 Aneir r. Anyr,
p. 89 l. 26 for had r. has p. 96 mar. l. 1^ r. page 101 r. 100. p. 96 l. 23
for 79 r. 7 and 9 p. 97 l. 20 for and r. of the, p. 104 l. 20 for buy r.
borrow, p 105 l. 10 for wit r. with, p. 105 l. 30 for inconsequent r.
inconstant, p. 106 l. 10 for Heretics r. Heresies, p. 119 l. 32 for contr.
Duc. r. contr. Duraeum, p. 123 l. 6 in marg. for colloq. mons. r. colloq. men's.
p. 123 l. 25 in marg. for Musenlus r. Musculus, p. 126 l. 13 for Instition r.
Institution, p. 126 l. 33 for Eutythians r. Eutychians p 127 l. 11 for with
gu^ft r. Whitgift, p. 136 l. 13 for Church r. Graekes, p. 139 l 31 for
dispurare r. disputare, p. 141 l. 28 for that is made r. that is, made p. 14^.
l. ult for in altogether r. are altogether p 147 l. 9. for lib. 8. de Civit Dei
r. lib. 18 de Civit Dei, p. 147 l. 23 for R^zias r. Razias, p. 150 l. 14 for
Zainglius r. Z^inglius, p 151 l. 20 for 1534 r. 1584, p. 155 l 18 for page 511
r. page 6^2 p. 159 l. 17 for Whitakers work r. Whitakers work p. 369. p. 159.
l. 30 for your Priest, r your Priest and Bishop, p. 160 l. 5 for your Elder r
your Elder, or Surveyer and Superintendent, p. 160 l. 26 for by r. be, p 160 l.
29 f^r an-Connivers r. and Co^nivers, p. 163 in marg. for 2 r. 1 p. 168 l. l.
24 for [ Act. 28] r. [ Act. c. 20 v. 28] p 171 l. 4 for he r. the p. 176 number
of the page 167 r. 176 p. 176 l. 31 for Staff r. Stuff; p. 176 l ulr. verb. for
manifest r. Bishop p. 184 l. 23 for Earth r. Gentiles, p. 185 l. 31 for Esaias
60.16. r. Esaias 60, 16. p. 186 l. 22 for 209 r. 294 p. 186 l, 23 for so r. to p.
187 l. 12 for Hemnitius r. Kemnitius, p. 187 l. 13 for Paregrni Nationes r.
Peregrinationes, p. 188 l. 3 for Romamam r. Romanam p. 188 l. 13 for grea r.
great, p. 190 l. 11 for 315. r. 15. p. 190. l. 24. for 438. r. 264. p. 196 l.
13 for os r. of p. 202 l. 10 for is r. if p. 203 l 30 for buth r. but, p. 204 l
3 for humor r. hum. p. 219 l 34 omitted these words seq. An Arbitrary Religion
has as many Supreams as Subjects, p. 220 l. 14 for think r. thing p. 223 l. 24
for and r. ad p. 225 l. 26 activitate r unitate, p. 232 l. 5 for Polon r.
Polit. 232 l. 12 for Jowor r. Tower p. 134 l. 12 ommitted the word They, p. 243
l. 6 for new r. now p. 246 l. 15 for by r. be p. 253 l. 2^ for Zeal r. Seal, p.
262 l. 10 for retained r. certain p. 269 l. 4 for by r. but p. 269 l. 10 for
them r. then p. 272 l. 28 for professing r. Prophesying p. 274 l. 19 for after
Birthright, is omitted these words, ina Prerogative p. 277 l. 20 for f^ain r.
fain p. 277 l. 28 for agree r. argue, p. 279 l. 17 for Scruting r. Scrutiny, p.
30 P. 280 for omitted the word not before Prelatick, p 292 l. 7 omitted the
word Ensuing, p. 292 l. 8 for but r. and, p. 292 l. 24. It is not the part of
Reason, etc. These and the ensuing words, until the Subs^ct. 1. are misplaced,
and ough^ to have been Printed immediately after the end of the foregoing Sect.
lin. 12. as also the words, Maro his Censure, and what follows ought to have
been immediately after Mr. Chillingworth's Character of the Protestant Cause
and Clergy lin. 8. p. 94 marg. l. 6 for with argues, r. which argues, p. 294
marg. l. 12 for know r. known p. 296 l. 29 for Sect. 8. r. Sect. 3, 4, 8. p.
30^ l. 8 omitted not p 302 l. 18 for reverences r. revenues, p. 309 l. 31 for
reverences r. revenues p. 315 l. 8 for became r. began p. 326 l. 17 for
foundeth r. founded, p. 327 l. 31 omitted Lutheran Book p. 328 l. 12 for tought
r. sought p. 341 l. 23 for Pabam r. Papam p. 355 marg. l. 3 for fol. 30 r. fol.
301 p. 156 l. 26 for greer r. geer p. 367 l. marg. l. ult. for 993 r 789 p. 371
l. 21 for 57 r. 53 p. 377 l. 2 Institiam r. Justitiam p. 378 marg. l. 20 for
three r. two p. 393 l. 4 for eidoolan r. eidolon p. 393 l. 32 for with r. which
p. 396 marg. l. 9 for Mat. c. 17. r. Mat. c. 27. p. 396 marg. l. 11, 12, 13.
these words, Et in Harm in Mat. 26. ver. 39. are to Be expunged. p. 407 l. 18
for 1 Thessalonians. r. 2 Thessalonians. p. 417 marg. l. 5 for orgilat r. or great p. 424 l. 27
for he r. I p. 425 l. 4 for notice r. Notes p. 430 l. 24 the word and must be
expunged p. 444 l. 8 for restored r. retorted p. 453 l. 5 for report r. detort
p. 457 l. 31 for rot r. not p. 458 l. 10 for Pramhalls r. Bramhalls p. 473 l. 9
for ad r. and p. 475 l. 7 for praeras r. praeeras p. 481 marg. l. 19 for
Figurinis r. Tigurinis p. 482 l. 13 for ad r. and p. 482 marg. l. 13 for le r.
de p. 495 marg. l. 17 thy r. they p. 503 l. 30 for at r. as, p. 528 l. 11 r.
mentibay nefas, in the same line r. hoc for tue, p. 508 for 22 r. 32 p. 515 l
10 for our r. your p. 525 l. 21 after return is omitted to p. 540 l. 31 for
them r. then p. 549 l. 23 for Anion r. Anjou p. 560 marg. l. 6 for Matthew,
11.12. r. Matthew. 11.21. Ibid marg. l. 7 for Joan. 10.26 r. Joan 10.25 Ibid
marg. l. 9 for Joan 2.23. r. Joan 3.2. p. 562 l. 20 for receive r. revive p.
566 l. 5 for this r. thus p. 571 l. 16 at Waldensis omitted cap. 63. n. 6. p,
573 marg. l. 24 for Moral r. Dialog. p. 584 l. 15 for 1664. r. 1604. p. 613 l.
27 for Regal r. Legal, page ult. of the Conclusion l. 8 for Actions 1. Nations.

A TREATISE OF RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT.
FIRST PART. Of the beginning, progress, and principles of Protestancy in
general, and of the Prelatick Church of England in particular.
SECT: I. How necessary a rational Religion is for a peaceable Government:
What Religion ought to be judged rational? That the truth of mysteries of Faith
is more credible then clear; A digression concerning the Notions and Natures
of things, and in particular of a Body. How unreasonable it is to judge of
impossibilities, in order to Gods omnipotency, because they seem so to our
human understandings. How dangerous it is for a temporal Soueraign to pretend a
spiritual jurisdiction over his subjects: and how the Catolick world ever
acknowledged the Bishop of Rome his spiritual jurisdiction over all Christians*
AMongst our Adversaries discourses against the Roman Catholic Religion, the
inconsistency thereof with the sovereignty and safety of Princes seems to be
most applauded. The Protestant Ministers ceas not to proclaim from pulpit and
press, that Kings are but Tenants at will to the Pope, and that his spiritual
jurisdiction depriues them of all temporal power. see herfter ^ar: 3. sect* 9.
We shall rid (I hope) protestant Princes of that iealousy (when we treat of
this point) by manifesting the calumny. In this part of our Treatise we confine
ourselves to matters of fact, reserving to dispute of the right herafter. And
indeed none can frame a true judgment of this, or of any other Controversy,
before he be informed of the historical part thereof. Therefore our method is to
set down in the beginning of this work the state and belief of the visible
Christian and Catholic Church until the yea^^ 1517. wherein the world heard
first of protestancy: afterward we shall proceed to examine whether the soul
and state may be better governed by the principles of protestancy, then of
Popery. We doubt not (with Gods assistance) to retort against our adversaries
their own arguments, and to prove, that as no Religion is a safe way to
salvation, but ours, so likewise not any is so favorable to the sovereignty of
lawful Magistracy, and to the peacebleness of human government, as the same
Roman Catholic. We need not inculcat to Statesmen (how ever so Irreligious)
that the support of government is Religion, and that their own Masterpiece is,
to keep the multitude in awe of the laws, not so much by force of arms (an
expedient more dangerous then durable) as by a religious fear of God, and a
firm persuasion that Soueraigns are his Vicegerents; and divine providence so
concerned in the maintenance of their authority and prerogatives, that neither
can be opposed without infallibility of eternal damnation to the opposers.

This persuasion must not be the sole work or word of the Soueraigns
themselves, or of their state Ministers; their testimony would be suspected by
the subjects, as partial; it must be grounded upon authority, credibly reported
to be divin, as (among Christians) the holy Scriptures explained by the ancient
tradition and sense of Councels and Fathers, which by another name we call the
Church, or Clergy; that is men to whom God has committed the charg of souls,
and commanded us to follow their directions in spiritual matters, as being
Jnterpreters of the divin Law, which Sovereigns must observe.

There could not be an expedient more satisfactory, then the institution of
such a Church, Clergy, and spiritual Court of Judicature, For, if
interpretation of Scripture had bin left to the Sovereign, the subjects would
mistrust his sincerity in explaining the same; if to the lay subjects, the
Sovereign would be as diffident of their explications: Wherefore to avoid
differences and disputes, God appointed the Clergy for spiritual Judges, (as
being by their institution less concerned in temporal affairs, and therefore
presumed to be more conscientious, and less partial in their sentences then lay
persons) and Tradition for the rule, whereby they must direct their judgments:
to the end their doctrine be Apostolical, not arbitrary, or altered from the
primitive; but rather all novelties and differences (concerning matters of
Faith) be still suppressed; and thereby all unlawful pretensions (which both
Sovereigns and subjects frequently claim under the pretext of Religion) be
remedied or prevented; for that, souveraignty is as apt to degenerat into
tyranny, as subjection into rebellion, if not regulated by a religion that
makes it as unlawful for lay men to intermeddle with the doctrine of the
Church, as it is improper for Church men to intrude themselves into matters of
state.

But because neither Soueraigns nor subjects are bound to submit their
judgments in matters of Faith to a doubtful authority, therefore unless they
who pretend to be the Clergy, can evidence by undeniable miracles (either
wrought by themselves, or by their known spiritual predecessors that
professed the same Faith) their jurisdiction and doctrine, they can not
rationaly pretend to have the charge of souls, or any divine authority for
determining controversies of Religion. Because, seeing the principal part of
Religion does consist in a perfect submission of the understanding to divi^e
authority, (even against the appearence of sense, and the probability of
reason) unless the Church or Clergy whereupon we rely does make it evidently
credible by supernatural signs, that their authority and doctrine is divine,
their religion is not rational; and therefore no rational person is bound
(without that supernatural evidence) to acknowledge in them a spiritual
jurisdiction, or to follow their dictamens, and forsake his own private
dictamens, and principles of probability, or the seeming evidence of his senses.

Some men do require more then this, and are of opinion that a Religion can not
be rational, unless the truth thereof be clearly discerned, or demonstrated by
the light of natural reason; and judge it a great folly in men to believe what
they do not comprehend. But this maxim is destructive to Religion and reason;
it does overthrow the very foundation of both, which consists in acknowlegding
an incomprehensible Deity, whose perfections are infinite, his thoughts and
revelations (and by consequence the mysteries of Religion) inscrutable, and
therefore to be revered, not examined by so limited and imperfect creatures as
we are; that can hardly diue into the bottom of ordinary difficulties, and
discern the immortality of our own souls, or the nature and composition of any
visible body.

Thomas Bonart in Concordia scientiae cum fide.
And albeit an excellent wit of our age, in a late Treatise, has endeavored to
clear by natural reason the mysteries of Christian Faith; and in order to
facilitat the belief of Transubstantiation, does teach that one body can not
be in many places at one time, nor be penetrated with another body; and
therefore is for'ct to say, that Christ has as many bodies as there are
consecrated pieces of bread: yet I think it more agreeable not only to Catholic
Religion, but to natural reason, to believe, that the very same body of Christ
that was born of the blessed Uirgin, and is in heaven, is also under every
consecrated species: otherwise it must be said that Christ our Savior is a
monster, that has not only as many heads, but as many bodies, as there are
Consecrations

How fallacious are our philosophical definitions and demonstrations concerning
the nature and essence of any thing.
But if this argument be thought more popular then philosophical, I hope
scholars themselves will judge it unrea^^nable that Divines or Philosophers be
too positive in defining the immutable essences of things, or (which is the
same) in determining what is possible, or impossible for God to do, and in
deducing conclusions from such notions as they call natures. If we consider
that we owe all our human knowledge to the evidence of sense (which is often
fallacious) and to reflections, of the mind (which are always fallible) we
must grant that we may be frequently mistaken in the ground of our
demonstrations, and do sometimes take our own fancies and false conceits for
true objects, which have no real existance in themselves, nor any other
immutability in order to Gods power, besides that tenacity, or obstinacy
wherewith men stick to their own opinions. This is sufficiently proved by the
great discord and diversity of opinion that is in the schools, even concerning
the essence or nature almost of every thing, and particularly of a body or
quantity. Wherefore it is more probable that M.r Bonart is as much mistaken in
placing the nature or essence of a Body in actual extention, Jnstanced in the
nature or essence of a Body.
as he takes others to be in their contrary opinions concerning the same
subject; otherwise Christ has non only as many Bodies as there are consecrated
species, but also it follows (if his Body can not be penetrated, or in the
same place with another) that he united to his Divine person a nature which he
cannot command to be whersoeuer himself (as God) is pleased to be: I am no
Vbiquist, and therefore I grant that the hypostatical union does not make
Christ's body to be every where, or whersoeuer the Divinity is; but I think all
Christians ought to believe that it is possible for Christ (as man) to be in
any particular place, and penetrated with any Body whatsoever, where his person
and Divinity is.

And as for Mr. Bonart his way of defending how Christ's Body did, and may
penetrat other Bodies, Page: 259*
I see no difference between it and that of the heretics which himself
derides, and condemns [ Page: 257.] but that the Heretics say he did show his
body to the assembled Disciples through some chinck of the wall, or through the
Keyhole of the door; and M.r Bonart says Christ shot or thrust his Body in,
through the indiscernable pores which are in every body; and how the whole or
the parts of a human body (such as that of Christ then was, and now is) can be
conveyed entire through one or many such little and distant pores, without
loosing all human shape, (if a perfect penetration be not allowed) I do not
understand. And I believe M.r Bonart will hardly be able to declare how the
substance of Christ's Body is not lost, as well as the shape, by Christ's passing
through the pores; for that according to his principles [ page 243.] the
substance of every Body consists in such a greatness and figure of the parts,
as compose that body; and upon this ground he proceeds when he says [ ibid.]
that the substance of bread and wine is changed into the Flesh and ^loud of
Christ, because the greatness and figure of the parts of bread and wine are
changed, though all the rest does remain. If therefore the greatness, figure,
(and by consequence the shape) of Christ's Body, and its parts, be changed, or
proportioned to the pores of the penetrated body (as they must of necessity be
before they can pass or be shot through them) Christ's Body, and the parts
thereof, do loose the substance, as well as the shape of a human body, according
to M.r Bonartes doctrine. Hence we conclude that actual extension does not so
clearly (nor so catholickly) declare the essence of a Body, but that it must
leave or breed some doubts of Christ's humanity, of Gods omnipotency, and of his
Mothers virginity.

Besides; if the least particles or Atoms of a Body are of the same nature with
the whole, and have real extension, by the addition whereof they make a body
greater, as this Author holds; it can not be well comprehended, Bonart in
concordia page 301. and 304. and passim.
how the Atoms can be so little as not to be capable of being lessend by Gods
power; especially seeing M.r Bonart does grant one side of an Atom may be
touched, and the other side not touched. For, if so: How can any that believes
Gods omnipotency, imagine, that God can not separat or divide sides which may be
severally wrought and wrought upon by a corporeal instrument? If an Atom be so
thick that a corporeal instrument may touch one side thereof, and not touch or
reach the other side, there is ground and room enough for Gods power to separat
one side from the other; for if one side of a Body or Atom can be wrought upon
independently of the other, it may exist also, or be moved, independently of
the same, and by consequence is distinct and separable from it. And indeed, if
to be touched, and not to be touched be not contradictions sufficient to prove
real distinction between the sides, or extremes so denominated, no kind of
contradictions can infer real distinction.

To say, [as Mr. Bonart does page: 301.303. and passim] that to be touched and
not touched argues only a verbal (not a real) distinction in the Atom whereof one
side is realy touched, the other not realy touched; and to pretend that this is
clearly deduced from the first notion or nature of a Body, or extense; because
forsooth, the notion of Parts must suppose not only one extense but many, page
297.
with a certain manner and measure of extension; and that therefore an Atom may
be extended, and yet not partible: To maintain this discourse I say, seems to
me a begging of the question, and as difficult as any other opinion in this
matter. For 1. It is not easy to conceive how any extension whatsoever, can
include in its first notion or nature, an exclusion of division. 2. In M.r
Bonart his own principles it seems inintelligible how any Body or Atom that
has so much extension [that is so much length, breadth, and profundity] as to
be capable of being touched on the one side, with out being touched on the other,
is not composed of parts distinct one from the other. For, [pag: 303.] he
grants that if in the expansion or extension of an Atom did appear any little
line or point, that line or point would conclude a real distinction of parts in
the Atom. Now why the touch of any corporeal instrument [suppose of a Painters
pencil framed and managed by Gods hand] may not leave an impression of it self
[which impression you may call a line or point] in that place or side of the
Atom that is touched, no reason can be given; and by consequence there can not
be any for denying real distinction, and division of the parts in the Atom.

Lastly: It must be concluded that the Atoms are either partible, or
penetrated: Because if they be not partible, they do touch each other wholly,
and every where, according to their dimension, and extensions; and if they
touch in such a manner, they are penetrated, or in one and the same place: And
if they be penetrated, or penetrable, impenetrability can not be the essence or
property of the Body which they compose, and whereof it only consists. This is
only said [by the way] to show that the best wits may mistake the notion and
nature not only of a spirit, but also of a Body; and that they are not the best
Guides when they steer themselves and others more by their own private
discourses, then by the common sense of the faithful, in mysteries of faith,
whereof it is a property to be more credible then clear.

But if the evidence of sense be fallacious, and the reflections of our mind
fallible, what certain knowledge can we have of any thing? Must we al turn
Stoiks or Sceptiks? Shall we doubt of all Geometrical Demonstrations? No, we
have certain Knowledge of our own existence, and of some other evident truths.
And as for the Demonstrations of Geometry, Euclid himself never pretended that
his notions of a point, line, superficies, perfect circle, etc. did point at
the real existence of any such objects, as indivisible points, lines, perfect
cercles etc. he knew, and Mathematicians confess, there are no such things in
rerum natura. And seeing Mathematicians are so ingenuous as to acknowledge that
their cleerest notions are not real natures, or immutable essences, I see no
reason why Philosophers [whose demonstrations are not so cleere] should be so
positive in defining things, Bonart lib 5. passim.
as if they were defy^ing Gods omnipotency to make them otherwise then they
have dictated in the Schools, or published in their Books. And he that thinks
to declare the reasonableness of Christian Religion by making the mysteries
thereof agree rather with his own Philosophical notions, then with the common
sense of the Church, will involue himself into a labyrinth of errors.

Wherein consists the reasonableness of Religion.
The reasonableness therefore of Christian Religion must not be measured by any
clear evidence of truth that human reason discouers, either in the works of
nature, or in the divine mysteries [for we shall prove herafter such evidence
to be inconsistent with faith] but rather by the clear evidence of an
indispensable obligation [that every man finds and feels in himselfe] of
submitting his judgment to the Church, when he reflects upon the signs and
sufficiency of its authority in order to propose divine doctrine. To submit our
reason to a Church or Clergy that has no clear and authentic signs of divine
authority, is simple and sinful credulity: not to submit to its sufficient
authority, that is, to authority signed with supernatural signs, is heretical
obstinacy.

As for the means whereby every one concerned in this spiritual subjection to
the Church and Clergy, ought to be informed of their miracles, authority and
jurisdiction, they are the same which all men practice and judge to be
sufficient for knowing and acknowledging the true and lawful Heir of a
Kingdom or estate. The right to temporal dominion is decerned by succession,
and that succession by Tradition; so also the right to govern souls, and
decide Controversies of faith, must be acknowledged to reside in them that by a
continual succession of Episcopal hands derive their spiritual caracter or
mission from the Apostles, and never varied from the Apostolical doctrine; of
which succession of Caracter, and continuance of doctrine, the best proof is a
never interrupted Tradition, or Testimony of honest and knowing persons in
every age, against whose verdict there can be no Lawful exceptions. That
Church or Clergy whose doctrine, caracter, miracles, and jurisdiction is
witnessed by this Tradition, ought to be obeyed, as having the spiritual
superiority whereunto Christ our Savior commanded both Soueraigns and subjects
to submit their judgments in the mysteries and Controversies of Religion.

Though this expedient of a Church and Clergy so qualified, ought to be
acceptable and satisfactory to lay Princes and people, yet modern Politicians
stand upon such nyceties, that the greatest danger and difficulty which they
apprehend in the government of a Christian Commonwealth is, to order so
affairs, that the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction may not clash; they
fear that by mistake, or ambition of the Clergy, the temporal may be too far
entrenched upon, and made not only subordinat, but subject to the spiritual;
and the spiritual at length become so absolute, and arbitrary, that the Clergy
may [at least indirectly] spiritualize any thing for their temporal
convenience; at least that they may persuade such as [by an implicit faith]
submit to their authority and direction, to question [if not contemn] any civil
Government, whereof they mislike the Laws or Ministers, and by their
Ecclesiastical Censures fright the illiterat multitude into rebellion upon the
score of religion.

To prevent this ^anger our English statesmen think fit to continue that
supremacy of spiritual Jurisdiction in our Kings, which K. Henry 8. assumed
(how piously and politikly, shall be seen herafter.) At present we will only
observe, that it is thought to be the concern as well as the custom of
Soueraigns, to employ Clergy men in state affairs, for two reasons. 1. That
they may be as much engaged in defending the temporal jurisdiction which they
receive from, and exercise by favor of their Prince, as in vphoulding the
spiritual, so much recommended to them by the Pope. 2. That the Soueraigns may
be cleared from all suspicions and aspersions of intermedling with the souls
of their subjects, farther then the Church and the Pastors thereof do allow.

This Christian policy is imitated by the Turck, he thinks it so necessary for
the safety of a Prince, not to be suspected by his people of affecting a
spiritual supremacy, that he consults with, and even remits to his Mufty,
matters of state depending of Religion. The Pagans give the same respect to
their Priests; and the wisest Heathen Princes who took upon themselves the
High Priesthood, pretended and persuaded their subjects (by some counterfeit
miracle) that they had bin inspired, or commanded by the Gods to assume the
dignity; or that the same was due to them by descent from some Deity. And
indeed nothing less then a miracle can make it prudently credible, that God
does trust temporal Soueraigns with a spiritual supremacy.

The grounds of peace, piety and policy.
The ground therefore of policy as well as of piety and peace, consists in the
choice of a Clergy or Church for governing souls, whose doctrine, jurisdiction
and caracter has bin confirmed by supernatural miracles; The legal settlement
of such a Religion and Clergy is so agreeable to reason, and so acceptable to
all sorts of people, that the nonconformity thereunto will be prudently (and
popularly) judged to proceed rather from the contumacy then from the conscience
of the non-conformists: and the severity of laws against such Recusants, will
savor more of piety then cruelty, and move more the generality of subjects to
praise the Soueraign, then pity the sufferers. In a word; such a Church and
Religion will make the Prince powerful and popular; the multitude peaceable
and obedient; the Clergy respected; their riches and privileges not envied; it
will take away conscientious pretenses of rebellion, and remove or reconcile
all differences between the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction. That the Roman
Catholic Clergy and Religion has all these properties; and the Protestant
reformations not one of them, shall appear after we have finished the
historical part of this Treatise. Now to the matter of fact.

For the space of almost 1500. years it was the general belief of Christendom,
that the true Catholic Doctrine was professed only by such as held to the Roman
faith, and that the Doctor Philip Nicolai in Comment. de regno Christi,
charge the Apostles, and the first next succeeding Bishops of Rome, with
affectation of the Roman Supremacy. And S. Victor Pope and Martyr (who lived in
the next age to the Apostles) is reprehended by Nutton, Polanus, Spark, and
other Protestants, for having exceeded his bounds when he took upon him to
excommunicat the Bishops of the East: S. Ireneus found fault with his severity,
but never doubted of his authority.

The Centurists ( Centur. 3. Col. 168.) do condemn S. Stephen Pope and Martyr
for undertaking to threaten excommunication to Helenus, Firmilianus, and all
others throughout Cicilia, Capadocia, and Galacia, for rebaptysing Heretics.
And col: 84. They reprehend S. Cyprian for teaching that the Roman Church ought
to be acknowledged of all others for the mother and root of the Catholic
Church. And Centur. 4. col: 764. they confess that the Council of Sardis
(consisting of 300. Bishops and above; assembled from all parts of the world,
and where at, sundry Fathers of the Nicen Council were present) decreed appeals
to the Bishop of Rome.


Supremacy of spiritual jurisdiction was annexed to the Bishop of Rome, as St.
Peter's Successor, and Christ's Vicar upon earth; and that the Sea Apostolic
changed not any one point of faith the first 600. years, is acknowledged by
our learned M.r Whitaker Lib. de Antichristo contra Sanderum page: 35. answering
D.r Sanders (who affirmed and proved that the Roman Church was not changed
during the first 600. years after Christ) Whitaker says: During all that time
the Church was pure and flourished, and inuiolably taught, and defended the
faith delivered from the Apostles. See the same acknowledged by M.r Fulk in his
confutation of Purgatory page* 373. And by Reynolds in his conference with Mr.
Heart page: 443. And Mr. Jewel in his reply to Mr. Harding page: 246.

That the Roman faith and the Catholic faith are Synonima, or the same,
appeared by


Adversaries; as also affirmed by the S. Hieroms words in Apo: 2. adversus
Rufinum, who pretending to be a Catholic, S. Hierom demands: What does he call
his faith? That which the Church of Rome holds? If he answered, it is the
Roman, ergo Catholici sumus; then without doubt we are Catholics. And ep. 57.
ad Damasum Papam: Quicumque extra banc domum Agnum comederit, profanus est, and
quicumque tecu^ non colligit spargit. S. Cyprian (lib: 4. epist: 2.) speaks
thus to Antonianus. You writ that I should send a Copy of the letters to
Cornelius (Pope) to the end that you communicate with him, that is to say, with
the Catholic Church* And the same S. Cyprian (ibid: Epist: 45. ad Cornelium)
it seems good to us that letters should be sent to all our Colleagues at Rome
that they should firmly embrace your communion; that is to say, the Catholic
Church. Et Ibid: Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudini tuae, id
est, Cathedrae Petri communione consocior. Super illa^ Petram aedificata^
Ecclesia^ scio. And S. Ambrose, de obitu Fratris, reports how his Brother
Satyrus being desirous to know whether the Bishop to whom he came were
Catholic or no, asked him, whether he did communicate with the Catholic
Bishop, hoc est, cum Romana Ecclesia convenerit.
Fathers, that the Roman faith or Church, and the Catholic faith or Church,
are Synonima; and that he who is not in communion with the Bishop of Rome is
profane, and not in the way of salvation.

And though some of the more modern Greecks attempted to make their Patriarch
of Constantinople at least equal with the Bishop of Rome, yet their frequent
submissions and recantations of that presumption, together with the clear
testimonies of their holy and ancient Theodoret [d] a Greek Father, in his
Epistle to Pope Leo, placed before his Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistle,
says, behold after all travel and sweat, I am condemned, being not so much as
accused. But I look for sentence of your Apostolik sea, and I humbly beseech
and require your Holiness in this case to aid me ( justum vestrum and rectum
appellanti judicium) appealing to your right and just judgment, and command me
to come before you. And in his Epistle ad Renatum Presbit. he further says, I
beseech thee persuade the most holy Arch Bishop Leo, to exercise his
Apostolical authority, and command me to go to your Council, because that holy
Sea has the government of all the Churches of the World. S. Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Innocentium Papam says, I beseech you write that these things so
wrongfully don in my absence, and I not refusing judgment, may not be of force,
and that those who have don wrong may be subject to the penalties of the
Ecclesiastical laws, etc. And command us to be restored to our Church etc.
Pope Innocentius in his Epistle to Arcadius the Emperor and his wife, who were
adverse to S. Chrysostom, and took part with Theophilus, (quoted Centur 5. col.
663.) says. I the last of all, and a sinner, yet having the throne of the
great Apostle Peter committed to me, do separat and remove, thee and her from
receiving the immaculat mysteries of Christ our God: and every Bishop, or any
other of the Clergy which shall presume to minister or give to you those holy
Mysteries after the time that you have read these present lettres of my Order,
I prononce them void of their dignity, etc. Arsacius, whom you placed in the
Bishops throne in Chrysostoms room though he be dead, we depose, and command
that his name be not written in the role of Bishops. In like manner we depose
all other Bishops which of purposed advice, have communicated with him etc. To
the deposing of Theophilus ( Bishop of Alexandria, we add excommunication etc.
The Centurists Cent. 5. col. 778. say of the Fathers of that 5. Century, They
did affirm erroniously that antiquity had attributed the principality of
priestood to the Roman Bishop above all. And Col. 782. they set down the
general Council of Calcedons petition to Pope Leo, desiring his Holiness to
confirm their Decrees, and [ Col: 823.] the words of the Council of Carthage
to Pope Innocentius, supplicating that to the statutes of their mediocrity
might be added the authority of the Sea Apostolic. They further acknowledged
that the Pope summoned S. Athanasius and his adversaries to appear at Rome:
And that Athanasius obeyed, whereof see also Nicephor. l. 9. c. 6. and hist.
Tripartit. l. 4. cap. 6. D. Philip. Nicolai de Regno Christ. l. 2. page 149.
confesses, that Julius Pope exercised the supreme spiritual Jurisdiction, as
given ex praescripto and jure divino, and as St. Peter's Successor; as also Pope
Damasus, and Pope Jnnocentius afterward. See Julius epistle to the Churches of
the East. Cent^r. 4. col. 735. and col. 746. how Pope Julius says to them, are
ye ignorant of the custom to write to us first, to the end from hence may be
determined what is just etc. For, what things we have received from St. Peter
the Apostle, those I signify to you.
Bishops and Counsels in behalf of the Popes supremacy over the Churches of
the East as well as of the West, sufficiently demonstrat the error of the Greek
Schismatiks. I say therefore that for the space of almost 1500. years, the Roman
Doctrine was held to be the true Catholic and Apostolic, and the Roman Bishop
to be S. Peter's successor, and Christ's Vicar upon earth.

For, abbeit our learned Adversaries do not all agree in acknowledging that the
Roman doctrine was pure for the first 600. Years (some of them saying that it
began to be corruped after the Year 400. others before that time) yet they do
not prove their assertions, but ground them upon this only reason, that the
Church in those ages did censure as Heresies some points of Protestancy, and
condemned the Functius (a Protestant writter) in lib. 7. Chronolog. anno
Christi 494. says, Henaias was the first who raised war in the Church against
Images. Nicep^* in Hist* Eccl. lib. 16. c. 27. says. Henaias iste primus (O
audacem animam and os impudens) vocem illam evomuit, Christi and eorum qui illi
placuere, Imagines venerandas non esse. August. haer. 53. Epiphan. haer. 75.
mentions Aerius his novelties against fasting appointed by the Church, prayer
for the dead, etc. Whereof M.r Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page
44. c. 41. says: I will not dissemble etc. Aerius taught that prayer for the
dead was unprofitable, as wittnes both Epiphan. and Austin. which they count
for an error. S. Aug. de Eccl. dog. c. 73. says: We believe that the bodies of
Saints, and chiefly the Relics of holy Martyrs, ought to be most sincearly
honored, as if they had bin members of Christ; if any contradicts this sentence
he is believed not to be a Christian, but an Eunomian or a Vigilantian. S. Aug:
lib: 3. c. 4. contra lit. Petil charge and reproves Petilian, with his foul
mouth, he proceeds to the dispraysing of Monks of Monasteries. He also
charge the Donatists Circumcellions with the same crime saying they use to
say what means the name of Monks, show where it is to be found in Scripture?
Aug. in Psalm. 132. S. Hierom contra Vigillan. c. 1. says: What do the
Churches of the East? What those of Egypt* and of the Apostolic Sea? Which
receive Priests either Virgins or Continent; or if they have wives, they cease
to be husbands. S. Epiphanius haer. 59. But you will tell me, that in some
places Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons, have children. But that is not
according to the Canon but according to men's minds, etc. S. Aust. de unit Eccl.
c. 12. reports the Donatists as heretics, for says he, they used to collect
certain places of Scripture, and ea detorquere in Ecclesiam Dei, that it might
seem to have perished in the whole world. And in Psalm. 101. conc. 2. relates
their words, the Church has apostatised and perished in all nations; this they
say who are not in the Church. [O impudentem vocem.]
Authors as heretics; In particular Henaias for opposing the worship of Images;
Aerius for denying prayer and offering the Sacrifice of the Mass for the Dead;
Vigilantius for denying prayer to Saints, and their worship; as also the
Monastical Profession; the single and unmarried life of Priests denied not only
by Vigilantius, but by Jovinian and others; as the Churches visibility, and
continuance by the Donatists:

But the censuring these protestant doctrins as errors, cannot be an argument
of corruption or chang of faith in the Church that did censure them, unless it
be made appear that the opinions censured had bin formerly the ancient and
generally received belief of the Catholic and visible Church, so that these
and the like exceptions are grounded only upon some unlearned Protestants
suppositions without proof, and rather confirm then disprove what we say.
Therefore we shall not argue against them, but in this particular of the Roman
doctrins purity for the first 600. years, we will prefer the testimony of
their more learned brethren, viz. their greatest Doctor Bishop. Bishop Ieuell
in his sermon at Paul's Cross, and iterated challeng, appeals (for the truth
and purity of the Protestant Religion) to S. Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome.
And so also does Whitaker in respons. ad Campian. rat. 5. page 50. in behalf of
all the English Clergy; his words are, O Campian, the speech of Jeuell was most
true and constant when provoking you to the 600. years he offered you, etc. It
is the offer of us all, the same we do all promise, and will be as good as our
words; which was to be Catholics if any Father of the first 600. years
(whereof S. Gregory the Pope was named) had any sentence in favor of Popery.
Bishop Godvvin
Ieuell, Bishop in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England, page 3. says, that
blessed and holy Father S. Gregory was the occasion of replanting the Christian
Faith in our Country, The same in substance says Whitaker etc. contra Duraeum
lib. 5. page 394. D.r Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. page 624 Gregorius
nomine quidem magnus, and re vera magnus Vir magnis and multis divinae gratiae
dotibus, etc. M.r Thomas Bell in his survey of Popery page 187. terms him, S.
Gregory surnamed the Great, the holy and learned Bishop of Rome. S. Damascen a
Father of the Greck Church in Orat. de Defunctis says, Gregory Bishop of the
more ancient Rome (as all have known) as well for Holiness of life, as
learning, excelent and famous.

Isidore de Scriptor. Eccles. c. 27. says, Gregory Bishop of the Apostolic
Sea of Rome etc. was by the grace of the holy Ghost so greatly endued with
light of knowledge, as no Doctor of this present age or in tyms past was equal
to him. S. Gregory's communion with the Bishops of Greece may be seen l. 4.
epist. 56. vniversis Episcopis per Hollodiam etc. l. 1. epist. 43. and l. 4.
epist. 7. Vniversis Episcopis per Illyricum. d. l. 4. epist. 53. Episcopo
Corinthiorum. For the Patriarchs of Constantinople, see l. 7. ep. 64. Ioanni
Episcopo Syracusano, ep. 65. For Africa, see in l. 7. ep. 30. and l. 5. ep. 60.
His Epistles to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, and see l. 4. ep. 3. and l.
6. ep. 32. Dominico Episcopo Cartaginensi. item l. 6. ep. 2. Columbo Episcopo
Numidiae.

For Asia, see his Epis. to Isicius Bishop of Jerusalem l. 9. ep. 40. see
further l. 9. ep. 27. Maximiano Episcopo Arabiae. In his epistle to the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch. l. 6. ep. 24.32. and ep. 24.


Godwin, D.r Humfrey, D.r Bell, Bishop Bale, and many others of their best
Divines versed in Ecclesiastical history; all of them positiuely affirming,
that the Roman faith was pure for the first 600. years; and that S. Gregory the
great, Bishop of Rome (with whom ended that term of years) lived and dyed in
the purity of the primitive faith; and that all the Orthodox Christians of the
whole world professed his belief, and communicated with him, as appears also
by his correspondence, and communion of faith with the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, and Jerusalem, and with all the Orthodox
Churches of the world through out Asia, Africa, and Europe.

We do also agree with most protestant Writers in this, that the same Religion
which S. Gregory the great held, was that which S. Austin the Monk and his
Companions (sent by Gregory into England to convert the Saxons) taught our
Ancestors, and that God was pleased to confirm the faith which they preached,
with Miracles; as appears by the Confession of our See Holinsheads Chronicle
vol. 1. l. 5. c. 21. page 102. acknowledging how St. Austin Monck restored
sight to one that was blind, as Bede recounts it hist. l. 2: c. 2. whereupon the
Britans present there at, acknowledged that his doctrine was true. See Holinshead
also page 100. and Mr. Fox Act. and mon. printed 1576. page 117. and Bishop
Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops, page 4. see Holinshead also in his great
Chronicle volum. 2. page 108. and 109. and Fox cit. page 120. and 121.
Adversaries, and by S. Gregory's letters to Austin This letter of St. Gregor.
is extant in Bid hist. l. 1. c. 31. and mentioned by Holinshead page 102.
himself an. 602. aduising him not to glory therein but rather to consider that
God gave him that gift for the weal of those to whom he was sent. As also by
his letters to Eulogius Archbishop of Alexandria ( lib. 7. epist. 30. indict.
1.) saying therein: Know then that where as the English Nation etc. remaining
hitherto in Infidelity; I did by the help of your prayers etc. send unto that
Nation ( Austin) a Monck of my Monastery, to preach to them etc. and now
letters are come to us, both of his health and of his work, that he has in
hand; and surly either he or they that were sent over with him, work so many
Miracles in that Nation, as they may seem to imitate the power and Miracles of
the Apostles them-selves.

That the particulars of the Religion professed by S. Gregory, and the visible
Church of his time, and preached by St. Austin the Monck and his Companions,
sent by Gregory to convert the English Nation, were the same which we Roman
Catholics profess at this present, is evident by all Histories, Both sacred and
profane; and even by the Confession of all Protestant writers, who treat of
this subject. Austin the great Monck (says Doct. Humfrey) " Dr. Humfrey in
Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. and 627.
sent by Gregory the great Pope, taught the Englismen a burden of Ceremonies
etc. Purgatory, Mass, Prayer for the Dead, Transubstantiation, Relics, etc.
And the The Century writers of Magdeburg in their 6. Century cap. 10. col. 748.
and collecting (elswher in the same Book) out of St. Gregory's own writings by
them cited his Popish Tenets, They do in the Index of that 6. Century, after
the first edition thereof, at the word Gregory, specially set down his supposed
Popish errors, as Mass, Purgatory etc. and particularly, with his claim and
exercise of Jurisdiction, and Supremacy over all Churches, col. 425. usque ad
432. Concerning his other Popish doctrine, see them c. 10. col.
748.369.376.381.384.364. and seqs. 693. and seq. and col. 425. usque ad 432.
Centurywriters, Carrion "in Chron. l. 4. page 567. and seq.
Carrion, Luke Osiander in his Epitome Hist. Eccl. Centur. 6. page 288. and seq.
and 289. John Bale in Act. Romans Pontif. edit. Basil. 1558. page 44.45.46.47.
and Centur. 1. fol. 3.
Osiander, and other learned Protestants say, that the Religion preached by St.
Austin to the Saxons was, Altars, Vestements, Images, Chalices, Crosses,
Censors, Holy Vessels Holy water, the sprinkling thereof, Relics, Translation
of Relics, dedicating of Churches to the bones and ashes of Saints,
Consecration of Altars, Chalices, and Corporals, Consecration of the font of
Baptism, Chrism, and Oil, Celebration of Mass, the Archi-Episcopal Pall at
Solemn Mass time, Romish Mass Books, also free will, merit, Justification of
works, Penance, Satisfaction, Purgatory, the unmarried life of Priests, the
publik invocation of Saints, and their worship, the worship of Images,
Exorcism, Pardons, Vows, Monachism, Transubstantiation, prayer for the Dead,
offering of the healthful Host of Christ's body and blood for the Dead; the
Roman Bishops claim and exercise of Jurisdiction and supremacy over all
Churches ( Reliquumque Pontificiae superstitionis Chaos) even the whole Chaos
of Popish superstition.

Now that D.r Fulck should term this conversion our perversion; Fulck in his
Confutation of Purgatory page: 333. Mr Willet in his Te^rasticon papismi page:
122. Osiander in Epit^m. Centur: 6. page: 290.
and that Mr. Willet should place St. Gregory and St. Austin, among the
Fathers of Superstition; and Osiander should say, they subjected England to the
Yoke of Antichrist; and Mr. Harison that they converted the Saxons from
Paganism to no less hurtful superstition then they did know before, making an
exchang from open to secret Idolatry etc. we attribute to an excess of their
private spirit, and zeal in their own Presbiterian, or Fanatik way, which does
not agree with the more sober and more Christianlike Protestants; nor indeed
impugn our assertion, which is, that this Popery, now so much raild at, though
professed by St. Gregory and whereunto our Ancestors were converted by St.
Austin* the Monck, and our selves yet profess, was the Religion held by the
visible Church as the only Catholic and Apostolik in the 6. age; and that until
then no known chang of Christ's Doctrine had bin made in the Roman Church.
Whether the whole Church of the 6. age was deceived or no, in this their
persuasion, and adhesion to the Roman Doctrine, is another question, and shall
be discussed herafter.

SECT: II. Of the Author and beginning of Protestancy, and of Luthers
Disputation and familiarity with the Devil, serjously related by him self in
his authentik Books.
THE first that preached the Protestant Religion, or Reformation, was Martin
Luther, a German, who (as himself Luther in his epist. to his father extant.
to. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 269. says, It seems that Satan did forsee something
in me of what he now suffers, and therefore endeavored to destroy me by
incredible stratagems.
confesses in a letter to his Father) had bin fearfully hanted from his youth
with Satan's apparitions, and (as others testify) often in the form Mallius
Luthers own Scholar in loc. commun. page 42. and 43. says that always after
the apparitions of firebrands, in the night to Luther, his head did ache
grievously. And at Coburg one of these apparitions of three flying firebrands
was so terrible, that he was almost cast into a sound, in prevention whereof,
oil was distilled into his ear, and his feet rubbed with hott Clothes etc.
of firebrands; These frights together with the sudden death of his dearest
Camerade slain by a thunderbolt, forced him (as he says, in the said Epistle)
to enter into the Religious order of St. Augustine, wherein he lived some years
(not without signs and suspicion of being possessed) until that an 1517. one
John Tecell a learned Dominican friar, was preferred before him in publishing
and preaching of Indulgences, which Sermon in like occasions had bin formerly
given to the Augustins.

This fancied injury don to his Order and Person, put Luther into such a
passion, that notwithstanding he understood not well (as he ingeniously See
Luthers words "in Sleydan l. 13. fol. 177.
confesses) what the name of Indulgences meant, yet he preached Sermons, and
printed conclusions against them: his propositions being condemned in Germany,
he appealed to Rome, and submitted his doctrine and himself to Pope Leo 10. Vt
Luther. in appellatione "prima ad Leonem X. tom. 1. Wittemberg. fol. 219.
reprobet, approbet, sicut placuerit, acknowledging his voice to be the voice
of Christ. But lo (says he) " Luther apud Sleydan. l. 13. fol. 177.178.
whilst I look for a joyful sentence from Rome, I am stricken with the
thunderbolt of excommunication, and condemned for the most wicked man alive;
then I began to defend my doings, setting forth many books and^. And seeing it
is so, let them impute the fault to them-selves, that have so excessively
handled the matter.

Cochleus* a virtuous and learned man, who lived with Luther many years, and
writ his life very exactly from year to year, sets down therein as a known
truth, how that one day when the Gospel ( Matthew 9.) of Christ's casting out
a dumb and deaf Devil, was read in the quire, Luther fell down to the ground,
and cried, non sum, non sum, I am not; and without doubt if Luther was
possessed, it was not by a dumb Devil.
Afther that Luther had lost his hopes of being favored in his opinions by the
Pope, he Sleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. says; Martin Luthers Appellation from the
Pope being contemned, his offers despised; looking for no more help nor health
at the Popes hands, was through extreme necessity brought to appeal from the
Bishop of Rome. See also Osiander in Epitom. cent. 16. c. 25. p. 63.
appeald from his Holiness sentence to a general Council, assuring himself that
none would be caled, or assembled in his own days. That this was his design,
and not any desire of being directed by a Council, is manifest by his
procedings; for, as soon as he heard there was a Council summoned, and
perceived some likelihood that the Bishops would meet, he writ a Belarm.
"praefat. de Consiliis.
book against the necessity and authority of general Councels, and begins with
the first at Jerusalem, condemning its Decrees; then, with the first Nicen, and
concluds there is no obligation of submitting our Judgments to their
Definitions; or of conforming our actions to their Canons; and declars to his
Germans, in what a sad condition they would all be, if they were bound to obey
Councels, for then they must have abstained from strangled meat, foul, add
(which is wors) from puddings, and sausages, according to the Apostles Decree
at Jerusalem; as if that Decree (intended but for a little time) were still in
force. Therefore he maintained that Christ Luther tom. 2. Wittemberg. "fol. 374.
and 375.

The Governors and Pastors of Christ's sheep have power to teach, but the sheep
must give judgment whether they propose the voice of Christ, or of strangers
etc. Let the Pope, Bishops, Counsels, etc, ordain what they please we will not
hinder it, but the judgment shall remain with us, who are Christ's sheep, and
hear his voice, whether they propose the truth and things agreeable to our
Pastor, and they must yield, subscribe, and obey our censure and sentence.


has taken away from Bishops, Doctors, and Councels the right and power of
judging of doctrine, and given it to all Christians in general; and admitts of
no other rule but Scripture, as every one will thinck fit to interpret the same.

Thus far was Luther driven by his pride, and passion against the Dominican
friars, with resolution not to recant what he had once writ, though he wished
Luther in Colloq. Mensal. fol. 158.
he had never begun that business and that his writings " Luther in praefat. in
tom. Germ.
were burned and buried in eternal oblivion: he had not as yet precipitated
himself into the particulars of Protestancy, but for some few years went no
further then the dispute of Indulgences, and wore still his religious habit
(though he had left the Monastery) said Mass, and was much tormented in his
Conscience for running so desperate a course as to appeal from the authority of
Popes, Fathers, Councels, and Church, upon a punctilio of his mistaken honor.
How often (says he) did my trembling heart beat with in me, and reprehending
me* object against me that must strong argument; Art thou only wise; do so many
worlds err? were so many ages ignorant? what if thou errest and drawest so many
into error to be damned with thee eternally? etc. Luther tom. Germ. fol. 9. And
t. 2. Witte^berg. of an. 1562. lib. de abroganda Missa privata, fol. 244.


And again. Luther tom. 5. Wittenb. in Galat. c. 1. fol. 290. and in colloq.
Mensal. fol. 273.
Do thou O sole man, and of no accounpt, take upon thee so great matters?
What if thou being but one offendest? Jf God permit such so many, and all, to
err, why may he not permit thee to err? Luther tom. 7. Wittenberg. anno 1558.
in l. de Missa privata fol. 443. and 228. and tom. 6. Ger. fol. 28. in lib. de
Missa angulari.
Hitherto apartaine those arguments, the Church, the Church the Fathers the
Fathers, the Councels, the Customs, the Multituds, and greatness of wise men:
whom do not these clouds and doutes, yea these seas of examples ouerwhelm?

Being thus tormented and tossed between his passion of pride, and a perplexity
of mind, himself relates at larg ( tom. 7. Wittemb. edit. an. 1558. lib. 1. de
Missa. angu.) how upon a certain time he was sudainly awaked about midnight,
and how satan began his disputation with him, saying; Harken right learned
Doctor Luther; Thou know thou have celebrated private Mass, by the space of
15. years, almost every day; what if such Masses were horrible Idolaty? etc.
The devil speaking thus to me, I burst forth all into a sweat, and my heart
began to tremble, and leap ( voce forti and gravi utitur) the devil had a
grave and strong voice etc. And then I learned how it came to pass that somtyms
early in the morning men were found dead in their beds. To the Devil I
answered, I am an anointed Priest, received consecration from a Bishop, and did
all things by order of my Superiors. In these streights and agony I would fain
vanquish the Devil with the arms of Popery, and did object the intention and
faith of the Church etc. But Satan with greater force and vehemence did
pursue; Go to, show where it is written ( teaching Luther to appeal to
Scripture alone) that a wicked and incredulous man can assist at the Altar of
Christ, and consecrate in the Churches faith? etc. If men have taught it
without the express word of God, it is altogether untrue: But in this sort are
you acustomed to do all things in the dark, under the name of the Church and so
set to sale your own abominations for Ecclesiastical doctrine. etc. After this
disputation Luther was so well acquainted with the Devil, that him self says
( tom. 2. Germ. Jen. fol. 77. Believe me J know the Devil very weell, for now
and then he walks with me in my Chamber. When I am among company he does not
trouble me, but when he catches me alone, then he teaches me my manners. And
( in Conc. Dom. Reminiscere fol. 19. apud Cochlaeum) J am troughly acquainted
with the Devil, for I have eaten a bushel of salt in his company. Yea
confesses ( in Colloq. Germ. fol. 275.281.) that the Devil was his
Bedfellow, and lay with him more frequently and ^loser to him then his beloved
Kate the Nun. And ( in litteris ad Electorem Saxoniae) he says, The Devil
does so run to and fro trough my brain that J can neither write, nor read. And
( in Colloq. Germ. fol. 283.) brags thus, J have a couple of rare Devils, who
attend and wait upon me most diligently: they are no petty Fiends, but great
Devils; yea great Doctors of Divinity among the rest of the Devils. One of
these two great Doctors of Divinity continued his disputation thus against
Luther.

Now I urge this, that thou did not consecrat in thy Mass, but did offer
and adore only bread and wine, and proposedst the same to be adored by others
etc. The institution of Christ is, that other Christians may communicate in the
Sacrament, but thou art anointed, not to distribute the Sacrament but to
sacrifice; and against Christ's institution thou have used the Mass for a
Sacrifice etc. And that which Christ did ordain for eating and drinking for the
whole Church, and to be given by the Priest to other Communicants etc. of this
thou do make a propitiatory Sacrifice O! abomination above all abomination,

And after that Zealous and learned Devil had thus exclaimed, and argued
against the Sacrifice of the Mass, the authority of the Church,
Transubstantiation, and adoring of the B. Sacrament, he reasons also against
the intercession and prayer to Saints; his words are set down by Luther in the
same place thus. We Spirits being rejected, do not confide in Christ's mercy;
neither do we look upon him as a Mediator or Savior, but fear him as a cruel
Judge; such was thine and all other Papists faith etc. Therefore ye did shun from
Christ, as a cruel Judge to Mary, and the Saints; and they were Mediators
betvveen you and Christ; so is Christ deprived of that glory.

In this disputation the Devil had so good success, that Luther was convinced,
and resolved to become a Protestant, and to preach and print, not only against
the Mass, and the other particulars mentioned in his Disputation, but (upon
these words of the Devil, ( So is Christ deprived of glory) did Luther ground
his opinions against the necessity of good works (in favor of Justification by
only faith) against merit, satisfaction, Purgatory etc. and maintained these
his Diabolical opinions with so great obstinacy, and so little respect to Luther
in lib. de servo arbitrio contra Erasm. in the first edition faith: Lay aside
all the arms of Orthodox antiquity, schools of Divinity, authority of
Councels and Popes, the consent of so many ages, and of all the Christian
people, we receive nothing but Scripturs, yet so, that we alone have the
authority of interpreting them. That which we interpret is the sense of the
holy Ghost, that which others bring, though they be great, though many,
proceeds from the spirit of Satan and madness.
Scripture, Church, Counsels, Fathers, Princes, and Prelates, that such parts
of Scripture as did not favor the Devils argument, he either rejected them as
apocrijphal, or altered the words and sense in his Translations and Comments,
against all exemplars and copies either in Greek* Hebrew, or Latin. And all
Princes and Prelates that contradicted his errors, he vilified in so virulent
and villainous terms, that none but a soul directed by the Devil could resolve
to print them. His Bull against all Bishops is full of most vile stuff: as
also against the Duke of Brunzuick, the Elector of Mentz, etc. In so much that
his own Scholar Sleidan acknowledges his manner of writing to be unworthy,
Base, Scurilous etc. In his Book, and answer against K. Henry 8. he calls him
an envious mad fool, babbling with much spittle in his mouth, more furious then
madness it self, more doltish then folly it self, endued with an impudent and
vvhorish face, without any one vein of princely blood in his body, a lying
sophist, a damnable rotten worm, a Basilisk and progeny of an Adder, a lying
scurill, covered with the title of a King, a clounish wit, a doltish head, most
wicked foolish and impudent Henry. All this he says tom. 2. Wittenberg. fol.
333.334.335. and fol. 338.334. he says: The King does not only lie like a most
vain scurre, but passes a most wicked knave: thou lie in thy throat foolish
and sacrilegious King; And other so immodestly base expressions against his
Majesty and all other Papists, that we are ashamed to English them. By Luthers
Language, and way of defending his Protestant doctrine, we might guess at his
Master, though him self had not told us his name was Satan.

SUBSECT I. How weakly Protestants excuse Luthers Conference with the Devil,
and the embracing of Satan's doctrine.
THERE is not any one thing troubles so much the learned Protestants, as their
Apostle Luthers acknowledged instruction in Protestancy received from the
Devil, and therefore Mr. Chark in his answer to Censure etc. as also Mr. Fulk
in his Treatise against the defense of the Censure page 234.
some of them endeavor to maintain that this Disputation was only a spiritual
fight in mind, and no bodily conference; but with the same probability of truth
they may affirm that all other real apparitions and the effects thereof, were
only spiritual conflicts. Luther tells so many corporeal circumstances, that
it could not be a mere spiritual fight: first, he says that the Devil spoke
to him voce forti and gravi, in a strong and grave voice. 2. That then he
learnt how men were found dead in their beds in the morning; True it is that
these words and circumstances are fraudulently omitted by the Divines of
Wittenberg, in their later editions of Luthers works, and perhaps Mr. Chark,
and Mr. Fulk did never peruse the more ancient and sincere edition ( tom. 6.
Germ. Ien. fol. 28.) where all these things are set down. Yet grant this were
no bodily conference, and but only a spiritual conflict, what matters it
whether Luther was instructed and persuaded this or that way, by sensible
conference, or inward suggestion into Protestancy, if therein the Devil was his
Master?

Other Sutcliff in his book de vera Cathol. Christi Ecclesia page 299. when he
says, Lutherus autem nihil aliud peccavit, quam quod ut homo Germanus and non
ita pridem Monachus etc.
learned Protestants excuse Luthers conference, saying it was only a dream; to
mistake which for a reality, he was subject, as being a German Monk, giving to
understand, that good drinck does frequently turn German dreams into real
persuasions. But unless they prove that Luther was in a dream, or in drink,
when he writ this conference, they will never persuade any man that reads it,
that this Disputation was not real. Him self says he was awake, tells the time
of the night that it happened, describs the Devils voice, his own fear,
learnt how people were slain by the Devil in their beds; these reflections and
impressions are far from dreams, especialy when the party delivers them as real
truths many years after, and Hospinian in Hist. Sacramentar. part. altera,
after that in his prolegomen. had said, that Luther was a man adorned with
excellent gifts, with the light of heavenly knowledge, zeal of Gods glory, and
raised up to restore the Ghospells light etc. affirms fol. 131. That Luther
being instructed by the Devil that the Mass was wicked, and being overcom
with Satan's arguments, did (thereupon) abandon the Mass.
maks them the ground of his chang in so important a matter as Religion.

But suppose German Monks were as much given to drink, and after drink as apt
to mistake their dreams for real truths, as Mr. Sutcliff insinuats; and to
maintain, even when they are sober, that their dreams are not dreams, as Luther
does his Conference; of what credit can such an evasion or excuse be to
Protestants? for what difference is there between a dreaming, drunken, and
Diabolical Religion?

These answers not being any way probable, other learned Protestants grant the
Devil did realy conferr with Luther; so Hospinian, B.p Morton, Joannes Regius,
Baldwin etc. This last in a Book of this subject printed at Jsleb 1605. page
76.75.83. says, let none wonder that I confess the disputation to be real, and
not written in jest, or hyperbolicaly, but seriously and historicaly; for,
Luther writ that history so consideratly and prolixly, that I still acknowledge
be writ it seriously, and according to the truth of the histor. But then he
adds that Luther had bin a protestant before that Conference, and that the
Devils drift was to make Luther despair for having said Mass, prayed to
saints. etc. But this is impertinent and falls; impertinent, because our dispute
is not of the Devils intention, but of his instruction, and whether Luther did
well in embracing (either before or after his revolt from us) the Devils
doctrine; falls, because until that Disputation Luther said Mass almost every
day; as satan objects to him speaking Luther tom. 7. Wittenberg. an. 1558.
fol. 229. sets down the Devils words saying to Luther ( as being then one
with the Papists) Behold your bouldness; you do these things in darkness, and
abuse the name of the Church etc. And fol. 230. why therefore in the private Mass
do thou blasphemously go against the clear words and institution of Christ
etc. And fol: 229. going about to prove that Luther may not in the Mass
communicate alone, he aleadgeth the example of the other Sacraments, which a man
can not use for himself, saying, If a man absolues himself it is no Absolution;
If he anoints himself it is no Unction: If one marries to himself, it is no
marriage etc. Fo, these are your seven Sacraments ( so plainly yet was Luther a
Roman Catholic) If therefore a man can not Minister to himself any of your
Sacraments, how com^ that thou can Minister to thyself alone this greatest
Sacrament? etc. Do thou think that Christ did institute the Sacrament for
thee alone, and that in thy private Mass thou do consecrat the body and blood
of the Lord?
somtyms in the present, and was then no protestant; for, the only point wherein
he differed then from Catholics, was, about Indulgences; and even that he
maintained more out of a pick and pride, then Judgment, as appears by what has
bin said in the beginning of this section.

Wherefore Joannes Regius Joannes Regius in his book entitled Liber
Apologeticus etc. under the Title Consideratio Censurae pa. 123. says of
Luthers instruction from the Devil. What does this avail to confute Luthers
doctrine of the word of God? And how do you know that it was an evell spirit
who told this to Luther? (We know it by Luthers own Confession) or if he were
an evell spirit it does not follow that he told lies, because the Devils speak
truth some tyms, when they speak that which the Scripture vvittnesseth.
in his Apology against Belarmin says, that the Devils instruction is no
argument to confute Luthers doctrine, because though it was the Devil that
instructed him, he instructed him according to the word of God; and the Devils
speak truth somtyms, especialy when they speak that which the Scripture
witnesses.

This, in my opinion, is the worst of all other evasions; 1. Because the Devil
seldom or never applies the words of Scripture, to the right sense; when he
tempted our Savior, though he quoted Scripture, yet he was no true Interpreter
thereof. Now what ground Protestants can have to believe that the Devil has
altered his old custom, or why they should prefer the Devils Scriptural
interpretation, before that of the visible Church, Counsels, and Fathers, is
not intelligible. 2. It is not credible that if all the visible Church of
Christians did err in professing Popery and committed Idolatry by hearing Mass,
and adoring the Sacrament, that the Devils would dissuade them from that
Idolatrous Religion; his design and desire is to seduce men, not to reduce them
to the way of salvation. 3. It is not likely that God would compel the Devil
to be chief instrument of reforming the Catholic Religion, and Church; in the
old law he never committed so great a charg unto him, he employed holy men and
Prophets to convert the Jews and Pagans; it is strange that in the law of grace
the Devil should become an Apostle. When Dives (who was but the Devils
Camerade) desired leave to come into the world, and preach to his Brethren, God
did not judge him a fit Messenger, or Missioner; it was answered that his
brethren ought to believe Moses and the Prophets, that is the Church, and the
Ministers thereof. And though this be a parable, it contains real doctrine,
whereby we are instructed that Gods Church would never be so low brought, as to
stand in need of Preachers from Hell. Seeing therefore we have so many reasons to
conclude that God would not make the Devil an Apostle, or a Reviver, and
Reformer of the Gospel, Protestants can have none to believe that the doctrine
and Reformation which Luther received from him, is true, or agreeable to
Scripture.

Doctor Morton D.r Morton in Apolog. Catholica part. 1. l. 2. c. 21. page 351.
says: Apud Surium liquet Diabolum in specie Angelica apparuisse statimque
Abbatem ut Missam celebraret hortabatur, alleging there in his margent,
Delrium I^s. lib. 4. de Magia cap. 1. quaest. ^.. 5.
late Bishop of Duresme (to prove ad hominem against us, that the Devil does
persuade men somtyms to piety, and by consequence that Luthers reformation
might be pious, though the Devil instructed him therein) objected Delrius (a
Jesuit) affirming, that the Devil appeared to an Abbot in the form of an
Angel, and persuaded him to say Mass. Therefore if the Mass be good (as
Catholics say) the Devil may and does exhort men to virtuous actions. To this
I answer, 1. That our question is not whether the Devil may somtyms persuade
men to do things of themselves good; we know he may, but when he does, it is
always with an evil design, and to the end good things may not be well don,
but that the manner of doing them may vitiat their goodness. This Delrius in
the place cited by M.r Morton, says, and proves by many exemples, whereof the
Mass is one. But M.r Morton wilfully conceals and mistakes the truth of the
story; for, Simon the Monk, whom the Devil endeavored to persuade to say Mass,
was neither Abbot nor Priest; but only Diacon, as Delrius shows, and therefore
he answered the Devil, that none ought to say Mass without the order of
Priesthood; and by his advice to the contrary, he was discovered to be the
Devil, though he appeared like an Angel. Without doubt this was a Lutheran
Devil, and perhaps the same that dissuaded Luther from the Mass, because
Luther Luther in lib. de captiv. Babylon. says: Whosoever is a Christian let
him be most certain that we are all equaly Priests, that is, we have the same
power in ministering the word and Sacrament. See more of this alleged out of
the edition of Jeneua by Cnoglerus in his Symbula tria, page 157. And in loc.
con. clas. 2. page 136. and 138. See also Luther in assert. damnatis per Leonem
X. art. 3. where he maintains that women can absolve from sins.
learnd of him amongst other points of the reformation, that lay men, and even
women, are Priests, and may consecrat the Sacrament, preach and absolve from
sins.

Having sincerely related this matter of fact in Luthers own words, and not
concealed any thing that any of the most learned Protestants could say, to
interpret or excuse the same; and nothing appearing whereby his instruction in
protestancy by the Devil may be denied, or justified, I leave it to the
consideration of all wise, and Religious persons, whether it be policy or piety
to promote a Religion whose confessed Author or Apostle is Satan. So long as
the generality of a people can be made believe that Luther did seriously, and
of set purpose, belie himself, and discredit his own reformation; or that the
Devil is a sincere Interpreter of Scripture; and Scripture interpreted by him,
is the word of God; so long, I say, as these Nations can be made believe so
impossible things, without doubt both the protestant Church and state may
thrive by protestancy, but how long so unlikly a persuasion will continue
amongst inquisitiue, though ignorant people is uncertain, as also the greatness
grounded thereupon. It has gained more ground in England then could be
expected, considering the ingenuity of the Natives; but Q. Elizabeth's interest
went a great way in the beginning of her Reign; every Courtier and country
gentleman expected (by giving his vote in Parliament for reviving the
Protestant Religion, whereby alone she could pretend to be legitimat) her favor,
and rewards out of the Church livings; and in her long continued government,
their Children were made believe that her Reformation was not the work of
Cecil, but of Christ; And ever since, their posterity have bin confirmed in
that opinion by false Translations of Scripture, and falsifications of
Counsels and Fathers, as shall herafter appear.

Its strange so improbable a persuasion can bear such sway, and beat down the
Catholic truth. But as the Devil insisted most upon discrediting the Divine
Sacrifice of the Mass in his Disputation with Luther, so the Protestant Clergy
strive to make that holy Mystery to be looked upon by their flock, as a
blasphemous fable, and dangerous deceit. We hope notwithstanding that the
English Laiety will reflect upon the occasion of their mistake, and consider
whether it be not a grievous sin and great folly, to prefer Q. Elizabeth's
temporal interests, (which now is turned into dust) before that of their souls:
and Whether any thing can be so unreasonable as to give more credit to the
Devil, and to Martin Luther, and his followers (debauched and dissolute Friars
and Priests) then to the holy Doctors, S. Augustine contra Faustum Manichaeum,
lib. 20. cap. 21. says of the Mass celebrated on Saints days, Although in
memory of Martyrs, yet not to Martyrs do we erect Altars. Et lib. 22. de
Civitate Dei cap: 10. Upon which Altars we offer Sacrifice not to Martyrs, but
to the God of Martyrs, (and lib. and cap. 27. de Civitate Dei, and contra
Faustum Manichaeum libro 20. cap. 2^. For which of the faithful has at any
time heard the Priests standing at the Altar (which in the honor of God is
erected upon the body of a Martyr.) to say in service time: O Peter, Paul or
Cyprian, I offer to thee Sacrifice. The protestant writers Eusebius and
Altkircher us do confess that the Arians seeing the whole Catholic Church by
unanimous consent offer Sacrifice in the Mass to God the Father (mistaking as
Fulgentius says lib. 2. ad Monimum cap. 3. that the same was not also offered
to the son) argued against Catholics, that the Father was greater then the
Son, lib. de mystico and incruento Sacrificio adversus abominandam Missae
superstitionem, page 241. And page 236. the same Protestant Author does
acknowledge and set down S. Irenaeus his Argument against Marcion the heretic,
deduced from the Churches received doctrine concerning the Sacrifice of the
Mass, and this was in the next age to the Apostles. S. Augustine lib. 9. Confess.
cap. 12. says, that the Sacrifice of our price was offered for his Mother
Monica being dead. And de verb. Apost. sermon. 34. That the universal Church does
observe as delivered from their Forefathers, to pray for the faithful deceased
in the Sacrifice, and also to offer the Sacrifice for them. Conc. 1. Nicen.
Can. 14. says, the holy Council has bin informed that in some places and
Cities the Deacons distribute the Sacrament to Priests, neither rule nor custom
has delivered, that they who have not power to offer Sacrifice, should
distribut the body of Christ to them who offer. Council. Bracarense 3. Can. 3.
Council. 12. Tolet can. 5.
and Martyrs of Christ's Church (ever since the Apostles) in their acknowledgd
writings, and in general Councels, who call the Mass the visible S. Augustinus
de Civitate Dei lib. "10. cap. 19.
Sacrifice, S. Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. and Aug. " cit. cap. 20.
the true Sacrifice, Aug. cit. 16. and Council. Tolet. 1. Can. 5. Cyprian de
Coena Dom. post med. Origin in number. hom. 23.
the daily Sacrifice, the Sacrifice Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. and Augustine. "
de Civit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 22. and passim. Aug.
according to the Order of Melchisedech, the Sacrifice de Civit. Dei, lib. 22.
cap. 8. and lib. 20. contra Faustum cap. 18. and Hieron. lib. 3. contra Pelag.
August. tom. 8. in Psalm. 33. con. 2. says: Ipse de Corpore et Sanguine suo
instituit Sacrificium secundum Ordinem Melchisedech. S. Chrisost. in lib. 1.
cor. hom. 24. says of Christ: Ipsum mutavit Sacrificium, et pro caede
brutorum, seipsum jussit offerri.
of the Body and Blood of Christ, the Sacrifice Aug. in Enchirid. "cap. 110.
and de cura pro mortuis, cap. 18.
of the Altar, the Sacrifice Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 20. and Cyprian
de coena Dom.
of the Church, and the Sacrifice S. Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 32. and August. de
"gratia novi Testam. cap. 18.
of the new Testament, which succeeded Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 17. cap. 20. S.
Clement the Apostles scholar in Apost. Constit. edit. Antverp. 1564. lib. 6.
cap. 22. fol. 123.
all the Sacrifices of the old Testament: and that it was offered for the
health of the Tertulian ad Scapul. cap. ^. says, Sacrificamus "pro salute
Imperatoris.
Emperor, for the Chrysostom. " hom. 27. in Acta. Apost. Pro infirmis etiam
sacrificamus.
sick upon the Sea, and the fruits of the earth, for the Aug. de Civit. Dei
lib. 22. cap. 8. says, one went and offered ( in the house infected) the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body, praying that the vexation might cease, and by Gods
mercy it ceased immediately.
purging of houses infected with wicked Spirits, for the sins Basil in Liturgia
fol. 40. Chrisost. in Mart. Romans 83. Cyprian de Coena Dom. prope initium.
Origin. Athan. etc. quoted by Crastonius cit.
of the living and dead; And this is so undeniable that our learned adversary
Crastoius in his book of the Mass against Belarmin (page 167.) reprehended
Origin, S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Gregory the
great, and venerable Bede, for maintaining the Mass to be a propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of the living and of the dead.

And if there can be no policy of state (as things now stand in the English
Monarchy) to make Q. Elizabeth's legitimacy and supremacy a matter or ground of
Faith, I am sure it cannot be Christian piety to press and prefer the
reformation (which she and her faction introduced for that reason of state
against the Stewards), before the Religion of all the ancient and learned
Fathers of the Catholic Church though we had no other exception against it,
but that all the wit and learning of Protestants, cannot make it probable in
any degree, that the Devil is not the Author of Protestancy.

SECT: III. Of the principles and propagation of Protestancy.
LVther after his Conference with the Devil, having resolved upon that
Foundation of his Reformation, which he had learnt from so godly a Master,
endeauored to gain as many Poets, Players, Painters, and Printers as he could,
to discredit with Scoffing, Ballads, Pamphlets, Poems, and Pictures, the Roman
Religion (which until then had bin caled and esteemed the only Catholic and
Apostolic) and to divulge his n^w Doctrine amongst ignorant and vicious People.
For encouragement of the dissolute Clergy to ioyn with him, he taught (against
the doctrine and practice of the whole Church ever since the Apostles as shall
be demonstrated), that Priests and professed Nuns might mary; and to give them
good example he took a professed Nun Osiander a Protestant writer, epist. cent.
16. page 90. says Leonard Keppen on the 7. day of April 1523. brought to
Wittemberg nine Nuns from the Monastery Nimptsen, among which number one was
Catharin Boren^, whom afterward Luther married. Peter Martyr, and Bucer
married Nuns. Luthers example of marriag was followed by all the Disciples,
though professed Monks, not only in Germany, but in every other country: Here
with us, these Protestant Bishops ensuing, Hoop^r of Worcester, Barlow of
Chicester, Dounham of Chester, Scory of Herefort, Barkley of Bath and Wells,
Couerdale of Excester, all Monks; Cranmer of Canterbury, and Sands of York,
Priests.
for his own wife: And prevailed with this doctrine more then Iouinian S.
Austin haeres. 82. says of Jouinian teaching the Lawfulness of Priests and
Votaries marriage. This heresy was (quickly) extinct, neither could it ever
preuail to the deceiving (so much) as of any (one) Priest. And ( lib. 2,
retrac. cap. 22.) that Jouinian with his heresy deceived but only nonnullas
Sanctimoniales, some few Nuns. But Luther deceived Priests, Monks, and Nuns: or
rather they concurred with him to deceive others.
the heretik.

For this liberty together with his principle of justification by only faith,
drew from sundry parts of Europe, incontinent Clergymen, whereof the chief were
Caro^stadius, Archdeacon of Wittemberg, Iustus Jonas head of a College of Canon
Regulars, Oecolampadius a Monk of S. Brigits Order; Zuinglius a parish Priest;
Martin Bucer a Dominican friar; Peter Martyr a Canon Regular. Bernardin Ochinus
a Capuchin; and some Augustine Friars of Luthers own Order. Each of these having
taken a wench, were engaged in Luthers quarrel against the whole Church.

But their course of life and the nouelty of their doctrine, being dislik't by
all men that were not Libertins; and not countenanced as yet by any Princes or
Prelates; it was thought necessary for their own preservation and propagation
of their Gospel, to make it plausible to the giddy multititude, whose
ignorance they knew to be as capable of incredible impressions, as their nature
is impatient of reasonable subjection. Luther de seculari potestate in tom. 6.
Germ. says: Among Christians no man can or ought to be Magistrate, but each one
is to other equaly subject etc. Among Christian men none is superior save only
Christ* And in his Sermons englishd by William Gage, page 97. and tom. 7.
Wittemberg. fol. 327. he says, Therefore is Christ our Lord that he may make us
such, as himself is, and as he cannot suffer himself to be tied and bound by
laws etc. So also ought not the conscience of a Christian to suffer them.

Afterward he taught to moderat this liberty by explaining, that subjects
ought to have an obedience rather of policy then conscience, which is as much
to say as to dissemble, and obey when they cannot help it, but if ever they can
rebel with probability of success, they may do it with a safe conscience. And
therefore in the same Sermons page 261. he does admonish we obey the civil
Magistrate, provided it be not pretended that it is necessary for salvation to
obey.

Most Protestants follow this obedience of policy not of conscience, see
Whitaker in resp. at Rat. Camp. rat. 8. page 154. And Danaeus against Belarmin
page 1127.


Therefore besides many other works, in the year 1520. Luther writ a book called
Praeludium captivitatis Babilonicae, wherein he maintained, that Christians are
not subject to human Laws (at least in foro Conscintiae) Christ having made
them all equal by the Gospel; but that the Pope, Prelates, and Princes had
tyranically usurped a Jurisdiction over them; and kept them for many years in
gross ignorance and wors then in a Babylonian captivity; therefore that God had
sent him to reform these abuses, and restore unto all oppressed people the
Christian liberty which they had received in Baptism, and by his reformation
they might enjoy so fully as to judge and govern all, omnia judicemus and
regamus.

Then he published his doctrine of justification by only faith so resolutly,
that he doubted not to preach, though men's words be the greatest blasphemies,
and their works the most damnable vill^nies: If they have as much confidence to
believe without doubt, as impudence to act without scruple, they may be sure
that God has received them into his favor, and cannot be damned, unless they
doubt of their salvation.

This abominable presumption Luther Luther in Comment. ad cap. 2. ad Galat.
says. When it is taught, Faith in Christ does indeed justify, but with all its
necessary to keep Gods commandments, there Christ is denied, and faith is
abolished; because that which is proper of God alone, is attributed to the
commandments of God, or to the Law, See also Luther in Colloq. Mensal. Ger.
fol. 152. and 153.

M.r Willet in his Synopsis Papismi page 564. says. The Law remains still
impossible to be kept by us through the weakness of our flesh; neither does God
give us ability to keep it, but Christ has fulfilled it for us.

D.r Whitaker de Eccles. page 301. We say that if a man have an a^t of faith,
sins do not hurt him, this truly Luther affirming, this we all say. Hofman de
Poenitentia edit. 1540. lib. 2. fol. 113. says, according to the Protestant
principles. Whosoever truly belieueth, suffers God to work for him, and
dispose eternal life for him; himself taking no labor nor working any thing
for himself.


grounded, upon the infinitness of Christ's merits, (as if forsooth, our Savior
had suffered, to the end we might not only be happy in heaven, but by his
passion hah waranted our wickedness upon earth) grossly mistaking, and
confounding the sufficiency of Christ's merits with the sufficiency of their
application; none can deny but that the least drop of our Saviors Blood is
sufficient to redeem millions of worlds, because it is of infinite value; but
all Catholics ever held that though his Blood and merits be infinitely
sufficient, in themselves, yet are they not sufficiently applied to sinners,
unless they concur to their own reconciliation and justification, not only by
faith, but by good works, Sacraments, and other means, which God has
appointed for that purpose. Yet Luther pretended that faith alone is a
sufficient application of Christ's merits, and that men needed not mortify their
bodies nor endeavor to secure their salvation by good works, thinking it a
diminution of our Redeemers glory, and a disrespect to his person, that with
our free will we should cooperat with his passion, and help our selves; and
upon this ground do Protestants raise all their batteries against Indulgences,
Purgatory, Pilgrimages, praying to Saints, Confession of sins, Penance,
Satisfaction, Merit, austerity of Monastical life, Works of supererogation, etc.

A reformation so indulgent to liberty, and sensuality, could not want
Proselits; and in a short time appeared the effects thereof; the Peasants of
Germany rebelled against their Princes and Lords in defense of that Euangelical
liberty which Luther had preached, and in the space of one summer, were on both
sides a hundred thousand men slain. Some Princes, to make themselves
considerable (by heading the multituds which ran to Luther) professed his
Religion, and protected his person, and he laid for the foundation of his
reformation the ensuing principles.

SVBSECT I. The fundamental principles of Protestancy.
THe first principle, and foundation of Luthers and of all Protestant
reformations, is, a supposition, that the whole visible Church fell from that
primitive pure doctrine, and true meaning of Scripture, which Christ our Savior
and the Apostles had planted, and the first Christians had professed. All
r^formed Churches do and must agree in this supposition (the very name of a
Doctrinal reformation implies a change and decay of doctrine) though they
disagree in the time, and other circumstances of the change. Until Luther had
conferred with the Devil, he durst not vent this principle; he appealed indeed
from the Pope to a general Council, and from a general Council (when he
perceived one was summoned) to the Church diffusiue; but after his conference
with Satan, he ventured to say: Lutherus lib. de servo arbitrio contra Eras.
edit. 1.

Cnoglerus symbola tria page 152. and nullus and nemo G. 6 page 153.


Lay aside all the arms of orthodox antiquity, Schools of Divinity, authority
of Counsels, and Popes; consent of so many ages, and all Christian People, we
receive nothing but Scripture, yet so that we must have the certain authority
to interpret the same. Our interpretation is the sense of the holy Ghost, that
which others bring, though they be great, though many, proceeds from the
spirit of Satan, and from a distracted mind. The reasons why Luther and all
Protestants run this desperate course, is, because having examined and found
that orthodox antiquity was Roman Catholic, and not one Church, parish, or
person ever Protestant, before 1517. they are enforced to maintain (by
mis-interpreting Scripture) that the whole visible Church erred, and that God
sent them to reform it.

The second principle of Protestancy is, to admit of no rule of faith but only
Scripture, of no other infallible Judge of the letter or sense of Scripture, or
of any controversies in Religion, but every particular The Catholic Doctrine of
the Church of England page 103. in the explanation of the 20. article of
Religion, says; Authority is given to the Church, and to every member of sound
judgment in the same, to judge in controversies of faith, and so in their places
to embrase the truth, and to avoid and improve Antichristianity and errors; and
this is not the private opinion of our Church, but the straight commandment of
God him-self particularly to all teachers and hearers of Gods word, and
generally unto the whole Church, and also the Judgment of our Godly Brethren in
foreign Countries.
Church and person, interpreting Scripture according to their best endeavors,
and discretion. This is expressly declared in the last mentioned words of
Luther, and inculcated by the Devil to him in his Conference; and though few
are willing to speak the same words, yet is there not one Protestant in the
world, that does not practice the very same doctrine, and defend it, when the
matter is argued: It necessarily follows from the first principle; Because if
the whole visible Church fell from the pure faith, and from Gods meaning of
Scripture, the belief, tradition, and testimony of that visible Church,
Council, and Fathers, can be no true rule of faith, nor themselves fit Judges
of Religion, or of the sense of Scripture. Therefore every private Protestant
must be his own Guide, and Judge, in matters of salvation and Scripture. For,
though Luther, Calvin, or any Protestant Congregation should pretend that their
sense and interpretation of Scripture, is that of the holy Ghost; and the
interpretation of others, Diabolical; yet no private Protestant does look even
upon their own reformers, or Churches, as infallible in this, or in any other
particular, but in as much as he Judges it agrees with Scripture; and therefore
every one that supposes the fall of the Roman Catholic and visible Church, and
the fallibility of the Reformers and reformations (as all Protestants Mr.
Bilson, Bishop of Winchester in his true difference etc. part. 2. page 353.
says, The people must be Discerners and Judge. of that which is taught.

The Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England art. 19. Proposition 6. page 94.
says, The visible Church may, and from time to time has errd both in Doctrine
and conversation. page 95 concludes, This with us, the Churches in their
Confessions do acknowledge.


do) will deny that him-self has any obligation to submit his Judgment in
controversies of Religion to any interpretation of Scripture, or decision of
doctrine, besides his own; and so becoms his own Guide, and his own Judge of
controversies, and makes his own interpretation of Scripture, his only rule of
faith.

Dr. Whitaker de Eccles. pa. 301. We say that if a man have an art of faith,
sins do not hurt him; this truly Luther affirms, this we also say.
The third principle of Protestancy is, that men are justified by only faith;
and that he who has once justifying faith, can neither loose it, nor be
damned. This tenet is clearly professed as the doctrine of all Protestant
Churches: in the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England art. 11. page 5^.
and seqq. And page 54. The Papists are declared heretics for holding that men
are to remain doubtful whether they shall be saved or not. From these
principles flow that infinite variety of Protestant Religions, and reformations.
They began in Luthers own days, and still continue to increase and multiply,
having no rule of faith but an obscure text of Scripture, nor no Church, or
Court of judging the controversies thereof (with an obligation to submit
there-unto) but every ons private opinion; which must needs breed division add
confusion. And so it happened in the very beginning to Luther. For, his
Disciples observing that every one of them-selves might pretend to be sent by
God (by an extraordinary vocation) as well as Luthers (seeing he proved not his
Mission by Miracles, or by any supernatural sign) to reform the Church; diverse
of them separated from him, and set up for them-selves; as Zuinglius, who
invented the Sacramentarian Religion against Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament; and Bernard Rotman, Father of Anabaptists etc. It were tedious to
relate all their divisions, and almost impossible. We will only assure the
Reader, that in the space of 30. years after Luther began his Reformation, it
was divided and subdivided in Germany alone, into 130. Sects.

For first, his Disciples divided them-selves into four principal Reformations,
of plain Lutherans, half Lutherans, Antilutherans or Sacramentarians, and
Anabaptists. These plain Lutherans, into eleven Sects; and these again into
soft, rigid, and extravagant Lutherans; the semilutherans or half Lutherans,
also into eleven Sects. The Sacramentarians or Antilutherans into 56. and one
of these into 9. The Anabaptists into 13. Sebastianus Traneus, a Protestant,
numbreth 70. How all these have bin subdivided since, we may guess at, by the
variety we see in England of Protestant Religions, not with standing the
severity of the Laws in favor of the Prelatik.

Not one of these Sects have subordination to another, and agree only in some
general Notions of Christianity, and in impugning the Roman Catholic Religion
(one of the marks whereby the Holy Fathers discerned Jrenaeus l. 1. c. 5. says,
Videmus nunc and eorum inconstantem Sententiam, cum sint duo vel tres,
quemadmodum de iisdem eadem non dicunt. And c. 18. Cum autem discrepant ad
invicem, and doctrina, and traditione, and qui recentiores eorum adnoscuntur,
affectant per singulos dies novum aliquid invenire etc. Durum est enim omnium
describere sententias.

Tertullian: de Praescrip. adv. haer. cap. 42. says, Mentior si non etiam a
regulis suis variant inter se, dum vnusquisque proinde modulatur quae accepit,
quemadmodum de suo arbitrio composuit etc. Denique inspect haereses omnes in
multis cum authoribus suis dissentientes deprehunduntur. And see cap. 37.
Chrystom. oper. imperfect. in Matthew. hom. 20. says, Omnes infideles qui sub
Diabolo sunt, non sunt vnum nec vnum sapiunt, sed sunt per diversas opiniones
dispersi: alius quidem sic dicit, alius sic, etc. Eo modo perfidia Haereticorum
qui nunquam sapiunt vnum, sed quot sunt, tot sententias habent. Hilar. lib. 7.
de Trinit. says, Haeretici igitur omnes contra Ecclesiam veniunt, sed dum
Haeretici omnes se invicem vincunt, nihil tamen sibi vincunt: victoria enim
eorum, Ecclesiae triumphus ex omnibus est, dum in eo Haeresis contra alteram
pugnat etc. S. Athanas. Orat. 1. contra Arianos, says, Jllud quoque prorsus
admirabile, omnes quot sunt Haereses in fingendo, diversa pugnantiaque inter se
adferre, nec alibi nisi in falsitate sibi invicem consentire. See the Centurists


Heresies.) Each of them pretend to be a true Church, and condemn the rest as
Schismatical, and Heretical Congregations; perpetualy quoting Scripture one
against the other, but understood according to every ons convenience, fancying
or feigning that the Spirit of God inspires him to reform not only the Roman
Doctrine, but the Protestant reformations.

But when we call to them for their commission (which must be signed by
Miracles) and desire to know by what authority they presume to take upon them
so high an employment? they tell us that Miracles are ceased in the Church, and
all ours either almost in every age attributing the Roman Catholic Miracles to
the Devil, V. g. Centur. 9. cap. 13. And Osiander in Epitom. Cent. 9. page 63.
says the same, and in particular of St. Bernards, St. Francis's Miracles etc.
Whitaker
counterfeit, or Diabolical, wrought by the Devil to confirm us in the
Idolatry of the Mass, Invocation of Saints, etc. But because our Miracles
exceed the Devils power, and can be wrought only by God, rather then
Protestants will embrace the truth by Miracles testified, they de Ecclesia page
348. And " Daneus in his answer to Belarm. part. 1. page 784.
teach a blasphemy, saying that God does give power of working true Miracles
unto false teachers, not to confirm their false and Popish opinions, but to
tempt those (the Indians, Iaponeses, and Chinese) unto whom they be sent.

By which Paradox they call in question Christianity it self; for why might not
God tempt the Jews and primitive Christians by Christ's Miracles, as well as the
Indians, and Iaponians by others of the same nature, and as prodigious? If the
Indians be not bound to believe the doctrine preached to them, though confirmed
by our true miracles, why should the Jews or any others be obliged in
conscience to believe Christ? For, if God may work true Miracles to make a
falsehood so plausibly credible as to oblige prudent men to believe it; no
prudent man is bound to believe the truth when it is evidently confirmed with
true Miracles, and by consequence none was or is bound to believe in Christ:
which doctrine is impious, and contrary to our Saviors own words Joan. 5.36.
and against 2. Cor. 12. Hebr. 2.4. and Marc. 16.20. and Joan 15.24. Where our
Savior declares that the reason why the incredulous Jews did sin in not
believing his Divinity was, because he confirmed his doctrine with Miracles: Jf
I had not don among them the works which no other man did, they had not sinned.

As for their authority of reforming the Roman Catholic faith, they answered
that they needed no other warrant but Scripture, which did clearly condemn the
Popish Tenets. Being desired to show what parts or words of Scripture were
Contrary to the Popish Tenets, (for that after comparing all places and Texts,
very godly and learned men could find no such opposition between Gods word and
the Roman doctrine) they Luther in proefat. assertionis articulorum a Leone
Pontif. damnatorum, says: Scripture must be the Judge of all controversies; and
that it is cleerer then the comments of the Fathers upon it. But that to the
proud and unfaithful (Papists he means) it is obscure. See him also in lib.
de servo arbitrio.
replied, that the reason why the Popish Diuins and Prelates did not see their
own errors, afterall their search and study was, because they had not the
spirit of God, which had revealed to Protestants the true meaning of holy writ;
though they could not deny but that their own interpretation was new and
contrary to that which the visible Church of the 15. ^n age had received from
the 14.th and the 14.th from the 13.th and so forth.

Therefore they all conspired in maintaining that the visible Church had erred
in doctrine, and that the mystery of iniquity began even with the Apostles, or
immediately after. But because some parts of Scripture are so clear against
their new doctrine, that they could not be wrested against the Roman Catholics
nor reach the Protestant, thy framed a new Canon of Scripture, and excluded as
Apocryphal many Books and Chapters which spook clearly against them, and in
their translations of the old and new Testament into vulgar languages, they
added to, Luther in his Translation, to assert his justification by only faith,
added to the text of Scripture the word alone, against all Originals and Copies.

Swinglius to maintain that the Body and Blood of Christ were not realy present
in the Sacrament of the Altar, in steed of Christ's words, This is my Body,
translateth, This signifies my Body.

See herafter more of this, and of the English Bibles corruptions.


and subtracted from Gods word, what they thought fit, to make the illiterat
people believe that their new inventions were agreeable to Scripture; and that
Popery was quite contrary to the same.

And because none of the first Reformers was a Bishop, and they knew Bishops
only could consecrat other Bishops and Priests, and that no Congregation could
be esteemed a Church with out that caracter and calling, according to the
received maxim of S. Hieron. Ecclesia non est quae non habet Sacerdotem. Luther
Luther tom. 2. lib. de Ministris Ecclesiae instituendis, fol. 368. and 369. and
lib. de abrog. Miss. private. tom. 2. fol. 249. and in lib. de captiv. Babylon.
cap. de Ordine.

Luther in assertionibus damnatis per Leonem cap. 10. art. 13. says. In the
Sacrament of Confession and remission of sin, the Pope does no more then the
meanest Priest, nay, where a Priest is not, every Christian can do as much,
though a child or a woman etc. That in the absence of a Priest a child or a
woman, and every Christian may absolve is clear out of Math. 18. Where Christ
says to all Christians, Quodcumque solveritis super terram, etc.


And the rest who pretended a Reformation, judged it necessary to alter this
doctrine, and declare that all Christians, both men and women, are Priests by
baptism; yet that only such as are chosen by the Congregation, or Magistrate,
ought to exercise the function, for the avoiding of confusion. Luther endeavors
to prove it at large thus. The first office of a Priest is to preach the word
etc. But this is common to all: next is to baptyze; and this also may do even
women etc. The third is to consecrat bread and wyn; but this also is common to
all, no less then Priests; and this I avouch by the authority of Christ
him-self, saying, Do this in remembrance of me; this Christ spook to all there
present, and to come afterward; whosoever should eat of that bread, and drink
of that wine etc. This also is wittnessed by S. Paul, who 1. Cor. 11. repeating
this, applies it to all the Corinthians, making them all as him-self was, that
is to say, Consecrators; etc. If then that which is greather then all, be given
indifferently to all men and women, I mean the word and baptism, then that
which is less, I mean to consecrat the supper, is also given to them. So much
Luther.

With Luther in this doctrine concurred all the reformed Churches, even the
Prelatick of England seems to approve thereof in the 23. and 25. articles of
Religion; and M.r Horn Bishop of Winchester in the Harbrough An. 1559. n. 2.
says concerning the Ministry, Preaching, or Priesthood of women: Jn this
point we must use a certain moderation, and not absolutely in every-wise debarr
women herein, etc. J pray you what more vehemence uses S. Paul in forbidding
women to preach, then in forbidding them to uncover their heads; and yet you
know in the best reformed Churches of all Germany, all the maids be bareheaded.
They who know this to have bin the Doctrine of Luther, and of the reformed
Churches, are not so much startled at Q. Elizabeth's spiritual headship of the
Church, nor at the Act of Parliament 8. Eliz. 1. wherein it is declared that she
and her successors may authorize any person whatsoever (whether lay man or
woman) to exercise any spiritual jurisdiction or power in any matter
whatsoever, even of consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, Priests etc. And albeit
afterward ( art. 27.) there has bin an explanation made concerning the
supremacy, excluding from the Church a she; or Lay Ministry and Priesthood;
yet the words of the Oaths both of supremacy and Episcopal homage, and the laws
of the land (especialy this Act 8. Eliz. 1.) maks it most manifest, that even
Prelatik protestancy maks the temporal Lay Sovereign to have the source of all
spiritual power and jurisdiction; and that the letters Patents of the Kings of
England, directed to any person whatsoever, renders him capable of consecrating
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests etc. as may be seen in the aforesaid Act of
Parliament. And if any person whatsoever may by virtue of the Kings letters
patents consecrat Bishops, Priests, etc. without doubt the King that gives that
spiritual authority, and the Lay men, or women so authorized, must of necessity
have the caracter of Episcopacy and Priesthood which they communicate to others:
unless it be maintained that men can give what they have not themselves.

Thus was Protestancy begun, principled, and propagated, by Martin Luther and
his Disciples; and because their Sects agree in nothing so unanimously as in
protesting against the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, and the Imperial
Decrees enacted in behalf thereof, though some Lutherans only (exhibiting the
Confession of their faith at Auspurg) were the Protesters, yet all others who
pretend a Reformation, like the name, and call themselves Protestants: thinking
it to be more for the credit of their dissenting Congregations, to pretend
unity of doctrine by assuming one name, then declare the novelty and diversity
of their Tenets by calling themselves by the names of their first Authors, and
Reformers. Now it is time we treat in particular of the Protestant Church of
England.

SECT. IV. Of the Protestant Church of England.
IT was the misfortune of England to have had in that time when Reformation
began to spread, a vicious King, and lewd Court, an ambitious Minister of
state, a timorous Clergy, and contemporising Parliament. Cardinal Wolsey who
had bin raised from the meanest parentage to domineer over the English Peerage;
not content with his good fortune, and the Kings favor, would needs be Pope,
and obtained from Charles V. the Emperor, a promise of his best endeavors to
promote him to that dignity; but perceiving himself deluded when the occasion
was offered of performance, and that Charles had preferred to the Papacy one of
his own subjects that had bin Instructor to him in his tender age, he resolved
to be revenged upon the Emperors relations, seeing he could not reach his
person. And observing that K. Henry 8. was weary of Q. Catharin the Emperors
Aunt, and desired her death or divorce, to the end he might marry and have
issue male to succeed him in the Crown, The Cardinal discoursed with his
Majesty of the doubts which himself had raised, and many seemed to entertain
concerning the validity of a marriage with one that had bin his brothers wife;
and proposed the public convenience and private satisfaction the King might
receave by taking to wife some relation of the French King, with whom he
persuaded Henry 8. to make a league in defense of the Sea Apostolic against
Charles V* whose army at that time had sacked, Rome, and kept the Pope prisoner;
not doubting that his Holiness so oblidged by Henry, and injured by Charles,
would declare Q. Catharins marriage void.

An' Bulle^'s incest and leaudness was afterward punished with her death, and
that of her brothers of Brue^ton, Weston, Norris, and Sineton, all of the Kings
privy Chamber. Another escaped death because he advertised his Majesty of her
immodesty before the marriage.
K. Henry applauded the motion, but liked not so well the French Lady, as An
Bullen one of his Queens Mayds of honor, of whom he was so desperately
enamoured, that though he was advertised of her amorous disposition, and lewd
conversation by one of the Courtiers that said he had enjoyed her savours; yet
she rejecting his Majesty's courtship, he thought, she was not so cunning as
chaste, and persuading himself that a woman so sparing of favors to a King,
would not be prodigal of them to others, he gave little credit to the public
reports, and private informations of her immodest behavior, and now courted her
not as his present Mistress, but as his future wife; not questioning but that
the Pope whom he had obliged, would declare null his marriage with Q. Catharin:
but his Holiness, though much inclined to gratify the King, and incensed
against the Emperor for many indignitys, resolved neither to reward, or
revenge by abusing his spiritual authority, which he knew could not be extended
to dissolve a knot that God had tied, and blessed with posterity: his
Predecessors dispensation, after mature deliberation, was found to be valid,
and no way contrary to Scripture, which is so far from prohibiting a marriage
with a deceased brothers wife ( Levit. 18.) that it commands ( Deuter. 25.) the
brother to marry his issuless brothers widow. And when S. John Baptist told
Herod, it was not lawful for him to keep his brothers wife, his brother was
then living: so that these words could not be applied to K. Henry 8. his case,
nor occasion any scruple in his conscience.

He therefore finding by experience that the Sea of Rome was not directed in
deciding controversies of Religion by human respects, or interest, and that the
College of Cardinals could not be corrupted with bribes, to favor his suit,
as some Doctors of foreign universities had bin; nor terified by his threats,
as was most of the English Clergy; he resolved to renounce that spiritual
jurisdiction and supremacy, (the only let against his lust) which all his
Christian Ancestors had acknowledged, and himself defended in an excellent
Treatise against Luther, demonstrating as well by Scripture as by reason, S.
Ambrose uses this very argument to the same purpose.
that the Bishop of Rom's supremacy and jurisdiction was de jure Divino;
otherwise how could S. Peter be caled by the Evangelist, Chief of the Apostles,
or Primus in dignity, seeing his brother S. Andrew was the first Disciple, or
primus in antiquity; and if there was a Chief among the Apostles, how can it
be imagined that their successors should be all equal, or that the successor
of the Chief Apostle could be deprived of a prerogative so necessary for the
peace, and government of the succeeding Church? Or if the Bishop of Rome had
not this supremacy as S. Peter's Successor, and by Christ's appointment, how is
it possible, that all the Christian Princes and Prelates of the world should
conspire, or consent to submit themselves to one whose temporal power could not
force that submission, and they had no cause to fear his spiritual more then
that of other Patriarchs, or Bishops confined to their own Dioceses?

These were the Kings reasons in behalf of the Popes supremacy against Luther;
but now his passion made him contradict his pen; and love (though blind) gave
him eyes to see more of Christ's mind since he had seen Anne Bullen, then all
the world had discerned in 1500. years before. He declared therefore by Act of
Parliament that the Popes spiritual jurisdiction was a mere usurpation, and
that every temporal Sovereign was Pope, in his own Dominions and by virtue of
this prerogative he declared his own marriage with Q. Catharin, void; married
Anne Bullen, and seized upon all the lands, and treasurs of the Monasteries,
and Abbeys; dispensed with all the young Friars, and Monks vows of obedience
and chastity (after that he had taken an order they should not break the vow of
Poverty) and to that purpose framed an instrument (and forced the Religious to
sign it) wherein they declared, that now at length (through Gods great mercy)
they had bin inspired, and illuminated to see the inconsistency of a^^
Monastical life with true Christianity, and the salvation of their souls, and
therefore they humbly petitioned his Majesty, by means of his Vicar General in
spiritualibus Cromwell, (who was Earl of Essex, and a black-smiths son of
Putney) to restore them to Christian liberty, and a secular life. And because
the Abbots of Glastenbury, Reading, Gloucester, and many others would not
subscribe to this instrument, nor by their approbation thereof declare that S.
Austin the Monk and Apostle of England (who converted the Saxons to Christian
Religion) professed a life inconsistent with Christianity, they were cruely
tormented and put to death.

The same tyrany was executed upon all sorts of people without distinction of
age, sex or quality, and amongst them suffered also Sir Thomas Moore Lord
Chancellor of England, and Cardinal Fisher Bishop of Rochester, two of the
greatest ornaments of that age, for refusing the oath of the Kings supremacy.
And for that S. Thomas of Canterbury, alias Becket, had opposed K. Henry 2.
Laws, made rather against the exercise, then the right of the Popes spiritual
authority in England; and therefore was Killed by some officious Courtiers, and
honored as a Martyr by the Catholic Church; and his Sanctity, and Martyrdom
had bin confirmed by most authentic Miracles (which also confirmed the Popes
spiritual supremacy and jurisdiction and condemned King Henry 8. vanity) he
without fear of God, or regard of the world, cited a Saint reigning in heaven,
to appear and hear upon earth his sentence; which was, to have his relics
burned, the treasure of his Church, and shrine confiscated, and all those
declared Traitors that would call him Saint, or celebrat his feast, or permit
his name to remain in the Kalendars of their Books of Devotion. He also
prohitited his subjects to call the Bishop of Rome Pope, and every one who had
S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Austin, S. Leo or any of the Fathers
works, was commanded to write in the first leaf thereof, that they renounced
those Saints doctrine of the Popes supremacy. Not content with these
extravagancies at home, he sent Ambassadors to solicit Princes abroad (and in
the first place to Francis 1. of France) that they might follow his example in
assuming the supremacy; and albeit the Pope was either agreed or engaged in a
Treaty with Charles 5. to the prejudice of France, Sand. lib. 1.
yet that Christian King would not as much as hear Henry 8. Ambassadors speak
of his imitating their Master in assuming to him-self the supremacy. Cochlaeus
lib. contra Morison.
And even the Protestant Princes of Germany, to whom the Ambassadors repaired
after that their negotiation had bin rejected by the French King, told them
they were sorry K. Henry 8. did not ground his reformation upon a more
religious foundation, then his scandalous passion for Anne Bullen.

And the first protestant Reformers abroad (part of whose design was to get all
spiritual jurisdiction rather into their own hands then into the hands of their
temporal Sovereigns) were much troubled at K. Henry's supremacy, and Calvin
writ a smart though short treatise against it, and no Protestants make a lay
Prince spiritual head of a Church, but our English Prelaticks.

Notwithstanding that the lateness of the discovery together with K. Henry 8
motives of his supremacy made it so incredible that no Catholic Sovereign
would assume to him-self that prerogative, nor any foreign Protestants approve
thereof, yet his cruelty made most of his English subjects swear that, which
neither themselves nor the world could believe; for had it bin any way probable
by Scripture, History, or Tradition, that temporal Sovereigns (as such) are
spiritual Superiors, how is it possible that all Christian Princes before
Henry 8. should be so short-sighted, and stupid in their own interest, and in a
matter of so great consequence, as not to see a thing so obvious, and
aduantagious? How careless in their own concerns, were Charles 5. Francis 1. and
many other Princes their Predecessors, who after having bin provoked, and
exasperated by some Roman Bishops, so far as to think it necessary to invade
their Teritories, sack Rome, and imprison their persons, yet at the same time
did acknowledge that spiritual supremacy which gave so much advantage, power,
and credit to their enemy? Without doubt the same forces which had bin employed
against the Popes person, and temporal power, would not have spared or favored
his spiritual jurisdiction; he would have bin forced to renounce his primacy
had not the world, and they who subdued him, bin fully satisfied that it was no
human donation, but divin institution.

Though these reasons were convincing, and the example of Charles 5. spiritual
subjection and submission to his subdued prisoner Pope Clement 7. was fresh in
King Henry 8. memory, and that he knew never any Catholic Princes pretended it
was a prerogative of sovereignty, to share with the Pope in the Ecclesiastical
government of the souls of their subjects (though many clamed as a privilege
granted by the Roman Sea, the liberty to examine and approve the authentikness
of Papal censures and injunctions) and that his passion for Anne Bullen was
turned into hatred, The Kings of France pretended to the Gallical liberties:
and the Kings of Spain to their Sicilian Monarchy and other privileges. The
kings of England also when they were Roman Catholics pretended to the like
privileges, presentations etc.
for her proved incest, and adultery; yet his pride and wilfulness was so
excessive, that rather then acknowledge his former error by a formal
recantation, he continued to exercise his scandalous supremacy so violently,
that he devised Articles of Religion, made Cromwell his Vicar General in
spiritual affairs took upon him to define what was heresy, what Catholic
faith; permitted the Scriptures to be translated by heretics, and read in
English, and (to vex the Pope) countenanced, and connived at any novelties;
though afterward he burned the novelists for heretics, and prohibited (when it
was too late) their Translations of Scripture, and other Books which he had
formerly permitted. But seeing that notwithstanding his severity, the
Sacramentarian heresy, which he most of all hated, did increase in his Kingdom,
and that the spiritual sword in his lay hand did not work those effects which
it, had don when it was managed by the Bishops of Rome (by whose sole authority
all the heresies of the first 300. years were condemned and suppressed without
the help of a general Council) and that the Keys which he had usurped served
rather to open the doors of the English Church to all errors, Stat Henry 8 34.
and 35. Be it enacted tha^ all manner of books of the old and new Testament in
English* being of the crafty, ^^alce, and ^ntrue Tran^lation of William
Tyndall, and all other books and writings in the english tongue, teaching or
compassing any matter of Christian Religion contrary to that doctrine which
since the year of our Lord 1540. is, has or shall be set forth by his Majesty
is clearly and utterly abolished.
then shut them out; and perceiving his end draw near, he began to think of a
reconciliation with Rome, but such a one as might suit with his humor, which he
termed Honor. Therefore he sent his favorit Bishop Gardener to the Jmperial
Diet, with private instructions, to endeavor in such a manner his return to the
unity and obedience of the Church (through the mediation of the Catholic
Princes of Germany, and of the Pop's Legate) that on King Henrys side it might
look more like a princely condescend^ncy then a penitent conversion; whereunto
he seemed to incline at the solicitation rather of others, then moved by a
detestation of his own errors? But God with whom none must dally, nor Princes
capitulat, summoned him to an account sooner then was imagined. Whether he
repented, or despaired at his death, is uncertain. Some say his last words were
omnia perdidimus, all is lost. In his last will and Testament he named 16.
Tutors for his Son, to govern, during his minority, with equal authority;
charging them not to bring in the Sacramentarian Religion. But God permitted
his will to be broken before his body was buried (who had changed the last
wills of so many thousands deceased) and that, but three days after his death;
for upon the 1. of February Seamor Earl of Hartford brother to Ed. 6. Mother,
was made Protector of the King and Kingdom, by his own ambition, and private
authority of his faction (which prevailed amongst the 16. Executors) without
expecting any Parliament, or consent to the Realm for so great a charge, or for
the change of religion which immediately followed. And because Wriothesly Earl
of Southampton Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Arundel, and Bishop Tonstall, and
some others, would not betray their trust, and opposed the new reformation,
they were disgraced and displaced.

SVBSECT I. Of the English Religion, and Reformers in King Edward VI. reign.
THe Earl of Hartford, newly created Duke of Somerset and Lord Protector of
England, was a man fitter to be governed, then to govern: his judgment was
weak, but himself very wilful, and so blindly resolut in commanding and
executing the designs of others, by whom he was guided, that without perceiving
it, he was made the instrument of his own ruin, as well as of his brothers; and
of the young King also by the chang of the ancient Religion. Dudley Earl of
Warwick was his director both in Church and state affairs, and yet was his
greatest enemy; which Somerset had not the wit to see, though all the world
knew him to be his Competitor. And albeit Dudly had bin always a Roman
Catholic in his judgment, yet (as most Politicians do) he dissembled his
belief, and yet ^oothed the Protector in his inclination to the protestant
reformation, not doubting but that having once intoxicated the people with the
liberty and inconstancy thereof, he might lead them from the contempt of
spiritual authority to rebel against the temporal, and humor so well their mad
zeal that for their new Ghospel's preservation and propagation, they would fix
upon him for their Director, and stick to whom he would appoint for their
Sovereign. He was not deceived in his expectation, the Protector Seamour was
destroyed; Dudly himself made chief Minister of England; the King poisoned; the
Princess Mary excluded, the Lady Jane Gray declared Queen (because she was a
Protestant) and married to Dudlys Son. All which things he compased in a short
time, though by degrees, as you shall hear.

No sooner was K. Henry 8. dead, but Dudly Earl of Warwick advised Somerset to
take upon him the Protectorship, and (to make him odious) by his private
authority to alter the public profession of faith; and because he knew so
notorious a fraud could not be effected without force, he devised with the
Protector, the journey of Musselborough field, and the war of Scotland, under
pretense of gaining by force the young Queen of Scots to marry K. Edward 6. but
in reality to get the power of the Militia into his own hands, and thereby to
settle in England a Religion whereby he might (in due time) upon the score of a
refined reformation, unsettle the government, and alter K. Henry 8. Testament,
and persuade England that his Daughter Marys reign would eclipse the light of
the ghospel, which then began to shine. After that he had made the Protector so
odious, that none could endure to hear his name, or to live under his
government, he thought it a proper time to establish by Parliament that new
profession of faith, which he knew could not be effected without the consent
and concurrence of that great Assembly. And though he was not ignorant of the
absurdities contained in the best of the new reformations, yet because since
the setlement of the spiritual headship of our Kings, he perceived the common
people might be led any way, and that an Act of Parliament was held sufficient
to make them believe the ancient Christian Religion was profane; and that any
protestant reformation was the primitive and Apostolic faith; he wrought so
much by the fear of the army and the Kings authority, that albeit in the first
Parliament and year of Edward 6. reign, nothing more could be obtained in
favor of Protestancy, but an indemnity for the preachers thereof from penalties
enacted by the ancient laws against married Priests, and Heriticks; and a
repeal of the English Statuts confirming the Imperial Edicts against heresies;
yet in the second year, and Parliament of Edward the VI. It was carried (though
by few votes, and after a long debate of above four months) that the Zuinglian,
or Sacramentarian reformation should be the Religion of England.

The first Reformers of the Prelatick protestant Church of England.
The charge of framing Articles of this Religion, as also of composing the
Liturgy, and a book of rits, ceremonies, and administration of Sacraments, had
bin committed to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and to some other
Protestant Divins, who were all married friars, and Priests, lately come out of
Germany, with their sweet-hearts, viz. Hooper, and Rogers, Monks; Couerdale, an
Augustine friar; Bale a Carmelite; Martin Bucer a Dominican; Bernardin Ochinus a
Franciscan; and Peter Martyr a Chanon Regular; these three last were invited by
the Protector, and appointed to preach and teach in both the Universities; and
at London; and were to agree with the rest in the new model and form of
Religion; which was a matter of great difficulty; because the Tenets which
until then they had professed, were irreconciliable. H^^per, and Rogers were
fierce Zuinglians, that is, Puritans or Presbiterians; and with them was joined
in faction against Cranmer, Ridly, and other Prelaticks (for that they opposed
his pretension to the Bishopric of Worcester) Hugh Latimer, of great regard
with the common people. Couerdale, and Bale, were both Lutherans; and yet
differed, because the one was a rigid, the other a mild, or half Lutheran.
Bucer also had professed a kind of Lutheranism in Germany, but in England was
what the Protector would have him to be, and therefore would not for the space
of a whole year, declare his opinion in Cambridg (though pressed to it by his
Scholars) concerning the real presence, until he had heard how the Parliament
had decided that controversy at London; and then he changed his opinion and
became a Zuinglian.

The same tergiversation was used by Peter Martyr at Oxford, and so
ridiculously, that coming sooner, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians
(which he undertook to expound) to the words Hoc est Corpus meum, then it had
bin determined in Parliament what they should signify, the poor friar, with
admiration and laughter of the University, was forced to divert his Auditors
with impertinent Comments upon the precedent words, Accipite, manducate, fregit
and dixit etc. which needed no explanation. And when the news was come, that
both houses had ordered they should be understood figurativly, and not
literaly, Peter Martyr said he admired how any man could be of an other
opinion, though he knew not the day before what would be his own. But as for
Bucer, he was a concealed Jew, or Atheist, for being asked confidently his
opinion of the Sacrament by Dudly Duke of Northumberland, in the presence of
the Lord Paget then a Protestant (who testified the same publicly afterward)
he answered, that the real presence could not be denied if men believed that
Christ was God, and spoke the words: This is my Body; but whether all was to be
belived which the Evangelists writ of Christ, was a matter of more disputation.

Bernardin Ochinus dyed a Jew in his opinion, he writ a book to assert the
lawfulness of having many wives at once; this together with his profession of
the Mosaic law at his death, proved that he was but a counterfeit Protestant.

Cranmer was a mere Contemporiser, and of no Religion at all. Henry VIII.
raised him from Chaplain to Sr. Thomas Bullen, to be Archbishop of Canterbury,
to the end he might divorce him from Q. Catharin, and marry him to An' Bullen;
afterward by the Kings order he declared to the Parliament, Statut 28. Henry 8
cap 17. an 1536
that to his knowledge Anne Bullen was never lawful wife to his Majesty when he
married the King to An of Cleves; and when the King was weary of her, Cranmer
declared this marriage also null; and married, and unmarried him so often, that
he seemed rather to exercise the Office of a Pimp then the function of a
Priest, which (to requite one courtesy for an other) made the King connive at
his keeping a wench, and at some of his opinions, though contrary to the Statut
of the 6. Articles.

In King Henry VIII. days he writ a Book for the Real presence, in King Edwards
6. days, See his letters in Fox. 1279 and in Stow page 1036.
he writ an other Book against the real presence. He conspired with the
Protector Somerset to overthrow K. Henry 8. will and Testament; and afterward
conjured with Dudly to ruin the Protector. He joined with Dudly and the Duke of
Suffolk against Q. Mary for the lady Jane Gray, and immediately after with
Arundell, Shreusbury, Pembrouk, Page^, and others against the same Duke. Finaly
when he was condemned in Q. Mary's reign for treason and heresy; and his
treason being pardoned, hoping the same favor might be extended to his heresy,
he recanted and abjured the same; but seeing the temporal laws reserved no mercy
for relapsed heretics (who are presumed not to be truly converted or penitent)
he was so exasperated thereby, that at his death (moved more by passion then
conscience) he renounced the Roman Catholic Religion, to which he had so lately
conformed.

These were the men who framed the 39. Articles of Religion the Liturgy and the
Book of Sacraments, rits, and ceremonies of the Protestant Church of England:
and though it may seem incredible that a Jew, an Atheist, a Contemporiser or
mere Politician, a Presbiterian, a rigid Lutheran, half-Lutheran and an
Anti-Lutheran, or Sacramentarian, should all agree to make one Religion, yet
when men do but dissemble, and deliver opinions to please others, and profit
themselves* and have no Religion at all, they may without difficulty concur in
some general points of Christianity, and frame negative articles impugning the
particular truths thereof. This was the case of the Church of England. For
though Hooper, and Rogers were prity obstinat in the Presbiterian, or Zuinglian
doctrine of the Sacrament, and prevailed therein so far by the Protectors
countenance, as to reform the common praier-Book, and to confound the caracter
of Episcopacy with single Presbitery, as if there had bin no real distinction
between both, nor no imposition of Episcopal hands required for either, but
only a bare election of the Congregation, or Magistrate; yet rather then loose
the revenues of benefices, and Bishoprics, they were content (contrary to
their solemn confederacy) to connive at the Episcopal discipline, and
ceremonious decency of surplises, square Caps, and Rochets; The names of
Priests and Bishops they were content to admit of in the common praier-Book, so
the caracter were not mentioned in their new form of ordaining them, but rather
declared not to be of divin institution, nor a Sacrament: In like manner Hooper
at length condescended to take the Oath of supremacy, and conformed thereunto
his conscience, when the Bishopric of Worcester was added to his former of
Gloucester, though until then he agreed with Calvin in impugning the Kings'
spiritual headship.

As Hooper condescended to the Kings' Supremacy, to the Prelatick discipline,
and ceremonies, so Cranmer and his prelatick party condescended to the
Presbiterian doctrine because they were indifferent for any that would allow them
wenches, and not deprive them of their revenues. And as for Ochinus the Jew,
Bucer the Atheist, and the rest of the protestant Divines, their vots as well as
their livelyhoods depended of Cranmer his will and pleasur. Besides Cranmer
perceived the Protector inclined to Zuinglianism, and the Presbiterian doctrine,
and therefore resolved to accomodat the doctrine of the Church of England to his
humor.

Hooper and Rogers agreed upon an ecclesiastical Government inconsistent with
Monarchy; which was, that over every 10. Churches or Parishes in England there
should be a learned Superintendent appointed, who should have faithful readers
under him, and that all Popish Priests should clean be put out: And to draw all
public matters of state and Religion to them-selves, they composed a Treatise
to prove: That it is lawful for any private man to reason and writ against a
wicked Act of Parliament, and ungodly Council, etc. see Fox page 1357. col. 1.
number. 72. And Hoopers prophecy against the Prelatick protestants for not
conforming them-selves to his Puritan and Presbiterian discipline. page 1356. And
of his contention with Cranmer and other Prelatick protestants about the oath
of Supremacy etc. Fox, page 1366.

Both Cranmer and Ridly, made apear to the Protector and Council, that Hoopers
Presbiterian discipline was not consistent with the Constitution of Parliaments;
and the refusal of the oath of Supremacy to be of dangerous consequence, in a
time that Deuenshir Northfolk, and many other Shires had taken arms in defense
of the Roman Catholic faith. It was further considered that so sudain a change
from on extreme to an other in matters of religion (as it would have bin, from
ceremonious Popery to plain Pre^bitery) was against the rules of policy*
therefore seeing the people had bin so long accustomed to the Mass, and to
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, it was judged expedient to make the vulgar sort
believe, the chang was not of Religion, but of language; that the common prayr
was the Mass in English; that the substance of the Catholic faith was retained
in the Prelatick caps, copes, and surplises; and what alteration there seemed
to be, was but of things indifferent, or petty circumstances; and had bin
resolved upon by the King and Parliament more to preserve uniformity, then to
promote novelty; as may be seen by any that will observe the words of the
statuts confirming the common prayr book, administration, rits, ad ceremonies
of the Sacrament. 2. Ed. 6.1. and the Councels letter to the Bishops recited by
Fox, page 1184. col. 1. Whereof long time there had bin in this Realm of
England diverse forms of common prayer. And where the Kings Majesty has hereto
fore diverse tyms assayed to stay innovations, or new rits. To the intent that
an uniform, quiet, and godly order should be had concerning the premises, has
appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury should draw and make one convenient and
meet order of common Prayer and administration of Sacraments to be used in
England, Wales, etc. The which at this time by the aid of the holy Ghost, with
uniform agreement is of them concluded, etc. in the Statut.

But in very deed the whole substance of Catholic Religion was changed, and
nothing retained but so much thereof as seemed necessary to keep the name of
Christians, and had not bin rejected by most of the ancient condemned
heretics, as shall appear by our observations upon the 39. ensuing articles of
Religion of the Church of England.

SECT. V. Of the 39. Articles of the Church of England.
WHosoever consider^^ these 39. Articles of Religion composed by Cranmer, and
his Divines, may easily perceive their drift was rather to humor factions at
home, and dissenting Protestants abroad* to countenance sensuality, and grant a
liberty of not believing the particulars of Christianity, then to instruct men
in the doctrine of Christ or to prescribe any certain rule of Faith. For, their
method is, to word so the matter of the Articles, that where Protestants
disagree among themselves, every one of the dissenting parties may apply the
Text to his own sense. In so much that the Presbiterians except not against the
doctrins themsel-ves rightly explained (that is according to their explanation)
but against the wording and expressions thereof, Doctor Bruges in his post
script to D. r Pearson edit. 1660.
which (say they) are ambiguous, and capable of more senses then one, and so
may be, and are wrested to patronise errors. In the mystery of the real
presence they speak clearly against it, because it was resolved in Parliament,
That England should be Zuinglian in that point, against the Catholic faith of
Transsubstantiation.

Wherefore after Cranmer and the other his Contemporisers had set down in five
of their six first Articles, the belief of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion,
and Resurrection, whereof no Protestants then doubted; they dare not declare
themselves (in the third, wheein they speak of Christ descent into Hell)
whether it was to that of the damned, or to a third place; for that if they
denied the first, they would have offended Calvin; Jf they denied the last,
they were sure to disoblige some Lutherans that admitted of Lymbus, or a third
place.

In the sixth Article they free all men from an obligation of believing any
thing that is not read in Scripture, or proved thereby, and make it their ownly
rule of faith, and themselves the Judges thereof: wherein they agree See the
ancient Fathers affirming it was the constant practice and principle of
Heretics to appeal to Scripture alone.

S. Aust^n l de unit Eccl and lib. cont* a Maximinum S. Hilarious l. contra
Constantium. S. Basi^ius l.de Spiritu S. c. 27. and 29. S Epiphani^s haer 69*
73.


with the ancient Heretics, Arians, Donatists, Eunomians, Nestorians etc. But
for that some Protestant doctrins are expressly reproved by many Parts of
Scripture, they make those parts Apocrypha, because, forsooth, they were
doubted of* by some Churches in the primitive times. And truly if a man will
reflect upon these words of their sixth Article, We do understand those
Canonical Books of the old and new Testament, of whose authority was never any
doubt in the Church, he may clearly see that they believe many parts of the new
Testament not to be Canonical Scripture, because many parts thereof have bin
doubted of in the Church before the Canon was determined. See after, part. 2.

In the 7. they only declare that Christians are not bound to observe the
ceremonial, but only the moral law of Moses.

In the 8. they tell us of four Creeds (whereof S. Athanasius his symbol is one)
are to be believed; because they may be proved by Scripture; and yet S.
Athanasius himself declared in ^he Council of Nice that the doctrine of his
Symbol, that is, the mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, could not be
proved by Scripture alone, S. Athanasius in l. 1* de decret Nicen. Synodi
contra. Eusebius.
or without Tradition.

In the 9. and 10. Article they S. Epiphanius haer. 64. Theodor^^ lib. de
haeres.
follow the heretic Proclus, the Messalians, Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin's
doctrine concerning Original sin.

In the 11. Article they teach with some of the August de fide and oper c. 14
and de haer. c. 54.
Pseudo-Apostles, with Eunomius, and with the same Zuinglius, Luther and
Calvin, that men are justified by faith alone. See herafter of the
justification by only faith, how inconsistent with any solicitude or care for
good works.

And in the 12. would feign (but in vain) free themselves and their Doctrine
from the aspersion of neglecting good works though they maintain them not to be
necessary for justification.

In the 13. Article they say all virtuous moral actions of men that are not in
grace, have the nature of sin; And in the 14. they follow Eunomius,
Vigilantius, Helvidius, Jovinian, Faustus, Mat* 19.27 1. Cor 7. v. 25.28.38.
and Ebion heretics, saying: that works of supererogation (that is, not
commanded but councel'd by God) cannot be taught without arogancy and impiety;
and yet Christ taught them, and S. Paul commends them.

In the three subsequent Articles they seem to agree with all Christians: But
in the 19. they differ from all Catholics, And as the Arians did maintain the
fallibility of the Nicen Council, and the Donatists the fall or invisibility of
the whole Church, ^o do Protestants; and thereby open a wide gap for all
heresies.

In the 20. they contradict themselves, and the former articles by saying that
the Church has power and authority to decree controversies of faith; for there
can be no authority in a Church to decree or define matters of faith, without
there be in the faithful an obligation of conscience to submit and conform
their judgments to the said Decrees and definitions; and s^ure there can be no
obligation of conscience in any man to submit or conform his judgment in points
of faith to a Church that does acknowledge it self may err therein, and lead men
to heresy, idotry and damnation. True it is that the Protestant Church of
England can never remedy it is want of authority, unless it pretends to
infallibility; and that, now can hardly be don; seeing in the 2^. Article next
ensuing, it denis that same prerogative to general Councels, which are of
greater authority then our English Convocations.

In the 22. Article Cranmer and his Associats (because all other Sects of
Protestants do the same) speak clearly against the Roman Catholic doctrine of
Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping of Images, Relics, and invocation of Saints;
and are pleased to censure it a fond thing, invented and grounded upon no
waranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God: as if, forsooth,
the Jews, Atheists, and Apostata Friars who composed these 39. Articles, knew
better the right sense of the word of God, then the whole Catholic Church, and
the general Councels which practiced, and thaught the Roman doctrine, and the
lawfulness of these things, and condemned the contrary as heresy.

These errors were raised by Aerius n. 342^ Xenaias and other heretics: Aerius
because he was refused a Bishopric, taught that Episcopacy was not distinct
from single Priesthood; He denied Prayrs and masses for the Dead ought to be
offerred, and by consequence the doctrine of Purgatory; as also that the Church
could command men to fast, but that every man might fast when he thought fit
Xenaias was the first who made war against Images^ Vigilantius against
Relics, praying to Saints etc. S. Hierom. ad Ripar. and Desider. Presbiteros:
Vigilantius orsus est subito, qui contra Christi spiritum, Martyrum n^gat
sepulchra veneranda, damnatqae Sanctorum Vigilias; ex quo fit vt Dormitantius
potius quam Vigilantius vocari debeat. Haeretici assumunt sibi linguas suas, vt
cordis venena ore pronuncient. O proescindendam itaque linguam, and in parts
and frusta lacerandam? meam injuriam patienter tuli, impietatem contra Deum
far non valui.

S. Hierom laughs at the folly of Vigilantius the heretic, and calls him
Dormitantius, for being in these points a Protestant; and says that his tongue
ought to be cut and carved into a thousand pieces for blaspheming against God
in his Saints. And truly it is a hard case that Scripture should warrant our
worshipping of Prophets, or recommending our selves to the Prayers of Saints,
when they convers with us upon earth; and yet that it should not be lawful for
us to do the same when they are in heaven; as if their enjoying the presence and
sight of God, did diminish their dignity, or charity. Or as if a Saint in Gods
glory were not as fit an object and as capable of our Religious worship as a
Prophet, Apostle or Bishop is in this world, to whom we kneel out of the
religious respect we own to their spiritual caracter, or Ecclesiastical
dignity, though their natural qualities deserve not such respect. My-Lord of
Canterbury (they say) commends very The Protestant Bishops* are well pleased to
see themselves religiously worshiped or respected, and yet exclaim against
Catholics for showing the like respest to Saints.
much the religious piety of some Ladys for craving his benediction upon their
knees; which reverence is not exhibited by them, nor expected by him, as he is
M^r Sheldon; but as he pretends to be Archbishop of Canterbury. And if it be
not only lawful but comendable to kneel to his Grace, or at least to others who
are true Bishops, and to show a religious respect of the like nature to his
picture or presence; and that all this may be don without danger of Idolatry,
or of derogating from the Deity; I see no reason why men should condemn in us,
the like worship of Saints in their Images, or Relics. It is not the outward
action, but the inward intention that maks the worship unlawful. So long as we
do not adore Images as Gods, or Idols, we may bow and kneel to them with as
much ceremony, as Protestants do to their Prelates, or Episcopal pictures. The
simplest Papist can hardly be so stupid by nature, or at least so destitut of
instruction, as to believe a stock or stone, can be God; or that there is no
difference between the worship due to Saints, (whom they know to be but Gods
servants) and the worship due to their Master and Creator.

The 23. Article is set down in such general and ambiguous terms that neither
Presbiterian nor Prelatick Clergy is thereby established; nor any caracter of
Priesthood, or Episcopacy asserted, but according to the doctrine of all the
first Reformers, a private ministry of preaching, and baptising insinuated to
be common to all Christians. Be you most certain, says Luther lib. de Captiv.
Babylon. and let every-man (who is a Christian) know that we are all equaly
Priests, that is, we have the same power to preach, and administer the
Sacraments. The same doctrine teaches Zuinglius and Calvin. Though (to avoid
confusion) it be not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully caled, and sent to execute the same. And because in the 25. Article
they declare it is not necessary that this caling or ministry be ordination by
imposition of Bishop's hands, or by Apostolical succession, and by consequence,
may be extraordinary vocation, or election, they leave the authority of caling
as doubeful as not determining whether the power be in the secular Magistrate,
or in the ecclesiastical Congregation* albe^^ they seem (by virtue of the
English Supremacy) to place it in the King; their words are, And those we ought
to judge lawfuly caled and sent, which be caled and chosen to this work by men
who have public authority given unto them in (not by) the Congregation, to
call and send Ministers into the Lords vineyard. So that they seem to place
all spirtiual authority and jurisdiction in the Kings, and reserve only the
application thereof, and the choice of the persons authorized, to themselves.
But they were loath to explain their meaning in this particular, for fear of
scandalizing their brethren abroad, that admit of no such Supremacy in temporal
Princes.

In the 24. Article they make it a point of the Protestant faith, that
Scripture expressly commands the public prayers and ministering of the
Sacraments not to be in Greek, Latin, or Hebrew (wherein the Scriptures were
written) because the common people understand not these languages, but under
pain of damnation must be in English, Dutch, Irish, Welsh, etc. as if,
forsooth, it were not lawful for a Priest or public Minister, to offer
Sacrifice, or negotiat for a multitude of iliterat people in languages they do
not understand; or as if it were not sufficient for them to understand, that in
public or private prayers, they thank God for his benifits, and crave new
favors. So that according to this Article, a Greek Priest cannot offer public
prayers for the Latins, or even his own Grecians, who understand not the
learned Greeck, nor a latin Priest for the Grecians, or any other nation that
understands not Latin; neither is it sufficient that God who alone is able to
grant what is demanded, understand the petition, and hear the public
Minister, but it is necessarily required that the demand be made in a barbarous
language, because the common people understand no other.

In the 25. Article they cut of five of the seven Sacraments, as not being
Sacraments of the Ghospel, or ordained by Christ; this extravagancy of doctrine
was thought necessary for the discipline of the protestant Churches, which
despairing of a succession of true Bishops, excluded the Episcopal Caracter,
and all Sacraments that had dependency thereof.

In the 26. Article they endeavor to excuse their own lewdness and liberty
(though by inculcating truth) to wit, that the effects of the Sacraments are
not taken away, by the defects of the Ministers.

In the 27. they condemn (against their own principle in the 6. Article) their
Brethren the Anabaptists, for not baptizing their children: which error cannot
be confuted by Scripture without Tradition.

In the 28. they tell us it is plain in Scripture that when Christ said This is
my Body, he meant This is not my Body, and therefore that Transsubstantiation
cannot be proved by holy Writ: if they can prove by Scripture that Christ means
the contrary of what he speaks we shall confess that neither transsubstantiation
nor any other thing can be proved by holy Writ, but only this, that Scripture
cannot be understood, nor be a rule of faith.

They add that the mean, whereby the Body of Christ is spiritualy received and
taken in the supper, is faith. To receive, and eat spiritualy the Body of
Christ (if it signifies any thing) must signify that we ought to believe that
the Body of Christ is received and eaten. And if this belief be true (as it
must, if it be Divine) then Christ's Body is realy received and eaten, though
in a spiritual manner, that is in a manner not perceptible by our senses. The
29. Article is but a quotation of some words of S. Augustine.

The 30. Article seems to have bin altered (as also the 37. of the supremacy)
in Q. Elizabeth's reign; because as we find it now, it contradicts not only the
doctrine of the chief Protestant See Martin Luther the first founder of
Protestancy ep. ad Bohem. in declarat. Euchar. and in ser. de Euch. has these
words. Although truly it were an excellent thing to use both kinds in the
Eucharist (and Christ in this thing has commanded nothing as necessary) yet it
were better to follow peace and unity which Christ has commanded us to follow*
then to contend about the kinds.

And lib. de Captiv. Babyl. Cap. de Euch. They sin not against Christ who use
one kind, seeing Christ has not commanded to use it, but has left it to the
will of every one, etc.

Philip Melancton in 2. edit. loc. com. impres. Argent. an. 1525. fol. 78. He
erreth that thinks it impious to eat swin's flesh. As also these things are
indifferent and placed in our power, and so I judge of the Eucharist, that they
sin not who knowing, and believing this liberty do use either part of the sign.
Bucer allows the same indifferency, and Jewel in his reply to Harding page
108.109. and 110. John Pezibram a Bohemian Protestant in his book de
professione fidei Cathol. cap. 19. Here fearing God and taking notice of the
evil custums of others, I do confess that I do not intend to condemn or censure
for heretics any such persons of the Church as do impugn the communion of the
faithful under both kinds: which yet of necessity must have don, if he had
thought that Christ had recommanded it.


Reformers (who acknowledge that the Communion under both Kinds was always a
thing indifferent) but also the statut made in Edwards 6. reign, and a little
before this article was framed. The statut 1. Edward 6. cap. 1. ordains indeed
that the B. Sacrament be commonly delivered to the people under both kinds, but
adds, except necessity otherwise require. And certainly there can be no
necessity, or possibility for any human power to dispense with Christ's
ordinance and commandment, which this 30. Article says was, (contrary to what
the statut supposed) that both kinds should be administered to all Christian men
alike.

Besides, the statut does in the end declare that by what it commands, it does
not condemn the usage of any Church out of the King his Majesty's Dominions;
which limitation does demonstrat that the Parliament and English Protestants
then believed the communion of the layty under both kinds, not to be a precept
or determination of Christ, but an indifferent thing left to the discretion of
the Church: neither have our modern Protestants (who grant no other substance
in the Sacrament but that of bread and wine, whereunto they add nothing but a
remenbrance of Christ's passion) any reason to vpraid us with robing them of
half the communion, seeing we exhort the layty to that remembrance, and offer
them wine after receiving the species of bread.

In their 31. Article we are told that the Sacrifices of Masses (in the which
it was commonly said that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the
dead, to have remission of pain or guilt) are blasphemous fables, and dangerous
deceits And yet S. Cyprian lib. 2. and 3. versus finem, Et de Coena Domini post
med. Council 1. Toletan. can 8.5. Origin in numer. hom. 23. August. de Civit.
Dei lib. 10. cap. 19. and 20. and passim. S. Clement the Apostles scholar in
Apost constit. lib. 6. cap. 22. fol. 113. edit. Antverp. 1564. Council Nicen. 1.
can. 14. Augustinus de cura pro mortuis cap. 14. and in Enchirid. cap. 110.
etc. Tertul. ad Scapul. cap. 2. Chrisost. hom. 27. in act Apost. S. Clemens
lib. 8. Constable. Apost. cap. 18. fol. 173. and 174. edit. Antverp 1564. Augustine.
de Civit. Dei lib 22. cap. 8. Ciprian. de Coena Dom. prope initium S. Ignatius
the Apostles Scholar in Epist. ad Smirn. S. Augustine. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 12.
and in Enchirid. cap. 110. and de verb. Apost. sermon 34. Says that the
sacrifice of our price was offered for his Mother Monica, being dead; and that
it is not to be doubted, but that the souls of the dead are relieved by the
piety of their living friends, when for them is offered the sacrifice of the
Mediator: and that the universal Church does observe, as delivered from our
Forefathers, that for those who are dead in the Communion of Christ's Body and
Blood when in the time of sacrifice they be remembered in their place, prayer is
made for them; and (besides this prayer) it is remembered the sacrifice be
offered* for them also etc. S. Ambrose maks express mention of the Mass lib. 5.
epist. 33. Ego mansi in munere, Missam facere coepi etc. S. Leo epist. 81. ad
Dioscor. Necesse autem est vt quaedam Populi pars sua devotione privetur, si
vnius tantum Missae more servato, etc. S. Augustine. sermon. 91. de Temp. In
lectione (quae nobis ad Missas legenda est) audituri sumas. etc.

Let any Christian be judge whether it be not more safe, and more rationa^l^ to
rely in matters of faith upon the Tradition of the whole Catholic Church, and
it is ancient Liturgies, and upon the Testimony of all the holy Fathers, and
Councels since the Apostles, then to take the bare word of Cranmer, a man who
married and unmarried K. Henry 8. to as many women as his Majesty liked or
dislik't, dissolving the holy Sacrament of Matrimony as often as the King
seemed to be weary of a wife; a man, whose religion was nothing but his
convenience and incontinency; and therefore did alter his faith as often as the
tyms changed, and factions prevailed, and sided with every Rebel against his
Prince; and was so carnaly given that even in Henry 8. days, when Priests were
not permitted to have wives, he kept a wench so constantly, that he carried her
about in his Visitations: Let any Christian I say be judge whether this man
together with Ochinus a Jew, Bucer an Atheist, Peter Martyr so indifferent for
any doctrine, that he framed his faith at Oxfor^, according to the news from
London, and the Parliament Diurnals; Hooper, Rogers, and Latimer, ambitious and
discontented Presbiterians, B^le, and Coverdale, two lewd and runigad friars;
whether I say, these men ought to be believed in this important point of
salvation, rather then the holy Fathers, and Councels, who (as has bin^ said
hertofore) call the Mass the visible Sacrifice, the true Sacrifice, the daily
Sacrifice, the Sacrifice according to the Order of Melchisadech; the Sacrifice
of the Body and Blood of Christ, the Sacrifice of the Altar, the Sacrifice of
the Church, and the Sacrifice of the new Testament, which succeeded all the
Sacrifices of the old Testament: Must the word of Cranmer and his fellows be a
sufficient ground for prudent men to believe as an Article of Religion, The 2.
Council of Carthage contradicts this article Can. 2. Omnibus placet, that
Bishops Priests, and Deacons, etc. abstain from wives, that what the Apostles
have taught, and has bin observed by antiquity, we may keep.
that the doctrine delivered as Catholic by the holy Fathers, and Doctors of
the Church, are but fables, and themselves but a company of Cheats.

The 32. Article was made by Cranmer and his Camerades to excuse their
lewdness, legitimat their bastards, and make their wenches wives. The second
Parliament of King Edward 6. had bin so importuned by Apostata Priests and
Friars, who had coupled themselves with women, that (their petition having bin
rejected by the first Parliament Edward 6.) at lengh against the inclination
and judgment of both houses, they obtained now by mere importunity an Act to
take away all positive Laws of man, made against the marriage of Priests statut
an. 2. Edward 6. cap. 21. But then they are told in the very Act, that it were
not only better for Priests to live chaste sole and separat from the company of
women etc. but that it were most to be wished that they would willingly and of
themselves endeavor to keep a perpetual chastity, and abstinence from the use
of women. And 1400. years before that, See Clement l. 6. Constit. Ap. c. 17.
and Consil. A^^^rcan. 10. and Council. Neocesariense c. 1 and Cons^l Nic. can.
34. And Eusebius. de demonstrat. Evangelica lib. 1* c 9. Epiph. haer. 59. ante
med. Bas^l ep* 1. ad Amphilocium ca. 6 and epist. 17 ad Paragonu^ Presbiterum,
and Cicil. Hierosolomy* Catech 12.
Origin Hom. 23. and lib. 8. contra Celsum declared the doctrine even of the
Greeck Church in these words. It is certain the daily Sacrifice is hindered in
them who serve the necessities of marriage; therefore it seems to me that it
appertains only to him to offer the daily Sacrifice, who has vowed himself
to daily and perpetual chastity; with whom^agree the other Fathers; S. Jerome
(in Apologia ad Pamachium, cap. 3.) desires them who like not of this doctrine,
not to be angry with him, (for telling them of it) but with the holy
Scriptures, with all Bishops, Priests etc. who know they cannot offer
Sacrifice if they use the Act of marriage; and said to Vigilantius (c. 1.) who
in this point also was a Protestant, and seemed to confess his own frailty.
What do the Churches of the East, of Egypt, and of the Apostolic Sea, who
receive none but unmarried or continent Priests, or if they have vviues, they
must cease to be Husbands? And against Iovinian cap* 19. and 14. and ad
Pamachium Apol. cap. 8. Truly thou do acknowledge that he cannot be a Bishop
who in that state getts children; if he be convicted thereof he vvil not be
taken for a Husband, but condemned as an Adulterer. But it seems out Protestant
Bishops know the Scripture, and the doctrine and discipline of the primitive
Church better then S. Hierom, Origin, and all the ancient Fathers and Councels
both of the East and West. Since the King's most happy restoration they were
not content to enjoy their wives, and see the legitimacy of their children
approved of, but in the first Parliament wherein they were permitted to vote (as
I have bin credibly informed) they at^empted the house of Lords should declare
their spiritual peerage did communicate the same honors and privileges to their
Ladys, that the law does give to Baron's wives; but seeing the house smile at
the motion, and one of the first Peers begin to rally (according to his witty
way) upon a subject so proper for his genius, one of the Bishops not so much
concerned in the suit, (because he was not married) in the name of all the
rest, waved the pretention by saying, there had bin a mistake in the motion.

Jn the two following articles, they would fain prevent diversity of opinions
and schisms among the Protestants of the Church of England, and gain authority
for the Prelates thereof, and reverence for their ceremonies and censures. But
this design is frustrated by maintaining the lawfulness of their own revolt,
and separation from the Church of Rome, as also the Roman Catholic fallibility
and fall from the true Apostolic Religion, without any farther proof or
evidence of so great a fault or frailty, then the fancy and private
interpretation of Scripture of some discontented and dissolute persons
pretending divine inspirations, and illuminations for the same, and for their
warant to depose their spiritual Superiors, and to reform the doctrine of the
whole visible Church; which reformation they also introduced in so tumultuous
and seditious a manner, that none who considers the principles, practices, and
circumstances of the chang, can prudently commit his soul to the reformers
charg, or condescend to any spiritual jurisdiction and authority in their
Successors. For, besides that they have nothing to show for their presumption,
and intrusion, but obscure texts of Scripture, interpreted by them selves in a
sense contrary to that of the whole visible ancient Church, that has bin
confirmed by continual and undeniable Miracles; they can give no assurance or
probability of them selves being or continuing in the right way of salvation,
because if all the Roman Catholic Churches did err in doctrine, how can their
reformations pretend not to be subject to the same mis-fortun or mistake? And
if the supposed frailty and fallibility of the Church of Rome be a sufficient
cause to question and condemn it is authority, how can the Church of England, or
any other Protestant congregation exact from their Sectaries, greater respect,
and obedience, then the first reformers gave to their Roman Superiors?
Presbiterians, Independents, Quakers, Anabaptists etc. pretend to as pure
doctrine, as Divine a Spirit, and as much Scripture against Prelaticks, as
Prelaticks do against Papists, and thinck there is as much reason for them to
be Judges of the truth of their own Canon and sense of Scripture, and of the
falsehood of the Canon and sense of Scripture of the Church of England, as there
is for the English Church to make it self judge of the falsehood of the Canon and
sense of the Church of Rome. As for the authority which the Prelatick religion
receives from the laws of the land, that gives but little advantage, seeing the
Roman Catholic doctrine has bin confirmed by the temporal laws of every
Kingdom, Country and City, besor, and at the time that Protestancy succeeded,
and prevailed; and yet that legality was not valued by the Reformers.

The 35. Article is to authorize some Puritan homilies, as the 2. wherein the
danger of idolatry in Popery is much insisted upon, as if Christians could
easily mistake Images for Idols, or Saints for Gods* Jews and Heretics have
often endeavored to confound the one with the other* Catholics never.

The ancient Fathers, as also the second Council of Nice have long since
declared the Protestant Doctrine against Images to be heresy, and the Council of
Trent confirms the same decree of Nice, and demonstrats how far that the
Catholic doctrine of worshipping Images is from any danger of Idolatry. The
words of the Council sess. 25. are: The Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother
of God, and of other Saints are to be had and retained, especialy in Churches;
and that due honor is to be imparted unto them, not for that any Divinity is
to be believed to be in them, or virtue, for which they are to be worshipped or
that any thing is to be begged of them, or that hope is to be put in them, as
in tyms past the Pagans did, who put their trust in Idols; but because the
honor which is exhibited to them, is referred to the first pattern which they
resemble. So that by the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our
heads, and kneel, we adore Christ and his Saints, whose likness they bear; we
reverence that which is ratified by the Decrees of Councels, especialy of the
second of Nice, against the impugners of Images.

In the 36. they make it an Article of Religion, that their new form of
ordaining Priests and Bishops is valid, and contains all things necessary;
but since his Majesty's happy restoration they have judged the contrary, and
therefore thought necessary to add thereunto the words Priest and Bishop. See the
new Ritual of the Church of England published since his Majesty's happy
restoration.
Yet this will not serve their turn, for before they can have a true Clergy,
they must change the Caracter of the Ordainers, as well as the form of
ordination: a valid form of ordination, pronounced by a Minister not validly
ordained, gives no more caracter then if it had continued invalid, and never
bin altered: The present Protestant Bishops, who changed the form of their own
Ordination upon their Adversaries objections of the invalidity thereof, might as
well submit to be ordained by Catholic Bishops, as allow (by altering the from
after so long a time, and dispute) that it was not sufficient to make
themselves, and their Predecessors Priests or Bishops.

In their 37. Article they give a spiritual supremacy to the temporal
Sovereign. But because the world laughed at that vanity and at the statuts 1.
and 8. Eliz. 1. Wherein is declared, that the English Sovereignty is so
spiritual as that it may give to any person whatsoever (whether man or woman,
lay or ecclesiastic) power and authority to exercise any spiritual function,
and consecrat Priests and Bishops) they would fain make us now believe that
they did not attribut to the Queen, and her Successors any power of ministering
God's word, or the Sacraments; notwithstanding that the aforesaid Statuts, yet
in force, certify the contrary; And indeed if none can give what himself has
not, seeing the Kings of England can give power and authority to any person
watsoever to consecrat Priests and Bishops, and to exercise all kind of
spiritual ministry, and jurisdiction concerning God's word, and Sacraments,
this power and ministry cannot be denied to be inherant in themselves.

In the 38. and 39. articles they endeavor to supress some errors of the
Anabaptists, which necessarily follow from the foundation and principles of
Protestancy: for if it be lawful to deprive men of a spiritual authority and
jurisdiction, whereof they are in present possession, and which their
Predecessors had peaceably enjoyed, time out of memory, the consequence of the
lawfulness to deprive men of their temporal jurisdiction, Dominions, riches,
and goods, is evident by a parity of reason: for if peaceable and present
possession, confirmed by a prescription of many ages, be not sufficient to
ground right for the Roman Bishop and Clergy to govern souls, and to enjoy the
Church livings, there is no temporal Prince, or person can be secure, or have a
right to govern subjects or possess his Dominions. So that by the same warrant
whereby Prelatick Protestants have taken from the Pope, and Roman Clergy their
spiritual jurisdiction, and temporalities, the Anabaptists and all others may
evidently demonstrat, that all goods are common, and no one person can pretend
right to Superiority, or any thing he does possess.

SECT. VI. Of the effects which these 39. Articles of Prelatick Protestancy
immediately produced in England, and may produce at any time in every state where
such principles are made legal: and how the Roman Catholic Religion was
restored by Act of Parliament of Queen Mary.
AFter that Prelatick Protestancy had not only bin permitted, but established
by Parliament in England, ensued the destruction of many thousand innocent
people, as also of the Protector Seamor, and K. Eduard 6. together with the
exclusion of Q. Mary, and others the lawful Heirs of the Crown, and the in
trusion of the Lady Jane Gray (and in her of Dudly's son and family) unto the
Royal throne. These were effects of Protestancy, not events of fortunc; they
were designs driven and directed by the principles of the Reformation, the like
whereof any politic and popular subject may compass as well as Dudly: witness
our late long Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell's proceedings. Though K. Edward 6.
was but a Child, and his uncle the Protector no great Politician, yet they had
a grave and wise Council; but against the liberty and latitude which men are
allowed by the principles of Protestancy, no conduct can prevail, nor
government be safe, as appears in many examples, and in our late Soueraign's
Reign, and death. Jt's in vain to make particular articles of Religion, or
temporal Statuts, if there be a general principle admitted as if it were the
word of God, whereby both are rendered vnsignificant. One of the general
principles, and indeed the foundation of Prelatick Protestancy, is, that it is
lawful for private men and subjects (such were all the first Protestant
Reformers) to despise and depose their spiritual Superiors by their own
arbitrary interpretations, and applications of Scripture, notwithstanding the
peaceable possession, immemorial prescription, legality, and exercise of their
said Superiour's authority and jurisdiction. From hence it evidently follows,
that if it be lawful to deal thus with spiritual Superiors, it must be as
lawful ( a fortiori) to deal after the same manner, and upon the same grounds
of every private man's interpretation of Scripture with temporal Superiors. To
imagine therefore that by a particular article of Religion, or by an Act of
Parliament against Presbiterians, Quakers, Anabaptists, etc. (in favor of the
subject's property to temporal goods, or of the King's prerogatives, and
sovereignty) such men's minds, or mouths will be stopped from raising tumults, and
running into a rebellion so clearly waranted by the fundamental principle of the
Protestant Reformation, is but a fancy, not to be relied upon by any discreet
person.

Dudly Earl of Wa^vvick, and afterward Duke of Northumberland, observing that
by this foundation of Protestancy the very ground of Alegiance, and Obedience
not only to the spiritual, but also to the civil Magistrate, is vndermin'd;
resolved to make his son King of England, and in order thereunto married him to
the Lady Jane Gray, a Protestant of the blood royal, not doubting but that they
who had renounced all subordination unto their spiritual Superiors under the
pretext of a reformation, would upon the same score prefer the lady Jane to
the Crown before the Princess Mary, a Constant Catholic. Therefore after that
he had beheaded the Protector, and poisoned the King, he crowned his son's
wife, with the concurrence and applause of the Prelatick Clergy, Cranmer, Ridly
etc. and with the consent of the Protestant Nobility, and City of London. But
Protestancy not being at that time so deeply rooted, nor so largly spread in
the nation, the Catholic Gentry and Commons together with Q. Mary's great
courage, and resolution, quash't this Polititian's design, and brought him to
due punishment. Upon the scaffold he declared that he never had bin a
Protestant in his judgment, and only made use of it is profession and principles
for temporal ends, as to raise his family, etc. he advertiss't the people of
the new Religion's inconsistency with peace and quiet; that it is Clergy were
but Trumpets of sedition: The substance of his speech is set down by D.r Heylin
in these words. D.r Heylin Eccles. restau. Q. Mary page 19.
He admonished the spectatours, to stand to the Religion of their Ancestors,
rejecting that of later date, which had occasioned all the misery of the
foregoing thurty years; and that for prevention for the future, if they desired
to present their souls unspotted in the sight of God, and were truly affected
to their Country, they should expel those tempests of sedition, the Preachers
of the reformed Religion; that for himself, what soever had otherwise bin
pretended, he professed no other Religion then that of his Fathers; for
testimony whereof, he appealed to his good friend, and ghostly Father the Lord
Bishop of Worcester; and finaly, that being blinded with ambition, he had bin
contented to make rack of his conscience by temporising, for which he professed
himself sincerly repentant, and so acknowledged the justice of his death. A
Declaration (says D.r Heylin) very unseasonable, whether true or false; as
that which rendered him less pitied by the one side, and more scorned by the
other. This is a more Politic then pious observation of D.r Heylin; would he
not have men confess their faults, and profess their ^aith when they are dying?
and would he have them prefer the vanity of the pity or scorn of the world,
when they are to bid the whole world adieu, before the satisfaction and
salvation of the soul? I fear too many of D.r Heylins principles not only
deferr until the last hour the profession of the truth, but even then
dissemble; thinking a Declaration and recantation of their errors at that tym^
either unseasonable, or unpardonable; and prefer, the vanity of the world's
opinion, before the necessity of a conversion unto the true faith.

Q. Marys danger ended not with Dudlys death, D.r Heylin cit page 33.34* and
35.
it lasted as long as there was any man to head the Protestant party, and to put
the people in mind of it is principles. First, the Duke of Suffolck, and others,
plotted the setting up once more of the Lady Jane Gray, and began the execution
thereof by their Proclamations against Q. Marys intended marriage with Philip of
Spain; this occasioned the Lady Jan's death. Other zealots of the Protestant
Religion concluded a marriage between the Lord Courtny and the Lady Elizabeth;
their plot was discovered, as also Wyats Rebellion suppressed; all these things
were don by the advice and assistance of the Protestant Clergy that remained in
England, and were commended by such of them as lived abroad. D.r John Poinet
the last Bishop of Winchester was not only of Wyat's Council, Heylin page 35*
but continued in his camp until he perceived the design would not take; then
he departed telling the Rebels he would pray for their good success. Goodman,
and Knox rayled in their Books against the Queen; and Calvin in his Coment upon
Amos terms her Proserpine. Cap. 14*
Goodman has this expression. Wyat did but his duty, and it was but the duty
of all others that profess the Ghospel, to have risen with him for the
maintenance of the same. His cause was just, and they were all Traitors that
took not part with him. O Noble Wyat* thou art now with God, and those worthy
men that dyed in that happy enterprise. This was the primitive spirit, these
the first effects of our English Protestancy.

Not only the Queen out of a zeal to the Roman Catholic Religion, but the
Privy Council and Parliament moved with a desire of peace (seeing it was moraly
impossible to govern people protestantly principl'd) resolved to restore the
ancient doctrine wherewith their Ancestors had so long prosper'd; and to
suppress the Protestant novelties by the rigor of the laws formerly made
against heresies, which had bin repealed at the instance of the reformed
Preachers, and Prelates, in K. Edward 6. reign. And therefore (as D.r Bancroft
Archbishop of Canterbury confesses in his book of dangerous positions page
63.) though Q. Mary was a Princess of nature and disposition very mild and
inclined to pity, yet she and her government is taxed with too much severity
by them that consider not the nature and consequences of Protestancy. If
Tinkers, Tailors, Tapsters, Tanners, and Spinsters, would needs run into the
fire for defending the fond inventions of Cranmer, and of other known
Temporisers, who could help it? neither patience nor pains was wanting in the
Catholic Clergy to reduce them to the truth; but their obstinacy, and the
vanity of dying Martyrs (forsooth) made them prefer their own private sense of
Scripture before that of the whole visible Church. So charitable were the
Catholics, that they delayed the penalties of such as they could not convert,
and connived at them who endeavored to escape by absenting or concealing
themselves. And as for Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer, and the other Ringleaders of
Protestancy, they had liberty given them to maintain their cause in public
disputations, with the time, books, and notaries that themselves desired. How
little they could say for their Religion and Reformation, and how they were
convicted of frauds and falsifications, in the planting and propagating thereof,
may be seen in the third part of this Treatise.

But that which most pleased and settled the Kingdom, was the Roman Clergy's
resignation of the Church livings to the Crown, and to others that possessed
them. The whole Convocation petitioned to their Majestys, declaring the
readyness they were in, to wave their claim, and interest; and thus conclude.

D. Heylin Eccles. resta. in the Histor. Q. Mary page 43.
Wherefore preferring the public good, and quiet of the Kingdom before our own
private commodities, and the salvation of so many souls redeemed with the
precious Blood of Christ, before any earthly thing whatsoever, and not seeking
our own, but the things of Jesus Christ, we do most earnestly and most humbly
beseech your Majesty's, that you would graciously vouchsaf to interceed in our
behalf with the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pole Legate a
latere, from his Holiness, that he would please to setle and confirm the said
goods of the Church either in whole, or in part, as he thinks most fit, one the
present occulants thereof, according to the power and faculties committed to
him, by the said most Serene Lord the Pope, etc. And for our parts we do both
now, and for all tyms coming give consent to all and everything, which by the
said Lord Legate shall, in this case, be finaly ordained, and concluded etc.

As the Clergy showed much zeal and charity in resigning their temporal
interest, so did the layty give an eminent proof of Christian humility in
acknowledging their schism and heresy by an instrument delivered by the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, to Cardinal Pole, craving absolution for
their sins and schism, mentioned in the Statut an. 1. and 2. Philip. and Mar.
cap. 8. part of which Statut I thought fit to set down a part for an example
worthy of imitation, it being credible that they who were Actors in the Changes
of Religion, and had experience both of the new and old faith, knew better how
things were then carried, and upon what motives, then any now living. Thus then
they petition to the Queen, and King.

Whereas since the 20. year of K. Henry 8. of famous memory, Stat. an. 1. and*
2. Pbil. and Mar* cap. 8.
Father unto your Majesty our most natural Sovereign etc. much falls and
erroneous doctrine has bin taught, preached and written, partly by diverse the
natural born subjects of this realm, and partly being brought in hither from
sundry other foreign Countries, has bin sow'n, and spread abroad within the
same; by reason whereof as well the spirituality, as the temporality of your
Highness Realms and Dominions have swaru'd from the Obedience of the Sea
Apostolic, and declined from the unity of Christ's Church, and so have
continued until such time as your Majesty being first raised up by God, and set
in the seat Royal over us etc. The Pop's Holiness and the Sea Apostolic sent
hither unto your Majesty's (as unto persons vndefil'd, and by God's goodness
preserved, from the common infection aforesaid) and unto the whole Realm, the
most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pole, Legate a latere, to call us
home again into the right way from whence we have all, this long while wandered
and strayd abroad; and we after sundry long and grievous plagues, and
calamities, seeing by the goodness of God, our own errors, have acknowledged the
same unto the said most Reverend Father, and by him have bin received and
embraced, into the unity and bosom of Christ's Church: and upon our humble
submission and promise made, for a Declaration of our repentance, to repeal and
abrogat such Acts and Statuts as had bin made in Parliament since the said 20.
year of the said King Henry 8. against the Supremacy of the Sea Apostolic etc.

And because the first occasion and main Motive of our English Protestant
Reformation was the pretended nullity of K. Henry 8. and Q. Catharins marriage;
for satisfaction of the world and a discovery of the truth, the Parliament
(wherein sat many both Lords and Commons particularly acquainted with the whole
matter, and employed in that intrigue) declare their knowledge and discharg
their conscience in the ensuing Act 1. Mariae.

An Act of Parliament an. 1. Mariae concerning the fraud and force of King
Henry 8. unlawful divorce from Queen Catharin.
FOr as much as truth (being of her own nature of a most excelent virtue,
efficacy, force, and working) cannot but by process of time break out and show
her self, however for a while she may by the iniquity, and frailty of man be
suppressed and kept closs: And being revealed and manifested, ought to be
embraced, acknowledged, confessed and professed in all cases and matters,
whatsoever, and whomsoever they touch or concern without respect of persons;
but in such cases and matters, especialy as whereby the glory and honor of God
in heaven (who is the Author of Truth, and truth it self) is to be specialy set
forth, and whereby also the honor, Dignity, surety, and preservation of the
Prince, and the Ruler under God in earth, depends and the welfare, profit,
and special benefit of the universal people and body of a Realm is to be
continued, and maintained. We, your Highness most loving, faithful and obedient
subjects, understanding the very truth of the state of Matrimony between the
two most excelent Princes of most worthy memory, King Henry 8. and Qu^en
Katharin his loving, godly, and lawful wife, your Highness lawful Father and
Mother, cannot but thinck ourselves most bound, both by our duty of Alegiance
to your Majesty, and of conscience toward God, to show unto your Higness,
first, how that the same Matrimony, being contracted, solemnized, and
consumated, by the agreement and assent of both their most noble Parents, by
the council and advise of the most wise and gravest men of both their Realms,
by the deliberat and mature consideration and consent of the best and most
notable men in learning, in those days, of Christendom, did even so continue by
the space of 20. years and more between them, to the pleasure of Almighty God,
and satisfaction of the world, the joy and comfort of all the subjects of this
Realm, and to their own repose, and good contentment, God giving for a sure
token, and Testimony of good acceptance of the same, not only godly fruit,
your Highness most noble person (whom we beseech the Almighty and everliving
God, long to prosper and preserve here amongst us) and other Issue also, whom
it had pleased God to take out of this Transitory life unto his eternal glory,
but also sending us a happier, flourihing and most prosperous Commonwealth in
all things.

And then afterward, how that the malicious and pervers actions, of some (a
very few persons) envying the great felicity wherein, by the goodness of God,
your said most noble Father and Mother, and all their good subjects lived and
continued many years, did for their own singular glory, and vain reputation
conceive sundry subtle, and disloyal practices, for the interruption and breach
of the said most lawful, and Godly concord. And endeavering to put the same in
ure devised first to insinuat a scruple into the King your Father's conscience,
of an unlawful marriage, between him and his most lawful wife the Queen your
Highnes's Mother, pretending for the ground thereof, that the same was against
the word of God. And thereupon ceased not to persuade continualy unto the said
King your Father, that he could not without danger of the loss of his soul
continue with his said most lawful wife, but must be separated and divorced
from her. And to this intent caused the Seals a^ well of certain Universities in
Italy and France to be gotten (as it were for a testimony) by the corruption of
money, with a few light persons, Scholars of the same Universities; as also the
Seals of the Universities of this Realm to be obtained by great travail,
sinister working, secret threatenings, and intreatings of some men in authority,
especialy sent at that time thither for the same purposes.

And how that finaly Thomas Cranmer, newly made Archbishop of Canterbury, most
ungodly and against all laws, equity and conscience, prosecuted the same wicked
device of divorce, and separation of the said King your Father, and Queen your
Mother, caled before him ( ex officio) the hearing of the same matter of
marriage, and taking his foundation partly upon his own unadvised judgment of
the Scripture, joining there with the pretended Testimonies of the said
Universities; and partly upon bare and most untrue conjecturs, gathered and
admitted by him upon matters of no strength or effect, but only by supposal,
and without admitting or hearing any thing that could be said by the Queen your
Mother, or by any other on her behalf; in the absence of the said late your
Mother, proceeded, pronounced, and discerned, declared, and gave sentence, the
same most lawful and undoubted matrimony, to be naught, and to be contracted
against God's law, and of no value, but lacking the strength of the law* and
the said most noble King your Father, and the said noble Queen your Mother so
married together, did separat and divorce, and the same your most noble Father
King Henry the 8. and the said noble Queen your Mother, from the bands of the
same most lawful matrimony, did pronounce, and declare, by the same his
unlawful sentence, to be free, discharged, and set at liberty. Which sentence
and judgment so given by unlawful and corrupt means and ways by the said
Archbishop of Canterbury, was afterward upon certain affections ratified, and
confirmed by two several Acts, the one made in the 25. year of the reign to the
said King your Highnes's Father, and entitled, an Act of declaring the
establishment of the succession of the Kings most Royal Majesty, of the
Imperial Crown of his Realm. The other Act of Parliament made in the 28. year
of the reign of the said King your Highnes's Father, entitled an Act for the
establishment of the succession of the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

In the which said two Acts, was contained the illegitimation of your most
noble Person, which your said most noble Person being born in so solemn a
marriage, so openly approved in the world, and with so good faith, both first
contracted, and also by so many years continued between your most noble
Parents, and the same Marriage in very deed not being prohibited by the law of
God; could not by any reason or equity in this case be so spotted. And now we
your Highnes's said most loving, faithful, and obedient subjects of a godly
heart and true meaning, freely and frankly, without fear, fancy, or any other
corrupt motion, or sensual affection, considering that this foresaid marriage,
had it is beginning of God, and by him was continued, and therefore was received,
and is to be taken, for a most true just, lawful, and to all respects, a
sincere and perfect marriage, nor could nor ought by any man's power, authority
or jurisdiction, be dissolved broken, or separated (for whom God joyneth, no
man can nor ought to put a sunder) and considering also, how during the same
marriage in godly concord, the Realm in all degrees flourished to the glory of
God, the honor of the Prince, and the great reputation of the subjects of the
same; and on the other side, understanding manifestly that the ground of the
said divice and practice for the said divorce, proceeding first of malice, and
vain glory, and afterward was prosecuted and followed of fond affection, and
sensual fantasy, and finaly executed and put in effect by corruption,
ignorance and flattery; and not only feeling to our great sorrow, damage, and
regret, how shamful ignominies, rebuks, slanders and contempts yea with death
pestilence and wars, disobedience, rebellions, insurrections* and diverse other
great and grievous plagues. God of his Justice has sent upon us, ever since
this ungodly purpose was first begun and practiced; But also seeing evidently
before our eyes that unless so great an injustice, as this has bin, and yet
continued, be rebuked, and that the said falls and wrongful process, Judgment,
and sentence, with their dependances be repealed and revoked, nothing is less
to be doubted, then that greater plagues, and strokes are like to increase and
continue daily more and more with in this Realm; do beseech your most excelent
Majesty, as well in respect of your own honors, dignity and just title, as for
truth's sake wherewith (we doubt not) but your Highness also will be specialy
moved in conscience, and also for the entire love, favor, and affection which
your Majesty bears to the common wealth of this Realm, and for the good
peace, unity, and rest of us your most faithful subjects, and our posterity;
that it may be enacted by your Highness, with the consent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled.

And be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that all and
every decree, sentence, and Judgment of divorce, and separation between the
said King your Father, and the said late Queen your Mother, and all the process
commenced followed, given, made, or promulged by the said Thomas Cranmer, then
Archbishop of Canterbury, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, whereby
the same most just, pure and lawful marriage, between the said late King your
Father, and the said late Queen your Mother, was, or is pronounced, or in any
wise declared to be unlawful, or unjust, or against the law of God, be, and
shall be from the beginning, and from hence forth, of no force, validity, or
effect, but be utterly naught, void, frustrat, and annihilat, to all intents
constructions and purposes, as if the same had never bin given or pronounced.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforsaid, that as well the said Act of
Parliament entitled an Act declaring the establishment of the Succession of
the King's most Royal Majesty, to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, made in the
25. year of the reign of the King your Father be repealed, and be it void, and
of no effect, as also all and every such clauses, Articles, branches, and
matters contained and expressed in the afforsaid Act of Parliament, made in the
said 28. year of the Reign of the said late King your Father, or in any other
Act, or Acts of Parliament, as whereby your Highness is named or declared to be
ilegitimat, or the said marriage between the said King your Father, and the
said Queen your Mother, is declared to be against the word of God, or by any
means unlawful, shall be, and be repealed, and be void, and of no force nor
effect, to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if the same sentence or
Act of Parliament had never bin had, nor made, and that the said marriage had
and solemnized between your said most noble Father King Henry, and your said
most noble Mother Queen Catharin, shall be definitivly, clearly, and absolutely
declared, deemed and adjudged, be, and stand with God's law, and his most holy
word, and to be accepted, reputed, and taken of good effect and validity to all
Intents, and purposes. etc.

Notwithstanding that the force and fraud used by King Henry 8. Cranmer, and
others engaged in this divorce, were so plainly manifested, the Catholics
faith reestablished, the folly and falsehood of former schisms and heresies
publicly acknowledged, yet no sooner was Queen Mary deceased, then Queen
Elizabeth and her Protestant faction, resolved to return to the former errors,
whereunto vicious persons (who always are the greatest number) were as
vehemently inclined, as men are to enjoy their liberty, and to excuse the
sensuality which they practiced, by the principles of that Religion.

Dr. Heylin Q Elizabeth page 107.
And though it seemed a business of great difficulty for Q. Elizabeth and her
Council, to revive a Reformation, which had bin so lately cried down as schism
and heresy, by the unanimous concurrence of a full and lawful Parliament, yet
her Regal authority, her sex, and words wrought so strongly upon the weakness
of some, and upon the ambition of others, that she gained the greater part of
the house of Lords (and yet but by on only voice) for establishing Protestancy;
the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Arundel employing in her service, all
their interest, with friends and relations, against the Religion of their
Ancestors. And such Lords and Gentlemen (says D.r Heylin) as had the managing
of elections of their several Counties, retained such for members of the house
of Commons, as they conceived most likly to comply with their intentions for a
reformation. Besides (says he) the Queen was young, unmarried and like enough
to entertain some thoughts of a husband; so that it can be no great mervail,
not only if many of the nobility, but some even of the Gentry also, flattered
themselves with possibilities of being the man whom she might choose to be her
partner in the Regal Diadem. Which hopes much smoothed the way to the
accomplishment of her desires, which otherwise might have proved more rugged
and impassable, etc. Notwithstanding all these devices, and compliances they
never passed an Act in Parliament for the validity of her Mothers marriage, on
which (says Heylin) her title most depended. It seems the late former Act
declaring the validity of Queen Catharins marriage detered her from attempting
an other incompatible therewith, and wherein men must have had contradicted
themselves most imprudently, as also the truth asserted by the many witnesses,
and confirmed with such individual circumstances, that without infamy to the
late Parliament they could not take from Queen Elizabeth the brand of bastardy.
Yet they resolved it should be no bar between her and the Crown, and so they
thrust her into the Throne, which of right belonged to Mary Steward Queen of
Scotland, as is manifest to all that are not persuaded, Catholic Religion does
make sovereigns incapable of Regal jurisdiction.

SECT. VII. Other effects of Protestancy after it was revived in England by Q.
Elizabeth, to exclude the Royal Family of the Stewards from the Crown; of the
nulity of her Clergy's caracter and jurisdiction.
By King Henry 8. his revolt from the Church of Rome, not only the Religion but
the realm of England was so embroiled, that very many who had no right,
entertained hopes of ascending into the Royal Throne; some by fishing in
troubled waters, others by marrying Q. Elizabeth, others by their descent from
the younger daughter of King Henry 7. (all mention of the heirs of the elder
Sister having bin omitted, or blotted out of the last will and Testament of K.
Henry 8.; and Q. Elizabeth having bin declared ilegitimat by three Acts of
different Parliaments, which never yet were repealed) very few there were that
did not hold their own title to be more legal then hers. This confusion also
made the Queen of Scots known right to be neglected. But the French King who
was concerned therein, commanded her to be proclaimed Q. of England, and
quartered the Arms of great Britanie with his lilies. Q. Elizabeth apprehended
some danger from a title so clear, seconded with the power of France, and
Scotland; and therefore by the advice of Secretary Cecil and others, resolved
upon the chang of Religion and the destruction of the Catholic party and
Clergy which favored the Stewards claim. Act. 14. v. 23. and tom. 5.22.
The Protestant Reformation (as being suitable both to her birth and interests)
was revived, and a new caracter of Priesthood and Episcopacy devised; not
imprinted in the soul by imposition of Episcopal hands, according to the
Ghospel, but in wax, as if forsooth by the weight of the great seal, and the
virtue of a she supremacy, a woman or lay men might make Bishops. This
superficial formality was declared a sufficient caracter, and ground of
Episcopacy, by a Junta of her Majesty's lawyers, and Divines as appears in
their definitive sentence, and her Commission See thee nulity of the Prelatick
Clergy of England cap. 2. and D. Bramhal in his vindication thereof pa. 92. and
page 10^.

Dr. Stapleton in his return of untruths against Jewel fol. 130. and in his
Counterblast against Horn fo. 79 and 301 Dr. Harding Confut. Apol. fol. 57. and
60 and part 2. fol. 59. edit. 1563 and fol. 57. and 59 edi. 1566


to the Consecraters of her first Bishops D.r Parker, and others, wherein she
dispenses with all the inhabilities, and incapasities even of their State and
Condition; because the true Bishops refused to ordain her Clergy, and a Clergy
she was resolved to have that would vote in Parliament, and instruct the People
as should be thought fit for her Succession and security.

And because the Roman Catholic Writers of those tyms laughed at the Protestant
Bishops Episcopacy, and bid them show the letters of their Orders, not the
letters patens of the Queen; and told them a secular Prince might give them
the revenues of Bishoprics, but not the Caracter of Bishops; and that the same
Catholic writers insisted much upon their Adversaries not being able to name
what Bishops did consecrat them; and besides pleaded in the public Court, they
were not realy nor legaly ordained; and that afterward it appeared so to the
Jury appointed for the examination thereof; both the Queen and her Bishops found
it absolutely necessary for her credit and their caracter, to ratify all Acts,
and things had made, or don by any person, or persons in or about any
consecration, Stat. 8. Elizabeth. 1.
confirmation, or investing of any person, or Persons elected to the office, or
dignity of Archbishops, or Bishops by virtue of the Queens letters patents, or
Commission, since the beginning of her Reign. So that to know whether D.r
Parker, and his Camerades were true Bishops, none must have examined whether
they had bin consecrated by other Bishops, but only whether the person or
persons that were the Consecrators (whether lay men or Ecclesiastic it
mattered not) performed that ceremony by virtue of the Queens letters patents,
or commission? If they could show her great seal, they might use what matter
and form they pleased; for, Stat. 8. Eliz. 8.
by the Act 1. and 8. Eliz. there was given to the Queens Highness, her Heirs
etc. full power and authority, by letters patents under the great seal of
England, from time to time, to assign, name, and authorize such person or
persons as she and they shall thinck meet and convenient (any lay man or woman
would serve turn) to exercise, use enjoy and execute under her Highness, all
manner of jurisdictions, Privileges, preheminences, and authorities, in any
wise touching or concerning any spiritual, or ecclesiastical power, or
jurisdiction within this Realm, or any other her Majesty's Dominions, or
Countries. Now priesthood being nothing but a spiritual power to Consecrat
Christ's Body and Blood, and forgive sins, and Episcopacy including besides the
same, a spiritual power to consecrat, and ordain other Priests and Bishops; who
can doubt but that by these words and Statut, the Queen might, and her
Successors may, by their sole letters patents and great seal, make any lay
man, (whether Carter or Catchpole), a Protestant Bishop, or Priest; seeing
thereby he receives full power to exercise, use, execute, etc. all manner of
jurisdictions, preheminencies, and authorities, in any wise touching or
concerning any spiritual, or ecclesiastical power etc.

And because there might remain no ambiguity or scruple of Parker, and the first
Protestant Bishops valid and legal Consecration, the same Statut 8. Elizabeth
1. assures us, that the Queen in her letters patents for that purpose directed
to any Archbishop, Bishops, Or Others (mark the word Others) for the
confirming, investing, and consecrating of any person elected to the Office or
dignity of any Archbishop, or Bishop, has not only used such words and
sentences as were accustomed to be used by the late King Henry, and King Edward
her Majesty's Father and Brother, in their like letters patents, made for such
causes; but also has used diverse other general words and sentences, whereby her
Majesty by her supreme power, and authority has dispensed with all causes or
doubts, of any inperfection or disability, that can, or may in any wise be
objected against the same, as by her Majesty's said letters patents (remaining
on record) more plainly will appear. Now Mr. Bramhal, the late Primat, would
fain make the Parliament so senseless, and his Readers so simple, as to referr
the words, mentioning and comparing the records of the Queen and her Father and
Brother's time in this Act, to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Register, and not
to their Majesty's letters patents; where as by the whole context and discourse
it is evident, that the Parliament's drift is to show no such ceremonious
solemnity (as of late has bin pretended and printed by Mr. Mason) was
necessary. Had there bin any such legal or formal Consecration at Lambeth, as
50. years after was forged, and foisted into the Archbishop's Register, the
Parliament 8. Eliz. 1. would have remitted us thereunto, named Lambeth, and not
insisted al-togeather upon the Queen's dispensation for the validity, and
legality of her first Bishops Consecration and caracter.

See the nullity of the Clergy and Church of England edit. 1659.
Many ar the reasons lately printed, and not like to be answered, that persuade
all prudent men, who have not too great a passion for the Prelatick Clergy, to
believe that Mr. Mason's new found Register of Lambeth is forged. 1. It was
never produced, nor mentioned by the first Bishops, so much pressed by their
Adversaries to show some Register, or any evidence for their Consecration. 2.
They were only desired to let the world know, where, when, and by whom they had
bin made Bishops? questions easily answered, had they bin consecrated at
Lambeth, or any Register then extant when Dr. Harding, Stapleton and others,
charged them with nulity and illegality of Episcopal caracter. 3. It Is no more
credible that such knowing and conscientious men as Stapleton, Harding,
Fitzherbert etc. then living in England, and probably at London, would question
so public and solemn an action, then it is, that a sober man would now call in
doubt King Charl's 2. coronation at Westminster, or ask in print, who set the
Crown upon his head pretending he never had bin crowned. And though Bishop
Godwin and other Prelatick Writers abuse Dr. Harding, Holiwood, Fitzsimons etc.
for relating the meeting of the first Protestant Bishops with a design to be
ordained at the Nagshead in Cheap Side, yet all the world knows that albeit
there could be no design to feign that story, yet our Controversy with the
Prelaticks, is not whether their first Prelates were ordained there, but whether
they were ordained any where? We know Bishops might be as validly consecrated in
a Tavern, though not so decently, as in a Church. But it is fit they also
consider, Bramhal in his vindic^tion page 132.
that if Dr. Parker and their first Bishops, were so narrowly watch't by Mr.
Neal, and other Catholics (whom Primat Bramhal does call Spies) that they could
not be merry in a Tavern without their knowledge, they could hardly perform so
serious, and solemn an Action in a Church, as the first Consecration of a
Protestant Archbishop, without their observation; it being a matter then so
much sought after, and controversed, of so great curiosity in it self, and of
greatest concern to us, the total credit, and being of their new Reformation
depending thereupon; And yet for above 50. years none of the Writers of either
side Catholic, or Protestant (who mentioned all other particulars relating to
the reformation) writ, or spoke a word of this solemnity at Lambeth. The
Puritans indeed upraided the Prelaticks with saying their Episcopal ordination
in England, had it is beginning and progress in a corner, not in a Congregation,
Demonstrat. Discipl. cap. 8.. 1 and 2. page 43.
but we can not imagine they could mistake the Archiepiscopal Chapel of
Lambeth, for a corner, or deny that the great Assembly pretended to have had
bin at Dr. Parker's Consecration, deserved not to be caled a Congregation.

Queen Elizabeth's Clergy thus created by her patents, and Parliaments, they
endeavored to show themselves gratful to her Majesty, by making the people
believe that Popery (by the principles whereof she was incapable of the Crown)
was Idolatry, the Pope Antichrist etc. And to that end corrupted Scriptures in
their English Translations, as shall be proved herafter. And because their
frauds and follies were discoverd by Catholic Priests, 2. part.
the sanguinary and penal laws were enacted and executed with great cruelty.
But that which most troubled the Queen and her Clergy, was the life and right
of the Queen of Scots; they found an expedient to rid themselves of both, that
innocent Queen was murdered, and seeing Queen Elizabeth was not inclined to
marry, it was decreed in Parliament that in case there should be any natural
issue of her body, it should enjoy the Crown after her death, See this Act of
Parliament in the life of the Queen of Scots, Written by Mr. V. dal, and
dedicated to King James page 200. and 201.
and so the line of the Stewards was excluded; and for that the doctrine of the
Roman Catholics favored their Title, all persons of that profession were
discountenanced, and persecuted. And albeit this setlement both of the Crow'n
and Clergy of England, seemed very absurd to all that reflected upon the
principles of Christianity, and the practice of God's Church, yet they who were
guided only by Maxims of human policy, excused the Queens proceedings, and
condemned not her Clergy for accepting of those revenues, and dignities which
they could not acquire by honest and ordinary ways, their learning being but
vulgar, and their birth obscure. Had not her Majesty exalted those mean persons
from nothing, to be a legal, though not lawful Clergy, she could not have had
any Clergy at all, for that no man of conscience, or honor, would have gained
his living by damning souls, and corrupting Scripture, nor received a spiritual
caracter from a secular seal, and she supremacy. And indeed even to this day
very few or none of the Protestant Nobility, or prime gentry, undergo that
course of life; and the better sort of Trads-men take it for no great honor
when any of their Relations become, Ministers.

And because the foundation of the Queens legitimacy, and of her Clergys
caracter and jurisdiction, was King Henry 8. and her own supremacy, an oath of
the same was pressed upon the subjects, and proposed in the Parliament. The
temporal Lords who were wiser then to believe that Christ committed the
government of souls, and of the Church to women or lay Princes (all of them one
excepted) having bin for the three first Centuries, Idolaters; and many, for
some succeding ages, notorious heretics, (and for the future may prove no
better,) refused to concur with their votes for passing of the Oath, unless
the Peerage were exempted from taking it: this being condescended unto, they
consented to make that Oath legal, which themselves had rejected as unlawful;
and yet is this oath, even in our tims, made the distinctive sign not only of
Prelatick Protestancy, but of Cavallier loyalty, and Christian honesty. But
this policy of State neither then, nor now, could worck that unity of faith,
and union of hearts for which it was devised. It divided Protestants into
Puritans, and Prelaticks; and confirmed Papists in their own belief, as being
scandalized to see others make a thing so incredible, the foundation of their
faith. The Puritans agreed with the Papists in denying the Queen's spiritual
supremacy, but differed from them in the ground of the denial, and in the
person whereunto they granted that prerogative. The Papists continued it in the
Pope; the Puritans usurped it to themselves. The Papists grounded their belief
concerning the Pop's supremacy upon the common and continual consent of all
Catholics, See 1* p. se^ 1.
acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be de jure Divino S. Peter's,
Successor;the Puritans rejected that consent and Tradition, relying upon their
own private spirit, and fond interpretation of Scripture. And though it be more
dangerous for Souveraigns to allow of this spiritual superiority in their own
subjects, then in a stranger, whose parentage (generaly speaking) is not
considerable, and whose power is not durable, as coming very late into his
hands, and not surviving his person by descent to his posterity, or relations;
yet Queen Elizabeth, was more jealous of the Pope, then of the Puritans; because
the generality of the Irish, and a great part of the English, were Papists; and
according to their principles, the Stewards ought to have bin in possession of
the British Empire, and the Pop's censures in behalf of the Queen of Scots, had
wrought already upon some of their consciences. But the Puritans hated her
Religion, person, and posterity, and were the chief instruments that Queen
Elizabeth employed in embroyling Scotland, and sheading of her Royal blood: and
therefore they were not only tolerated, but many of them exalted to places of
trust, honor and profit. On the contrary, the Roman Catholics were
persecuted, as a party that not only wished, but wrought what was possible for
the Queen of Scots liberty, relief, and the restitution of the Crown to her
self, and to her line, whereof it had bin so unjustly deprived by the principles
and practices of Protestants: whereof some were so ignorant or impudent, as to
give out then, and even now Dr. Heylin page 131. does rashly maintain, that the
Pope offered to confirm her English Liturgy, upon condition she would
acknowledge his supremacy. This was then, and is now reported, to the end
illiterat Protestants may believe there is no great difference between their
Reformation, and the Catholic Religion; and that the Bishops of Rome, and the
Council of Trent proceeded rashly in their Censures, or at least may now, and
would then, contradict former definitions, upon more mature deliberation, or
for some temporal respects: But they who know it is not in the Pop's power to
legitimat a spurious brood, on begot and born in adultery, as Queen Elizabeth;
and that he would be deposed from his Papal dignity, if he offered to confirm,
or allow any of the many defined heresies contained in the English Liturgy: They
I say, will not believe the Bishop of Rome could be so fond of Queen Elizabeth,
or forgetful of him-self, as to become a Protestant, and chang the revenues of
his Popedom for the uncertainty of her pension, in case she would value his
kindness so much as to bestow a pension upon him. By such follies and frauds is
Protestancy supported in the opinion of credulous, and carless people, and
their Clergy kept in possession of a vast revenue.

SECT. VIII. Reasons why Queen Elizabeth in her 44. years Reign could not make
her Prelatick Clergy and Religion acceptable, neither is it possible for her
Successors to gain credit and esteem for the same.
THe setlement of a Christian Religion or Clergy does not consist in making
them legal by Acts of Parliament, but in persuading the people that both the
Religion and the Clergy is Apostolic; and by consequence that the Acts of
Parliaments whereby they are confirmed, are lawful. Notwithstanding the great
severity of Queen Elizabeth's laws, and the little sincerity of her Clergy, in
pulpit, press, and private conversations, against the Roman Catholic Religion,
for the space of above 44. years of her Reign, though Popery was thereby rendered
odious, and ridiculous to simple men, silly women, children, and others, whose
want of capacity, and even of curiosity made them not reflect upon the drift of
Protestant Preachers, nor upon the reasonableness of Catholic Tenets; yet
their Prelatick Protestancy did and does every day rather loose then gain
ground, and the generality of these Nations can not be wrought upon either by
fair or foul means to thinck well of that Religion, or to submit their
Judgments, and consciences to the direction of the Bishops, and Prelatick
ministry. The reasons are obvious to such as are not obstinat. 1. The
incredibility of their pretented spiritual caracter and jurisdiction. 2. The
incoherency of their doctrine with the fundamental principles of Protestancy.
Their Episcopal caracter and jurisdiction, is as incredible as King Henry 8.
spiritual supremacy, Queen Elizabeth's legitimacy, and the validity and
solemnity of their first Bishops consecrations. They have indeed of late
endeavored to excuse the latness of their Masonian Registers discovery, Primat
Bramhal's succession and vindication of the Prelatick Clergy was answered by
the Author of the nullity of the Church of England, and by an other book after
he had both these a^swers by him; and durst not reply: but rather co^curred
with his Brethren in adding the words Priests and Bishop to their forms of
ordination, as appears in their last edition of the Common prayer, rites etc.
of the Church of England.
and to clear them from the suspicions of forgery, but so faintly and
fraudulently, that their vindication (though penned and published by on of the
ablest Prelates of their Church) has furnished their adversaries with so many
new demonstrations against their Caracter, that in steed of a reply, the
Protestant Bishops have resolved upon a submission to the evidence of our
arguments, and changed the controverted and essential part of their forms of
Ordination.

As they endeavored of late to vindicat their Registers from forgery, so they,
long since explained the Queens supremacy, but so contrary to the known laws of
the land, and clear words of their Oaths both of supremacy and Episcopal
homage, that neither can bear their fond interpretations; and if they could,
the Bishops would have nothing to show for their pretended spiritual function
and jurisdiction, it being manifest they cannot deduce either of them by
succession from any Apostolic Church, or orthodox Council; and therefore must
content them-selves with what they can buy from a lay sovereign, and temporal
Statuts, or acknowledge the truth, and confess ingeniously, they are but
laymen, and have no lawful authority to take upon them a spiritual function,
and jurisdiction, seeing they have no Catholic Predecessors, and degenerat
from the first Protestant Reformers, and are ashamed to claim (with
Presbiterians and Fanatics) the extravagancy of a private spirit, and
extraordinary vocation.

The incoherency also of the Prelatick doctrine maks these nations averse from
the Prelatick Church and Clergy. ^n the 39. Articles of Religion they declare
with Luther, and the first Reformers, that no visible sign or ceremony (and by
consequence no such thing as imposition of Episcopal hands) was instituted by
Christ, or is the necessary matter of a Priest's and Bishop's ordination; and
yet now of late, that visible sign and ceremony is held by them-selves to be so
essential, that without the same, no caracter of Priesthood or Episcopacy is
thought to be given to the party ordained; and therefore they reordain such
Presbiterian Ministers as did neglect, or contemn imposition of Episcopal
hands. 2. They maintain in the same 39. Articles, that the Roman Catholic
Church has falen into damnable errors, and acknowledge that only such a fall can
justify the Protestants separation, or excuse them from sin and schism. And yet
when they are pressed with a consequence that necessarily follows out of this
supposition, to wit, that if the Roman and visible Church had so erred,
Protestants can have no Christian faith, nor certainty of the Scriptur's being
God's word, or of the Trinity and Incarnation etc. which they received and
retain upon the sole Testimony of the Roman Catholic Church, having in their
own 39. Articles declared the Greeck Church, Heretical (for the doctrine of the
Holy Ghost's procession) and therefore it is testimony (even in other Articles) is
invalid, and it is concurrence, in those other Articles, with the Roman Church,
is vnsignificant. And yet they again contradict them-selves, and confess that
the Roman Catholic Church is infalible in all articles necessary for
salvation. 3. The same inconstancy and incoherency they show in denying, that
doctrinal Traditions are the word of God, or that Tradition it self is a
sufficient ground of Divine belief; and yet when they are demanded to show a
proof by clear Scripture of the distinction between single Priesthood, and
Episcopacy (v.g.) then they maintain that traditional doctrine is God's word,
and the testimony of the Roman visisible Church, a sufficient evidence thereof.
Their wavering and inconsequent way of proceeding, does manifest to the world,
that as well in this, as in other particulars of Christian Religion, nay even in
declaring which are necessary or not necessary points of faith, the Prelatick
Clergy has a greater regard to their own convenience, then to God's veracity;
and to the revenues of ^he Church, then to the salvation of souls: Otherwise
why should they take our Roman Catholic word for Episcopacy, and not for the
Pop's supremacy; for the letter, but not for the sense of Scripture; for not
rebaptising, or for receiving relapsed penitents, more then for Purgatory, or
Transubstantiation; or for keeping Sunday, and not praying to Saints etc.
Seeing all these doctrins are equaly proposed to them as Catholic truths by
the sole credible testimony and tradition of our one and the same Roman
Catholic Church; the testimony of the Greeck and all other Churches (as has
bin said) being rendered invalid by the heretics wherwhith Protestants confess
they are infected:

Some are of opinion that if the more modern Prelaticks had not forsaken their
old way of being ordained Bishops by the Queens letters patents, or by some
such public testimony and superficial ceremony of their Congregations, without
troubling them-selves with the doctrine of the inward caracter given by
imposition of Episcopal hands, so contrary to the principles of the reformation
a broad, and to the 23. and 25. of their own 39. Articles at home; they had not
bin so hard put to it by their Presbiterian Brethrens arguments, who stick to
the Tenets and Rules of pure and primitive Protestancy, detesting those
formalities and dregs of Popery, which Prelaticks of late have so much affected
in ordaining of Ministers.

Mr. Hooker, Dr. Couel and some other Prelaticks in their writings toward the
end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, began to inculcat the doctrine of making
Ordination a spiritual caracter imprinted in the soul by imposition of
Episcopal hands, and not a bare formality, of the secular Magistrat's election,
by some outward ceremony, or letters patents, as all English Protestants had
believed and practiced until Hooker and Couel broacht this among their other
Popish novelties, and therefore were publicly blamed, and complained of by
Prelatick Writers, and particularly by Dr. Willet in his worck upon the 112.
Psalm. printed 1603. and dedicated to the Queens Majesty page 91. he says:
From this fountain have sprung forth these and such other whirlpoints, and
bubles of new doctrine; and amongst others he sets down as a novelty in the
Church of England this, That there is in ordination given an indelible
caracter; and then adds, Thus have some bin bold to teach and write, who, as
some Schismatics (the Puritans) have disturbed the peace of the Church one way
in external matters concerning discipline; they have troubled the Church
another way in opposing themselves by new quircks and devices to the soundness
of doctrine among Protestants.

And truly, to pretend with all reformed Churches, that the Pope is Antichrist,
and the man of sin, and at the same time profess (as the learned Prelatick
writers do in their books) that without his caracter of Priesthood there can be
no orthodox Clergy or Christian Church; are things that do not hang well
together; neither is it credible that so zealous Protestants as were the first
English reformers Cranmer, Coverdale, Bale, etc. who strained Scripture in
their Translations (and made formal abjurations) against the caracters of
Episcopacy and Priesthood, which they had received in the Church of Rome; or
that Parker, Jewel, Horn, etc. who received that same doctrine, and excluded
those caracters by an express Article of their 39. of Religion from the Church
of England, and from their form of ordination, it is not I say credible, that
these and the like men did maintain in their convocations, the late Prelatick
contrary doctrine, or that they exercised or recorded any such Popish
formalities of consecrating Priests and Bishops by imposition of Episcopal
hands, as M.r Mason pretends he found in Parker's Register at Lambeth, as
appears also to any that will consider, the homely choice, and caling of the
primitive Pastors and Preachers of our Prelatick Protestancy, objected to
themselves in print when they were living, and yet could not deny the fact,
neither did they go about to excuse it, not taking it to be a fault.

D.r Kelison in his survey page 373. and 374. says of the Protestant Clergy in
Q. Elizab. time. Lay men were taken, of which, some were base artificers, and
without any other consecration or ordination then the Prince's, or the
superintendent's letters, made them Ministers and Bishops, with as few
ceremonies and less solemnity then they make their Aldermen yea Constables and
cryers of the market. D.r Stapleton in his Counterblast lib. 4. number. 481,
says. And wherein I pray you rests a great part of your new Clergy, but in
Butchers, Cooks, Catchpols, and Cobblers, Diers, and Dawbers, fellows carrying
their mark in their hand instead of a shaven Crown, etc.

Seeing therefore our Catholic Arguments convince all disinterest'd persons (that
weigh them) of the absurdity and novelty of Protestancy in general; and such as
do not take them to be of any weight (because themselves are biased, and bent
against us by education or interest) must needs take notice (if they think
seriously of any Religion or of their own Protestant principles) that the
Prelatick Reformation is but a politic appendix or addition of Q. Elizabeth in
pursuance of her Father's passion, and by her self resolved upon, more for
securing a Crown then saving the soul; See in the epistle Dedicatory, and our
Preface, the Act of Parliament preferring any natural issue of Queen Elizabeth
to the Crown before the royal family of the Stewards.
and therefore containing more mysteries of state then of faith, and more
regarding conveniences then conscience, as appears by the layty of her
Clergy, by her She-supremacy, by the anticipated Royalty of her unlawful issue,
in case she would be pleased to own any; these things I say being no calumnies
of malignant pens or persons, but most manifest by her own Articles of
Religion, and Acts of Parliament, can hardly be digested by honest subjects,
(much less settled as Divine truths in Christian souls) or carry the face of a
pious and plausible Religion, even amongst the most silly sort of people. Yet
far be it from our thoughts to censure with folly or impiety such as sucked
with their Nurses milk the poison of this Prelatick Protestancy; no, we know
they want neither piety nor policy according to their own principles; but I
hope they will not be offended, if, according to ours, we do pity their
condition, and pray for their conversion; we believe their zeal against our
catholic Religion proceeds not from malice, but mistaks; and desire they may
likewise believe our intention is only to expel by this antidot, the poison
which others have infused into their brains. This humble apology and
explanation does not relate to them that made the chang of Religion for
preferring Q. Elizabeth, and any natural issue of her body to the Crown, before
the lawful heirs, who (by God's providence) since her death, and at this
present enjoy right, nor to any that will obstinatly maintain such proceedings:
It is intended for all well meaning Protestants that believe themselves to be
Catholics, and if they be not, wish they were; and that the true Religion were
settled in these Nations. But what mervaile is it that private persons be
mistaken in Protestancy, when the Royal family of the Stewards (against whose
title and succession it was introduced and established, both in England, and
Scotland; in England by Q. Elizabeth, in Scotland by the Bastard Murry) are so
much in love with that Religion; devised for their own ruin? So bewitching a
thing is education, engrafted in good dispositions, and so dangerous, if not
cultivated, and corrected, by our own more mature reflections, when we arrive
to years of discretion.

SECT. IX. How injurious Protestancy has bin to the Royal family of the
Stewards, and how zealous they have bin, and are in promoting the same*
AFter that King Henry 8. had usurped the Pop's Supremacy, See Udal (a
Protestant) in his history of the Queen of Scots, where he proves how the
bastard M^rry, by the means of John Knox and others that he employed; changed
the ancient Religion in Scotland to the end him self might be made King by the
Protestants; and how afterward by the same way he murdered King James his
Father, and persecuted King James, and his mother, all under the pretext of a
Protestant Reformation.
and divised certain Articles of Religion, he desired his Nephew K. James 5. of
Scotland, to follow his example, which that Catholic Prince refused to do,
King Henry in his last will and Testament (confirmed by his Protestant
Parliament) excluded the Royal family of Scotland from their right and
succession to the Crown of England, preferring before the Stewards not only his
illegitimat daughter Elizabeth, but the Grays, and all others that descended of
the younger sister Queen Dowager of France, and Duchess of Suffolk. King James
5. deceased, his wife the Queen Regent of Scotland, and his young daughter
Queen Mary, were so persecuted by the Scotch and English Protestants, that the
Queen Regent was deposed, and Queen Mary was forced to fly for refuge into
France. After her return into Scotland, the King her Husband was murdered by
the Protestants, his subjects, and the innocent Queen trepan'd by her
protestant Bastard Brother to marry Borthvel one of the murderers; with a
design to diffame and depose herself from the government, which the Bastard had
usurped; and had murdered likewise King James 6. an infant, but that God
prevented his wicked designs by permitting him to be killed by the hand of a
Hamilton.

Other Protestants succeeded the Bastard Murry in the government; and though
King James escaped the dangers, and designs they had laid for his life, yet
they perverted his soul, and when he was but 13. months old, Protestancy was
set up in his name; his Mother (being driven out of her own Kingdom by those
Protestants that deposed herself, and abused her Son's minority) was (contrary
to the public faith and private promises of Queen Elizabeth) imprisoned in
England, her Rebels countenanced, and her self at length most unworthily
murdered by the joint consent of a Protestant Queen and Parliament: and her
son and Family excluded from the British Empire, in case Queen Elizabeth should
have, or at least own, any natural issue: which many suppose was the true
cause, why she or the Parliament would never declare her Successor.

King James having bin brought up in this school of affliction, attained to
more then ordinary wisdom, dissembled with his enemies in England, and
strengthened him-self with as many friends and Allies as he could in foreign
Nations, to the end he might recover his right after Queen Elizabeth's death,
which he and the best part of the world every day longed son* He kept fair
with France, Spain, and even with the Pope. He succord Tyrone Tirconel, and the
Jrish Scots in Irland against Queen Elizabeth but under hand. He corresponded
with the Catholic party in England, and was civil even to that party that
contrived and pressed his Mothers murder. By his marriage he obtained the
confederacy of Denmarck and the Protestant Princes of Germany for recovering of
England. Cecil and others of the English Council, observing how prudently this
young King had ordered his affairs, and prepared him-self for being their
Master, courted him, and unknown to the Queen, gave him daily intelligence, and
thought it their best course to fix upon him for her Successor; seeing they
could hardly keep him out, they invited him to the Throne after his enemie's
death; and he finding that very Protestancy by which his mother and him-self
had bin so long excluded from their right (and would have bin for ever, if
Queen Elizabeth had bin as capable as it is said she was desirous of Posterity)
was deeply rooted in the hearts of most of his English subjects (who either did
not see he chang, or not observe the motives and Mysteries thereof) King James J
say, reflecting upon this inclination of the people to Protestancy, conformed
him-self unto that Reformation which had bin settled by law in England;
discountenanced the Puritans, by whose doctrine he had bin persecuted in
Scotland; and would have tolerated the Catholic, if the gun powder Treason
(whereunto some few discontented and desperate Papists were cunningly drawn by
Cecil, to make their Religion odious) had not blasted our hopes, and blotted
out of his Majesty's memory what we had suffered for his Mother, and how not
only our persons, but our principles had bin persecuted for supporting the
title of his Family to the British Empire.

By King James his learned works, and discourses, it is manifest he had a
design to reform the principles of Protestancy, and reduce them to some rules
of reason, and confine that dangerous liberty which they give to every private
Protestant, of being supreme Judge in all spiritual Controversies to one certain
interpretation of Scripture that might be less prejudicial to Monarchy,
Monarchs, peace and all civil Government, then the Protestant arbitrary
interpretations have proved hitherto. To that purpose he commanded the Bible to
be truly translated, and those fraudulent and foolish corruptions to be
corrected, which had bin imposed upon the people for God's word by Queen
Elizabeth's Clergy, for maintaining her title, and securing the revenues of the
Church to them selves. But his command was not obeyed, some falcifications in
the old and new Testament were corrected, but very few, in respect of what
remain and pass now current for true Scripture. He declared that Catholics and
their Religion had no hand in the gunpowder treason, those few persons
excepted, which had bin executed. He was not, afraid to acknowledge that the
Pope was the first Bishop of Christendom, and Rome the mother Church; he
suspended the rigor of the sanguinary and penal Statuts; commended not
apostatised Priests, that became Protestants, as he said, to get wenches, and
benefices. These things he did, not out of any inclination to Popery, but out
of his zeal to Protestancy, which he perceived would in a short time become as
infamous, as it is intolerable to Monarchs, in case it is principles were not
corrected and brought nearer unto Catholic Tenets.

After King James his death, his son King Charles 1. pursued the Father's
design; but found by sad experience that the Protestant liberty of interpreting
Scripture, cannot be restrained to reason by any human industry of the wisest
Princes; especialy so long as they are guided by a fallible Church that
confesses it is own uncertainty of doctrine.

King Charles the 1. was persuaded by his Council and Clergy that the Laws
which had bin enacted in favor of the Prelatick fallible Church, and doubtful
jurisdiction, were of sufficient force and authority to contain Protestant
subjects in awe, and obedience, and to stop the course and consequences of those
fundamental, and violent principles of their reformation against superiority,
at the Church of Rom's door; and keep them from passing further, or
entrenching upon the Church of England. But the mistake soon appeared; they who
are allowed by the Prelatick principles to rebel against their Roman
Superiors, under the pretense of a Religious interpretation of Scripture, and
evangelical Reformation, could not then, nor cannot for the future, be
contained, or deterred by any authority from rebelling against their Protestant
Kings, and Bishops upon the same score, whose superiority could not be more
authentic, then the Roman Catholic. And therefore because the King, had engaged
in the Bishops quarrel, he drew upon himself the odium of all Protestants that
with the spirit and zeal of Reformation stuck to the fundamental principles of
Protestancy, which is, to contemn all authority both spiritual and temporal,
which any private person judges contrary to his own interpretation of Scripture;
and seeng the Prelatick Church of England does grant this doctrine was lawful in
Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Parker, and other particular persons, Churches, and
States against the Pope, and others their then acknowledged spiritual and
temporal superiors, it will be very difficult to show why now a Presbiterian
or Fanatic Congregation may not as rationally pretend, and as lawfully
practice the same doctrine as their primitive Protestant Predecessors had don.
And so in virtue of this fundamental principle of Protestancy, was the sacred
person of a good King judged and murdered, by a rude and wicked multitude,
without regard to innocence, or respect to Sovereignty: And by a remarkable
revolution of tyms, and interests, the grandson came to loose his head for
upholding that same Prelatick Religion and Clergy which by Q. Elizabeth had bin
raised for the destruction of his Grandmother, and the exclusion of his family
from the crown.

Since Christian Sovereigns have reigned, the like Tragedy has not bin acted;
many Princes have bin murdered by their Subjects, but never by any such
formality of Law, and a public Court of Judicature, pretending superiority in
themselves, and Scripture for their rule and warrant. Wherefore they that look
into the principles and privileges for the future in so zealous and resolute a
people as the English, who stand much upon enjoying their temporal liberties,
and much more upon the spritual prerogative of Protestancy, which according to
Luther (the first Author, Luther in epist. ad Argentinenses, anno 1525.
Christum a nobis primo vulgatumau demus gloriari.

See part 2 sect 5. n. 5. See M.r Belson Bishop of Winchester, in his true
difference etc. part. 2. page 353.

See M.r Rogers in the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England, page 103.
perused and published by the Lawful authority of the Church of England, an.
1633.

Calvin in Dan c. 6. v. 22. and 23. Abdicant se potestate terreni Principes du^
insurgunt co^tra Deum etc potius ergo co^spicere oportet in illorum capita,
quam ^llis parere etc.


and Apostle thereof is) omnia judicemus and regamus. Let us judge and govern all
things; and not only his German Scholar Brentius but our English Bishop
Bilson, and all Prelaticks grant, that the people must be discerners and Judges
of that which is taught. And the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England
explaining the 39. Articles thereof says, Authority is given to the Church, and
to every member of sound judgment in the same, to judge controversies of faith,
etc. And this is not the private opinion of our Church, but also the judgment of
our godly brethren in forain Nations. And it is not only the Tenet of Calvin,
but of all Protestant Writers, that temporal laws oblige not in conscience any
Christians to obey.

It being therefore a principle and privilege, even of Prelatick Protestancy,
and agreeable to the 39. Articles, that every member of sound judgment in the
Church, has authority, to judge controversies of faith (and by consequence) all
other differences that may be reduced thereunto, how is it possible for any King
to be a Sovereign among Protestants, who are all supreme judges both of faith
and state? for that State Affairs are subordinat to Religion, and must be
managed according to the Protestant sense of Scripture, that is, according to
the judgment and interpretation of every particular Protestant or of him that
can form or fool the multitude into his own opinion. Wherefore we ought not be
astonished, that men constituted supreme Judges and Interpreters of Scripture
by the legal authority and articles of the Church of England, and by the
Evangelical libertys of Protestancy, should presume to make them-selves the
King's Judges. For my part, I shall thinck it a great providence of God, and
extraordinary prudence in the government, to see any King of England (during
the profession and legality of such principles in his Kingdom) escape the like
danger; and do continualy pray, that their good Angel may deliver them from
the effects of their own Religion.

His Majesty that (by miracle) now Reigns (long may he live and prosper) has
bin forced to lurck for his life in one of those secret places whereunto Priests
retire, when they are searched for; God giving him to understand thereby, that
the most powerful Princes (where Protestancy prevails) even in their own
Kingdoms, are never secure; and may be often reduced to as hard shifts, and as
great extremities as the Poorest Priests, and meanest Subjects.

RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT.
THE SECOND PART. Of the inconsistency of Protestant principles with Christian
piety and peaceable Government.
SECT. I. Proved by the very Foundation of the Protestant Reformation, which
is, a supposition of the fallibility and fall of the visible Catholic Church
from the pure and primitive doctrine of Christ, into notorious superstition.
IN the beginning of the first Part, it has bin said that the groundworck as
well of Policy, as of Peace and Piety, consists in making that persuasion to be
the Religion of the State, which is most credible, or most agreeable to reason;
because no commands, duties, taxes, or charges will seem intolerable to
subjects, for the preservation, and propagation of such a Religion, nor for the
maintenance of the spirititual and temporal Ministers, to whose charge is
committed the government of such a Church and Commonwealth. How far all kind
of Protestancy (even the Prelatick) is from having this prerogative, we shall
demonstrat in this Part of our Treatise; and in this Section prove the same by
the absurdity of the fundamental Protestant principles, Common as well to the
Prelatick as to all other Reformations.

The foundation whereupon all Protestant Reformations are built, is this
incredible or rather impossible supposition, Viz. That all the visible and
known Christian Churches of the world ^ell from that purity and truth of
doctrine, which they had once professed, into superstition, and damnable errors;
until at length in the 15. age, God sent the Protestant Reformers to revive the
true faith and Religion; whose separation from the Roman Catholic Church and
all others then visible, is pretended to be free from sin and Schism, by reason
of the falsehood of the Roman Catholic doctrine, not consistent with salvation.
But this supposition is incredible. 1. Because Protestants confess the fall and
change of Religion was not perceived until 1300. or until at least 1000. years
Perkins in his exposition upon the Creed p. 400. we say that before the days of
Luther, for the space of many hundred years an universal Apostasy overspread
the whole face of the earth, and that our Church was not then visible to the
world.

Mr. Napper upon the revelations, dedicated to King Jams page 143. says, from
Constantin's time until these our days even 1260; years the Pope and his
Clergy has possessed the out ward visible Church of christianity.


after it happned, and such an imperceptible change in Christian religion,
involues as plain contradictions as a silent thunder.

For, either it must be granted that all the Pastors, and Prelates who lived in
the time that any alteration of doctrine began, were so stupid as not to take
notice of so important and remarcable an object; or so wicked as to observe,
and yet not oppose novelties so destructive to the souls committed to their
charges. Both which are proved to be groundless calumnies by the acknowledged
zeal learning, and integrity wherewith many Prelates and Pastors were endued in
every age since the Apostles, as their works yet extant do testify.

The truth of this Protestant supposition is not only incredible, but
impossible; because the supposed chang of Christian Religion into Popish
superstition is not pretended to have bin only a chang of the inward
persuasion, but of the outward profession, visible and observable in ceremonies
and practices, answerable to the Mysteries believed; as the adoring of the B.
Sacrament, worship of Jmages, Communion in one kind, public prayer in unknown
languages etc. How then is it possible that any Christian man, or Congregation
could begin so discernable and damnable novelties, as (according to the opinion
of our Adversaries) The adoration of the Sacrament, Transubstantiation, worship
of Jmages, Communion of the layty under one kind, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
and public prayers in an unknown language, the Pop's supremacy, the doctrine of
Purgatory, Jndulgences, Praying to Saints, the unmarried life of Priests etc.
How is it possible I say, that any one should begin to teach, and practice any
of these supposed damnable doctrins, and yet never be noted, or reprehended by
any one Prelat, Pastor, or Preacher (who ar (according to Esaias) the wat^chmen
upon thy vvalls o Jerusalem have I set watchmen all the day, and all the night
for ever, they shall not be silent Esaias 62.6. see Ephesians. 4.11.
of te visible Church) until Luther's times, or at least until these supposed
superstitions had bin so universally spread, so deeply rooted and plausibly
received as Catholic truths, and as ancient Traditions of Christ, and of the
Apostles, that they who censured and opposed any of them, were (for so doing)
immediately cried down and condemned by the then visible and Catholic Church
and Counsels, as notorious heretics; How come the Preachers and Professors of
these pretended Popish errors to escape for so many ages, as Protestants
confess they had continued, vncontroul'd from the censures of Christ's pure
Protestant Congregation, if there was any upon earth during that time? was
there not one Bishop, Priest, or Preacher in all the world for so many ages, so
zealous as every Protestant is in ours! If any Protestants lived then, why did
not they speack or write? were they all Temporisers, and Turn-coats? or were
they all so blind, dumb, deaf, and dull, that not one of them could see, hear,
reprehend, or observe practices and ceremonies so erroneous, obvious, and
offensive?

The Protestant evasion or answer to this evident Demonstration, is both
frivolous and fallacious. Their chief Doctors Dr. Powel in his consideration of
the Papist's supplication page, 43. Buchanan. in loc. com. pa. 466. And Whitaker
contra Camp. rat. 7. page 101. and 102. and contr. Duc. page 277. This Whitaker
after vainly attempting to show the beginning of Popery, and seeing the
insufficiency of his particular instances, does at length acknowledge his
weakness, and runs with the rest of his Protestant Champion^ to divert the
Reader from the evidence of truth so deceitful, and silly similituds.
acknowledge they can not tell by whom, nor at what time the Popish errors were
broacht, and say that errors in Religion may creep as insensibly into the
Church, as a building may decay, or white hairs grow in man's head: as if,
forsooth, all and every Christian of the world, and particularly the Pastors
and Prelates of the Church, were as much concerned in the observation of every
gray hair and head, or in the preservation of every building from decay, as
they are in observing and preserving the purity and integrity of every article
of faith, and in opposing the least novelty contrary to the same. Besides, the
outward profession and propagation of those points of Popery that Protestants
suppose to have crept insensibly into the Church, could neither be concealed,
nor confounded with the contradictory principles and practices of Protestancy,
as a white hair may be easily confounded and concealed with others that cover,
or come near it in color. Moreover, the chang from youth, and stately
buildings, into gray hairs, and ruinous edifices, is wrought insensibly by the
hand of time without any perceptible concurrence of any other cause; Time wears
out and consumes structure, strength, youth, and beauty, whether men gaze or
not gaze upon such gay objects; but the planting, preaching, or inculcating of
new doctrine, and new ceremonies of Religion, are of a quite contrary nature;
they have not such dependency of time alone, they must be effects of attention
and observation of discourses and disputs, of Sermons and Catechisms; they must
be also professed and practiced in the view of the world. Time without these
and the like notorious practices and observations, can not alter Christian
Religion, nor induce a contrary superstition.

Lastly. Granted there were no fallacy in the similitude, nor disparity in the
Comparison; the examples are better retorted against Protestancy, then applied
to Popery; for, though hairs may begin to grow white, and buildings to decay,
without any great notice taken of their chang, yet when either coms to the
height, or even to the mediocrity of their chang, that chang is observed by as
many as have eyes to see; and is not only observed, but resented, and remedied
(according to their power) by them who are most concerned in such decays and
defects. If then a white head is so easily discerned from black, and a ruined
edifice from a new Palace, and a decayed face from a beauty, by all kind of
people that make use of their senses, and if so much industry is used by them
who are most sensible of those imperfections, to hinder their further progress
or appearance; how is it possible that all or any orthodox Christians (being so
greatly and particularly concerned in the purity and truth of their Religion,
and in the observation of it is rites and Ceremonies) could be for many ages so
stupid, as not to distinguish it is doctrine and profession from the quite
contrary? or so carless in applying remedies against the grouth, and
continuance of errors both damnable and discernable? Is it not more probable
and possible that Martin Luther (a man so impious, proud, and passionat, that
him-self acknowledges he did retain Idolatry in the Church at Wittenbergh, to
vex his Scholar Carolostadius; should (to disgrace the Pope and Papists his
enemies) be seduced (by his confessed disputation and submission) in his
diabolical doctrine, then that the whole visible Church, Fathers and Councels
before Luther for at least 1000. years, should not only forsake Christ's
doctrine, but mistake the true sense of Scripture now pretended to be so clear
and manifest to every Protestant? That all the world did conspire and concur
to such an apostasy, is not credible: That they who did not concur, should sit
quiet and conive, is as unlikely.

If no Pastor nor Prelat had the courage to oppose Idolatry and superstition,
sure some one or other would have had the curiosity to describe the occasion,
beginning, and progress of so great and remarkable a change; and would mention,
(if not condemn) the stupidity of the whole Church, in not opposing doctrine so
inconscionable, and unreasonable. And yet there is no Tradition thereof, nor a
syllable in any history sacred or profane, of this supposed change in any on
point of Popery, nor so much as the least sign thereof in any monument of
antiquity.

SECT. II. The Protestants evasion of the cleerness of Scripture against our
Roman doctrine, as also of the invisibility of their own Church, confuted: and
the incredibility of the supposed change and Apostasy, proved by the difference
of the Roman Catholic, and Protestant principles.
THE second evasion of Protestant Writers is, that they are not bound to
inquire when or where our Popish errors crept into the Church, or became so
universal, but think it sufficient to prove by Scripture, that Popery is not
Christ's doctrine. This shift is no less absurd then the former, because they
suppose for granted what is denied, and the subject to our disputes.

The controversy between Protestants and Catholics is, whether the Roman
Tenets be contrary to Scripture? Protestants say they are, and prove it,
because, forsooth, Scripture is contrary to the Roman Tenets; We deny it, and
they prove it only by pretending that the letter and sense of Scripture is
evident for the Protestant doctrine, and by consequence they must say that all
Papists for the space of 1500. or at least 1000. years, have bin either so
witless as not to understand what is evident, or so wicked as to contradict
evidence, and the cleerness of God's written-word and meaning. Let any
Protestant (who has so much sense as to understand that nothing but the
obscurity of Scripture can make it the subject of disputs, and occasion
diversity of opinions among so honest and learned Christians), be judge, whether
the controversies between us, and Lutherans, Presbiterians, and Prelaticks.,
etc. be not a demonstration that the true sense of Scripture is not clear and
evident in the controverted Texts. And if the dissent and dissentions amongst
honest men and learned Scripturists be an undeniable proof, and evidence of
Scriptur's obscurity, whether it be not great obstinacy in Protestants to
maintain that Popery is evidently condemned in Scripture, and that so many
thousands of honest and learned Papists could not or would not discover what is
clear to every illiterat Protestant; or if they did, would not embrace that
truth to which their judgments and God's clear word did direct them?

Until the year 1517. no man ever pretended the cleerness of Scripture for
Protestancy; at that time Martin Lather (seeing all the Fathers contradicted
his protestant doctrine) bouldly affirmed Luther tom. 2. Wittemb. anno 1551.
lib. de se. arbit. page 434
the ancient Doctors and Fathers of all former ages to have bin blind and most
ignorant in the Scripturs, and to have erred all their life time.

And in Colloq. cap. de Patribus Ecclesioe Luther says of sundry Fathers in
particular thus. Jn the writings of Jerome there is not a word of true faith in
Christ and sound Religion. Tertullian is very superstitious. J have holden
Origin long since accursed. Of Chrysostom I make no account. Basil is of no
worth, he is wholly a monk, I way him not a hair. Cyprian is a weak Divine,
etc. Adding further that the Church did degenerat in the Apostles age, and that
the Apology of his scholar Philip Melancton does far exceed all the Doctors of
the Church, and exceed even Austin him self. And in his Treatise de formula
Missae, and in tom. 3. Germ. folio 274. Jf the Council should in any case
decree this (the Communion under both kinds) least of all then would we use
both kinds, yea rather in despite of the Council, and that decree, we would use
either but one kind or neither (notwithstanding Christ's precept and the
necessity of that spiritual refection) and in no case both.

But this man's bare word ought not to weigh more then the Testimony of all the
Fathers and Councels that went before him, or be preferred before the constant
Tradition of 15. ages, especialy if we reflect upon the pride, and passion
which he declares in all his writings, not only against the Doctors of the
Roman Church, but against his own Disciples: and (as has bin said) how in the
beginning of his reformation (when his spirit was in it is primitive fervor) he
does plainly confess that he did favor Idolatry, to contradict Carolstadius
for anticipating his commands in a point of the reformation, viz. for
abolishing of the adoration and elevation of the B. Sacrament in his absence:
Luther in par^a Confess. and to. 3. Germ fol. 55. in Colloq. mons. Germ. fol.
210.
I did know (says he) the elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatricall, yet
nevertheless J did retain it in the Church at Wittenberg to the end J might
despite the Devil Carolstadius. And yet this wicked friar's authority is the
first foundation of protestancy: Therefore notwithstanding his known impiety he
is termed by their writers Mr. Gabriel Povvel in his consideration of the
Papists supplication page 70.
Holy saint Luther, a man sent of God to lighten the world: Fox act. and Mon.
pa. 40 Jewel in his Apology p. 4. c. 4.5* 2. and in his defense of the Apology
edi. 1571. p. 426
the Helias, Conductor, and Chariot of Israel: to be reverenced next after
Christ and Paul: Andreas Muse^lus in praef. in libellum Germ. de Diaboli
Tyranide. Nicolaus Androphius Conc. ^ de Luthero.
greater then whom, lived not since the Apostles tims: Conrad. Schlusletbur.
Catal. haeret. l. 13. pa. 314 and seqq.
The Angel and last trumpet of God, whose caling was M. Cartwright in M. whit
gifts defense page 17.
immediate and extraordinary etc. Let the most peevish Protestant, I say once
more be judge, whether it be not more probable and possible that one private
proud and Luther contra Regem Angliae, fol. 344. I pass not if a thousand
Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King Henry's Churches stood against
me. Et libro de se. arbit. contra Eras. edit. 1. Lay a side all the arms of
orthodox antiquities etc. see also nullus and nemo G. 6. page 153. And
Cnoglerus his symbola tria page 152.
passionat man did mistake the true sense of Scripture, and misapply the words
thereof to humor his passion of pride and revenge, then that all the primitive
Fathers and Christians of the world did conspire to forsake the known true
letter and clear meaning of God's word; or if all did not conspire in the
Apotasy, that there should be no monument left, or mention made in record,
history, or tradition, of the fidelity of the party that resisted.

Secondly, this supposed change is proved incredible not only by the
impossibility of an insensible change in a thing so remarkable and important as
the doctrine and Profession of Christian Religion, but also by the impossibility
that a change and corruption of Christ's doctrine should be made to the
detriment of the wary layties temporal interest, and to the disadvantage both
of the layty and Clergie's liberty; For when men resolve to go out of the
narrow way which leads to heaven, they are not so foolishly wicked as to retire
from the wide world into deserts, or Monasteries, and to impose upon themselves
or their followers an obligation or principles of a more Danaeus page 939. in
his answer to Belarm. of the confessed austerity of life of S. Bernard, S.
Francis, S. Dominick, the Monks etc. says they were all fools. And M.r Willet
who makes a special Treatise against the austerity of the ancient Fathers in
page 358. of his Synopsis, reproved S. Bazil, S. Gregory Nazianzen for plucking
down themselves by immoderat fasting, and concludes: Where in all the Scripturs
learned these men thus to punish their bodies? Oseander reprehended S. Anthony
the Eremit for the same, and says his Religion was superstition. And Calvin
lib. 4 cap. 12. sect. 8. that the austerity of the ancient Fathers, was not
excusable and differs much from God's prescript, and is very dangerous. And
Iunius in his animadversions page 610. and 611, attributs S. Simon Stilletes
his austerity and Miracles to cunjuring melancoly, and his prophecies to
suggestion from the Devil.
strict course of life then that which they had forsaken, as daily experience
does clearly demonstrat.

If protestancy therefore was the primitive and pure Christian Religion, the fall
from it to Popery, must have bin rather condessending then contrary to
sensuality and liberty: And yet if the doctrine of the reformation, and it is
exceptions against Popery be considered, we shall find that in every particular
wherein they differ, Protestancy does favor liberty and vice; Popery does
favor temperance, and virtue.

We shall declare herafter to what great crimes and carlesness of life men are
encouraged by the Protestant doctrine of predestination, and justification by
faith alone. Christ's sufferings and satisfaction for our sins they apply not
to themselves by imitation of his virtues, and mortification of the flesh, but
think it a diminution of his glory, and a disrespect to his person, that men
endeavor by God's grace to help themselves, and to cooperat with Christ's
passion; and upon thi^ ground they raise their batteries against Indulgences,
Purgat^^y* ^^lgrimages, Prayer to Saints, Confession of sins, Penance, the
three Vows, and the austerity of a Religious life, Works of Supererogation etc.
and censure Catholics as guilty of superstition and folly for believing, that
though Christ's passion be infinitely sufficient to redeem us from the guilt and
penalties of sin, yet is it not sufficiently and actualy applied to actual
sinners without their own concurrence, good works, and the Sacraments of the
Church. As for their pretense that Christ has satisfied for all, they may as
well say, that he has prayed, fasted, and given alms for all, and so discharge
men of all such Christian-duties and devotions.

And as to other particulars, we desire to know, what can the Protestant
Clergy's design be in allowing Priests marriages, and a liberty to dissolve
marriages, change wives Bucer one of the Composers of the Common prayer book and
of the Religion of the Church of England (whom Mr. Withguift Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his defense page 522. terms a Reverend learned, painful,
sound Father) teaches in his applauded work of the Kingdom of Christ, and
translated into English, that it is lawful to procure liberty by a libel of
divorce to marry again, not only in the case of adultery, but in case of the
on's departure from the other, in case of homicide, theft or repairing to the
company, or banquets of immodest persons; likewise in case of incurable
infirmity of the woman by Child birth, or of the man by lunacy or otherwise.
See his own words in the aforsaid work l. 2. c. 26. and 27. page 99. and 100.
and cap. 28. page 101. says, that who ever will not induce his mind to love
his wife with conjugal charity, that man is commanded by God to put her away
and marry an other. And in Math. cap. 19. says, that the wife repudiated
either justly or unjustly, if she has no hopes to return to her husband and
desirs to live piously, and wants a husband, may be married to an other without
sin. The whole University of Cambridg comends this Bucer for a man most holy
and truly devine, and this letter of commendations is printed with Bucer's
Book, wherein he teaches this doctrine, see it page 944. Luther's words in Sermon.
de Matrim. are notorious, If the wife will not or can not come, let the maid
come. Et ibd. fol. 123. tom. 5. Wittensb^rg. he is so vehement against the
wifes refusal of her husband's bed, that he says if the Magistrate omit it is
duty in punishing her, the husband must imagine that his wife is stole away by
thieves, and dead, and consider how to marry an other, for (says he yet
further) we cannot stop St. Paul's mouth etc. his words are plain, that a
brother or sister are free from the law of wed lock, if the one depart, or do
not consent to dwell with the other, neither does he say that this may be don
once only, but leaves it free that so often as the case shall require he may
either proceed or stay. In which case (as he signifies to Wittemb. f^l. 112 a
man may have ten or more wives fled from him and yet living. Nay he doubts
not in case of adultery to give liberty even to the offending advlteror to fly
into an other country and marry again. Luther loc. cit. fol. 123. and
Melancton consil. Theol. part. 1^ page, 648.
and husbands in case of adultery, departure, infirmity by childbirth, or
otherwise, but lust and sensual liberty contrary to the instition of matrimony,
and to the purity and practice of Christianity, which Roman Catholics observe?
From whence proceeds their allowing of eating of flesh and fish promiscuously
on all days of the year, but from gluttony? Their Clergy's denial of the Pop's
superiority (which their betters in virtue, birth and learning acknowledge) but
from want of humility? And their placing it in the temporal Sovereign, but from
excess of flattery? Their dullness in confounding the substance with the
appearance of bread and wine in the Sacrament, but from sensuality? Their
denial of the Church's infallibility (and yet assert in themselves an
vncontroul'd authority) but from pride and obstinacy? Their fond expressions of
their own prelatick reformation and doctrine, but from want of Christian
modesty, and from their for-fathers the ancient heretics, whose presumption
and obstinacy was never more manifestly absurd, nor more legaly condemned at
Nice, Ephesius, Calcedon, or Constantinople, then the Protestant Tenets have
bin at Trent, as will appear to any that will read the history of those
Councels, and compare the objections and exceptions made by Arians, Nestorians,
and E^^tychians, ande. against the Authority and decrees whereby they were
censured in these four first Councels, with the Protestant exceptions and
objections against the Council of Trent; especily if they will pervse but the
very first leaves of Cardinal Palavicino his confutation of Fr. Paulo Suarez,
or Servita, his history, wherein they will find above tree hundred lies and
calumnies of that Apostata Friar in matter of fact, so notorious and
undeniable, that our English Prelatick Clergy will (or ought to be) ashamed of
the Preface they have set before it, and of abusing King James and his Subjects
with such impostures, by their extolling so improbable and infamous a Libel.

Seeing therefore the supposed change and fall from primitive Protestancy to
popery, has bin from presumption and pride of a private and censorious Mr.
Whitgift the Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury in his defense page 472.
says, The doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this day, is much
more perfect and sound then it commonly was in any age since the Apostles tims.
and pa. 473. asuredly you are not able so reckon in any age since the Apostles
time any Company of Bishops that taught and held so perfect and sound doctrine
in all points, as the Bishops of England do at this time. In the truth of
doctrine our Bishops be not only comparable with the old Bishops, but in many
degrees to be preferred before them. etc
judgment against the public testimony and sense of the visible Church, to
submission and humility of an obsequious and prudent belief; from notorious
rebellion against spiritual and temporal superiors, to religious and dutiful
obedience; from gluttony to abstinence; from incontinency to chastity; from
sincerity to flattery; from Cloisters and austerity to Sacrilege and liberty;
from a pretense of faith alone to the Christianity of faith and good works etc.
It must be concluded, that either Protestancy was not the pure and primitive
Religion, or if it was, that the change thereof into popery, has bin for the
better, and by consequence that the first Papist, introduced into the world a
more sacred and sincere profession, then had bin taught by Christ and his
Apostles. But this being impious and as impossible, as it is that men abandoned
by God, should exceed God's servants in piety, or that they should establish
and practice more Godly principles and more zealously promote virtue when they
fell from God, and the way of salvation, then when they were in the same; it
must be granted, that Popery is the pure and primitive Religion taught by
Christ; and his Apostles; and that only weak brains, or such tender plants as
in their infancy received strong impressions of the possibility, and existence
of an invisible Christian Church upon earth, can fancy an insensible change of
it is doctrine, profession, and ceremonies, into so remarkable and different a
worship of God as Popery is, compared with Protestancy.

Congregations of Protestants living in the same Provinces, Cities, and
Parishes with Papists, and dissenting from them in the outward and oral
profession of faith (if they did not profess protestancy, (which they suppose
was Christ's faith) with the mouth, they were dissemblers, and could be no part
of the true Church) in the Canon and sense of Scripture, in the administration
and number of Sacraments, in Rites and Ceremonies, in the substance and
language of the Liturgy, in adoring the B. Sacrament, in worshipping of Images,
in receiving of the Communion etc. such Protestant Congregations, I say, to be
invisible and never heard of in 1500. or 1000. years, nor observed, nor
persecuted by the prevailing Papists among whom they lived, is not a thing
possible, or intelligible, much less prudently credible. We see by experience
in these Kingdoms, how impossible it is for a Recusant not to be discerned, and
discovered; Papists are known though not convicted. Many of them through the
mildn'ss and prudence of the government, escape the penalties and rigor of the
Law; but none the observation of their neighbors, and very few the menaces of
both ecclesiastical and civil Courts. The invisibility therefore of the
Protestant Church and the insensibility of it is change to Popery, is a fitter
subject to ground ther-vpon a ridiculous Romance, then a religious reformation.
Perhaps it will be said that Protestants were until the last age among the ten
tribes as the Jews, of whose appearance there has bin of late so much talk; but
we hear not of Protestants among them; neither did Luther, Zuinglius, Cranmer,
or Calvin pretend that they came from those Israelits, or from Terra australis
incognita; they were born and bred nearer, and they bragged that them-selves
were the first Reformers. Now to their Scripture.

SECT. III. Protestants mistaken in the Canon of Scripture maintained by the
Church of England, and by Doctor Cousins Bishop of Duresme.
OUr second Argument against the probability, or possibility of Protestancy
being the word or work of God, is taken from the Protestants mistake of
Scripture, and their altering of the Canon. And whereas Hooker lib. 1. Polit.
Eccles, page 86. and lib. 2. sect. 5. page 192. It is not the word of God which
does or possibly can assure us that we do well to think it his word; for if any
book of Scripture did give testimony of all, yet still that Scripture which
gives credit to the rest, would require an other Scripture to give credit unto
it. Neither could we come to any pause where on to rest, unless besides Scripture
there were some thing which might assure us. etc. Which he lib. 3. sect. 8.
page 146. and lib. 2. sect. 7. page 116. Acknowledged to be the authority of
God's Church. Whitaker against Stapleton lib. 2. cap. 6. page 270. says: The
testimony of the spirit being private and secred, is unfit to teach and refell
others, and therefore we must recurr to Ecclesiastical Tradition, an argument
says he ibid. cap. 4. page 300. Whereby may be argued and convinced what books
be Canonical, and what be not. M.r Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic page 5. says, the Church of Christ has judgment to discern true
writings from counterfeit, and the word of God from the writings of men, and
this judgment she has of the holy Ghost. M, r Jewel in his defense of the
Apology page 201. And afther the edition of 1571. pa. 242. says, the Church of
God has the spirit of wisdom whereby to discern true Scripture from false.
our learned Adversaries do agree with us in saying that neither the Scripture
itself, nor the private spirit can determine which parts of Scripture are
Canonical, or holy, but confess that this controversy must be decided by the
Testimony and authority of the Church; and that above 300. years after the
Apostles, some of their writings were not held by all orthodox Catholics to be
Canonical, which now are comprehended in the Canon, and admitted as the word of
God by many Protestants; it follows.

1. That the Canon of Scripture was not so sufficiently proposed to the whole
Church for the three first ages, as to make the denial or doubt thereof, Heresy
2. That the 6. Article of the Prelatick-Religion of England, which admitted
only such books of Scripture for Canonical, of whose authority was never any
doubt in the Church, is false, and the ground thereof fallible.

For as all men versed in the Ecclesiastical History well know, and learned
Bilson the Protestant Bishop of Winchester does acknowledge (in his survey of
Christ's sufferings etc. printed 1604. page 664.) The Scripturs were not fully
received in all places; no not in Eusebius his time (which was above 300. years
after the Apostles) he says the Epistles of James, Jude, the second of Peter,
the second and third of John, are contradicted as not written by the Apostles;
the Epistle to the Hebrews was for a while contradicted, etc. The Churches of
Siria did not receive the second Epistle of Peter, nor the second and third of
John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the Apocalips, etc. The like might be said
for the Churches of Arabia. Will you hence infer that these parts of Scripture
were not Apostolic or that we need not receive them now, because they were
formerly doubted of?

This Argument of Bishop Bilson we apply to the Machabees, and to the other
books declared by the Church of England to be Apocryphal.

Doctor Cousins writ a book caled a Scholastical History of the Canon of
Scripture (for which him-self and his friends think he well deserved the
Bishopric of Duresme that he now enjoys) in defense of the Prelatick
Protestant Canon, and of the 6. article of the Church of England. And because
he tells us in his Preface, that men of knowledge pressed him to publish it as a
piece that would give more ample satisfaction, and clear the passages in
antiquity from the objections that some late Authors in the Roman side bring
against Protestants, then those other writings of home, or foreign Divines have
don that are extant in this kind. I thought fit to give Protestants a proof of
the soundness of their doctrine, and of the sincerity of their Doctor. And
though it seems to me impossible for any man to know what parts of the new
Testament the 6. Article and Canon of the Church of England, declares
Canonical, it being so intricatly worded, that either it must be non sense, or
else exclude from the Canon the Epistles of James, the second of Peter, the
second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
the Apocalips, seeing the authority of all and every one of these has bin
doubted of in the Church, and the 6. Article of the Protestant Religion of the
Church of England is, that In the name of the holy Scripture we do understand
those Canonical Books of the old and new Testament, of whose authority was
never any doubt of, in the Church, Though I say, it is impossible for me to
comprehend how common sense and Christianity can meet in this Article, but that
if the words thereof signify any thing, out of the English Protestant new
Testament, must be excluded all the aforsaid Epistles and Apocalypse; yet
leaving this difficulty to the decision of that Church, I will suppose at the
present with D.r Cosins that all these Epistles and Apocalypse are included in
the English Canon, and come to the examination of the Arguments whereby he
pretends to defend it.

He therefore foreseing the impossibility of giving any reason why the parts of
the New Testament hertofore doubted of should rather be received by Protestants
into their Canon, then the Books of the Old Testament, no more questioned by
the Church of Christ then the aforsaid epistles and the Apocalypse; thought to
avoid the force of this pressing parity, by flatly denying ( page 5. and alibi)
That ever any entire Church, or any National or Provincial Counsel or any
multitude of men in their confessions and Catechisms, or other such public
writings, rejected or doubted of the said epistles etc. In case so many
solemnities had bin requisite for the questioning of Canonical authority, (which
his Lp: knows, are not necessary) It seems his lordship did not peruse Eusebius
his works, though he quotes them very often; or at least did not thinck that
the ancient Churches of Syria and Arabia deserve to be called Churches, not
that the Lutherans of Germany, Denmark, Suethland etc. who stick to Luther's
principles and Canon, can make one, or many Churches, Its a gross mistake in
the Doctor to say ( page 4. and 5.) that Luther or his Lutherans recalled or
recanted their error concerning the Epistle of St. James; he might see the
contrary in the very book him-self cites of Chemnitius the famous Lutheran,
whose authority and words he places ( in his addition of certain Testimonies)
in the same rank with sentences of St. Augustine, and St. Thomas of Aquin etc.
This Chemnitius in most of his works (as in his Enchirid. page 63, and in his
examine of the Council of Trent. p. 1. page 55. and 56.) declares his own
sense, and that of his Church in these words, The second Epistle of St. Peter,
the second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of John,
are Apocryphal, as not having sufficient testimony of their authority.

His lordship might also have bin better informed of Luther's sense and Church
by the saying of Illiricus an other pillar and Writer thereof, (whom Mr. Bell in
his regiment of the Church ( page 28.) terms a very famous Writer, and most
worthy defender of the Christian truth) his words are, Luther in his preface
upon St. Iem's Epistle gives great reasons why this epistle ought in no case
to be accounted for a writing of an Apostolic authority, unto which reasons I
think every godly man ought to yield* Luther's reasons are to be seen in the
ancient editions of Jene, and are comprehended in these few words of his, The
Epistle of James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and unworthy an
Apostolic spirit. And because these words and others were omitted in the later
editions of Wittemberg by some Divins that would fain reform Luther's Canon,
Religion, and Church, the chief Lutheran Doctors met in a Synod at Altembury,
complained of their Adversaries corrupting Luther's books, and resolved to
stick to the ancient editions, and to the literal sense of his words. So that
in case it were true the Canon of Scripture could not be said to have bin
questioned by any Protestant Congregation, whithout declaring their doubt in a
public confession of faith, we see the Lutheran does so; as also in their
confession of Wittemberg quoted by Belarmin (lib. 1. de verb. Dei cap. 7.
init.) which is seconded by all heretics of these tims, (says Belarmin.) the
Calvinist only excepted.

But the Doctor is so much mistaken in the necessity of such a formality, that
the Arians were condemned as heretics, notwithstanding that in their public
confessions of faith they endeavored rather to disguise then declare their
errors.

It is well known that Lutheran Churches in Germany not only do reject from
their Canon the Epistles of S. James, Jude, the second of Peter, and third of
S. John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse, but are so obstinat in
denying them to be in any wise Canonical Scripture, that they do not as much as
print them in their Bibles. And if my Lord of Duresme thinks that the rigid and
moderat Lutherans, half Lutherans, and other Protestant Congregations wherein
are many as learned Ministers and See Pomeran. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 4. Vitus
Theodorus in annot. Test. page vl,.

The Century writers of Magdeburg cent 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. and cent. 2. lib. 3.
cap. 4.

Hafferoferus in loc. Theol. lib. 3. stat. 3. loc. 7. page 222. Adamus Fancisci
in Margarita Theol. page 448. gives this testimony of the Protestant Church
whereof him-self was a member. The Apocriphal books of the new Testament are the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Iams, the second and third of John, the
second of Peter, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse. And all the Authors
here mentioned give the like testimony in behalf of their Protestant Churches,
wherefore we can not but admire Doctor Cossins confidence in affirming a matter
so notoriously contradicted; and much more the carelessness of them who ground
their faith and Canon of Scripture upon its not being ever questioned.


Writers as him-self, deserve not the name of a Church, he may expect that they
will censure his Church after the same manner, and perhaps with as much reason.
But let them agree as well as they can, it concerns not us. Yet I hope he will
not pronounce so severe a Censure against the Greeck and Latin Churches, and
vn-church both; Whereof S. Hierom (in epist. ad Dordunum) testifies, that the
Greeks doubted as much of the Apocalypse against the common consent of the
Latins, as the Latins did of the Epistle to the Hebrews against the common
consent of the Church.

Seeing therefore it is evident by the confession both of ancient Fathers and
modern Pro^estants, that in the primitive Church the Canonical Scriptures were
not generally received all at once, but in so great variety of pretended
Scriptures, great care and search was requisite to determine which Scriptures
were Canonical, and which not; whereby it came to pass tha^ sundry books and
parts were for a long time misdoubted by some Churches and Fathers, and by some
Councels omitted, or not received, which yet afterward upon greater search and
consideration, were generally acknowledged; it must be very great obstinacy in
Doctor Cozins and other Protestants, to reject the Canon which the Council of
Trent proposes, and embraces, because forsooth some books therein contained,
were not as soon believed by all Catholics to be Canonical, as the others. Or
to deny the authority, and authentikness of some books of the old Testament,
because they were not in the Canon of the Jews; as if the Jews might not doubt
and omit to put some books divinely inspired into the Canon, as well as the
primitive Christians; or as if the Apostles might not supply that defect, and
declare some books of the old Testament (whereof the generality of the Jews
doubted) to be Canonical.

SVBSECT I. Doctor Cozins exceptions and falsifications against the Council of
Trent's authority answered. The difference between new definitions and new
articles of faith explained.
THe Protestant obstinacy is not excusable by the exceptions made against the
number of Bishops that voted in the Council of Trent, or against the pretended
novelty of the Canon which they decreed. As to their number, the authority of
defining matters of faith in a general Council is no more limited, or
diminished by the absence of members legaly summoned, and long expected, then
the authority of a lawful Parliament by the absence of many Lords, and commons;
especialy if there be a necessity of applying present remedies to the
distempers of Church or Commonweal. Doctor Cozins does confess that the
Catholic Church stood in need of a reformation, and that the Council was too
much diferr'd and delayed; After they had met at Trent, Seeing the Bishops were
not as many as the Pope and his Legates expected and wished, See Cozins in the
17* chap. per to^.
for the greater solemnity, of so important a decision as that of the Canon of
Scripture, whereupon they were to ground their further definitions, they put of
that session for 8. months, and at the end of them, hearing that besides those
who were at Trent, many Bishops were setting forth, and others in their
Journey, they differred the definition of Canonical Scripture for three months
more, to the end as many as could possibly come might be present. If through
neglect, contempt, age, infirmity, or other accidents, whereof the Pope was not
in fault, many Bishops were absent, that could no more prejudice the authority
of the Council at Trent, then the like circumstances disanull the authority, or
make void the Acts of our Parliaments. But sure the learned Protestant Pastors
cannot but smile at the simplicity of their illiterat flocks, when they
consider the zeal and earnestnes wherewith they except against the small number
of Bishops (and their presumption forsooth) in the Council of Trent, For the
declaring the Canon of Scripture, and other Divine truths; and yet them-selves
accept the Canon of Scripture, and doctrine of their own Churches upon the bare
word of one Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, or upon the sole authority of the 12. or
seven men, appointed by Parliament in the reign of Edward 6. Besides, our Canon
of Scripture was confirmed by the whole Council of Trent afterward, together
with the other points of faith therein defined.

And though Doctor Cozins (page 208.) tells how the Princes and reformed
Churches in Germany, England, Denmark, etc. immediately set forth their
Protestations, and exceptions against the Council, aleadging that the caling of
this Council by the Pop's authority alone was contrary to the Rights of Kings
and the ancient Customs of the Church; That he had summond no other persons
thither, nor intended to admit any either to debate or give their voice there,
but such only as had first sworn obedience to him; that he took upon him most
injustly to be Judge in his own cause etc. Yet it is sufficiently manifested to
the world by the very Acts of the Council, that the Pope did nothing but what
his Predecessors had don, and the Catholic Princes, and Church had approved in
the like occasions; and that, though Protestants were not admitted to vote at
Trent, Salvus Conductus datus Protestantibus sess. 13. and 14. Council. Trident.
Vt Protestants, de iis rebus quae in ipsa Synodo tractari debent, omni
liberate confer, proponere, and tractare etc. ac articulos quot illis
videbitur, tam scripto quam verbo afferre, proponere, and cum Patribus, etc.
confer, and absque ullis convitiis, and concontumeliis disputare, nec non
quando illis placuerit, recedere possint. Placuit praeterea Sanctae Synodo vt
si pro majori liberate, ac securitate eorum, certos tam pro commissis, quam
pro committendis per eos delictis, Iudices eis de putari cupiant, illos sibi
benevolos nominent, etiamsi delicta ipsa quantumcunque enormia ac hoeresim
sapientia fuerint.
yet they were not only permitted but invited in a most secure, and civil
manner by the Council to reason, dispute, and debate their controversies, and
answer for them-selves and their doctrine; and this way of proceeding is no more
unreasonable in a general Council, then it is in a Parliament, not to permit
any to vote therein before he taks an oath of alegiance, (not to say any thing
of the oath of Supremacy) and much less to admit of Lords or Commons accused of
treason, or rebellion, to sit in the House, until they prove their innocence,
or acknowledge their fault, and obtain their pardon by a dutiful submission, and
profession of repentance.

And granted that nothing had bin resolved in the Council of Trent by the
Fathers thereof, but what first was canvass't at Rome by the Pope and Conclave
(which is false (yet we conceive that, to be no more against the constitution
or freedom of a Council, then it is against the constitution or freedom of a
Parliament, that no Bill pass unto an Act, unless it be first signed by the
King and approved by his Council, and yet we know, that to have bin the
constant custom in one of his Majesty's Kingdoms since the reign of King Henry
7. As for the Pope or Church of Rome being Judge in their own cause, it is a
prerogative so absolutely necessary for the authority and govermnent of
Magistracy, and the quiet and peace of the people governed; that no Monarchy or
Commonwealth can want it without falling into great inconveniences and
confusion.

A subject it is true may sue the King; but the sentence must be given in the
King's Courts, and by his authority, notwithstanding any objected dependency or
parciality of the Judge explaining the laws and customs in favor of his
Sovereign. And he who would not acquiesce in such a sentence, but would needs
have the cause decided by a foreign Prince, or People, is a rebel. If this be
reasonable and just in temporal Courts, and fallible sentences, how much more,
in spiritual controversies, and infallible definitions of the Church; which
definitions of the Church if not acknowledged to be infallible, the Church can
not have any jurisdiction or authority in matters of faith* as not being able
to satisfy doubts, and setle the inward peace of Christian souls either
perplexed in them-selves, or in danger of being perverted by others, whether
heretics or pagans, neither of which can be indifferent Judges, or competent
Arbitrators between the Catholic Church and her Children. And seeing doubts and
differences are unavoidable in both Church, and Commonwealth, and that there
can be no appeal to Infidels, or Foreigners, without doubt it is more agreeable
to Scripture, to the law of nature, and light of reason, that Parents and
Pastors be Judges in any cause of their Children and inferiors, then the
contrary; or that there be no Judge at all, nor jurisdiction either spiritual or
temporal.

But that which Doctor Cozins, and all Protestants most press against the
judicature of Popes, and the council of Trent is, that they do not judge
according to Scripture, and to the right sense thereof, whereas Kings and their
Judges are regulated by the laws of the land, even when the suit is against the
King, or his pretended prerogative. To this we answer that Popes and Councels
are as much regulated by Scripture in their definitions as Kings and their
Courts by the laws; But Protestants do not observe, that as the interpretation
of the laws depends not of them who sue the King, but of the ancient practice
of his Judges, and Courts, so the interpretation of Scripture must not be made
by t^em who sue the Pope and Councels, but by the Bishop and the Church; who ar
to explain it, not according to every on's private fancy, as Protestants do, but
according to the tradition, customs and practices of the orthodox Christians in
former Ages.

And by this we free the Roman Catholic Church, New definitions are not new
articles of faith
and the Council of Trent from the Protestant calumny of novelty of doctrine,
not only in this particular of the Canon of Scripture, but in all it is other
definitions: Pro^estants confound our new Decrees with new doctrine, whereas
nothing is more clear then that old doctrine may be defined by a new Decree,
that is made more public, and authentic. The Council tells them ( sess. 4.)
that it only declares what Canon of Scripture the primitive Church held, and
quotes for it diverse ancient Fa^hers, and Councels; and therefore it is Decree
maks no new Canon of Scripture, but is a promulgation of the old, which
induces an obligation of believing, what formerly had not bin so generaly
known, because it had not bin so clearly and solemnly proclaimed.

Methinks none ought to carp less at the novelty of our definitions then
Protestants, if they would reflect upon their own reformations. They pretend
that their doctrine is not only renewed, but revived, because forsooth, the
whole visible Church had lost that purity of the Primitive faith for many ages
which they now have restored. Roman Catholics are more moderat and modest, as
having a better opinion of the Church and of God's providence; they confess
that the doctrine defended by the Council of Trent was never extinguished in the
Church, but that it lived in the hearts and profession of many faithful, though
many others of the same communion did not hold them-selves obliged to believe
it as a doctrine of faith, until it had bin sufficiently and solemnly proponed
by the Definition of the Church in a general Council, as Divine. That being
don, no addition or alteration was made of divine faith; For new definitions
are not new articles of faith, but promulgations of the old faith, or
declarations of our obligation to believe as articles of faith those things
which had bin formerly revealed, but not so sufficiently proposed to the whole
Catholic Church. Wherefore articles of Faith not believed before they be
decreed by a general Council, may be aptly compared to laws, or ordinances,
before they are published; as the publication or proclamation of a law maks not
a law, but declares the obligation of complying therewith, so the definition of
a general Council maks not the article of faith, but declares the obligation
of believing that doctrine, which before the publication or proclamation of the
Church, had not bin sufficiently proposed as Divine revelation.

To what purpose then did Doctor Cozins trouble him-self and his Readers with
composing a book against the Catholic Canon of Scripture declared in the
Council of Trent, when all his arguments are but sayings of men who doubted of
books and parts of Scripture before they were declared (and only because they
were not declared*) Canonical by a general Council. He would fain impose upon
the world that S. Ierom was so much a Jew, and so little a Christian as (for
the Canon of the old Testament) to rely altogether upon the Hebrew Rabins, and
that he set a greater value upon their testimony, then upon the authority of
the Church, or of the great Council of Nice, which received into the Canon of
Scripture the book of Judith, though rejected by the Jews. His proof of S.
Jerome's judgment being the same with that of Protestants in this controversy
is, that in some places of his writings he says, the contested books of the old
Testament are not in the Canon of the Jews, nor received as Canonical by the
Christian Church; to which is answered that S. Jerome altered his opinion, as
appears in his prefaces prefixed to the said books, which he translated into
latin at the instance of the Churches and Bishops that held them to be
Canonical, to whose belief S. Jerome at length conformed his own judgment. In
his preface to the Book of Tobie he says: Ye desire me to translate a book
from the Caldean language, to Latin, the book of Tobie, which the Hebrews admit
not into the Catalogue of Sacred Scriptures, J have satisfied your desire, etc.
The Hebrews reprehend us etc. Because we have translated into latin things
against their Canon. But I judged it better to displease the judgment of
Pharisees, then disobey the commands of Bishops, etc. In conformity to this he
says in his preface of Judith: With the Hebrews the book of Judith is read
amongst the Agiographa, the authority whereof is judged less fit to decide
controversy, etc. But because the Nicen Synod is read to have computed this
book in the number of holy Scripturs, J have acquiesced, or complied with your
demand. Out of which words it is manifest 1. That St. Jerome was not of the same
opinion with the Jews concerning these books, because he says he displeased or
offended their judgment by his translation, as a thing against their Canon,
which would not have ^in, unless his intention in translating and judgment were
known to favor the belief of the Bishops and Christians, that held them to be
Canonical; for, the translating them only as pious books, could not be
offensive to the Jews, who acknowledged them for such, as Cozins with
Chemnitius and all Protestants confess, though ( page 82.) he contradicts
him-self (having no other shift left to prove St. Ierom a Jew in this
particular) And his words of the book of Judith demonstrat that he opposed the
authority of the Nicen Council against the opinion of the Jews, to prove that
book Canonical, and fit to determine controversies of Religion; and in case we
should grant he doubted whether the Council numbered it in the Canon yet non can
doubt but that he believed the Council had authority to declare it Canonical,
which is the point disputed of.

But Doctor Cozins would willingly make us believe (by a notorious fraud and
imposture) that Cardinal Belarmin does not only acknowledge St. Ierom to have
persisted still in his former opinion of excluding these controverted books
from the Canon, but also that the Council of Nice never received that of Judith
into it, and to that purpose ( page 45.) quotes Belarmin's words ( de verbo Dei
lib. 1. c. 10. vlt.) thus, Admitto Hieronymum in ea fuisse opinione, quia
nondum generale Concilium de his libris aliquid statuerat; These words the
honest Protestant Bishop of Duresme setts down in capital letters, and with
them concluds Cardinal Belarmin's sentence and sense concerning Hierom's
opinion of the book of Judith, and of the Council of Nice; and most
unconscionably cuts of the words immediately following, where Belarmin says the
quite contrary of what Cozins imposed upon his Readers, to make good his
English Canon of Scripture. The words immediately following are: Excepto libro
Judith, quem etiam Hieronimus postea recepit: Except the book of Judith, which
also Hierom afterward received, as Canonical. So that where Cozins says
Belarmin confesses that S. Hierom said the Council of Nice declared not the
book of Judith Canonical, Belarmin in that very place says the quite contrary.
And in the same page cap. 12. Belarmin proves by S. Hieroms testimony and
words, that the book of Judith was declared Canonical in the highest degree by
the Nicen Council. It were to be wished that Ecclesiastical promotions had bin
better bestowed then upon 139 men whose labor and learning (...) altogether
employed in seducing souls, concealing the truth of Religion from their flocks,
and corrupting the writings of the ancient Fathers and modern Doctors of the
Church, for no other reason but because they speak so clearly against the
Protestant Doctrine of these times, whereby our Prelatick Ministers are
maintained, usurping vast revenues from the Crown, and come to the greatest
preferments both of Church and State. I have not seen any one Protestant Writer
free from this fault; it is strange that after so manifest and manifould
discoverys as have bin made of Mortons, Andrews, Fox, Sutclif, Jewel, Barlow,
Whitaker, See this largly proved in 3. part of this Treatise.
Willet, Usher, Lauds, and others, falsifications, frauds, and labyrinths,
there should be men yet found to follow their examples; and much more to be
wondered that they should thrive by a trade so base, unconscionable, and
distructive, notwithstanding so manifest and frequent discoveries of their
impostures.

As to this work of Doctor Cosins, it may be properly called a Cosenage,
independently of an allusion to his name; had not his book bin sufficiently
confuted by the absurdity of his fundamental principles, denying that the
Apostles or Christian Church could declare any book of the old Testament,
Canonical, which the Jews omitted or rejected, and affirming that no parts of
the New Testament were ever questioned by any Church ancient or modern, I
should set down many more of his willful falsifications, and weak evasions;
but that labor being rendered superfluous by the incoherency of his own
doctrine, and by the inconsistency of his principles with including in that
Canon of Scripture (which he undertakes to defend) the epistles above mentioned
of Peter, John, Paul, and Jude, and the Apocalypse (for it is evident by the
quoted testimonies both of ancient Fathers and learned Protestants, that these
epistles of John Jude, Peter and Paul, as also the Apocalypse, were doubted of
by many Christian Churches, for three or four ages) I do not think fit to
trouble the Reader nor my self with a more particular confutation of this
rather fantastical then Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture:
fantastical J say, because he fancies to him-self that the authority and
sayings of men who writ before this controversy had bin decided by a general
Council, and at the same time professed a faith which obliged them so submit
there writings and judgments to the decrees of Councels, can be of any force
against that general Council by which the contrary was decided, and they would
have bin guided by, if they had bin now living, as St. Austin says of St.
Cyprian in a point of doctrine which was determined by a general Council
against the holy Martyrs opinion, long after his death.

Whosoever can take delight in seeing the pitiful shifts, and sleights whereby
interested writers endeavor to blind men's eyes, and understandings, let him
peruse this book of Doctor Cozins and he will find more sport in observing how
he tosses and turns the sayings of the Fathers against them-selves, then could
be wished in so serious a subject. When the Fathers call the books of Macabees,
Tobie, Judith, etc. sacred and Divine Scripture, Canonical Scripture
prophetical writings of Divine authority, etc. Holy inspirations, revelations
etc. he tells you ( page 93. and alibi passim) all this must be understood in a
large and popular sense, though the contrary may appear to any vnbyass'd
judgment that will read the words by him cited ( page 92. and alibi;) in the
Authors themselves; as for example let any one observe how Doctor Cozins
mingles and mangles S. Austin's words concerning the controverted books of the
Machabees, and afterward see what the St. him-self says, he will ^^rce believe
the words are the same, and may swear the sense is not. For, S. Austin (lib. 2.
de doctr. Christ. cap. 8.) sets down as his own sense the same Canon of
Scripture which the Council of Trent accepts and confirms, page 101. and seq.
and he subscribed unto in the third Council of Carthage; And because he knew
that this Canon had not bin defined by a general Council, and therefore many
Churches and Fathers doubted of some books, which he and the 3. Council of
Carthage held for Canonical, he gives some instructions how they who do not
follow his Canon, shall proceed until they be more fully informed, or the
matter decided; and these instructions which he sets down for others, who
doubted and differed in opinion from him, Doctor Cozins wilfully mistakes and
misapplies to St. Austin him-self, as if he could be ignorant of his own belief
of the Canon.

He is also troubled that St. Austin does favor so much the doctrine of
Purgatory, and the authority of the Catholic Church (in declaring books of the
Old Testament to be Canonical, which were rejected by the Jews) as to say (
lib. 18. de Civit. Dei c. 36.) That the books of the Machabees are accounted
Canonical by the Church, although not by the Jews. To weaken this testimony he
brings an other that strengthens it, and quotes St. Austin's words ( Ep. 61. ad
Dulcitium) wherein confuting the error of the Circomcellions who (to cloak
their self-homicides with text and examples of Scripture) excused that doctrine
with the examples of Eleazarus and Razias, related in the Machabees; which
pretext St. Austin largly confutes not only in his epistle ad Dulcit, but in
his 2. book against the epistle of Gaudent. cap. 23. not by deminishing the
Canonical authority of the books of the Machabees as Doctor Cozins falsely
imposes upon his Readers [ page 108. and seq.] but by declaring how the
Scripture does indeed relate, yet not commend the self-homicide of Eleazarus
and R^zias, nor canonize them Martyrs, or propose their deaths to be imitated,
though it cannot be denied but that they showed great worldly courage, and
contempt of life. Did Doctor Cozins imagine that Dulcitius, Gaudentius, and
other learned Circumcellions were such Coxcombs, as to prove their Religion by
Scripture, and then to quote for Scripture a book which their Adversaries
admitted not at least for so Canonical as that controversies of Religion could
be thereby decided? or does he think that St. Austin would not have put them in
mind of that folly in very clear terms, and excuse farther disputes by telling
them plainly, and without going about the bush, that the Machabees was not
Canonical Scripture nor fit to be quoted in matters of Religious controversies?

But the Doctor argues ( page 110.) that St. Austin tells Gaudentius, the
Christian Church receives those books not unprofitably, if they be discreetly
or soberly read or heard, what then? All discreet and sober men say the same,
not only of the books of the Machabees, but of all the other books, and parts
of Scripture; and St. Peter says the same in substance of St. Paul's epistles:
Will the Doctor conclude from thense, that St. Paul's epistles are not
Canonical Scripture? because men may read them indiscreetly, and deprave them
to their own damnation? Or that there is no Scripture at all, because he
himself or some of his Bishopric of Duresme do not read the Bible with
sobriety and discretion? these words of St. Austin in the Doctor's judgment (
page 108.) are so clearly against the Canonical authority of the Machabees,
that he says Cardinal Belarmin laid his thumb upon them, and durst not relate
them. I am sure he pointed at them with his Pen, and directed all the world to
see and examine them by his quoting the book and Chapter where they are, as my
Lord of Duresme him-self confesses in the margent: neither could Belarmin,
Peron, or any other Catholic Writer observe any disadvantage to their cause in
those following words of S. Austin, Which Doctor Cozins pretends to be so
notoriously prejudicial; Recepta est ab Ecclesia non invtiliter etc. The
Machabees is received by the Church for holy Scripture not unprofitably, if it
be soberly read or heard. That is, says Doctor Cozins [pag. 110.] As St.
Augustine else where expounds him-self (but where, Doctor Cozins does not,
because he cannot tell) If those things that we read there, be conferred with
the sacred and Canonical Scriptures, that whatsoever is thereunto agreeable may
be approved, and what is otherwise, may be rejected. According to this acute
explanation, which Doctor Cozins falsely fathers upon S. Austin, the most
profane books, and Romances, Esop's Fables, and Don Quixote, may be received by
the Church for holy Scripture, as well as the Machabees, if those things that
we read therein be conferred with the sacred and Canonical Scriptures and
whatsoever is thereunto agreeable be approved, and what is otherwise be rejected.
It were too tedious to note all Doctor Cozins his mistakes. Let these few serve
to know by what a pillar the English Canon and Church is supported.

SECT. IV. Protestants so grossly mistaken in their letter and Translations of
the Scriptures that they can not have any certainty of faith; and are forced at
length (by their principles) to question the truth of Scriptures, and of them
who writ the Canonical books thereof.
THe holy Scriptures were written by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists,
either in Hebrew, Greeck, or Latin; the old Testament (excepting some few parts
written in Chaldaick, and Syriack) was written in Hebrew, the new Testament, for
the greatest part, in Greeck, S. Mathew's Ghospel in Hebrew, S. Marck's in
Latin. We have not the original writings of these Prophets and Apostles, nor of
the 70. Interpreters who translated the old Testament into Greek some 300.
years before the coming of Christ; we have only Copies; for the truth and
exactness whereof, we must rely upon the testimony, and tradition of the Church,
which in so important a point, God would never permit to err; at least it must
have bin so infallible therein, as that the Copy be sufficiently authentic to
be a rule of deciding controversies of faith, and of directing men to holiness
of life; though perhaps no copy is so exact but therein may remain some erratas
of the press and pen; yet easily discoverable by it is coherency or incoherency
with other parts of the Text.

Notwithstanding the necessity of admitting some true and authentic copy of
Scripture [for what can it avail a Christian to believe that Scripture is the
word of God, if he be uncertain which copy or Translation is true and
authentic Scripture] Protestants pretend there is no authentic copy of
Scripture in the world, as may be seen in the preface of the Tigurin edition of
the Bible, and in all their books of Controversy, seeing therein they condemn the
Council of Trent for declaring that the old Latin Translation is authentic;
and yet themselves name no other for authentic: and therefore though the
Lutherans fancy Luther's Translation; the Calvinists that of Geneva; the
Zuinglians that of Zuinglius; the English some times one, sometimes an other;
yet because they do not hold any one to be infallibly authentic, it follows
(from their exceptions against the infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church
in declaring or decreeing a true and authentic copy of Scripture, and their
confession of the uncertainty of their own translations) that they have no
certainty of Scripture, nor even of faith, which they ground upon Scripture
alone.

Most of the old Testament as it is in the vulgar Latin Translation, which the
Council of Trent declares to be authentic, was S. Hierom. in lib. de (...)
illustr. extremo, and in Praefat librorum quos latin^s ^ecit.
^ranslated out of Hebrew by St. Hierom; and the new Testament had bin before
his time translated out of Greek, but was by him Hierom. epist. 89. ad Aug.
quaest 11. inter ep. August. S. Hierom. in his Preface before the new Testament
dedicated to Pope Damasus, Novum opus etc.
revewed, and such faults as had crept in through negligence of the
Transcribers, were corrected. You constrain, me says he, to make a new work
of an old, that I after so many copies of the Scripture dispersed through the
world, should sit as a certain Judge, and determine which of them agree with the
true Greek and in this Cathalogue he says, Novum Testamentum graecae fidei
reddidi; vetus juxta haebraicum transtuli.

The antiquity and sincerity of the first Interpreter, and the great
Commendations thereof to be seen in St. Austin de Civit. Dei lib. 18. c. 43.
Non defuit temporibus nostris Presbiter Hieronymus homo doctissimus, and omnium
trium linguarum peritissimus, qui non e Graeco sed ex: Haebraeo in Latinum
eloquium easdem Scripturas converterit. Cujus tamen litterarum laborem Judaei
fatentur esse veracem. And ( lib. 2. doct. Christi. cap. 15.) together with
the eminent Sanctity and learning of S. Hierom, forces our Adversary ( B^eza,
to confess, Annotationibus in caput 1. Luc.) That the old Interpreter seems
to have interpreted the holy books with marveilous sincerity and Religion; and
[in praefat. novi Testam.] The vulgar edition I do for the most part embrace
and prefer before all others. Carolus Molinaeus [in nov. Testam. part. 30.] I
can very hardly depart from the vulgar and accustomed reading, which [in Luc.
17.] he professes to prefer before Erasmus, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the
Tigurin Translation, and even before John Calvin's, and all others. Doctor
Humfrey [de ratione interpret. l. 1. page 74.] The old Interpreter seems to
be much addicted to the propriety of the words, and truly with too much
anxiety, which I attribute more to Religion then ignorance. See also Pelicanus
(a learned Protestant writer) his great praises of the Translation of the
Psalms in the vulgar Latin edition in praef. in Psalterium an. 1584. See also
Doctor Covell acknowledging in his answer to Burges page 94. The antiquity of
the vulgar translation to be so great, that it was used in the Church a
thousand three hundred years agone: and concluding page 91. That the most
approved Translation authorized by the Church of England, is that which comes
nearest to the vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible. And Doctor
Whitaker (in his answer to Mr. Reynolds (page 141.) was pleased to moderat his
former railing against our vulgar Translation revewed by St. Hierom at the
request of St. Damasus Bishop of Rome, saying, St. Hierom J reverence, Damasus
I commend, and the work I confess to be Godly and profitable to the Church.

The reason that moved the Protestants not to accept, or acquiesce in our
vulgar Latin Translation so much commended by them-selves, and the ancient
Fathers, is, because they would have as much liberty to reject the true letter
as the true sense of Scripture their new doctrins being condemned by both. For
had they granted that any one ancient Translation is authentik, how could
Luther have had the impudence to thrust into the Text the word Luther being
admonished of his corruption, would not correct his error, but says tom. 5.
Germ. fol. 141. and 144. sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas etc.
Lutherus ita vult. And concludes, Therefore the word alone ought to continue in
my New Testament, although all Papists run mad, yet they shall not take it from
thence. It grieves me that I did not add those two other words, Omnibus, and
omnium.

The Church of England in Edward 6. time, Translated some times This signifies
my Body; other times, this is my Body, other times, neither is nor signifies,
but instead thereof a blanck as not yet resolved upon which was true.

See Knot in his Protestancy condemned, Edit. 1654. page 87.


alone, to assert his justification by only faith, [Rom. 3.28.] or how could he
omit 2. Petr. 1. (where it is said) wherefore brethren labor the more that by
good works you may make sure your vocation, this particle by good works? How
could Zuinglius have translated for this is my body, this signifies my Body, to
maintain his figurative signification of the words, and cry down Christ's real
presence in the B. Sacrament? And so of all other Protestants Translations,
whereof every one has words added, and omitted in the Text, which cannot be
justified or excused by any ancient copy of Scripture, extant in any language
whatsoever.

No mervaile therefore if the Lutherans reject the Calvinists Translation and
the Calvinists that of Lutherans; the TransTranslation Translation of the
Divines of Basile is reproved by Beza, who says ( respon. ad defens. Cast.)
that it is in many places wicked, and altogether differing from the mind of
the holy Ghost. And Molinaeus [in Testam. part. 20.30. etc.] says of Beza,
that in his Translation he actualy changed the Text: and of Calvin [in
Translation. Testam. nov. fol. 110.] That he makes the Text of the Ghospel to
leap up and down, and that he uses violence to the letter of the Ghospel, and
besides this, adds to the Text.

As for the English Translation we have King James his true censure in the sum
of the conference before his Majesty ( page 46.) that he could never yet see a
Bible well translated into English. His Royal judgment is confirmed by Mr.
Carlisle of Christ's dessent into Hell [pag. 116.] where he says of the English
Translators, that they have depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and
deceived the ignorant; that in many places they do detort the Scripturs from
the right sense etc. The Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in their abridgment of a
book delivered to his Majesty the first of December, page 11. and seq. say,
that the English Translation takes away from the Text, adds to the text, and
that, somtyms to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost.
Also Mr. Burg^s in his Apology ( sect. 6.) says how shall I approve under my
hand a translation which has many omissions, many additions, being somtyms
senseless, somtyms contrary.

Other precise and learned Protestants in a Treatise entitled A petition
directed to his most excellent Majesty etc. [pag. 76.] say, Our Translation of
the Psalms comprised in our book of common prayer* does in addition,
subtraction, and alteration differ from the truth of the Hebrew in 200. places
at least, And make this the ground of their scruple to make use of the common
prayer. And these corruptions are so undeniable, that Dr. Whitaker has nothing
to answer to Dr. Reynolds (page 255.) who objected them against the Church of
England, but these words, What Mr. Carlisle with some others, has written
against some places translated in our Bibles, makes nothing to the purpose, I
have not said otherwise but that some things may be amended.

These corruptions in the English Protestant Bibles are so many and so
notorious, that Doctor Gregory Martin composed a whole book of them, and therein
discovers the frauds whereby the Translators pretend to excuse them; somtyms
they recurred to the Hebrew Text: and when that spoke against their new doctrine
and translation, then to the Greeck; when that favored them not, to some copy
acknowledged by them-selves to be corrupted, and of no credit; and when that no
copy at all could be found out, to cloak their corruptions, the book or Chapter
of Scripture that contradicts them, is declared Apocryphal; and when that
cannot be made probable, they fall down right upon the Prophets and Apostles
that writ them, and say they might, and did err, even after the coming of the
holy Ghost. This is not only Luther's shift, all Protestants follow their first
reformer in this point, having the same necessity imposed upon them by their
own reformations and translations, so contrary to the known letter of
Scripture. Luther being told by Zuinglius [tom. 2. ad Luther. l. de Sacram.
page 412. and seq.] Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be a
manifest and common corrupter and perverter of the holy Scriptures, how much
are we ashamed of thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and
now prove thee to be such a man? Luther knowing all this to be true, had no way
left to defend his impiety but by impudency, preferring him-self and his own
Spirit, before that of them who writ the holy Scriptures, therefore ( tom. 5.
Wittemberg. an. 1554. fol. 290. and in ep. ad Galat. cap. 1. after the English
Translation fol. 33. and 34) he says, Be it that the Church, Austin, and other
Doctors, also Peter, Paul, yea an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, yet is my
doctrine such as sets forth God's only glory etc. Peter the chief of the
Apostles did live and teach (extra verbum Dei) besides the word of God; and
against St. James his mentioning the Sacrament of Extreme Unction ( de Capti.
Babyl. cap. de extrem. vnct. in tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 86.) But though this
were the epistle of James I would answer that it is not lawful for an Apostle
by his authority to institute a Sacrament; this apertaineth to Christ alone: As
though thas blessed Apostle would publish a Sacrament without warant from
Christ. See also what he says of Moses his writings ( tom. 3. Wittemberg. in
Psalm. 45. fol. 432. and 422. and tom. 3. Germ. fol. 40.41. and in Colloq.
mensal. Germ. fol. 152. and 153.) The Century Writers of Magdeburg follow this
doctrine of Luther [Centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 10. col. 580.] and particularly accuse
St. Paul of error by the persuasion of St. James. Brentius also, (whom Bishop
Ievel in his defense of the Church of England ( page 473.) terms a grave and
learned Father, affirms [ in Apol. Confess. cap. de Council. page 900.] that
St. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas after the holy Ghost
received, together with the Church of Jerusalem, erred.

Though Lutherans and Calvinists differ extremely in many points of doctrine,
yet in this of fallibility of the Apostles in faith and manners even after the
receiving of the holy Ghost, they fully agree. Calvin him-self in his Comentary
in omnes Pauli epistolas in Gallat. c. 2. verse. 14. page 612. reprehendeth
Peter, Barnabas, and others; and page 150. says, that Peter added to the schism
of the Church, the indangering of Christian liberty, and the ouer-throw of the
grace of Christ* See him also in Act. c. 21. Clebitius a learned Calvinist (in
his Victoria veritatis argum. 5.) impugneth St. Lukes report in the history of
our Saviors passion, saying, Matthew and Mark deliver the contrary, therefore
Mathaeo and Marco duobus testibus plus adhiberi debet quam uni Lucae, qui
Synaxi non interfuit, quemadmodum Mathaeus. To Matthew and Mark being two
witnesses, more credit is to be given, then to one Luke. And Gualter (in Act.
21.) reproves St. Paul's shaving of his head. And other Calvinists mentioned
in Zanchius his epistle ad misc. said. If Paul should come to Geneva and preach
the same hour that Calvin did, I would leave Paul and hear Calvin. And
Lavaterus in his historia Sacramentaria (page 18.) affirms, that some of
Luther's followers, not the meanest among their Doctors, said they had rather
doubt of St. Paul's doctrine, the^ of the doctrine of Luther, or of the
confession of Augusta.

This desperate shift being so necessary for waranting their corruptions of
Scripture, and maintaining the fallibility of the Church in succeeding ages
(for the same reasons which conclude it infallible in the Apostles time, are
applicable to ours, and to every former century; other-wise it must be said
that God's providence and promises were limited to few years, and him-self so
partial that he regards not the necessities of his Church, nor the salvation
of any person that lived after his Disciples, this impiety could not be
rejected by the Prelatick Church of England without contradicting their
brethren abroad, and their own principles at home. Therefore B. Jewel in his
defense of the Apology for the Prelatick Church of England ( page 361.) does
affirm, that St. Mark mistook Abracher for Abimelech, and St. Matthew,
Hieremias for Zacharias; And Mr. Fulck against the Remish Testament in Galat.
2. fol. 322. charge Peter with error of ignorance, and against the Gospel;
and Doctor Goade in his Tower disputation with Campion (the second days
conference arg. 6.) affirms that St. Peter did err in faith, and that, after
the sending down of the holy Ghost upon them. And Whitaker [de Eccl. cont.
Belarmin. Controv. 2. q. 4. page 223.] says: It is evident that even after
Christ's Ascension, and the Holy Ghost's descending upon the Apostles, the
whole Church not only the common ^ort of Christians, but also even the Apostles
them-selves erred in the vocation of the Gentills etc. yea Peter also erred: he
further more also erred in manners etc. And these were great errors, and yet we
see these to have bin in the Apostles even after the Holy Ghost descending upon
them. And truly if the Apostles were not only fallible, but did teach errors in
manners and matters of faith, after the holy Ghost descending upon them, their
writings can be no infallible Rule to direct men to salvation; which conclusion
is so immediately and clearly deduced from this Protestant doctrine, that the
supposal and premises once granted, their can be no certainty in Scripture; and
indeed this all the Reformers aimed at, though durst not say it, yet they did
as well, and sufficiently declare what little esteem they have for Scripture,
though they make their ignorant flocks believe they teach them nothing but true
Scripture, and the infallible word of God.

SVBSECT I. Particular instances of Protestant Corruptions in the English Bible.
THough it may seem superfluous to specify any corruptions of the English
Translators of Scripture after so clear testimonies, and confessions drawn from
men of their own party, yet to excite a conscience, or at least curiosity in
the Protestant Reader of examining further this matter, I will mention a few of
many which he may find both in Doctor Gregory Martins book of this subject, and
in the Remish Testament. To maintain by Scripture that Popery is, or at least
savoreth Idolatry, by worshipping of Images, whersoever the Scripture speaks of
Jdols, they translate Images, as 1. Jhon 4.21. My babes keep your selves from
Images. And, how agrees the temple of God with Jmages. Bible 1562
And be not worshipers of Images as some of them, etc.

And 2. Paralip. 36. verse. 8. they added to the Text, words, that are not in
the Greek, Hebrew, Latin, or any copy however so corrupted. The rest of the
acts of Ioakim and the rest of the abominations which he did, and the carved
Images that were laid to his charge, behold they are written etc. These words (
carved Images laid to his charge) are added by the Protestant Translators, and
not to be found in any copy or Text of Scripture in the whole world. And though
for mere shame in some later editions this impiety has bin corrected, and
Jdols not Jmages put into the Text, yet to make the illiterat sort of people
believe that they are the same thing, Image is put in the margent; and in some
places left uncorrected.

The first Protestant Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's reign not being able to
prevail with the deposed Catholic Bishops to consecrat them, as Scripture
commands, by imposition of Episcopal hands, and therefore relying for their
Caracter upon the letters patents, supremacy, and election of the Queen,
translated the Greek word Kerotonia [which S. Hierom and all the Ecclesiastical
writers before and after him translate, Ordination by imposition of hands they
to make good I say their want of such an Ordination, by words of Scripture in
the Bible which then they set forth] translated the said Greeck word Ordination
by Election: but their Successors who of late pretend to a more lawful
caracter then ever their Ordainers durst profess to have had received, or
them-selves can make good, corrected this translation, and restored into the
text Ordination by imposition of hands.

To assert marriage of Priests, when St. Paul says Have we not power to lead
about a woman? they translate, instead of woman; wife; but when he says in the
same epistle, and uses the same word, Bible 1562. Cor. 7. v. 1.
It is good for a man not to touch a woman, then they translate not wife, but
woman.

To cry down the Sacrifice of the Mass, they translate Temple, or Table, for
Altar, elder for Priest. To discredit the worship and honor of Saints, they
corrupt the words of the Psalm. 138. Thy friends O God, are become exceeding
honorable; their Princedom is exceedingly strengthened, thus How dear are thy
Counsels (or thoughts) to me o God: How great is the su'me of them?

To condemn vows of Chastity as impossible to be performed, they translate
Matthew 19. v. 11. All men do not receive this saying, thus, All men cannot
receive this saying. To assert the Supremacy, in King Henry 8. and Edward 6.
days, they translated thus, submitt your-selves etc. unto the King as chief
head. 1. Peter. 2. But in Queen Elizabeth's reign (because she did not think the
title of head of the Church so proper for one of her sex, they altered their
Scripture, and translated, To the King as having preheminency, or as superior.
But when King James obtained the Crown, and seemed to affect much the
supremacy, Bible 1577. and 1579.
then Scripture spoke according to his humor, to the King as supreme.

To excuse many of their corruptions and falls Translations, Doctor Whitaker
writ a book, wherein he endeavored to show that some Greek and Hebrew words
might be taken in that sense which the English Translators gave them; but he
never could prove that the profane and Poetical signification whereunto the
Translators and he had applied them, could make sense in holy scripture, nor be
accommodated to ecclesiastical discipline, and Divine doctrine. And therefore
Doctor Reynolds in his reprehensions of Whitaker's works, proves the absurdity
of his defense, and of the English Translations, by this example. Suppose
(says he) that a young spruce Minister should step into the pulpit, and exhort
his Parish to prepare them-selves for the holy Communion, and the Anabaptists
for baptism; according to the style and phrase of the English Protestant
scripture, wherein Priest is caled elder, Church, Synagogue, holy ghost, holy
wind, Lord Baal. Master, rain, Baptism washing, soul carcas. (Because they
had rather bury Christ's soul with his body, or deny that he had a soul, then
confess it went to Limbus Patrum, and therefore they also translate Hell grave;)
Sacrament secret, Beelzebub lord of afly, Angels Messengers; The Minister
therefore who according to the proper and ecclesiastical sense of these words
might have spoken sense thus, I that am your Priest placed in this Church by
the holy Ghost, for the feeding of your souls, do denounce unto you in the
name of Christ our lord and Master, that unless your souls be regenerated by
Baptism, and prepared for the Sacrament of the Altar, you shall be condemned
body and soul into hell, and your portion shall be with the Devils, I say
with Beelzebub and his Angels; the young Minister I say in steed of this godly
exhortation which might move the Audience to devotion, must in his own
scriptural language move the parish to laughter, thus; I that am your elder,
placed in this synagogue by the holy wind, to the feeding of your Carcasses, do
pronounce unto you in the name of the anointed our Baal and rain, that unless
your Carcasses be regenerated by washing, and prepared for the secret of the
Table, you shall be condemned body and carcass to the grave, and your portion
shall be with the slanderers, I say with the lord of a fly and his Messengers.

Let none therefore admire if Doctor Gregory Martin so celebrated for his
knowledge in the Hebrew and Greek tongues (which he taught in Oxford,) should
conclude his Treaty of the English corruptions of scripture with this zealous
reprehention of the Protestant Clergy of his Nation Are not your scholars
(think you) much bound unto you, for giving them in steed of God's blessed word
and holy scripture such translations Heretical, Judaical, profane, false,
negligent, fantastical, new, naughty, monstrous? God open their eyes to see,
and mollify your hearts to repent of all your falsehood, and treachery, both
that which is manifestly convinced against you, and can not be denied, as also
that which may by some show of answer be shifted of in the sight of the
ignorant, but in your consciences, is as manifest as the other.

For my part, J will not say much to the Protestant Clergy with any great hopes
of their conversion; there must by more of Divine inspiration then of human
persuasion in bringing men to acknowledge corruptions so abominable in
themselves; so advantageous to the Contrivers, Continuers, an Connivers, and so
much applauded by the poor souls that are seduced. My rhetoric is not
sufficient to persuade blood and flesh to recounce the Peerage and profit of
their Bishoprics and Benefices, and reduce them-selves, their wives and
Children, to their former despicable condition, and then either to beg their
bread, or rely for a livelihood upon the charity of those, whom they had
deceived by their doctrine or disobliged by their censures. To attempt so
difficult an enterprise would argue as much vanity in me, as it does folly in
lay Protestants, that thinck, them-selves safe in conscience and sufficiently
informed of the way of salvation, by asking a Protestant Bishop or Minister,
whether he be a Cheat? or (which is the same thing) whether the doctrine whereby
alone he can live, and hope to thrive in this world, be not sufficient to save
the soul? Few men will confess their guilt, or pronounce an infamous sentence
against them-selves, though they be guilty; neither will it be a tolerable
excuse in the day of Judgment for any discreet Protestant to say, that he made
Judges of his Religion (no indifferent but) indigent persons, that have no
other interest, credit, or livelihood, but to preach and maintain Protestancy,
whether it be sufficient or not sufficient for salvation, the Bishop or
Minister lives by saying it is sufficient, and the true Religion. I can not
deny but that some Protestant Bishops and Ministers have recanted and repented
their errors; but few, before they were summoned out of this world by
approaching death, or before they had lost their interest and hopes, by the
violence of war and the vicissitude of times.

Wherefore seeing the Protestant layty has so much reason to doubt either of the
sincerity o^ sufficiency of their Clergy in matters of a Religion without which
their Ministers can not subsist [few of them having either patrimony, or a
trade]; let them be pleased at present only to consider whether it be more
credible that St. Hierom, the greatest Doctor of God's Church, and the most
skillful in the three languages wherein Scripture was written, who lived in the
primitive times, whem perhaps some of the original writings of the Apostles
were extant, or at least the true and authentic copies, in Hebrew and Greeck,
better known then now they are, a man that renouncd' the pleasures and profits
of this world, retiring him-self to deserts, where he employed days and nights
in his devotions, and study of the Scriptures; let them be pleased, I say, to
consider, whether it be more credible that a Translation made or received by
this most holy Doctor, (and then approved of by all the world and ever since
accepted and applauded in God's Church) be defective, or deceitful, then a
translation made since the pretended Reforma^ion, by men not only engaged in
that new doctrine, but maintained thereby, and so addicted to the pleasures and
profits of this world, as the first Reformers, and their Successors the
Protestant Clergy are known to be, not only in England, but in all other parts
of Christendom: Let them be pleased also to consider, whether the judgment of
the Roman Catholic Clergy in these Kingdoms, (who in being of that judgment,
can have no motive, but conscience as is manifest by the incapacities and
penalties laid upon them for not conforming to Protestancy) be not a more
impartial, and less to be suspected rule for any prudent person to follow, then
the judgment of the Protestant Clergy, rewarded, and promoted to the greatest
employments both in Church and state, for being of that opinion they profess,
and who would forfeit all their being if they declared them-selves contrary to
Protestancy.

This being as maturely and impartially considered as the importance of the
matter does require, non will believe that the vulgar Translations made by
Protestants, is holy Scripture, they being so contrary to our vulgata in latin,
translated out of the true Greeck and Hebrew copies, written first by a holy
Martyr, and after revewed by a St. whose sincerity and learning were sufficient
to canonize his Translation, had it not bin the word of God, and most holy of
it self, and so declared by the testimony and approbation of the Church for the
space of 1200. years before the Council of Trent. In vain therefore do
Protestant Writers tell us that their Translations are taken immediately from
the fountains of the Greek and Hebrew, so is our vulgata; only with this
difference, that ours was taken from the fountains when they were clear, and
by holy and learned men that knew which were the crystal waters, and true
copies, but theirs is taken from fountains of trouble'd waters, by lewd and
vicious persons, and after that the Arians and other Heretics had poisoned and
corrupted them with their false and filthy doctrine.

Thus much against the Protestant letter of Scripture; now to their sense of
Scripture.

SECT. V. The Protestant interpretation is not the true sense of Scripture.
THE principal part, and as it were the soul of Scripture, is the sense, which
was delivered to the Church together with the letter. For as St. Hierom [in
ep. ad Galat.] says, the Ghospel is not in the word, but in the sense, not in
the bark, but in the sapp, not in the leaves of the words but in the root of
the meaning; So that though we should grant the Protestant Translations to be
true, yet if we prove their interpretation false, we demonstrat they have no
Scripture, nor the least pretext or color for their Reformations.

And first, that the Church received together with the letter the true sense
of Scripture, is as evident as it is, that God would not speak words without
sense, or leave the interpretation of them to men whose capacities reach not
the mysteries of Religion, contained in the words. Therefore our learned
Adversaries are obliged to confess, that no man doubts, Chemnit. in examine.
part 2. fol. 74.

Saravia in defens. tra. diversis mini. ^r. gradibus page 3.

Jewel in his defense of the Apology 157. pa. 35.


but that the primitive Church received from the Apostles and Apostolical men,
not only the text of Scripture, but also the right and native sense thereof.

The dispute therefore between Catholics and Protestants is not, whether the
Church ever received the true sense of Scriptures, but whether that sense
continued as well as the letter in the Church; and whether the interpretations
of Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Hamond, etc. or of the Prelaticks of England, ought
to be preferred before that of the Roman Catholic Church; because the true
sense of Scripture, is supposed by all Protestants, to have bin lost for many
ages, and that the whole visible Church of God was either so careless as to
forget the ancient sense, or so wicked, as to forge a new sense of Scripture.

And first it seems against reason, to believe that any Christian Congregation
could be less careful of the sense of Scripture, then of the letter, because
the sense is that which imports most for preservation of the faith. Therefore
if the Prelates and Pastors of the Church have bin so watchful and diligent in
all ages, as to find out and correct all heretical corruptions of the letter of
Scripture, how is it possible they would neglect the same industry for
preservation of the sense which is the principal part of God's word? And if
Protestants think the letter was safe in the custody of the Roman Chatholick
Church, from which they received it, how can they suspect the purity of that
sense which was kept and delivered to them by the same Church and authority?
And if God's providence (as they confess) was engaged in keeping the leaves,
and letter of Scripture from corruption, surely it could not be so vnconcern'd
for the integrity of the sense, and substance, as to permit it to perish.
Besides, it is much easier to keep the sense of Scripture incorrupt and pure,
then the letter: The letter was writ only in paper or parchment, the sense in
the heads and hearts of the Bishops, Doctors, and People of the Church: a dash
of a pen may alter the letter, but cannot have access to the sense, which
lodges in the hearts and heads of the faithful.

The precept of receiving the sense of Scripture from the Church, is not only
agreeable to reason, but prescribed in Scripture, as the only way of salvation.
Go not from the doctrine of the elders, for they have learned it from their
Fathers, and of them thou shall learn understanding, and to answer in the time
of need. Eccles. 8.8. The first Protestant Reformers observed not this, they
went to no precedent Church, nor Fathers for their interpretation of Scripture;
and therefore the words of Jeremy 18.15. may be literally applied to them. They
have stumbled from the ancient ways to walk in ways not trodden. The Protestant
Clergy ought to say and confess ingeniously that of holy Job 8.8. Jnquire
therefore I pray thee of the ancient generation and prepare thy self to search
of their Fathers, for we are but yesterday, and ought not intrude their own
Imaginations as the true explanation of God's word. They do not imitat St.
Gregory Nazianzen and St. Basil who as Eusebius relates [ Hist. l. 11. cap. 9.]
did seek the understanding of the Scriptures not from their own presumption,
but from the writings and authority of their Ancestors. They do not follow the
rule of Origin saying [ tract. in Math. 29.] That in our understanding of the
Scripture we must not d^part from the first Ecclesiastical tradition, nor
believe other-wise, but as the Church of God has by succession delivered to
us. Nor that of Tertulian [l. 1. de prescrip. c. 6.] What the Apostles
preached, what Christ revealed to them, ought not be otherwise proved then by
the Churches which they planted. Tertullian in lib de praescr. Qui estis vos.
vnde and qua^do venistis? vbi tam diu latuistis S. Hilarious l. 6 de Trinit.
ante med. Tarde mihi hos piissimos doct^res aetas nunc ^ujus ^^culi protulit
etc. S. Hierom in epist ad Pama^^ and ^ce an (...) p^st quadring (...) (now
1600) annos docere nos (...) qu^d an^^a neseivimus? Vsque in ha^c diem sine
isra doctrina mundus christianus fuit Luther in ^p. ad Irgentineneses au^ 1525.
Christiana nola^ primo vulga tun. audemu. gloriari.


Protestants contemn all these rules, and because there was never any Church in
the world which professed the same faith that any of their Reformers preached,
or them-selves now profess, they are necessitated to except against all
Testimonies of ancient Fathers and Councels, and against the continual and
common consent of all Christian Churches concerning the proper sense of
Scripture, delivered to the primitive Christians: and will be judged therein by
none but by them-selves, and by their own fancy of Scripture. They all follow
this rule of Luther the first Reformer, which he laid as the foundation of all
Protestant Reformations: The Governors of Churches, and Pastors of Christ's
sheep have indeed power to teach, but the sheep must judge whether they propose
the voice of Christ, or of strangers, etc. Whefore let Popes, Bishops, Councels
etc. decree, order, enact, what they please, we shall not hinder, but we who
are Christ's sheep, and hear his voice, will judge, whether they propose things
true and agreeable to the voice of our Pastor; and they must yield to us, and
subscribe and obey to our sentence, and censure. Luther tom. 2. Wittemb. cap.
de Sacra Script. fol. 375.

And because B.p Jewel in his challenge (thinking that none durst answer or
accept it) appealed to the holy Fathers of the first ages, and was thereupon
immediately convicted of hypocrisy, and impostures, he was grievously
reprehended by his own Prelatick brethren as injurious to him-self, and as one
who had given the Papists too large a scope, and after a manner spoiled
him-self and the Church, see Doctor Humfrey in Iewel's life edit. Londin page
212. and the same also in Fulk's retentive against Bristow page 55. Ever since
that foil, the Prelatiks have bin more wary, and one of their greatest
Champions Bilson Bishop of Winchester in his true difference between Christian
subjection etc. part. 2. page 353. says in plain terms The people must be
discerners and Judges of that which is taught.

How contrary to Luther's Reformation was the doctrine of the primitive Church
and Fathers, we may judge by these words of Gregory Nazianzen in the oration,
wherein he excuses him-self for having bin long absent from his flock and not
exercised his function. Vos Oves, nolite pascere Pastores, neque super terminos
eorum elevamini, satis enim est vobis, si recte pascimini, nolite judicare
iudices, nec legem feratis legis-latoribus etc.

Now let any man who has common sense be Judge, whether it be in the least
degree probable that not only the illiterat Protestants, but even their
greatest Doctors, and their first Apostles, Luther, Calvin, Cranmer etc. should
know better the true sense of Scripture that was delivered to the first age,
then they to whom those of that age told what they were taught by Christ and
his Apostles, or then the second which told the third what they were taught by
the first? and so from generation until Luther and Calvin's time. That every
age gave this favorable testimony to the subsequent, of the sense of Scripture
which it delivered, can not be denied; otherwise none would have received their
sense of Scripture, or their doctrine, as Divine; whether they were sincere in
delivering their testimony is the question; And because none questions it but
Luther, Calvin etc. and their followers, until we see be ter evidence and a
more clear cause of their reformed principle and knowledge of the visible
Churches apostasy, then their private spirit, or Luther and Calvin's new and
extravagant interpretations of Scripture, we dare not condemn the whole ancient
visible and Catholic Church, nor concur with it is declared enemies in so rash
a judgment, as to affirm, that the Church betrayed it is trust, and posterity*
which rash judgment is the ground of the Protestant Reformations.

S. Athanasius in lib. de Decretis Nicen. Synod. contra Eusebius. Ecce nos quidem
ex Patribus ad Patres, per manus traditam fuisse hanc sententiam
demonstravimus; vos autem O novi Judaei, Caiphae filii, quos tandem nominum
vestrorum potestis ostendere progenitores. S. Gregor. Nazian. ep. 2. ab Chelid.
Absconditam post Christum sapientiam nobis annunciant, rem lacrymis dignam, si
enim triginta his annis fides originem habuit, cum quadringenti (now 1600.)
fere anni ab eo tempore fluxerint quo Christus palam conspectus est, inane
tanto tempore fuit Evangelium, inanis etiam fides nostra; and Martyrs quidem
frustra martyrium subierunt, frustra etiam tales tantique Antistites populo
praefuerunt.

St. August. de vtilit. credendi cap. 14. says, to the Manichees, what we may
to the Protestant Reformers. Vos autem and tam pauci estis, and tam turbulenti,
and tam novi, nemini dubium est, quoniam nihil dignum autoritate proferetis.

Seeing therefore the Roman Catholic sense of Scripture has for the space of
1600. years bin delivered by the visible Christian Church from age to age, as
the true meaning of God's word; and that the Protestant sense of Scripture was
never accepted of by any but condemned Heretics, and even in this last age was
delivered but by a few turbulent and disagreeing persons, and obnoxious ^o many
exceptions much diminishing the credibility of their testimony; it is at least
16. to one, not only in the number, but also in the quality of the witnesses,
that the Roman Catholic sense of Scripture is true, and the Protestant false;
and by consequence the Protestants have no Scripture to maintain the doctrine
wherein they differ from Roman Catholics.

SECT VI. Protestants mistaken in the Ministry and Mission of their Clergy, in
the Miracles of their Church, in the holiness and honesty of their Reformers.
ALbeit God was able to call, justify, and confirm the elect without any mediat
means, yet (as Protestants confess) he was pleased, not to accomplish the same
otherwise then in, and by the ministry of his Church. Therefore S. Paul tells
us [ Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.] that Christ has placed in his Church Pastors and
Doctors to continue to the consummation of Saints till we all meet in the unity
of faith. The chief of these Pastors and Doctors are the Bishops, unto whom (as
the same Apostle testifies) it belongs to govern God's Church [ Act. c. 2^.]
These Bishops must succeed not only in Doctrine, but in caracter to the
Apostles; which caracter is the ordinary ministry or vocation, discerned and
received by imposition of Episcopal hands [1. Tim. 4.] But because Luther was
only a single Priest, and Calvin (as most say) not so much as a Priest, and
that both despaired of Episcopal and Priestly succession, they resolved to
remedy that want, by saying that the caracter of Priests and Bishops was not
distinct from that of Baptism; and whereas, Luther's ordination or ordinary
vocation in the Roman Catholic Church, was, to preach the doctrine which he had
received from that Church, and not his new doctrinal Reformation, Georgius
Milius in August. Confess. explic. art. 7. de ecclesia page 137.
he and all Reformers after him, pretended an extraordinary and immediate
vocation and mission from God, to teach an other faith contrary to that which
the then visible Church professed, and could not be proved that any precedent
Congregation ever held. If there had been right believers says Georgius Milius
page 138. that went before Luther in his office there had then bin no need of a
Lutheran Reformation. Therefore we say that Luther was raised up ( divinitus and
extra ordinem) by God's special apointment and extraordinarily. See Luther in
loc. Com. class. 4. page 51. Bucer in epist. ad Episcop. Hereford. calls Luther
the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine. Beza in epist. Theolog. ep. 5. Ergo
de extraordinaria vocatione videamus Huic vero tum demum locum esse dicimus,
cum vel nulla, vel pene nulla est ordinaria vocatio, sicut nostris temporibus
accidit in Papatu, cum expectari extraordinaria vocatio, quae nusquam erit, nec
debuit, nec potuit. Bishop Jewel in his Apology for the Church of England
part. 4. cap. 4. divis. 2. And in his defense of the Apology page 426. The
truth was unknown at that time when Martin Luther and Vldrick Zuinglius first
came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Ghospel.

Mr. Parkins in his exposition upon the Creed, pag^ 400. and in his works
printed 1605. fol. 365. And in his reformed Catholic, page 329. We say that
before the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an universal
Apostasy overspread the whole face of the earth, and that our Church was not
then visible to the world.

Calvin in Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 4. Quod Dominus nobis iniunxit, etc.
Lascicius in proof of his extraordinary vocation, lib. de Russorum Relig. page
23. alleges Calvin saying. Because the succession or Series of ordination
has bin interrupted by the Pop's tyranny, there is need of a new subsidy, etc.
And this gift was altogether extraordinary.

Mr. Fulk against Stapleton, page 2. The Protestants that first preached in
these last days had likewise extraordinary calling. Mr. Perkens says the same
in his works printed 1605. fol. 916. Mr. Symonds, page 123. upon the
Revelations, affirms a calling to preach by the civil Magistrate, a holy and
sufficient calling (says he) in the time of these confusions.

But this pretext and presumption of theirs is groundless 1. Because the
ordinary Ministry of Christ's Church being to continue (as S. Paul says) to
the consummation of Saints, and end of the world, there could be no necessity
of an extraordinary contrary mission or ministry; but rather it must be
concluded that there is an impossibility thereof, seeing it is impossible that
God should send men to contradict him-self or that doctrine, which he promised
should continue until he day of judgment by the Ministry and means of the
ordinary Pastors and Doctors of the Church. 2. Whenever God sent any
extraordinary Ministers or Reformers, he confirmed their mission and Ministry
with undoubted miracles, as is manifest by the example of Moses, and the
Prophets of the old Testament, and of the Apostles in the new. But no such
thing appeared in Luther or any Protestant.

Their ordinary excuse that Miracles are ceased in the Church, is confuted by
their Dr. Feeld in his Treatise of the Church lib. 3 cap. 46 Mr. Abr* Hartwell
in his report of the Kingdom of Congo, printed 1597. in his epistle to the
reader.
own acknowledging that in the Indies, God, by means of the Jesuits and other
Catholic Preachers, works Miracles for the conversion of Pagans.

And Philippus Nicolai confesses that the Jesuits and other Spanish and
Portugal Preachers, converted both Indies, Iapon, Cataia, etc. And wrought many
true Miracles in those parts, and in our age, but Withal adds lib. 1. of his
Comentaries de Regno Christi, page 91. 312. and 313. 314. 318. and 219. That
such Miracles wrought by the Jesuits and other professed Papists, proceed not
from their faith as it was Roman Catholic, Simon Lythus in respons altera ad
alteram Gretseri Apol. page 331 Danaeus contra Belarmin page 781.
but as it was Lutheran. See him page 91. and 53. and page 91. he sets down
some mysteries of Christianity, wherein Lutherans agree with Roman Catholic,
and attributs the Miracles to them only; concluding. Hucvsque enim
Lutheranisant. Whereas it is well known that the Jesuits inculcat to their
Pr^selits in all parts of the world the Romnn Catechisms, and in the Indies,
Iapon, China, etc. bid them beware of the English, Holanders, and other
Protestants doctrine, as of heresy: And many of their Miracles are wrought at
^he intercession of our B. Lady S. Jgnatius, S. Francis Xaverius, etc. and by
application of their Relics.

Mr. Hartwell is more reasonable; he confesses loc. cit. that the conversion
of Congo was accomplished by massing Priests, and after the Romish manner, and
this action (says he) which tends to the Glory of God, shall it be
concealed, and not committed to memory, because it was performed by Popish
Priests, and Popish means? God forbid.

Now if God works miracles for the Conversion of Pagans to our Catholic
Religion, it must be confessed, that either ours is the true Religion, or that
God deceives those poor souls which by our Ministry, and his miracles are
thereunto converted. Besid's; if what Protestants say, and that whereupon they
ground their Reforma^ions, be true viz, that for above 1000. years the true
Church has bin invisible, or suppressed, and the world abused by Popish
Impostors, and counterfeited miracles, etc. the innocent and illiterat Papists
(who are supposed to have bin seduced) seem as fit an object for Divine mercy,
and miracles, as the Indian Idolaters: But seeing not one undoubted miracle has
ever bin wrought to convert them from Popery to Protestancy, it must
necessarily follow, that either God does not approve of Protestancy, or has
altered the usual Style of his providence, which never failed to work miracles
for the conversion of the Israelits, and Heretics when most guilty of heresy
and idolatry. It Is strange he should not observe the same custom with Popish
Christians, and convert them by the means and miracles of holy Protestants, if
these be his chosen people, and sent by him to preach the Ghospel.

Not on Protestant Preacher could hitherto be prudently taken for an ordinary
Prophet, or for a person of extraordinary piety; even the first Protestant
Reformers are convicted of dishonest dealing, and scandalous conversation, and
are far from that degree, J do not say, of sanctity, but of morality, required
in men pretending to reform others. We grant that a true Religion may be abused
by the wickedness of it is Professors, yet never was the truth of Religion
planted, or revived by the ministry of wicked persons. Let us run over all
Christendom, and we shall find every Province thereof converted to the Roman
Catholic Religion by men not only Apostolical in their lives, and
conversation, but also in Miracles. We shall find (not to leave our own Islands)
an Austin in England, a Patrik in Ireland; a Columban in Scotland, and almost
in every county of these Kingdoms a miraculous Saint that converted our
Ancestors to Popery. How incredible therefore is it, that Protestancy can be the
true Religion, seeing that in all the world they cannot name one Protestant
eminent for Sanctity, Miracles, or morality. Cranmer carried his wench with him
in his Episcopal visitations; Bale says him-self was inspired to take a
sweetheart called Dol; Bishop Poynet went to law with a Butcher for his wife;
Peter Martyr, and Bucer came to preach into England, each of them having a Nun
for a wife; Calvin kept a Gentleman of Lausanna his wife; Beza run away with
the wife of a Tailor; And as for the Protopatriarch, and first Apostle of all
the Protestant Reformations Luther, himself confesses ( loc. com. class. 4.
page 50.) that from his infancy he was haunted by the Devil, and to be rid of
him entered the Religious Order of St. Austin; but afterward the Devil
prevailed in a real, not imaginary dispu^ation against him, concerning the
abrogation of the Mass, adoration of the Sacrament, and invocation of our B.
Lady and other Saints; and he resolved (having bin convicted by the Devill's
argument to for-sake his Order, and set up Protestancy, which never had bin
heard of before. And whereas during the time he lived amongst his friars, he
acknowledges that he lived chastely, and virtuously, yet after his revolt from
the Roman Catholic Religion, he professes in sundry places of his writings,
that he could not live without a woman, and none could serve his turn but a
Nun, whom he debauched out of her Monastery. Luther tom. 1. epist. fol. 334.
and Colloq. Germ. cap. de Matri. Eight days were now past wherein I neither did
write, pray, nor study, being vexed with the temptation of the flesh, etc. As
none can abstain from meat or drink, so he cannot from a woman etc. But it
suffiseth that we have known the riches of the glory of God, the lamb which
takes away the sins of the world, can not draw us from him although we should
commit fornication, or kill a thousand times in one day.

His pride was so excessive that his Disciples are ashamed of him, and have
endeavored (by altering many things in the later editions of his works) to
conceal the impiety of his Tenets, and the imperfections of his person; He was
a better Drol then Doctor; sociable, but scandalous. Melanchton excusing
Luther's scandalous marriage in epistol. ad Joan. Camer page 39. says, Est vir
iste nequaquam ex iis qui homines oderunt, and congressus fugiunt, quotidianae
autem vitae illius vsum non ignoras, vnde cogitare te caetera, quam me
scribere, melius ut opinor fuerit.

He wanted not wit to se the meakness of his Zealous Proselits, and was so
facetiously wicked as to laugh at them for relying upon one Luther in a matter
of so great importance as the chang of Christian Religion, against the
testimony of the whole visible Church, and the sense of all ancient Fathers and
Councels; and therefore was used to say when he was merry amongst his
confidents, and Camerades in the Alehouses of Wittemberg, Bibentibus nobis
cervisiam Wittembergensem crescit Evangelium: That the Ghospel was zealously
preached (by fools) while he made good cheer with friends. He spent his life
in good fellowship; and Sleydan his deer Scholar ( lib. 3. edit. 1521. fol.
29.) reports, how that Luther him-self acknowledged his profession not to be
of life or manners, but of doctrine, wishing ( l. 2. ed. 1520. fol. 22.) that he
were removed from the office of preaching, because his manners and life did not
answer to his profession: wherefore it was usual with such Protestants as knew
his life and conversation to say when they resolved to give them-selves to
pleasure, and debauche: body Lutheranice vivemus, to day we will live
Lutheranlike: see Benedict Morgensterne in tract. de Ecclesia. page 221. His
death was answerable to his life, in the morning he was found dead, having bin
very merry and feasting him-self the night before. He attempted in vain two
miracles, at the importunity of his Scholars; the one was to revive a dead
man; the other was, to dispossess one of his own Disciples, according to his
new form of Exorcisms; But Staphylus, who was present, says, Luther was so
foully frighted, that in steed of chasing the Devil, him-self run away, and was
in danger of being killed; The want of success in these two attemps, made him
say that miracles were ceased in the Church, and that all ours are but
impostures, or don by compact with Satan.

Zuinglius Author of the Sacramentarian Religion, having bin tied by Luther to
no other rule of faith besides the letter of Scripture (for he had bin Luther's
scholar) but differing from his Master in the point of the real presence,
invented a new reformation, which he planted among the Suitzers; and before he
would impart it to them, he made The title of Zwingitu, his writing is Pietate
and Prudentia in signi Helveti orum Reipublicae, Hulde ricus Zwinglius aliique
Evangelicae doctrinae Ministri gratia and pacem a Deo etc. ton: 1. fol. 110 See
all these words and much more related by him-self 1. sq ad fol. 123.
his conditions by way of petition (yet extant in his works) that if the
Cantons would permit him and his Ministers who joined with him, to take wives,
he would reveal to them the Evangelical doctrine, so long hidden. An other
Epistle to the same purpose he writ to the Bishop of Constance: and the reason
he gives for his demand is, least the souls committed ^o his own and his
fellow's charge, should be any longer offended by the example of their
sensuality. We have proved (says he) that the weakness of our flesh has bin
(O for grief) cause of our often falling, etc. we have burned (O for schame) so
greatly that we have committed many things vnseemingly, etc. To speak freely
without boasting, we are not otherwise of such uncivil manners that we should
be ill spoken of among the people to us committed for any wickedness ( hoc vno
exc^pto) this one point only excepted. And confesses tom. 1. fol. 115. that he
and his fellow Ministers by means of their lustful desires were made infamous
before their Congregations.

Himself and his Camerades having taken wives, or wenches, he began to reveal
his Ghospel, and impugn the Mass by instruction from a spirit that appeared to
him, Zwingl. tom. 3 in lib. de subid. Ecclesiae fo. 249
Whether black or white, he remembers not. Having by this Diabolical dream or
apparition, resolved to abolish the Mass, and change the doctrine of
Transubstantiation by altering the Text of Scripture in his Translation
(dedicated to Francis King of France edit. Tigur. an. 1525.) saying, This
signifies my Body, for This is my Body. Zuinglius tom. 2. de vera and falsa
Religione. fol. 202. and fol. 210. He quotes his own Text of Scripture thus,
Sic ergo habet Lucas, and accepto pane, gratias egit, etc. dicens, Hoc
significat Corpus meum. He proceeded after a very strange manner in his design:
for he confesses that his doctrine was more accomodated to temporising liberty,
then to sincerity or truth; and that God commanded him to proceed in that
manner, least his design should be quasht in the very beginning by his
Adversaries, whom he terms Dogs and Swine. Retractamus igitur hic quae illic
diximus, tali lege, vt quae hic damus anno aetatis nostrae quadragesimo
secundo, propendeant eis quae quadragesimo dederamus: quando ut diximus,
tempori potius scripsimus quam rei, sic jubente Domino, vt tali ratione
aedificemus, ne inter initia Canes and Porci nos rumpant.

He had no great opinion of the Apostles writings, as is proved by his altering
the very Text of Scripture contrary to all copies both Greek and Latin, and by
his saying, that S. Paul did not attribut so much to his own Epistles as to
think that all therein contained was sacred; for, that were to impute immoderat
arrogance to the Apostle ( tom. 2. Elench. contra Catabaptistas, fol. 10.) And
because the other Cantons of the Suitzers would not accept of this Reformation;
he sticking to the principles thereof, endeavored by force of arms to bring them
under subjection, and to his own Ghospel, and in this attempt Zuinglius was
killed, sealing with his blood what he had writ, ( tom. 1. in explanat. art,
42. fol. 84.) that Kings and Magistrates may be deposed when they resist the
Ghospel, The Reformers of the English Church.
that is any private Protestant interpretation of Scripture.

As for the Reformers of the Protestant Church of England, they were King Henry
8. Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, Peter Martyr, Hooper, Rogers,
Ridley, Bucer, Okin; The Revivers were Jewel, Parker, Horn, etc. of whose lives
and conversations we have said something, and enough to prove they were not fit
men to reform christian Religion; their doctrine they borrowed from Luther and
Zwinglius (the supremacy only excepted, which King Henry 8. invented) and
therefore Bishop Jewel the chief maintainer both of the Protestant doctrine and
Prelatick caracter of the Church of England, in his defense of the Apology (
edit. 1571. page 426. as also in the Apology part. 4. c. 4.) thought it
necessary for the credit of the 39. Articles of the English Religion, which had
bin compiled out of Luther and Zwinglius writings, to commend those two Pillars
of Protestancy as most excellent men, even sent by God to give light to the
whole world in the midst of darkness, when the truth was unknown and unheard
of. As for B.p Jewel him-self, we remit the reader to Doctor Hardings
Confutation of the Apology, wherein he may clearly discern the false luster of
this counterfeit Jewel, and the value which men ought to set upon this precious
stone, laid for a foundation of the Prelatick Church; and upon the rotten stuff
which he and his Successors have sold for Divine truth to English Protestants
ever since he undertook, Jn Queen Elizabeth.
to maintain their cause; for as Doctor Heylin ingeniously acknowledges in
his Ecclesia restaurata, all the learned English Protestant Writers have
borrowed from B.p Jewel what they have said in defense of the Protestant
Religion, and that is one reason why their works are so full of manifest
untruths, and them-selves so frequently convicted of gross mistakes; they rely
too much upon this reviver of their faith; or at least would make the world
believe that he may be relied upon in matters of faith.

But because Doctor Heylin makes it his business to persuade the world, that
Ievel then did make good the caracter and ordinary vocation of the Church of
England against Harding; and that Doctor Bramhall, late Protestant Primat of
Ireland, triumphed over the supposed Jesuits who renewed Harding's quarrel, I
judged it necessary to clear both these mistaks in few words; As for Bishop
Jewel, we have said in the 1. part sect. 7. of this Treatise how easily he
might have stopped Harding's mouth by only naming the Bishop who consecrated
Parker and his Camerades; for, Harding used no other Argument against the
nullity of the English Protestant Clergy, but this, A Bishop must be ordained
by an other Bishop; but Parker and his Camerades were not ordained Bishops by
any other Bishop. Ergo. His proof that they were not ordained by any Bishop was
this, name the Bishop that ordained them, name the place where they were
consecrated. This was a demand soon satisfied if ever Parker or his fellows had
bin ordained Bishops; especially with so much ceremony and solemnity as the new
records of Lambeth report that matter. Yet Jewel could never name Parker's and
the first Protestant Bishops Consecrators; he named indeed Parker for his own
Consecrator, but being pressed by Harding to name Parkers, instead of answering
Harding's question, whereupon depended the whole controversy, the credit of his
Clergy, and the satisfaction of the Reader, he maks an impertinent digression
and long discourse of the obligation which some pretended to have bin in ancient
times, of consulting the Bishop of Rome before they proceeded to the election
and consecration of Bishops, but never returned to the point of naming the
first Protestant Bishop's Consecrator, whom he would have named to Harding, if
ever they had bin consecrated. And this is one part of the great victory, which
Doctor Heylin so much brags of.

The other part concerns Bramhall and the supposed Jesuits. The true relation
whereof is as follows.

After that his Majesty and the Royal Family had bin driven out of England and
France by the late usurped powers: and all Christian Princes thought it their
convenience to court the Rebels, and not entertain in their Dominions the
Person of our King, much less embrace his quarrel; it happened on day at
Bruges, that Doctor Crouder Chaplain to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, in
his Master's Chamber and presence, without any provocation, or occasion given
by any of the Roman profession, vtter'd very intemperat words against Doctor
Goff Almoner to the Queen Mother, for having taken orders in the Church of
Rome, after that he had received them in the Church of England* To which a
Catholic Gentleman answered, he had don no more then what all other Protestant
Ministers who became Roman Priests, had continually practiced, and (as he
believed) upon good grounds. Whereupon the Doctor (notwithstanding the King was
come to his Brother's chamber) reassumed his Argument, and continued to dispute
with such vehemence, that being caled to read morning prayers, he mistook the
time of the day, and in the morning read evening prayers to the congregation.
The cause of his mistake being known, and many believing that his excess of
choler argued a weakness in his cause, Doctor Bramhall late Primat of Ireland,
Writ a Treatise in vindication of the English Clergys caracter, which is the
book so much applauded by the Prelaticks, and by Doctor Heylin, as
unanswerable; whereas it was sudainly and so substantially answered, that Primat
Bramhall never durst reply, notwithstanding the general concern of his Clergy,
and his own particular engagement; and the Church of England perceiving the
evidence of our arguments against the validity of their forms of ordination,
See the nullity of the English Church and Clergy.
thought their best answer was to confess the force of our reasons, and correct
the errors of their Bishops, by changing the forms they had composed of
Priesthood and Episcopacy: and by in serting into those forms, See this in the
new Edition of the Common prayr book, rit^s etc. of the Church of England.
words that might bear the signification of the caracters which their
Predecessors had excluded from or omitted in the ordination of Protestant
Ministers, as superfluous, and superstitious. This manner of answering is of
great satisfaction to Catholics, but how safe it is for the Protestant layty
to rely upon the validity of a Ministry that now after 100. years confess the
insufficiency of their own forms of ordination, and by consequence of their
Priesthood, Episcopacy, and Sacraments, we leave to their consideration, and
pass to speak a word of Calvin the chief Author of the Presbiterian sect, and
faction.

John Calvin (whom the Magistrate of Noyon condemned for infamous Sodomy) was by
his friend Beza canonized for extraordinary Sanctity; but Sclusselburg a man of
so great esteem among Protestants that he was made Superintendent and general
Inspector of many Churches in Germany, after relating Calvin's Sodomy and
vices, says; I know Beza writ otherwise of Calvin's life, manners, and death;
but seeing him-self noted with the same Heresy, and almost with the same sin as
the history of Candida etc. witnesses, none can credit him. Therefore I am
induced to believe Bolseck the Physician of Geneva, who begins his book of the
life and death of Calvin with this protestation. I am here, for the love of the
truth to refute Theodor Beza his false, and shamless lies in the praise of
Calvin, protesting before God and all the holy Court of heaven, before all the
world, and the Holy Ghost it self, that neither anger nor envy, nor evil will
has made me speak or write any one thing against the truth and my conscience.
Then he relates how Calvin was branded for Sodomy with a burning iron on the
shoulder, and therefore retired from his Country ( Noyon in Picardy) and how
this punishment was testified by that City under the hand of a public and
sworn Notary to Mons.r Bertelier Secretary to the Council of Geneva, which
testimony (says Bolseck) is yet extant. Then he describes Calvin's delicat
diet, how his wine was choice, and carried with him in a silver pot, when he
dined abroad; that also special bread was made for Calvin only, and the same
made of fine flower, wet in rosewater, mingled with sugar, Synamond,
Aniz-seeds, besides a singular kind of biscuit; and this he affirms as a
matter known to all Geneva: This delicasy of diet was not prescribed to
preserve his health, but prepared to foment his lust and lewd conversation with
a Gentleman of Lausann's wife, and others; his ambition was so great, that he
aimed at being Lord of Geneva, approving of their notorious rebellion and
deposition of their lawful Prince from his temporal right and jurisdiction.

His death is described by the aforsaid Schlusselburg (lib. 2. fol. 72.) in
these words. God in the rod of his fury visiting Calvin did horibly punish him
before the fearful hour of his death; for he so stroke this Heretic (so he
termed him in regard of his doctrine concerning the Sacrament and of God being
the Author of sin) with his mighty hand, that being in despair, and calling
upon the Devil, he gave up his wicked soul swearing, cursing, and blaspheming;
he dyed of the disease of lyce and worms (a kind of death where with God often
strikes the wiked as Antiochus, Herod etc.) increasing in a most lothsom ulcer
about his privy parts, so as none present could endure the stench.

His Miracle (for he never attempted to work more then one, or two) is recorded
not only by Bolseck, but also by Ninguerda Lindanus, Copus, and others, and it
was thus. Calvin pretending extraordinary vocation, thought necessary, for the
confirmation thereof, and his own credit, to cheat the world with a feigned
miracle; to that purpose he agreed with a poor man caled Bruleus to feign
him-self dead, promising him great rewards if in this Trage-comedy he would be
secret, and act his part hansomly; non knew of the plot but Bruleus, and his
wife, who upon the day and howr appointed, sart in her house lamenting her
husband's death; Calvin passing by with a great number of his friends [as it
were by chance] and hearing the lamentations of the poor woman, seemed to
pity her sad condition, and moved, forsooth, with charity and compassion, fell
down upon his knees with the rest of the company; praying in a loud voice; and
begged of God that for the manifestation of his glory, and confirmation of his
servant Calzin's doctrine and mission, he would vouchsafe to revive the dead
Carcass, which he took by the hand, and bid him rise in the name of the Lord.
The wife seeing her husband did not move nor rise, as he had promised, drew
near, and perceiving he who had bin well but half an hour before, was now
dead, lamented in good earnest the loss of her husband, reviled Calvin as a
Murderer, Cheat, Hypocrit, Heretic etc. and related to the whole company what
had past between them; Calvin seeing Bruleus had acted his part more naturaly
then he wished, retired with have and confusion to his lodging. I leave it to
the judgment of any disinteress'd person whether Bolseck and other grave
Authors, would report such remarkable lies (as Calvinists will pretend, this
and other passages of Calvin's life and death to be) and set down in print so
many circumstances, in a time wherein they were so notably disprovable. This
kind of miracles, as Tertulian says, is proper to men who teach new doctrine
contrary to that of the Apostles; as their doctrine is contrary, so ought their
miracles to be; the Apostles raised men from death by miracles, their
Antagonists by miracle make men dead. Jsti (Apostoli) de mortuis suscitabant,
ipsi de vivis mortuos faciunt. Tertulian. in lib. de preter. Beza (an other
Protestant Saint) was in love with a boy and a girl at the same time; in his
amourous and lascivious Epigram's printed at Paris 1548. he called the boy
Andebertus, the girl Candida, in these Epigram's is expressed his passion for
both, and his perplexity in the choice of on before the other. At last he
resolves, to prefer the boy before the girl, and if his Candida should
complain, to content her with a kiss: his words are. Prefer tamen alterum
necesse est, O duram nimium necessitatem! sed postquam tamen alterum necesse
est, Priores tibi defer^ Andeberte, Quod si Candida forte conqueratur, Quid
tum? basiolo ^acebit vno.

I will not trouble the Reader with relating the known vices of other
Protestant sectaries; these three are the chief, all other Sects being but
branches of theirs. If any English Protestant will pretend that the Church of
England is neither Lutheran Zuinglian nor Calvinist, let him fix upon his
Reformers; Jf he rejects Henry 8. Cranmer, Ridley, Bucer Martyr, Ochin,
Latimer, etc. And will needs have the whole Parliament which authorized them in
Edward 6. reign to reform Religion, or the Parliament of Queen Elizabeth that
received the English extinct Protestancy, to have the honor of being Authors,
or Reformers, let him be pleased to read the Cronicles of this Nation, and
compare the integrity of them that pretended to reform Popery, and revive
Protestancy, with as many more Members of precedent English Parliaments, and he
will find there was never found in this Kingdom, or in any other, such a number
of men, or a Parliament that deserved less credit in matters of Religion, then
they, who admitted and settled Protestancy. He may observe how in King Henry 8.
days (to humor his lewdness and couetousness) they cried down the Pope, and
flattered a temporal Sovereign with a spiritual Supremacy, and yet persecuted
as heresies all other points of the Protestant Reformation. In Edward 6. days
he may see how the same men (to comply with Seamors folly and Dudleys ambition)
declared the doctrine which them-selves had professed as Catholic in King Henry
8. reign, to be notorious heresy. In Queen Mary's time he may read in the
statuts, and in this Treatise (1. part. sect. 6.) how they recanted and
condemned them-selves, and censured the King's Supremacy (together with all
points of Protestancy) as heresy; and with in six years after see them pass the
same censure against the Roman Catholic doctrine, to which they had bin so
solemnly reconciled again; and revive the Supremacy together with other points
of Protestancy. So that in the space of less then 16. years they changed their
Religion, by public Acts of Parliament, five of six tyms, to humor the
factions which then prevailed. Wherefore it cannot be denied but that these
Parliaments and persons deserve as little credit in matters of Religion, as
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, or any other private sectary.

SECT VII. Protestants mistaken in the application of the Prophecies of
Scripture, concerning the conversion of the Kings, and Nations of the Gentiles
from Paganism to Christianity, foretold as an infallible mark of the true
Church, and whereof the Protestant is deprived.
SAint Augustine says: In psalm. 30. con. 2.
Obscurius dixerunt Proph^tae de Christo, quam de Ecclesia; puto propterea quod
videbant in Spiritu contra Ecclesiam homines facturos esse particulares, and de
Christo non tantam litem habituros, de Ecclesia magnas contentiones
excitaturos, ideo illud vnde majores lites futurae erant, planius praedictum
est. The Prophets did speak more clearly of the true Church then of Christ
him-self, and gives this reason, because they did forsee in spirit that there
would arise greater doubts, and heresies against the Church then against our
Savior; Therefore to stop the mouths of heretics it was fit that God should
describe the Church in Scripture by so remarkable and obvious signs, that
neither ignorance nor obstinacy might be excusable by pretending want of
knowledge of the truth, or means of repairing to that Guide of faith whereby the
illiterat ought to be instructed, and the learned directed in all doubts, and
controversies of Christian Religion. Amongst all the marks of God's Church
mentioned in Scripture, not any is more discernable and less subject to
mistakes, then the conversion of Kings and Nations from Paganism to
Christianity; Miracles may admit of disputes whether they be true or false? But
the conversion of Nations from Paganism to Christian Religion, cannot be
counterfeited, nor concealed. If therefore the Protestant Congregations never
converted any Kings or Nations of the Gentiles to the Christian faith, not any
nor all of them can be the true Church of God. For

The Prophet Esaias foretells of the true Church, tha^ all Esaias 2.2.
Nations shall flow to it. And concerning the Gentills coming to the Church in
abundance, Thou Esaias 60.16.
shall see and shine, they heart shall be astonished and enlarged, because the
multitude of the Sea shall be converted to thee, the Isles Esaias 60.9.
shall wait for thee, their Esaias 60.10.11. and Psalm. 102.15.22. and Esaias 62.2.
Kings shall minister to thee, and thy gates shall be continually open, neither
day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches of the
Gentills. And that their Kings may be brought, thou Esaias 60.6.
shall suck the milk of the Gentills, and the breast of Kings. Kings Esaias 49.23.
And see the marginal notes of the English Bible of 1576. in Esaias 49.23.
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Mothers. I will Psalm. 2.8.
give thee the earth for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for thy
possession. Thou must prophesy again unto Nations, Peoples, Tongues, and many
Kings: Apocal. 20.11. All The English Bible 1576. in the marginal notes, says:
The meaning is, that Kings shall be converted to the Ghospel, and bestow their
power and authority for preservation of the Church. Luther tom. 4. Wittemb. in
Esaias 6. folio 234. Kings shall obey and believe the Ghospel, etc. The Church is
in perpetual use of converting others to the faith, etc. For this is signified
by her gates being continually open.
Protestants as well as Catholics apply these prophecies to the conversion of
the Gentills.

In like manner do Whitaker in his answer to Mr. William Reynolds in the
Preface, page 37.
Protestants and Catholics agree, that these prophecies of God have bin
accomplished; but not in the first 300. years, because as Barlow says (in his
defense of the Articles of the Protestant Religion page 34. ( Jn the primitive
Nonage of the Church, the promise of Kings alleigance thereunto was not so fully
accomplished, because in those day's that prophecy of our Savior was rather
verefied, you shall be brought before Kings for my nam's sake, by them to be
persecuted even to death. From the time of Constantin the Great until the time
of Gregory the great, or Boniface the third, Bishops of Rome (which was 200.
and od years) few Kings professed the Christian faith, the Emperors of the
East and West only excepted; and even of those, some revolted, as Julian the
Apostat, and sundry others were Arians, as Constans, Constantius, Valens etc.
And in case any illiterat Protestant should pretend that the Religion professed
by Constantin, and propagated in those 200. and do years was not the Roman
Catholic, but the Protestant, we remit him to his own learned Writers, and to
Eusebius de vita Constantine, and particularly to the Centurists in their
fowrth Century dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, in which they undertake to deliver
to her Majesty the state of the Church which in Constantin's time illustrated
the whole world, and yet do charge the Fathers and Doctors of that and
the ensuing ages with the Popish doctrines of Centur. 4. col. 292. and 293.
under the titles de justificatione and bonis operibus, where they conclude
saying: J am cogitet pius Lector quam procul haec aetas in hoc Articulo de
Apostolorum doctrine desciverit.
Justification, and merit by works; Centur. 4. col. 254. Ad hoc Presbyter^m
aliquem deputarunt, ad quem qui deliquerunt accedentes, quae gessissent
confiterentu^, etc. Ea lege confitentes absolvebat, vt a seipsis poenas
commissorum exigerent.
Confession of sins to a Priest, Centur. 4. col. 255. and col. 256.257. are
recited and rejected the particula^ sayings, of Bazil, Ambrose, Prudentius,
Ephrem, Athanasius.
Invocation of Saints, Centur. 4. col 304. Where are recited and rejected the
sayings of Lactantius and S. Ierom.
Purgatory, the real See confessed testimonies for Transsubstantiation
alleged by the Centurists. cent. 4. col. 29^ and col. 985. And cent. 5^ col.
517. They say Chrysostom seems so confirm Transsubstantiation. And cent. 4.
c. 10. col. 985. that Eusebius and Emissenus did speak unprofitably of
Transsubstantiation.
presence and Transubstantiation, worshipping Chemnitius in his examine part. 2.
page 29. alleged the several sayings of S. Austin, S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory
Nazianzen affirming the ado^^tion of the Sacrament. And Orat. 11. de Gorgonia
sorore, tells how his deceased sister prostrated her self before the Alter,
and calling upon him who is worshipped on it. (^ miracle) says he, the departed
presently received health. And the Centurists cent. 4. col. 430. do reprove
some prayers of S. Ambrose, saying Continent adorationem panis in Sacramento.
of the Sacrament confirmed by miracles, offering Centur. 3. col. 83. they
reprove S. Cyprian, saying, Sacerdotem vice Christi fungi, and Deo Patri
Sacrificium offerre. They also say that the writings of S. Ireneus and Ignatius
the Apostles scholar, are here in, incommodious and dangerous. And Sebastia.
Francus, in his Epist. de abrogandis Statutis omnibus Ecclesiast. affirms
that presently after the Apostles time the supper of our Lord was turned into a
Sacrifice.
it in Sacrifice to God, as being propitiatory for the living and dead, with
Centur. 4. col. 456. and 457. and 482. and 1446. Centur. 4. col. 602. and 1250.
and 457. And S. Ierom contra Vigilantium, cap. 3. affirms the estimation of
Relics to be in his time the received doctrine non vnius vrbis sed totius
orbis.
solemn translating of Saints Relics, and their [t] worship, with Hemnitius
examine part. 4. page 10 Suscipiebant etiam Peregri^^ Nationes ad loca vbi
Reliquias Miraculis celebres and claras audiebant.
pilgrimage to them, with Centur. 4. col. 409.
Images in the Churches, with numbering prayers upon little stones or beads,
worshipping Mr. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders, etc. page 657. affirms that by
report of Paulinus, the Cross was by the Bishop of Jerusalem brought forth at
Easter (yearly) to be worshipped of the people. See Evagrius hist. lib. 4. cap.
25. also Danaeus in respons. ad Belarmini controvers. page 1415. affirms that
Cyril and sundry other Fathers were plainly superstitious, and blinded with
enchantment of the Crosses adoration.
of the Cross, and by it is virtue driving See Mr. Covels answer to Burges page
130 and 136.
away Devils, single life Cent. 4. col. 616. It is alleged out of the Council
of Neocesa^ea, can. 1. Presbyter si vxorem duxerit, ab ordine suo, illum deponi
debere. and col. 486. col. 303. col. 704. and 1293.
of Priests, the Bishop of Rome his Supremacy Centur. 5. col. 1274. they charge
Gelasius who lived an. 480. saying: Romanam Ecclesiam jure Divino contendit
(Gelasius) esse omnium primam in epist. ad Brut. etc. cap. 11. And Gelasius in
decretis cum. 70. Episcopis initis says: Romana Ecclesia ^alli^ S^^odicis
constitut. caeteris Ecclesiis praelata est, sed Evangelica voce Domini,
Primatum obtinuit; Tu ^s Petrus inqui^^s, and super hanc Petram, etc.
Iure Divino, etc. So that in those 200. and od years* Protestants cannot
pretend that any Kings or Nations were converted to their Religion. Centur. 4.
col. 1329. Et Osiander in epitom. cent 4. page 454. And Zozimen hist. lib. 6.
c. 27. post med. reported of S. Paul the Monk. In dies singulos trecentas
Orationes Deo, velut tributum quoddam reddidit, ac ne per inprudentiam in
numero erraret, trecentis lapillis in sinum conjectis, ad singulas preces,
singulos inde ejecit lapillos: consumptis igitur lapillis, constabat sibi
Orationes lapillis numero pares abs se expletas esse. And see other like
examples of saying prayers by account, or numbering of them, in Palladius his
historia Lausiaca, cap. 24. and cap. 25.


Therefore they desire the decision of this controversy concerning the
Conversion (...) Pagan Kings and nations to Christianity, may be reduced (...)
these last thousand and od years, from St. Gregory the great his time to ours
which point being open matter of fact* and so clearly mentioned in all
Histories, and confessed by Protestants, to have bin don by Roman Catholics,
and to the ^oman Catholic Religion, no demonstration can be more convincing
then this is, against the Protestant Church and Reform^^^^^. In so much that
Whitaker (lib. de Eccles. contra Belarm. page 336.) has nothing to say to this
our objection of all the converted Kings and Nations since Gregory the great to
this present, to have bin performed by Papists, and to Popery, but, I answer
that those conversions of so many nations after the time (...), mentioned by
Belarmin, were not pure, but corrupt. The like answer and no other* is given by
Danaeus, Simon de V^yon, and others. But Mr. Barlow in his defense of the
articles etc. page 35. says, The promise by Esaias prophesied ((...) the Church)
was accomplished, and the number so increased, though still invisibly that as
her love said in the Canticles, there (...) therefore Queen etc. so that there
were threscore invisible Queens, Princes, or Kingdoms converted to Protestancy;
and that performed by Protestants as invisible as they. What greater evidence
can there be of heretical obstinacy, then to maintain the real existence of an
impossibility, by it is invisibility? what is more impossible then that so
remarkable things as the conversion of great princes and Nations from Idolatry
to the outward profession of Christianity, could be invisible or concealed? I
must confess though Mr. Barlow's answer be very absurd, yet is it very
consequent to the principles of Protestancy; for why should not threescore
Queens, Kings, and Kingdoms be invisible, as well as the whole Protestant
Church whereof they were but a part? And if all the Christian world could be
insensibly and invisibly changed from pure and primitive Protestancy to
superstitious Popery, why might not the same world, Kings, and Queens be
invisibly and insensibly changed from Paganism to Protestancy?

We Catholics are not forced to admit of such absurdities; our grea^est
Adversaries name the Kings and Nations by us converted to Christianity. Any
Protestant may see the particulars confessed and alleged by John Pappus (in
his Epitom. histor. Eccl. cap. de conversionibus Gentium page
89.91.92.93.94.100.106.107. etc.) also the Century Writers of Magdeburg mention
the conversion of sundry nations wrought by us since Gregory the first, as
Germany ( centur. 8. c. 2. col. 20.) of the Wandals ( centur. 9. c. 2. col.
15.) of the Bulgarians, Sclavonians, Polonians, the Danes and Moravians ( cent.
9. c. 2. col. 18.) And of sundry Kings and Kingdoms ( cent. 10. c. 2. col. 18.
and 19.) And of a great part of Hungary ( cent. 11. c. 2. col. 27.) And of the
Norwegians ( cent. 12.) See the Protestant Writer Osiander (in his Epitom.
histor. Eccles. centur. 9.10.11.12.13.14. and 15.) mentioning the conversion of
many Nations performed by Roman Catholics, as of the Danes, the Moravians, the
Polonians, the Sclavonians, the Bulgars, the Hunns, the Normans, the Bohemians,
the Suecians, and Norwegians, Livonians, and the Saxons, The Ungarians, the
Rugij, and Thuscans, of Candia, Majorca, of Tunes in Africa etc. whereunto may
be added not only the like known conversion of our Ancestors the English
Saxons, Scots, and Jrish in more ancient times, but in this last age of many
Kings and Kingdoms in the East and West-Jndies, Africa, Iapon, and China,
confessed by our Adversary Simon Lythus (in respons. altera ad alteram Gretseri
Apologiam page 931.) where he says: The Jesuists etc. in the space of few years
not content with the limits of Europe, have filled Azia, Afrik, and America,
with their Idols: And Philippus Nicolai who writing of the accomplishment of
the prophecies concerning the conversion of the Gentiles (as he professes in
his Preface to the Duke of Saxony page 12.) is enforced wholly to insist and
rely upon our Popish Preachers, and Iesuists in all parts of the world. See
lib. 1. c. 1. page 2. and 3. and lib. 1. page 15. and page 52.

There is not any history profane, or sacred, ancient, or modern, which
mentions as much as one King or Kingdom converted from Paganism to
Protestancy; unless they will pretend that their histories, and Records are as
invisible as their Church had bin before Luther and their Registers of Lambeth
before Mason, I cannot say that all Protestants wanted ^^ale to attempt such
conversions; but the^^ zeal wanted success in all their attempts, and that
proves the prophecies of Scripture pointed not at their Church or Doctrine.

Calvin sent some Ministers, and amongst them Richerus (whom Beza terms a man
of tried godliness and learning) into Gallia Antartica to convert the heathens
there; and he writ to Calvin a letter (extant in Calvin's epist. and respons.
page 438. his words are. Latet eos an* Deus (...), tantum abest ut legem ejus
observent, vel potentiam and bonitat^m ejus mirentur, ut prorsus sit nobis
adempta spes lucrifaciend^^ eos Christo, quod ut omnium est gravissimum ita
inter caetera maxim aegre feremus.

He says more over that nothing could be don until the children which Mr.
Villegaignon delivered to the Barbarians to learn their language, had bin
perfect therein; but while the children were learning the heathens tongue,
Richerus, Villagaignon and the other Ministers disagreed so in their doctrine,
that the whole design fell to the ground; and Villagaignon instead of
conventing the heathens, forsook his own Religion, moved thereunto by the
dissentions, and inordinat accomplished lusts (not to be named) of the
Protestant Preachers, whereof see Launoy (...) la Republicque Christi^ne etc. l.
2. c. 16. fol. 281. and Villegaignon adversus articulos Richeri l. 1. c. 90.
Franciscus Gomarus a Protestant Writer ackowledgeth the like want of success in
other places, and persons: se his Speculum verae Ecclesiae page 161. and 168.
And Mr. Hacluits book of voyages and discoveries of the English Nation, and
their frustrated labors in conversion of the remote northen Nations; whereof
the Author says ( page 680.) The events do show that either God's cause has
not bin chiefly preferred by them, or else God has not permitted so abundant
grace as the light of his word, and knowledge of him, to be yet revealed to
those Infidells before the appointed time.

No mervaile therefore if Beza cit. apud Sa^^i^^am in defen Tract. de div^^sis
gradib^^ Ministrorum etc. page 309.
Beza despairing of any success in the Protestant Church of converting Pagans,
disclaymeth therein, and does advise his brethren to leave that labor to the
Jesuists, and so employ them-selves at home among Christians, thinking perhaps
that to make Papists Protestants is a sufficient accomplishing of Esay's
prophecies. Nec enim nunc magnopere nobis de legatione ad remotissimas aliquas.
Gentes laborandum, cum nobis domi, and in propinquo satis suporque sit quod nos
and posteros nostros exerceat: Has igitur potius tam (...) pe^grinationes
locustis illis JESU nomen ementientibus, relinquamus. But as the converting of
Gentills to Christianity is an infallible mark of the true Church, so is the
drawing of Catholics to Protestancy, an infallible mark of a false Church, and
of Heretics, whose endeavor, says Tertullian Tertull. lib. de praescr. c. 42.
Is not to convert Pagans, but to pervert Christians. Negotium est illis
(Haereticis) non Ethnicos convertendi sed nostros evertendi.

Their success in that particular is no argument, that God approves of their
Religion, but is only a sign of our human frailty, and perverse inclinations to
vice and liberty. And they who say that the Protestant Reformation needs no
other miracle to prove that it is Divine, but it is propagations, mistake and
misapply the argument; the miracle consists not in that many embra^^
Protestancy, but rather in that any at all reject or forsake a Religion so
favorable to sensuality of li^^, and singularity of judgment. Is it not an
argument and a miracle of God's special and supernatural grace; that any one
temporal Catholic Sovereign reject so absolut and advantageous a jurisdiction
over these Subjects, as the spiritual supremacy? That Bishops prefer the
Catholic subordination to the Pope before the Protestant equality? That
Catholic Priests contemn the conveniences, and co^^^nt which Protestant
Ministers find in a married life (...) that the Catholic layt^, change not
their wives or husbands according to the principles and practices (...)
Protes^^^cy* and not only contradict their senses in the (...)*
Transubstantiation, but dis-own the Protestant pretended right of every private
person to judge (according to his own sense of (...) all controversies of
Christian Religion? A Reformation so indulgent and obliging to every man and
woman of what ^^ate and condition soever, could as little want Proselies as the
(...) neither is the multitude of believers more a miracle (...) P^^^estant,
then in the Mohammedan, or any other popular (...) pleasing Religion.

SECT. VIII. Protestants mistaken in the consistency of their justifying faith
with justice, or civil Government. Demonstrated in the new setlement of Irland,
and in the persecution against Catholics in England: and yet the King and his
government vindicated from the note of Tyrany, or the breach of public faith;
because his Ministers are compelled, by a necessity of state, to run with the
spirit and principles of Protestancy: Notwithstanding all which the Irish, and
English Roman Catholics are bound in conscience not to attempt the recovery of
their right or Religion by arms, but rather to submit them-selves to his
Majesty, and suffer their crosses with Christian patience.
All Protestants agree in the doctrine of Justification by only faith, but seem
to differ in that of good works. And though all necessity of good works be in
very deed excluded by the pretended sufficiency and efficacy of the Protestant
justifying faith; for in what need can a man stand of good works, if he be sure
of his justification (and by consequence of his salvation) by only faith. But
the scandal of the world at their dispensing with the observation of the ten
Commandments as things not required by Christians, and clearly inferred from
their Justification by only faith, was so general, that they disguised (but
never disowned) the doctrine; and do yet stick to their principle though they
dare not openly allow the consequences. They speak so sparingly in favor of
good and gracious works, that no one Protestant Church will attribute to them
any merit, congruity, or influence upon either justification, or salvation. In
so much that our Prelaticks (who are more mod^^at then any other Protestants in
this particular) will not grant that good works are commanded by God as if they
were depending of our liberty, or relating to our endeavors, but only are
commanded as unavoidable effects flowing necessarily from a Protestant and
justifying faith, as heat from fire, or fruit from the tree.

Luther in Comment^r. ad. cap. 2. ad Galat. Where it is taught, Faith in Christ
does in deed justify, but it is necessary with all to keep God's Commandments,
because it is written, Jf thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments,
there Christ is denied, and says is abolished, because that which is proper to
God alone, is attributed to the Commandments of God, or to the law. When any
one proposes Moses with his Commandments to thee, and would oblige thee to
keep them, then thy; with thy Moses to the Jews. J will have nothing to do
with Moses nor his law, for he is an enemy to Christ. Luther in Collo. men's.
Germ. fol. 152. and 153. Si scortus es, si scortator, si Adulter, vel alioquin
peccator, creed, and in via salutis ambulas. Cum in peccatum demersus es ad
summum vsque, si credis, in m^dia beatidudine versaris. This doctrine of the
Antinomian Lutherans together with their rejecting the ten Commandments as
impertinent to Christians, is censured by the Man^feldian Ministers, Confess.
Mansfeld. fol. 39. and 90. And yet the principle from whence all necessarily
follows is maintained.

Mr. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi page 564. says, The law remains still
impossible to be kept by us, through the weackness of our flesh, neither does
God give us ability to keep it, but Christ has fulfilled it for us.


The Prelatick Church of England in the 11. Article of it is Religion, says: We
are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Wherefore that
we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of
comfort.

And in the 12. Article declares All beit that good works which are the fruits
of faith, and follow after justification, can not put away our sins, and endure
the severity of God's Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith; in so much
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by
the fruit.

This explanation concerning the necessity of good works, mak^ men as carless
of them, as if they had bin impossible, or not at all requisite; Because we are
not solicitous of what we are sure of; he who is well clad, and sits by a good
fire, fears not to be starved with could, neither does he think it necessary to
use any other exercise, or diligence for keeping him-self warm. If therefore
good works do spring out as necessarily of a true and lively faith, as heat
from fire, or fruit from the tree, any Protestant that supposes, him-self has
that faith, needs not be solicitous of good works; they will spring as a
necessary consequent from his faith.

But because experience does show that the Protestant who pretends to a
justifying faith, has not always good works, and many who are not Protestants,
exercise moral virtues, it is further declared by the Church of England in the
13. Article (for the comfort of Protestants, and confusion of Papists) That
even the best moral works and virtues when they spring not of faith in JESUS
Christ, are no way pleasing to God, but rather have the nature of sin; Hence it
is, our English as well as other Protestants hold expressly with Luther, That
good Luther in his Sermons translated into English an. 1578. page 147. and 176.
works take their goodness of the worker, and that no work is disallowed of
God, unless the Author be dis-allowed before; that sin is not hurtful to him
that actually believes; and therefore when the faithful do sin, they Acts and
Mon. " page 1338.
diminish not the glory of God, all the danger of sin being the evell example
to our neighbor; That David when he Mr. Wotten in his answer to the "Popish
articles page 92. and page 41.
committed adultery, was and remained the Child of God; that sin is Mr. Fulk
against the Remish Testament in Epi. Joan. Sec. 5. and fol. 447. Dr. Whitaker
de Eccles. page, 301 We say that if a man have an act of faith, sins do not hurt
him, this truly Luther affirms, this we all say.
pardoned as soon as committed* the believing Protestant having received
forgiveness of all his sins past and to come. And that Acts and Mon. page 1335.
Sinit quisquis vere credit Deum pro se operari, and disponere sibi vitam
aeternam ipse plane ad eam rem nihil operis seu laboris sibi sumens. Hofmannus
de paenitentia edit. 1540. l. 2. fol. 113. Whitaker contra Campian. rat. 8.
page 151. Christus conditionem nobis aliam multo faciliorem proponit, Creed and
salvus eris.
there is no work better then other: to make water, to wash dishes, to be a
Sower, or an Apostle, all is one to please God. That he who Dr. Fulk in the
Tower disputation against Campian, the second days conference 1. 6.
does once truly believe, cannot afterward fall from the grace of God, or
loose his faith by any sins; and therefore faith is either Whitaker against
Campian "rat. 8. page 143. fides aut perpetua est aut nulla est.
perpetual, or no faith.

What a wide gap is opened by this wicked doctrine to all kind of vice,
libertinism, and rebellion, is more visible in it self, then considered by well
meaning Protestants, who may tax the most dissolut of their brethren with being
evil Christistians, but must withal confess them to be good Protestants, as
not violating the principles of their Religion, by which they are encouraged to
justify the most wicked actions, by their sole belief in Christ, without any
regard to the morality of good works, or to the alleigance and obedience due to
Majesty or Magistrasy. That which makes most men careful in God's service, is
the uncertainty of their salvation, and fear of his displeasure by their daily
sins; but Protestants are rid of all those perplexities and troubles by their
assurance of being justified and saved by only faith, which makes adulteries,
Murders, rebellions etc. either no sins at all in them, or so venial that they
are no sooner committed then pardoned, by a more plenary Jndulgence and
Jubilee, then ever the Pope pretended to have power to grant, and without
obligation of any satisfaction, alms, fasting, or prayer for past offenses, or
any purpose of future amendment, that purpose being rendered not only
superfluous by their faith, but ridiculous by their doctrine, either of the
impossibility of keeping God's Commandments, or by their Tenet of the necessary
springing of good works from faith. And because this their Evangelical liberty,
and indemnity is not consistent with the words of St. Peter 2. Pet. 1. Brethren
labor the more that by good works you may make sure your vocation, They either
make that Epistle apocryphal, or leave out of the Text in their Translations
those two words, good works.

It is commonly said that though many stats-men be Atheists, yet they will
never permit Atheism to be made the legal Religion of the state, because they
know that men who do not believe there is a God, or providence, cannot be kept
in awe of the government, or brought to observe any other laws but their own
appetits, seeing they neither fear punishment nor expect rewad in an other life
for vice or virtue, and without this fear and hopes, the multitude cannot be
governed in this world. The same reason concludes that Protestant Politians
ought not to make Protestancy the Religion of the state, civil government being
rendered as difficult and contemptible by an indulgent and over-confident
belief, as by non at all; He who persuads himself that faith alone is
sufficient assurance of his salvation, and that such a faith once possessed,
can not be lost, will not avoid the occasion, or resist the temptation of
finning for his pleasure or profit; nor omit the opportunity of rebelling
whenever it is offered with probability of success: so he be cautious in his
vices and villainies, his justifying says makes all his designs and devices
conscientious; and if he can save him-self from being hanged, his Protestant
belief will secure him from being damned, or droun'd in Hell. How impossible it
is to govern a multitude where this is the Religion not only permitted but
promoted, The Protestant doctrine of justifying faith most dangerous and damnable
is evident by our late distempers. Could Tanners, Tinkers, Tailors, Cobblers,
and Bruers, domineer, and possess peacebly these tree Kingdoms, and murder our
lawful and innocent King by a formality of Religion, laws, and justice, had
not their wicked practices bin countenanced by the Protestant principles, and
looked upon as a restoration of Protestancy unto it is primitive purity? It is
credibly reported of their Ringleader and Regicide Cromwell, that he dyed
without remors of conscience, or signs of repentance for his monstrous
villainies, because (said he to his Protestant Divine that assisted him in his
last sickness) I am sure to be saved, seeing I had once justifying faith, and
could never loose it. Every resolut Rogue may attempt the most horrid crimes
with hopes of prevailing amongst men whose principles are so presuming upon
mercy, and so applyable to mis-chief.

I know it will be answered by them in whom education has created zeal for
the protestant religion, or interest has rendered obstinat in maintaining the
same, that the principles and articles of protestancy are mistaken, and
misapplyed not only by us Catholics, but even by those protestant Authors last
quoted in the margents. To which we reply. 1. That nothing is more prejudicial
to the soul, and good government, then a religion subject to so many mistakes,
and so generally, and plausibly mistaken by it is own greatest Doctors. 2. We
say that our being mistaken, is but their private opinion which opinion though
it were backed by a public Act of their Church can pretend (at most,) but to
probability; and so much they must also grant to our contrary censure, and
Judgment of their justifying faith: and seeing that of two probable opinions the
generality of men follow that which favors most their particular inclinations,
and interests, very few protestants will vary from the most favorable
explanation, of justifying faith, or will wave the comfort that the 11. Article
of the Church of England affords to them in that particular, calling or
canonising it a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort.

K. James was a wise, and fore-seing Prince, and in the conference at
Hampton Court did countenance the Dean of Paul's, and the Bishop of London
disputing against Doctor Reynolds and others, that maintained the assurance of
salvation (or predestination) by the protestant justifying faith; and yet not
withstanding the King's dislike (noless politik then religious) of a principle
so damnable to the soul, and dangerous to the state, it would not be
condemned, nor censured, unless the 39. Articles of religion, and the whole
frame of English protestancy were overthrown, as Doctor Reynolds made appear;
And indeed Mr. Perkins does demonstrat (in his reformed Catholic (page 39.)
the necessary connection and continuance of the assurance of salvation with the
protestant doctrine of justifying faith, in these words. If upon every abode in
sin the party be again uncertain of his salvation, then was the former
certainty no certainty at all. For (his sin notwithstanding) he yet remembers
his former supposed certainty, and therefore if he was once truly assured, he
can not during every his abode in sin forget, how that he was so assured, which
his only remembrance thereof suffiseth to continue, and preserve his former
supposed certainty even during his abode in sin. So that if Cromwell by his
justifying faith was once sure of his salvation, or predestination, Protestants
must believe he could never loose that assurance, and must grant that he went
to heaven without any punishment (even in Purgatory) for his murders, perjury,
hypocrysy, adulteries etc. Such a belief must needs raise other Cromwells; for
who will not venture his life for a Crown, by the most unjust means, when he is
sure to be cron'd in God's glory, though, he miss of his aim in this world,
and perish in the attempt?

As it cannot be denied but that these, and the like dangerous consequences do
naturally flow from this principle of Protestancy, so we must acknowledge and
admire the extraordinary skill and constancy of them* who sit at the helm, and
steer the ship of this great Commonwealth so stedily in so turbulent a sea,
and stormy weather, against the most violent currents of perverse inclinations
and principles: long may they continue their prosperous course; but surely
them-selves do apprehend that at long running, no human industry will be able
to escape the rocks and shelves where upon this great ship must be driven, If
our Pilots, and Parliaments will be overruled by the loud and rude outcrys of
the Scumme of the people, against Toleration, or liberty of conscience; and
will think it sound policy to condescend to their zeal, and raise protestancy
to the height of it is principles, in particular to the purity of their
justifying faith* which is of so great virtue, that it has made Regicides and
Rebels Saints in England, and Lords in Ireland; working in that miserable
Kingdom stranger miracles, then are read of, in the Ghospel. It has changed
the very essence or nature of things, and defined Innocence and nocency by such
new notions, that Adam before his fall (had he bin an Irish Catholic) would
have bin declared nocent; whereas every Protestant, however so guilty of
rebellion and murder, is a Child of grace, and favor: no sin or crime must be
imputed to him, his justifying faith saves and salves all* It has turned a
Convention of Cromwell's officers into a Cavaleer House of Commons: And though
it has not removed mountains, yet it has ^^mov'd the (...) nobility and
gentry that had bin active in the King's service, unto mountains; and deprived
most of them (since the King's restoration) of that small pittance which had
bin allowed to them by Cromwell, in Conaght. It has made the rebellious and
the Royal interest, on and the same thing, because forsoo^h, both are called an
English and Protestant interests; and for as much as Oliver and Henry Cromwell
were English Protestants, it is declared to be the King's interest that not only
Cromwell's Officers, but that him-self, his son, and their Trusties and
Assigns, ought to possess and enjoy Irish Cavaleers estates.

In England also this justifying faith has wrought wonders; for though it has
not restored no one the ^ares he lost, and loft on the Pillory for his
sedition, yet has it restored him to such credit, that his word against
Protestant Bishops and Catholic Cavaleers, is like to be made the vote of the
House of Commons: and an other Presbiterian that formerly headed the table of
London against the King, has kindled such a fire in ^arliament that can hardly
be quenched without the blood of Innocents. And truly I should admire that such
a Cavaleer Parliament as this is, does not punish Presbiterian Persecutors as
french Pensioners (for that by their persecution (...) slow in a Treaty of
Confederacy with England, seeing non can have greater security of performance of
articles then was given to the then Confederats of Irland, which signified
nothing but a breach of the public faith.

We shall not presume to discourse further of this subject then our Alleigance
and affection lead us to vindicat the Government. How it agrees with the Rules
of Policy to make Ireland Protestant, many Protestants dispute, most resolve
that Irish Popery would be a surer support to our King's soveraignity in Irland
then English and Scotsh Presbitery, or a forced and feigned conversion of
Cromwell's Creatures to Prelacy and Monarchy. The great Earl of Strafford's
opinion was, that it is the King of England's Interest, to make Irland a
counterpoyse against all rebellious attempts of his Protestant subjects; and to
that (...) that the Irish ought to be countenanced even in their Religion, it is
principles being so favorable to Monarchy, and irreconciliable to Presbitery;
and by consequence thereby all combinations and Covenants between Scotsh and
English Sectaries may be prevented or suppressed, and the King without any
charge or care (only by ^ot persecuting Papists for their conscience) may
secure the Irish to him-self; who if treated like other Subjects, would never
think of domestic conspiracies, or seek foreign protections.

And as for England, we hope it shall never feel again the effects of
Presbiterian policy, and piety, nor be governed by another long Parliament; yet
he who best understands the affairs and constitution of the Kingdoms, thinks
it part of his trust and duty, to bid the Royalists be vigilant in their
stations, and charges, not only for preventing and suppressing plots and
insurrections, but much more to beware of Godly Parliaments composed of the
purer sort of Protestants; My Lord Chancellor in his speech to the Parliament
at Oxford.
such as her tofore by reforming and reducing Protestancy to it is primitive
purity, and coherency with it is fundamental principles, have in these Kingdoms
destroyed both Monarchy, and morality. It seems (by the caution of this great
Minister) these men (...) and Jacobus Andreas ad cap. 21. Lucae. Luther in
postilla super Evang. Dom. 1. Advemus. Dominica 26 post Trinit.
And Luther him-self acknowledge the world grows daily worse, men are now more
revengfull, covetous, licentious then they were ever before in the Papacy: And
before, when we were seduced by the Pope, every man did willingly follow good
works and now every man neither says, nor knows any thing but how to get all
to him-self by exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usury etc. And in his Colloq.
Mensal. Germ. fol. 55. It is a wonderful thing and full of scandal, that from
the time in which the true doctrine of the Ghospel was first recalled to light,
the world should daily grow wors. Mr. Stubbes in his motives to good works,
printend an. 1596. in his epistle to the Lord Major of London, says, that
after his travail in compassing all England round about, I found the people in
most parts dissolut, proud, envious malisious covetous, ambitious, carless of
good works etc.

Mr. Richard Jeffery in his Sermon at Paul's Cross 7. October printed 1604.
page 31. says. I may freely speak what J have plainly seen in the course of
some travailes, and observation of some courses, that in Flanders was never
more drunkness, in Italy more wantoness, in Jury more hypocricy, in Turkey more
impiety, in Tartary more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England,
particularly in London; all this is seen in on of the worst ages wherein these
Roman Catholic Religion was professed, see our Adversaries the Centurists
Cent. 7. c. 7. col. 181. who say: Although in this age the worship of God was
darkn'd with man's traditions, and superstisions, yet the study to serve God
and to live Godly and justly, was not wanting to the miserable common people
etc. They were so attentive to their prayers as they bestowed almost the whole
day there in etc. They did exhibit to the Magistrate due obedience, they were
most studious of amity, concord, and Society, so as they would easily remit
injuries, all of them were careful to spend their time in honest vacation, and
labor, to the poor and strangers they were most courteous, and liberal, and
in their judgments and contracts most true.

And Bucer in his Scripta Anglicana page 24. says The greatest part of the
Reformed Ghospelers seemed to look after nothing by the Ghospel, but to be rid
of that yoke of discipline which was remaining in the Papacy, and to do all
things according, to the lust of their flesh: It was not then unpleasing to
them to hear that we are Justified by faith in Christ, not by good works,
which they in no wise did affect. We Catholics do not pretend to have no
evill-livers in our Church; but this we may say with truth, and (I hope)
without offense, that the difference between Protestant and Catholic
^^^ll-livers is, that when Protestants sin, they do nothing but what they are
encouraged unto by their justifying faith, and the other principles of their
Religion; but when Catholics sin, they go against the known Tenets of their
faith and profession. Even our Pardons, and Jndulgences, how-ever so plenary,
are so far from encouraging us to a continuance or relapse of sinning, that
they involue as a precedent and necessary condition, a serious and sincere
repentance of our former offenses, and afirm purpose and resolution of never
returning to the like crimes; and after all is don, we pretend to no such
undoubted certainty of being pardoned either by confession or Indulgences
(because we are not certain whether we do al as we ought) as Protestants
presume to have of their justification and salvation by only faith.

The nature of this justifying faith* and of other Protestant principles
considered* We Catholics have reason to thanck God* that the prudence ^f the
Prince, and moderation of his Ministers is so extraordinary, that it keeps the
indiscreed zeal of a multitude so strangly principl'd, if not as much with in
the limits of Christianity, and civility toward their fellow subjects, as were
to be wished, yet so that the execution of the sanguinary and penal statuts is
not altogether so distructive, as the Presbiterians and others endeavor.
Until the generality of these Nations reflect upon the impiety of the first
Reformers, and upon their own mistakes in preferring the mad fancies of a few
dissolute Friars (concerning the nature of Christian faith) before the constant
Testimony and doctrine of the whole visible Church, we cannot expect that they
who govern so mistaken a multitude, can make justice the rule of the public
Decrees, which depend of the concurrence and acceptance of men, whose greatest
care is to promote Protestancy and persecute Popery.

SECT. IX. Protestants mistaken in the consistency of Christian faith,
humility, Charity, peace either in Church or state, with their making Scripture
as interpreted by private persons, or fallible Synods, or fancied general
Counsels (composed of all discenting Christian Churches) the rule of faith,
and Judge of Controversies in Religion. How every Protestant is a Pope; and how
much also they are overseen in making the 39. Articles or the oath of Supremacy
a distinctive sign of Loyalty to our Protestant Kings.
LVther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmer and all others that pretended to reform the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, seeing they could not prove their new Religions,
or Reformations by testimonies from antiquity, or by probability of Reason,
were enforced to imitat the example of all Heretics, who (as S. Austin says l.
1. de Trin. c. 3.) endeavor to defend their falls and deceitful opinions out
of the Scriptures. If on shall ask any Heretic (says that ancient Father
Vincentius lyr: l. 1. cons. Haer. c. 35.) from whence, do you prove, from
whence do you teach, that I ought to forsake the universal and ancient faith of
the Catholic Church? Presently he answers, scriptum est, It is written; and
forthwith he prepares a thousand testimonies, a thousand examples, a thousand
authorities, from the law, from the Apostles, from the Prophets. This shift is
so ordinary and notorious, that Luther him-self ( postill. Wittemberg. in 2.
con. 8. Dom. post Trin. fol. 118. Dom. post Trin. fol. 118.) affirms, the
sacred Scripture is the book of Heretics, because Heretics are accustomed to
appeal to that book, neither did there arise at any time any heresy so
pestiferous, and so foolish, which did not endeavor to hide it self under the
veil, of Scripture.

And yet Luther, Calvin, Cranmer etc. finding nothing to say for them-selves,
either in History, or Fathers: and seeing Tradition so clearly bent against
them, that they could not name as much as on Parish or person which ever
professed their protestant doctrines, they appealed from the word of God
(proposed by the visible and Catholic Church and Coun^^ls) to their own Canon
and Translations of Scripture; and from that sense of Scripture which the
Church and Counsels had followed for 1500. years, to that which their own
private spirit, temporal interest, or fallacious reason di^^^ted to them-selves;
and so did others that followed their examples, making every private Protestant,
or at least every refor^^d Congregation Judge of Scripture, Church, Counsels,
and Fathers; In so much that Luther (tom. 2. Wittemberg. cap. de Sacram. fol.
375. sets down this rule for all Protestants to be directed (...)* The
Governors of Churches and Pastors of Christ's sheep (...) indeed power to
teach, but the sheep must judge wh^^^er they propose the voice of Christ, (...)
of strangers etc. Wherefore let Popes, Bishops, Counsels, etc. decree, order,
enact what they please, we shall not hinder, but we who are Christ's sheep and
hear his voice, will judge whether they propose things true and agreeable to
the voice of our Pastor; and they must yield to us, and subscribe and obey our
sentence, and censure. Calvin, though contrary to Luth^^ in many other things,
yet in this does agree, as being the ground whereupon all protestant
Reformations must rely; in his lib. 4. Institut. cap. 9.. 8. he says, The
definitions of Councels must be examined by Scripture, and Scripture
interpreted by his rules and Spirit. The same is maintained by the Church of
England as appears in the defense of the 39. Articles printed by authority
1633. wherein it is said page 103. Authority is given to the Church, and to
every member of sound judgment in the same, to judge controversies of faith etc.
And this is not the private opinion of our Church, but also the judgment of our
godly brethren in foreign Nations. And by Mr. Bilson Bishop of Winchester (in
his true difference etc. part. 2. page 353.) The people must be Discerners, and
Judges of that which is taught.

How inconsistent this doctrine is with Christian faith, is evident by the
pretended fallibility and fall of the visible Church which all Protestants do
suppose, and must maintain, to make good the necessity and lawfullness of their
own interpretations, and Reformations. For if the Roman Catholic, and ever
Visible Church may, and from time to time has erred (as the Church of England
declares in the 39. Articles) no reformed Congregations, whether Lutheran,
Presbiterian, or Prelatick can have infallible certainty but that them-selves
have fallen into as great errors, as those which they have pretended to reform
in the Roman Church: And if they have not infallible certainty of the truth of
their reformed doctrine, they can not pretend to Christianity of faith, that
involves an assurance of truth* which assurance is impossible, if that the
Church can be mistaken in it is proposal. So that Christianity of faith,
including as an essential requisite the undoubted assurance of the truth of what
is proposed by the Church* as revealed by God, and Protestancy necessarily
supposing fallibility, or possibility of error in that same Church and
proposal; Christian faith is there by rendered impossible, and the Protestant
Doctrine demonstrated (...) be inconsistent with the nature of Catholic
Religion, with the certainty of Divine faith, and with the Authority of
Christ's Church.

Neither is the Protestant doctrine in this particular less consistent with
Christian charity, and humility, then with Catholic faith. For, what judgment
can be more rash, injurious, and contrary to Christian charity, then to assert,
that so many holy and learned Doctors as have bin, and are confessed Papists
(and even the whole visible Church for the space at least of 1000. years) could
either ignorantly mistake, or would wilfully forsake the true sense of God's
word, so clearly shining in Scripture as every petty Protestant does pretend?
or what is more repugnant (...) Christian modesty and humility, then that
homely Doctors, and half witted wits should prefer their own private opinions
in matters of faith, before the common consent and belief of (...) Fathers of
the Church, the Definitions of general Councels, the Tradition and testimony of
so many ages? It is both a ridiculous and sad spectacle to see, how every
student of the University that has learn'^ to conster (...) and (...), or to
quibble or scribble somewhat in Greek, English or Latin, takes upon him to
talk of Religion, and to censure St. (...), St. Austin, St. Christom etc. and
contemn both ancient and modern Catholic Avthors, preferring before the whole
Church, him-self, and his Po^antick Tutors, or Fellows* of Oxford, and Cambrige
Coll^g^s. Nay the illiterat people, even the women are grown to that height of
spiritual pride (an infallible (...) of Heresy) that they pity our Popish
ignorance, and fancy they can (...)* with the Text of their English Bibles
(falsely translated, and fondly interpreted) the greatest Roman Divines. So true
is the saying of St. Hierom (in Epist. ad Paulinum) Scripture is the only art
which all people teach before they have learned. The prattling woman, the old
doting man etc. And therefore (advers. Lucifer.) bids men not flatter
them-selves with quoting Scripture to confirm their opinions, seeing the Devil
him-self made use of God's word; which consists more in the sense then in the
letter.

How impossible is it to govern peaceably so prattling and presuming a
Protestant multitude either in Church or state, is too manifest by the last
experiences in England, where the endeavors of reducing this Protestant
arrogance to some kind of reason, was the occasion, and object of the
Rebellion. King Charles I. and his Council for attempting to make the inferiors
subordinat to their superiors, in doctrine and discipline, and the subjects
obedient to the laws of the land, were aspersed as Papists, and destroyed as
enemies to the Evangelical liberty of Protestancy, and as subverters of the
fundamental principles of the Reformation. Popish rebellions happen because the
Promotors thereof fall from that fervor of their faith, and devotion which they
ought to practice; but the English Protestant Rebellion was raised and
continued by the most devout, pure, fervent, and zealous sort of Protestants,
in persuance and maintenance of their Religion. Other rebellions are commonly
unexpected chances, springing from a sudain fury or fear of desperate people,
but the late Rebellion was, and is to this day, pretended by many to have bin a
pious, and sober proceeding (the King's murder only excepted) of the prudent
and Religious men of the Nation, assembled in Parliament; and is so justifiable
by the principles of Protestancy, that he must be thought not only a wise but a
fortunat King of England that can prevent or suppress the like revolution in
his Reign, so long as Protestancy does reign with him.

The reason is as manifest as the experience, and the cause as the effect. For,
if a Commonwealth were so instituted that every private person might pretend
(by his birthright or Privilege) to admit of no other Judge or Interpreter of
the laws, but him-self, or at least might lawfully and legaly appeal from all
Courts of Judicature (even from the highest which is the Parliament) to his own
private Judgment, what intolerable confusion would it breed? what justice,
subordination, peace, propriety, or prosperity, could be expected in such a
government? The same laws and authority which ought to decide all differences,
would be the subject and occasion of perpetual quarrels. This is the condition
and constitution of Protestant Churches and States. Every private person is a
supreme Judge of Religion, and sole Interpreter of Scripture; he may appeal
both from Sovereigns; and Bishops; from their temporal and Ecclesiastical laws
to his own private judgment, or spirit; and him-self must determine the
difference and conclude whether the Decrees of Church and State be agreeable to
God's word that is, to his own Interpretation thereof, which commonly is biased
by private interest, or some singular fancy of his own. And though the Governors
and Clergy of his Church and Country tell him, he ought to suspend his
judgment, and submit the same to (...) Parliament, or to a general Council, not
like that of Trent, but to one composed of all Nations and Christian
Congregations, called by the joint author^^y of all temporal Princes (but in
the mean time he must (...) to the Decrees of the Church and state, whereof he
is a member) when they inculcat this lesson unto a zealous Protestant^ (...)
not so simple as to believe that they who read this (...), speak as they think
or that they believe any such general Council is possible; for that every (...)
knows, temporal Princes will never agree about the President, time, place, and
other circumstances of such a Counce^^ and though they should, (and the Turck
and other Infidels give way to such a s^spitious Assembly of Christians) yet
when they m^t^, nothing could be resolved ^or want of their agreement in a (...)
of judging of controversies; every sect ^^icking to it is own principles and
proper sense of Scripture. So tha^ every Protestant understands the design of
this doctrine to be but a fetch of their own Clergy, to make itself in the mean
time sol^ Judge of Religion, contrary to the principles and privileges of
Protestancy, and therefore laugh at the folly of such a proposal, and pretext.
We Roman Catholics need no such Devices, nor delays: we are content to submit
to such general Councels, as may be had; our Popes and Councels define
according to the tradition and sense of Scripture of the true Church; our
Censures must suppose known causes, and crimes; and if with all these cautions
the Pop's spiritual jurisdiction is thought to be so dangerous to the
sovereignty of Kings, and peace of subjects (least forsooth, it might be
indirectly applied to temporal matters) that all Protestants upon that score
renounce the Papal authority; with how much more reason ought every one to
renounce his own judicature of Religion and Scripture tied to no rules, but to
his own discretion, and to an indiscernable and private spirit. There is greater
danger that Protestants may abuse this spiritual Sovereignty, by an indirect
application thereof to temporal affairs, then the Pope his; who being a
stranger, and at such a distance, can not (if he would) have the conveniences,
oportunities, and occasions of plotting rebellion, which Natives and subjects
may lay hold on, with less danger of a discovery, and greater hopes of success.

It is said that in time of a Parliament wherein many of the lower House stood
upon higher terms then was thought convenient for the state, though warranted
by the purest Protestancy, a Gentleman presented a petition to King James, who
seemed to admire that any would sue to him, in a time there were (as his Majesty
said) three hundred Kings sitting in the House of Commons, and therefore bid the
Gentleman repair thither for relief. We see in the late long Parliament how
some few members of the House of Commons prevailed against K. Charles I. in his
own Court and City, by making them-selves popular, upon the score of the
Protestant Religion, and Scripture. How afterward these and their faction were
supplanted by Cromwell's sense of Scripture, and how that he wanted only the
name of King. How after his death every Commander had hopes to succeed him in
this power and Protectorship, and without question some might, had not the Duke
of Albermal^ bin so honest. We have grounds therefore to say that every
Protestant that has wit, and valor, and will take hold of the advantages of
his Religion, may hope to be a King, or Protector; and we cannot but admire
that any statesman does except against the Roman Catholic Tenets, for
admitting of one Pope, whereas according to the ground and principles of all
Protestant Reformations, there are as many Popes as Pro^^stants, and every one
of them much more absolute then the Bishops of Rome, and their supremacy less
consistent whith the security of Princes, and peace of the people, then his
spiritual jurisdiction.

Besides; the stay and security of a state consists in a discreet distribution
of public charges and employments; and this, in the choice of persons
qualified with such signs of conscience, and loyalty, as can hardly be
counterfeited, or misapplied; whereof the principal is the profession of the
Religion of the state; therefore we see non trusted in weighty affairs of the
Commonwealth, but such as are of the Prince his Religion. But if that Religion
have no certain rule, or only such a rule that maks men of no certain Religion,
it can be no more a sign of conscience and loyalty, or fit to direct ^he King
and Council in their choice of persons for their purpose and ^ust, then a
plume of feathers, or a garniture of ribands fancied for it is colors. The
reason is obvious and concluding* because the security of a King, and the
prosperity of his Kingdoms, is grounded upon the loyalty of his subjects, and
servants, who are entrusted with secret designs, and public employments, both
in the civil and military list; their loyalty is directed by their conscience;
their conscience by their Religion; their Religion by their rule of faith: If
therefore their rule of faith be but their own fancy of Scripture, or Scripture
as it is interpreted by every man's private judgment, without any obligation of
conscience to submit to the contrary interpretation of their national Syn^^ or
Church (because neither of them pretend to be infallible) then loyalty,
conscience, religion, government, and King, are as subject to the changes of
fortune, and animosities of faction, as the fickle fancy of every private person
is apt to vary according to his weackness of Judgment, or strength of passion,
and to declare for that party which will be most for his interest.

This inconstancy of the reformed Religions is acknowledged by them-selves.
Duditius a learned and zealous protestant, quoted and highly commended by Beza
for his piety and elegant wit ( ep. 1. ad Andraeam Duditium page 13.)
lamenteth the condition of his reformed Brethren, in these words. They are
carried about with every wind of doctrine, now to this part, now to that; whose
Religion what it is to day you may perhaps know, but what it will be to morrow,
neither you nor they can certainly tell. and page 5. ep. Bezae cit. In what
head of Religion do they agree that impugn the Roman Bishop? If you examine all
from the head to the foot you shall almost find nothing affirmed by on, which
another will not averr to be wicked. And, their Divines do daily differ from
them-selves, Menstruam fidem habentes, coining a monthly faith.

"Now what small hopes there are of remedying, this misfortune, Sands
ingeniously confesses in his relation ( fol. 82.)) The Papists have the Pope
as a common Father, Adviser, and Conductor, to reconcile their jarrs, to decide
their differences, to draw their Religion by consent of Councels unto unity
etc. whereas on the contrary side Protestants are as severed or rather scattered
troops, each drawing adiverse way, without any means to pacify their quarrels:
no Patriarch; one or more, to have a common superintendance or care of their
Churches for correspondency and unity; no ordinary way to assemble a general
Council of their part, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their
contention. To this we may add the saying of Melancton, as remarkable as true,
Quos fugiamus habemus, sed quos sequamur non intelligimus, we know who we
should avoid (meaning the Papists) (...) Religions is, to believe what you
think fit according to your best understanding of a writing you can not
understand by any human and private industry of your own, and will not learn
from any publik authority of the Church, because by following the
interpretation of the Church you fancy that you may be mistaken) so that for
fear of being mistaken in, or by public authority, the protestant either
falls into obstinacy in his own private opinion, or into an indifferency for all
opinions, and so becoms to be an Heretic, or of no Religion.

Among the protestant Confessions of faith, the 39. Articles of the prelatick
Church of England is estem'd an excellent piece; and yet the same Articles
acknowledge that the visible Church of God has erred, and may err from time to
time; and by consequence the prelatick may have erred in this very assertion,
as in most of the 39. Articles. How this acknowledged uncertainty of truth can
agree with the certainty or Christianity of faith, or with any hopes of
salvation, I can not comprehend. But albeit these articles seem as insufficient
for salvation, as men are uncertain of their truth, yet are they thought
useful to the government; for, though they want the substance, (that is, the
certainty) of faith, yet they have the face of religion, and formality of law;
because they talk of God, Christ, Trinity etc. And are confirmed by acts of
Parliament. But that which makes them to be so much insisted upon, is, that
they are so indifferent, and appliable to all Protestant Religions, that with
much reason he is censured a very wilful Presbiterian, and fanatic, who will
not submit, and subscribe to articles so indulgent, and indifferent. Therefore
not only now but formerly in the beginning of all distempers grounded upon
Diversity of Protestant opinions, it was thought good policy to commit the 39.
Articles to the press, thereby to please all dissenting parties; and this has
bin practiced not only in Queen Elizabeth, and King James Reigns, but also in
King Charles I. an 1640. when the rebellion began to break forth, and was
cloak't with the authority of a legal Parliament, as well as with the zeal of
the Protestant Religion against the Church of England. And an. 1633. when the
Symptoms of that rebellion were first discerned, there was printed, by special
Command, a Book setting forth, the agreement of the 39. Articles with the
doctrine of other reformed, but rebellious Churches of France, Germany,
Netherlands, Basil, Bohemia, Swethland, Suitzerland etc. The Title of the book
is, the Faith, Doctrine, and Religion, professed and protected in the realm of
England and Dominions of the same, expressed in the Articles etc. The said
Articles analized into propositions; and the propositions proved to be agreeable
both to the written word of God, and to the extant confessions of all the
neighbor Churches Christianly reformed. Perused, and by the lawful authority
of the Church of England, allowed to be public, London. printed by John
Legatt. 1633.

So that no mervaile if the 39. Articles have not proved to be a better antidot
against Rebellion, then we have seen by experience, they being so agreeable to
the doctrine of Churches raised and maintained by rebellious people and
principles against their undoubted lawful Sovereigns.

The French Hugonot Ministers in their assembly at Bema 1572. decree that in
every city all should swear not to lay down arms as long as they should see
them persecute the doctrine of salvation etc. In the mean time to govern
them-selves by their own protestants rules. See Sutcliff in his answer to a
libel supplicatory. page 194.

See the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England art. 19. page 94. agreeing
here in with Confess. Helvet. 2. Saxon. art. 11. Wittemberg. art. 32. Sueu. art.
15. all quoted ibid. page 95. Dresterus the Protestant writer in part. 2.
Nullenarii sexti page 661. acknowledges that all the wars of Germany against
the Emperor and lawful Sovereigns happned ex mutatione Religionis Pontificiae
in Lutheranam. See Crispinus of the Churches estate page 509. how the reformed
Church of Basil was founded by the rebellion of some Burgesses against the
Catholic Senators whom they ejected etc. The Rebellion of Holland and the
other Protestant Provinces, is well known, as also of Geneva, Zuitzers, or
Helvetians. See Chitreus in Cron. an. 1593. and 1594. page 74. and seq. How the
King of Swethland being a Catholic, was by his Subjects the Lutherans forced
so content him-self with Mass in his in his private Chapel, and to assent, that
no Catholic should bear office in that Kingdom, and at length an other made
King.

We may say without either vanity or flattery, that were it possible to
maintain the Sovereignty of a King, the peace and prosperity of a people
together with the principles of Protestancy, the English Nation would have don
it, wanting neither wit or judgment to find out the expedients after long
experience (of 100. years) since the pulling down of Popery; and yet we see
that nothwithstanding the wisdom of them who govern, the learning of the
Clergy, the worth of the gentry, the sincerity of the common sort, and the
natural inclination to loyalty of the whole Nation, since Protestancy came
among us we have violated the laws of nature and Nations, we have by public
acts of State don many things, whereof but one perpetrated by a private person
(whithout any countenance from the government) were sufficient to make not
only him-self, but his whole family, and Country infamous; Murders of
Sovereigns by a formality of justice, breach of public faith for the
Protestant interest, were never heard of in England, nor acted by English men
until they were Protestants: Therefore the infamy, and reproach thereof must be
left at the doors of the English Protestant Church, without blaming our
English Nation, or nature. It is the nature of an arbitrary Religion to pervert
good natures; It confounds the state more then any arbitrary government. The
worst of arbitrary governments have some regard to the honor, and word of the
Prince, and to the public faith. An arbitrary religion dispenses with all* An
arbitrary government is reduced to one supreme; an arbitrary government does
pretend reason for the Prince his ComCommands, an arbitrary Religion by
pretending to be above reason, commands against reason.

How arbitrary and applicable all Protestant Religions are to every particular
interest, and fancy, notwithstanding their public professions and confessions
of faith, is visible by the 39. Articles of the Church of England, that
hitherto could neither setle the judgments of subjects in any on certain
belief, nor tie them to their duty and alleigance to the lawful Prince, though
the said articles wanted no countenance of law to gain for them authority; And
yet the profession of the 39. Articles together with the oath of supremacy, is
made the distinctive sign of truth and loyalty in our English Monarchy. But the
Articles being applicable to contrary religions and interests, and an oath
asserting a thin^ so incredible as the spiritual supremacy of a lay Sovereign,
must needs expose the government to continual dangers that flow from a
plausible and popular tenderness of conscience, and from the contempt of so
indifferent and improbable a Religion; and therefore though many do abhor, yet
few do admire, our late King's misfortune, his Majesty having grounded his
Sovereignty, and security upon Counselors, servants, and soldiers (of whose
fidelity he had no other evidence but the profession of 39. Articles so
uncertain, that they signified nothing, and dispensed with every thing) and an
oath of a jurisdiction so incredible, that they who took it either understood
not what they swore, or if they did (by swearing a known untruth) disposed
them-selves to violat all oaths of alleigance, and learned in all other
promises to prefer profit before performance, convenience before conscience*
Were not this true, and were the prelatik Religion (with all it is laws, and
oath's) capable of establishing Monarchs, or of making subjects loyal, and
servants faithful, how were it possible that so just and innocent a King as
Charles 1. (The ancientest by succession and inheritance of all Christendom)
should be so generally and unworthily betrayed by them that professed the 39.
Articles, and took the oaths of supremacy and alleigance? By the laws of the
land it is enacted, (and accordingly practiced,) that non be permitted to vote
in Parliament, or trusted with any employment in the state, who professes not
the prelatick Protestant Religion, and swears not the Supremacy and Alleigance:
And yet we see how little this Religion and oaths wrought upon the generality of
these Kingdoms, or availed the late King. None that understands the genius of
the English Nation will believe, that by nature they are so base, and
treacherous, as of late the world has observed. Therefore what they have don
amiss, so contrary to the generosity, and honesty of their dispositions, and to
the rules of Christianity, must be attributed to their Religion. Wherefore it
must be concluded, that any outward sign, though it be but a red scarf, or
garniture of ribands of the King's colors, does engage and confirm more the
subjects and soldiers in their duty, and loyalty, then the 39. Prelatick
Articles, and the oath of supremacy. A Rebel, or Roundhead, may, it is true,
wear the King's colors, but not with so great danger to his Majesty, or
dommage to the public, as when he professes the King's Religion. Very few
Englishmen will fly from the King's colors they once wear and profess to
esteem, but many that profess the 39. Articles will fight against the Prelatick
interpretation thereof, for their own private sense, and against that of the King
and Church of England: So applicable are the 39. Articles to all dissenting
Reformations, and so pliable to every Rebellion that is grounded upon any
pretense of Scripture.

SECT. X. How the fundamental principles of the Protestant Reformations
maturely examined, and strictly followed, have led the most learned Protestants
of the world, to Iudaisme, Atheism, Arianisme, Mahometanisme etc. and their
best modern wits and writers to admit of no other Rule of Religion but Natural
Reason; and the Protestants Churches of Poland, Hungary, and Transylvania, to
deny the Mystery of the Trinity.
SEbastian Castalio, termed by Osiander (in epitom. page 753.) Vir apprime
doctus, linguarum peritissimus. Ranked by Doctor Humfrey (In vita Ivelli page
265.) with Luther and Zuinglius; and placed by Pantaleon (in Chronographia page
123.) amongst the Fathers and lights of the Church; this great and learned
Protestant, having considered the Prophecies mentioned in Scripture, of the
conversion of Kings and Nations by the Christian Church, and of it is happy
state, splendour, and continuance, and compared all with the very foundation and
first principle of protestancy, to wit, with the protestant supposition of a
general apostasy, and fall of the visible Church from the true faith, and
their remaining in superstition and idolatry for so many centuries of years,
together with the invisibility of the Protestant Church until Luther, and (by
consequence) it is not converting any visible Kings or nations from Paganism to
Christianity; having I say, maturely considered these things, was so perplexed,
and doubtful in point of God's providence and veracity, that he came at length
to believe nothing, as may be seen in his Preface of the great latin Bible
dedicated to K. Edward 6. where he says: verily we must confess, either that
these things shall be performed herafter, or have bin already, or that God is
to be accused of lying: If any may answer that they have bin performed; I will
demand of him, when? If he said in the Apostles time; I will demand how it
chances, that neither then the knowledge of God was altogether perfect, and
after in so short space vanished away, which was promised to be eternal, and
more abundant then the floods of the sea? And concludes; the more I peruse the
Scriptures, the less do I find the same performed, howsoever you understand the
same prophecies.

Martin Bucer one of the primitive and prime Protestants, And an Apostle of the
English reformation, of whom Sir John Cheek K. Edward 6. Master, says, the
world scarce had his fellow, and whom Archbishop Whitgift (in his defense etc.
page 522.) terms a Reverend, learned, painful, sound Father etc. this great
Bucer after his first Apostasy from his Dominican order, and Catholic Religion,
became a Lutheran; afterward a Zvinglian; as appaereth in his epistle (...)
Norimb. and ad Ess^ingenses; Then he returned again to be a Lutheran, as may be
seen in the Acts of the Synod holden at Luther's house in Wittemberg. an. 1539.
and in Bucer's own Comentaries upon the 6. John. and 26. Matthew, where he
asks pardon of God and the Church, for that he deceived so many with the
error of Zuinglius, and the Sacramentarians; And notwithstanding this open
repentance, he returned again to the same Zuinglianism in England, and therefore
is reprehended by Schlusselburg (in Theol. Calv. lib. 2. fol. 70.) At length
seeing the incertainty of Christianity whereunto by protestancy he had driven
him-self, and others that stuck to it is principles, at the hour of his death
he embraced Judaisme, as they who were present thereat, testify, says Prateolus
(page 107.) He declared long before to Dudley Earl of Warwick, that he doubted
whether all was true that the Evangelists relate of Christ. whereof see
hertofore. part. 1.

David George who for many years had bin a pious and publik Professor of
Protestancy at Basil, and Osiander in epitom. Centur. 16. part 2. page 647
says of David George, vtebatur enim publico vir Dei ministerio Basiliensi,
egentibus eleemosy nam subministrebat, aegrotos consolabatur etc.
called a man of God, for his notorious charity to the poor and sick,
considering and comparing the aforesaid doctrine of protestancy with the
prophecies of Scripture concerning the visible Church, became a blasphemous
Apostata; and affirming our Savior to have bin a seducer, drew many
Protestants to his opinion, convincing them by their own principles, and this
argument. Historia Georgij Davidis published by the Divines of Basil and
printed of Antwerp. 1568 si Christi and Apostolorum doctrina vera and perfecta
fuisset etc.
Jf the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had bin true and perfect, the Church
which they planted should have continued, etc. But now it is manifest that
Antichrist has subverted the doctrine of the Apostles and the Church by them
begun; as is evident in the Papacy: therefore the doctrine of the Apostles was
falls and imperfect.

Bernardin Ochin one of them whose opinions were Oracles to the Composers of
the 39. Articles of Religion, and the liturgy of the Church of England, so much
celebrated for his learning and piety, that the Protector Seamor and
Archbishop Cranmer called him out of Germany, to help them in their Protestant
reformation; termed by Bishop Bale a light of the Church, and England happy
whilst it had him, miserable when it lost him, highly commended for learning
and virtue by Simlerus, and Sleydan l. 9. fol. 297. and by Calvin l. de
scandalis, etc. This Ochin whom as Calvin writ, all Italy could not match, this
light whose presence made England happy, and whose absence made it miserable;
this very Ochin, considering well the principles of protestancy, became a Jew;
concluding that Christ never had a Church upon earth. When I did (says he in
praefat. Dialogorum) consider how Christ by his power, wisdom, and goodness had
founded and established his Church, washed it with his blood, and enriched it
with his spirit; and again discerned how the same was (funditus eversa) utterly
over thrown, I could not but wonder, and being desirous to know the cause, J
found there had bin Popes. And proceeding from this conceit of the Popes
prevailing against Christ in utter overthrow of the whole visible Church, he
concludes that he who founded and purchased the Church with such pains, and at
so dear a rate, could not be Christ, because he wanted power or providence to
preserve it, and therefore Ochin turned Jew and taught circumsion and Polygamy.

Upon the same motives Osiander in epitom. Centur. 16. page 818. Schlusselb. in
Theol. Calvin l. 1. art. 2. fol. 9.
Adam Neuserus a most learned Protestant, and chief Pastor of Heydelbergh,
turned Turk, and was circumsised at Constantinople, persuading many of his
flock to become Mahometans. Idem Schlussenburg cit. fol. 9. where he brings
many other examples of Protestants to the same purpose, as also Osiander
centur. 16. page 207.208.209. Concerning that known Text, I and my Father are
unum, one thing, Joan. 10.30. Calvin avoydeth it (as the Arians did) saying.
Abusi sunt hoc loco veteres vt probarent Christum esse Patri homousion. Neque
enim Christus de activitate substantiae disputat, sed de consensu etc. Calvin.
in Joan. 10.

Calvin in admonit. ad Polonos explant. in Tract. Theol. page 794. Sententia
Christi, Pater major me est, restricta fuit ad humanam ejus naturam; ego vero
non dubito ad totum complexum extendere.

Stancarus contra Minist. Geneuenses Tigurinos fol. 94. and 95. and 118. and
123. affirms that the Reformed Churches professing the faith of Geneva and
Tigure, be Arian, and says. Conclusum est o Calvine, doctrinam tuam de Filio
Dei esse plane Arianam, a qua, resilias quam primum te oro atque obsecro.


Allemanus esteemed, and beloved by Beza for his learning, seeing that the
predictions of the Prophets were not fulfilled in the Protestant Churches, and
being resolved not to be a Papist, held that the Messiah was not come, and so
renouncing Christianity became a blasphemous Jew.

Calvin, the Oracle of Protestant learning, and the most plausible Reformer of
Popery, is not only by Catholics but by sundry Protestants charged with
Judaism, in so much that the famous Protestant Writer Egidius Hunnius Doctor
and public Professor in the University of Wittembergh, and chief Disputant in
the conference of Ratisbone against the Catholics, writ a Book entitled
Calvinus Judaizans: And another Protestant book was printed 1586* and reprinted
1592. the Author whereof is the learned Ioannes Modestinus, and it is Title, A
Demonstration out of God's word, that the Calvinists are not Christians, but
only baptized Jews and Mahometans: and an other very learned Protestant John
Scutz (in lib. 50. causarum cap. 48.) affirms, Mahometism, Arianism, and
Calvinism, to be brothers and Sisters, and three pair of hose made of one
cloth.

The Calvinists do, and may say the same of the Lutherans, and of every other
Sect of Protestants; they are all made of one cloth, and differ only in the
fashion, according to the diversity of their fancies. They all agree in
clothing and covering their errors with Scripture, but some like one mode,
some an other. Calvin and his faction seem to approve most of the Arian, to
which also most Protestants incline, by reason of difficulty they find in the
Mystery of the Trinity, explained after the Catholic manner; But non of them
will tie himself to an others fashion, seeing their Rule of faith is their own
fancy. Wherefore notwithstanding the Confessions of faith of their sundry
Churches, they do not hold them-selves obliged to Profess that, or any faith
longer then it agrees with every on's private sense of Scripture, which he
changes as often as further study, information, or seeming reason moves him to
the contrary. So that not only Mahometism, Arianism, and Calvinism, are three
pair of hose made of one Cloth, according to Scutz expression, but his
Lutheranism, and all other Protestant Reformations are remnants of the same
piece, with different trimmings and patches; and though they be hose this day,
to morrow they would perhaps be Turbants, or Jews garments, had not those
forms and fashions bin so generally cried down, as ridiculous in these parts
of the world, that the learned Protestants, who think them more Religious then
their own, despair of ever making them the mode. So true it is, that the bare
letter of Scripture without Tradition (the rule of faith) makes men Heretics,
Turcks, Jews, and the worst of Infidells.

The learned Protestants who are not Jews, Turks, or Arians, become Atheists,
or mere Rationalists; Because there is not any thing moves learned men so much
either to Atheism, or to have no Religion but natural reason, as the diversity
of Religions, and the confessed uncertainty of such as are professed. The
interpretation of Scripture and Fathers being left by their principles of the
Reformation to every particular person's discretion, maks Protestants differ as
much in Christian belief as in human opinions, concerning any ordinary, and
obscure matter; and their supposition of the fall of the visible Church into
errors of doctrine, together with the acknowledged fallibility, and uncertainty
of their own Congregations, takes away (as we proved in the last Section) all
certainty, and Christianity of belief. What doubt therefore can be made but that
such learned Protestants as turn not Jews, Mahometans, or Arians, will either
become Atheists, Socinians, or mere Rationalists? such as observe that the
Prophecies sett-down in Scripture concerning the spendor, extent, and
propagation of Christ's Church upon Earth, are not accomplished in their own
petty Reformations, and withal are so peevish, and maliciously bent against
the Roman Catholic faith, as not to examine it is truth, turn Jews, Mahometans,
or Atheists; But such as are ashamed or afraid to renounce the name of
Christians, and yet are as obstinat against the Roman Catholic doctrine, as the
aforsaid Protestants, fall from on reformed sect to an other; and at length
perceiving there is no reason to prefer on before an other, renounce all, and
rely only upon their own reason; most of them follow Chillingworth, Fauckland,
Stilling-fleet, and become Socinians, denying or doubting of Christ's Divinity,
and are driven to that impiety, partly by the incoherency of the Protestant
Tenets, and partly by their contempt of Tradition; but most of all by the
foolish presumption of their own wit and judgment, and by that secret pride so
manifest in Protestants, and proper to Heretics.

There is not any one Protestant Writer, in whose works you may not find this
heretical Strain. Neither is it to be admired that men whose Religion is
occasioned by pride, and grounded upon singularity of judgment, do betray and
declare those passions in their discourses, they being the chief ingredients of
their Symbols and the Conclusions most clearly deduced from their principles. I
will omit all others at present, and only mention a passage of Socinus against
Volanus (pa. 2.) wherein you may see to what a pass Protestants are brought by
their own proud and private spirit, and by their contempt of Catholic
Tradition. Thus therefore he says. To what purpose should I answer that which
thou borrowest from the Papists etc. especially where thou opposest to us the
perpetual consent of the Church? very excellently doubtless in this behalf
has Hosius (a Papist) discoursed against you, wounding you with your own
sword. And therefore you are no less falls in urging against us, the Churches
perpetual consent (for the Divinity of Christ) then are the Papists in their
urging thereof against you and us. And ibid. page 222. We propose to us in this
question (concerning the Divinity of Christ) non for Master or Interpreter, but
only the holy Ghost etc. we do not think that we are to stand to the judgment
of any men though never so learned, of any Councels though in show never so
holy, and lawfully assembled, of any visible Church, though never so perfect
and universal. Even Uolanus himself disputing against the Jesuits, is enforced
to reject the examples, sayings, and deeds, of Athanasius, Hierom, Austin,
Theodoret, and other Fathers, whose authority he now opposes against us, as
sacred. Thus much have I thought good to remember, that Volanus may receive
answer from himself, when he so often inforceth against us the authority of
learned men, and the consent of the Church, etc. And truly Socinus does defend
his error concerning Christ, with as many and as clear texts of Scripture (not
understood in the sense of the Roman Catholic Church) as any point of
Protestancy is maintained by other Protestants.

The Puritans (now called Presbiterians) use the same way of arguing against
the Prelatiks, and with no less success, then socinus against Volanus, as may
be seen in Cartwright in his second reply against episcopacy ( p. 1. page 484.)
And that it may appear (says he) how justly we call this Canon of the Council
(the first general of Nice, in the Canon touching the Metropolitan which the
Prelatiks urged in favor of Episcopacy) unto the tuch stone of the word of God,
let it be considered etc. In the same Council appears that to those chosen
of the ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward etc.
Paphnutius shows, that not only this was before that Council, but was an
ancient Tradition of the Church, in which both him-felf and the whole Council
rested etc. If the ancient Tradition of the Church can not authorize this,
neither can ancient custom authorize the other.

The Prelatick Clergy would fain hold Episcopacy by virtue of Tradition, and
of the authority of the Nicen Council, and yet would have Priests marry,
contrary to the same tradition, and authority. In like manner, as the same Mr.
Cartwright well observes ( ibid. page 582.) the Bishops of the Church of
England would needs have the Nicen Council be of sufficient authority to
maintain Archbishops, but not the Pope, whereas the on is as clearly expressed
as the other, and no less necessary for the government of the Church. If (says
he) an Archbishop be necessary for calling a Provincial Council, when the
Bishops are divided; it is necessary there be also a Pope, which may call a
general Council when division is among the Archbishops; for when the
Churches of one Province be divided from other (as you ask me, so I ask you)
who shall assemble them together? who shall admonish them of their duties,
when they are assembled? If you can find a way how this may be don without a
Pope, the way is also found, whereby the Church is disburdned of the Archbishop.

When Prelaticks dispute with Presbiterians about Episcopacy and ceremonies
etc. they extol the four first general Counsels; but when they dispute with
Roman Catholics, about the unmarried life of Priests, the Pop's supremacy, or
any other point of Popery, then they extenuate the authority of the same
Counsels, and will admit of no other rule of faith but Scripture. So that a
Prelatick Protestant against Presbiterians is a Papist, and against Papists is
a Presbiterian: what he is, or would be if both did argue against him at the
same time, is not well known to me (nor as I suppose to him-self;) but if he
admits of the two main pillars whereby protestancy is supported, which are the
pretended fall and fallibility of the visible Church, and the arbitrary
interpretation of Scripture, he may be any thing he pleases; and (to speak more
modestly of him then Modestinus of Calvinists) he is in a fair way to be a
baptized Jew, Mohammedan, or Arian, and can not miss that way, if he will be
guided by the Protestant principles, and follow the track of the most learned
of the reformation. Both Luther The word Trinity is but a huma^ inventio^ and
sounds couldly Luther in Postil majore Basileae apud Hernagium in enar-
Evangel. Dom. Trinit. Calvin. ep. 2. ad Polonos in tract. Theolog. and page 796
says, Precatio vulgo trita est, sancta Trinitas vnus Deus miserere nostri,
mihi non placet, ac omnino barbariem sapit.
and Calvin dislik't the word Trinity, on said it sounded couldly, the other
barbarously; and Luther by omitting in his Translation of the new Testament
this Text of Scripture. There-be three which give witness in heaven, the
Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and these three be one, shows how
little inclined he was to believe that sacred Mystery; and by saying that his
soul hated Homusion and that the Arians did very well Luther in lib. contr^
Jacobu^ Latomum (...). 2. W^tte^b. latin edito anno. 1551. The later editions
are altered and corrupted herin, as in many other things.
to reject that new and profane word from the rules of faith, he declares how
his Protestant rule and reformation does direct men to heresy and to all kind
of infidelity; for, there is not a more refined heresy then Scripture
mis-interpreted, and mis-applyed; and Scripture may be as easily
mis-interpreted and mis applied against the Trinity, or the second Person's
equality, and consubstantiality, as applied to any on point of Protestancy. The
Anti-Trinitarians of Poland, Transylvania and Hungary think themselves as good
Calvinists as any French Hugonots, and better Protestants then English
Prelaticks, or German Lutherans; because they not only agree with all reformed
Churches in the Fundamentalls of Protestancy (that is, in supposing the
Apostasy of the Catholic Church, and in reforming it by private authority, and
their own interpretation of Scripture) but go a step further in the
Reformation, by denying the Trinity. By the principles of Protestancy, and the
practice of the first Protestant Reformers, it is left to the choice and
discretion of every particular Church and person, what articles of Popery are
fit to be rejected by their private interpretation of Scripture: and indeed it
is impossible for men not tied to any rule but to their own fancies of
Scripture, to agree in the points of Popery what to reject or retain. They who
confine with the Turk's Dominions, venture to deny the Trinity, and the
Divinity of Christ, and laugh at their brethrens arguments (against their
impiety) as deduced only from Tradition, Counsels, and Fathers and call them
old Roman rags long since torn in pieces (by the Protestants them-selves) in
other points of Protestancy etc. Hi sunt vetusti panni quos vos laceratis in
aliis fidei articulis etc. and lacerata jamdudum calceamenta. (Nullus and Nemo
H. 9.) They are (say they) patcht shows worn out long agon, but here in
England, France etc. where no neighboring Nations deny the Trinity, or
Incarnation, Protestants make those Mysteries fundamental articles of faith;
but in Transylvania, and Hungary, The principles of Protestancy are not kept in
such awe as here, they make bold there to apply Scripture against any mysteries
of Christianity.

Wherefore we must not admire that they (as Mr. Hooker tells us Eccles. Pol^^.
l. 4. page 183.) Of the reformed Churches of Poland, Osiander in Epitom. cent.
16. page 169 Symbolum Athanasiivocant doctrina^ and fidem Satanasii; vanissime
insuper jactitant Lutherum vix tectum Babilonicae turris detex isse, se vero ex
imis fundamentis eam ex scindere.
think the very belief of the Trinity to be a part of Antichristian
corruption, and that the Pop's triple Crown is a sensible mark whereby the world
might know him to be that mystical Beast spoken of in the Revelation, in no
respect so much as in his doctrine of the Trinity: Nor when they say that St.
Athanasius his Symbol is the Symbol of Satan; and brag that Luther did scarce
until the Babilonian Jower (of Rome) but that they do utterly demolish it, and
dig up its very foundation. By which words they give clearly to understand,
that the Protestants of Germany, England, Denmark etc. are but superficial
Protestants and are as yet far short of that substantial, and fundamental
Reformation whereunto the principles of Protestancy, and the Protestant rule of
faith, or an arbitrary interpretation of Scripture, does direct, and incline
all Churches of the Reformation. As for our English Presbiterians and
Fanatics, they agree with the Polonian, Hungarian, and Transilvanian
protestant Arrians, and Anti-Trinitarians, in believing the Protestant
Reformations can not be pious, and perfect, so long as they retain any on point
of Popery; and indeed there is as much reason and ground in Scripture to reject
all, as any on; and the Protestant principles warant the denial of the
Trinity, and Incarnation, as well as of the Mass and Transubstantiation. The
prelaticks perceive this to be true, and therefore in the 39. Articles (to avoid
scandal and discredit) profess the belief of many mysteries, that according to
the very foundation of their Reformation they ought to deny; and though they
seem not to be guilty of impiety in their resolution of retaining some, yet are
they convicted of incoherency in not rejecting all, as we shall now manifestly
prove.

SECT. XI. How the indifferency, or rather inclination, of Protestancy to all
kind of infidelity, is further demonstrated by the Prelatick doctrine, and
distinction of fundamental and not fundamental articles of faith. The design of
their fundamental distinction laid open. The Roman Catholic, the sole
Catholic Church; and how it has the authority of judging all controversies of
Religion.
Unity of doctrine being a confessed mark of the true Church, which is called
One in relation to one and the same faith; and Protestants perceiving they want
this unity, and the means to bring them to it, (every particular Church and
person challenging a right to interpret Scripture after his own manner, as well
as Luther and Calvin etc. who could not assume to them-selves that liberty
without granting it to others) and that not only their sundry Churches and
confessions differ extremely in doctrine, but even the members of one and the
same Congregation agree not among them-selves in the explanation of their
Articles, nor in the Authority of their Church, to command and determine, what
articles ought to be believed; this I say considered by Protestants, some of
their chief writers (and particularly the English Prelaticks) have invented a
distinction whereby they hope to fool their flocks, and make them believe, that
there is not only an unity, but an universality of faith amongst all dissenting
Protestants, and by consequence that they are true Catholics. They divide
therefore the articles of Christian Religion into fundamental, and not
fundamental. Fundamental they call those, wherein all Christians do agree: not
fundamental they make every article whereof them-selves, or any other
Christians doubt, how ever so fundamental it may be held by the rest. By which
doctrine they make Arians, N^^torians, and all ancient Heretics, good
Catholics, and their errors not fundamental, or destructive to salvation,
because forsooth they are Christians, though deny the consubstantiality of
Christ. This is no wrested consequence of ours, but their own confessed Tenet.

The great prelatick writer Doctor Morton late Bishop of Duresme, in his
approved and applauded book, of the Kingdom of Jsrael, and of the Church,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth (page 94) says, The Churches of Arians are to be
accounted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of the
Gospel which is faith in JESUS Christ the son of God and Savior of the
world. And page 91. He gives this general rule. Whersoever a company of men do
jointly and publicly by worshipping the true God in Christ, profess the
substance of Christian Religion, which is faith in JESUS Christ the Son of God,
and Savior of the world, there is a true Church, notwithstanding any corruption
what soever etc. Thus they plead for the Arrians declaring in their favor that
consubstantiality of the son, or his being the natural son of God, is not the
substance of Christian belief. A man would think that the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, is a substantial point of faith, seeing there of
depends the reality of our Sacrifice, the feeding or famishing of our souls,
and the verifying or falsifying of Christ's plain and express words; and yet
Bishop Jewel the greatest pillar of the Church of England, in his Apology for
the same ( page 101. edit. 1600.) ob^erving that Protestants were divided in
the belief of that mystery, tells us it is but a matter of indifferency; The
Lutherans and Zuinglians, says he, are both sides Christians, good friends,
and Brethren; they vary not between them-selves upon the principles and
foundations of our Religions, etc. But upon one only question (the real
presence) neither weighty, nor great. Doctor Reynolds in his 5. Conclusion
annexed to his conference ( page 722.) affirms the real presence to be but as
it were the grudging of a little ague, if otherwise the party hold the
Christian faith. And all Protestants conspire in this heretical shift, because
their change and choice of articles of faith can not be maintained by any other
way, but by denying that thereby they touch the foundation of Christian
Religion. So Luther defended his Consubstantiation, as may be seen in Amandus
Polanus in his Synop. page 446. And Iacobus Acontius (lib. 3. Stratagematum
Sathanae page 135.) says: It Is evident concerning as well those who hold the
real presence of Christ's Body in the bread, as those others which deny it,
that although of necessity one part do err, yet both are in way of salvation,
if in other things they be obedient to God.

Jn this Protestant distinction we must distinguish two things. 1. The design.
2. The doctrine whereupon Protestants ground their design. In this Section J will
discover the design, and declare the weakness thereof. In the next I will
demonstrat the falsehood of the doctrine whereby they intended to carry on their
design. Protestants proceed in this affair as weak Ministers of state; when
they find by experience they have bin mistaken in taking their measures, and in
the management of public concerns, they would fain be reconciled, and make
strict leagues with such Potentats as formerly they had disobliged, and
them-selves now stand in need of their friendship, and fancy they can effect
all by inculcating unto them general notions of a common danger, grounded upon
the power and pride of some neighboring and emulous Prince. So Prelaticks
reflecting upon the weackness of their cause occasioned through the dissentions
of the Reformed Religions, and upon the incoherency of their own 39. Articles
with the foundation and liberty of Protestancy, would fain (by a general
notion of Christianity) unite all heretical Churches to them-selves against the
Roman Catholics pretended pride and power. In which proceedings they commit
two great indiscretions. 1. They do not consider how they have disobliged the
Greek, and most of the Eastern Churches, by declaring in their 39. Articles the
doctrine of the Holy Ghost's procession from the Father, and not from the son to
be heresy; though now (too late) they would fain moderat the censure, as also
be reconciled to all Sects of Protestants in Europe. 2. At the same time they
endeavor to make this league offensive and defensive against the Roman
Catholic Church; Whitaker contra rat. Camp. page 78. And in his answer to Mr.
William Reynolds cap. 6. page 135. art. 136. says: The Fathers thought by
their external discipline of life to pay the pains due for sin, wherein they
derogated not a little from Christ's death etc. Which though it be an error,
yet were they notwithstanding good men and holy Fathers. From whence follows
that Indulgences, Purgatory, Satisfaction, Prayer for the dead, Merit, etc. may
be held by learned and holy men.

Mr. Bunny in his treatise tending to pacification, sect. 17. page 104.
excusing some points of popery, and amongst others the worshipping of images,
says, in these therefore or such like, whosoever will condemn all those to be
none of the Church, that are not fully persuaded therein as we are, etc.
committed an uncharitable part toward his Brethren. See Doctor Some against
Mr. Penry page 176. Tindall act. Mon. page 1338. I doubt not but S, Bernard,
Francis and many other holy men erred as concerning Mass.

Mr. Francis Johnson in Mr. Jacob's defense of the Churches and Ministry of
England, etc. page 13. Did not John Hus that worthy Champion of Christ and
others also of the Martyrs of fore times, say and hear Mass, even to their
dying day? etc. Did not diverse of them acknowledge, some the Pop's calling and
supremacy, some the 7. Sacraments, some auricular confession? etc. Morgenstein
in tract. de Ecclesia, etc. page 41. These things were pardonable in the Godly,
who held the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ and Head of the Church, the Papacy
for the Church, Saints for mediators, and the Mass for the supper of the Lord.
Luther de vtraque specie, says: If thou coms't to a place were the Communion
is ministered under one only kind, take it with others. The like indifferency is
affirmed by Melancthon in centur. epist. Theolog. page 252. and not denied by
Bishop Jewel in his reply page 110. and 106.


their chief writers profess there is no cause to quarrel with that Church,
because it is also a Christian Congregation, and differs from Protestants only
in things indifferent, among which they place even the Worship of Images, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, the communion under one kind, the Pop's supremacy etc.
Whence it must needs follow that their Protestant separation from the Roman
Church can not be justified, as confessedly not having sufficient ground to
break the communion of the Church upon the score of doctrine acknowledged by
them-selves to be lawful, and therefore their Protestant Reformations must be
concluded schismatical.

This their Prelatick moderation toward our Roman Catholic doctrine is the
effect of a necessary compliance with our Adversaries, condemned heretics; not
of any Christian charity that they bear to our principles, or persons, as
appears by their quite contrary expressions in other occasions, and by the
severity of their statutes against Priests, and Papists. They can hardly excuse
the errors of Arrians, Nestorians, etc. And yet accuse us of heresy; nor can
they maintain the Greek worshipping of Images, to be lawful, and yet condemn
the same in us as idolatry.

But that which they most press against the Roman Catholic Church, and wherein
all sectaries dissenting from it, are concerned to ioyn with Protestants, is,
that we say, ourselves are the sole Catholics, and the Pope and general
Councels supreme Judges of heretics. Rather then admit our Church to be the
Catholic, they cantonize God's Church into dissenting congregations, and
canonize for Orthodox all sects of heretics, though they have no
subordination, connection, or communication among themselves, much less that
care of the common good, that is among the Suitzers, whose Commonwealth they
would fain make a pattern of Christ's Church. To this end they sent their Agents
to Ieremias Patriarch of Constantinople, and in their printed books make
honorable mention of Nestorius, Dioscorus, Eutiches, and other heretics brood,
and branches, that are dispersed in Egypt, Ethiopia, and East Jndies, as if
they had bin their Brethren (whereas they do not know their Tenets) and brag of
their numbers in comparison whereof they say the Romanists are but few, and, at
the best, but a part of the universal Church; and if a part, they ought not to
judge of the whole, if they do, their sentence must be slighted as invalid and
partial.

And though the Schismatics, and Heretics of the Greek Church whom the
Protestants so much courted, have by a particular definitive sentence of
I^^^mias their Patriarch, disowned the doctrine, and refused the communion of
all Protestants, yet are the so deserted and despised reformed Churches,
compelled to maintain the indifferency of the eastern heresies, even of those
which the Greeks them-selves twelve times recanted (having bin so many times
reconciled to the Church of Rome) though now again revolted, and returned to
some of their former errors, but not without a visible mark of God's
indignation and justice. Protestants therefore are content to excuse the errors
of the Greeks, and of all other Christians, though Heretics, hoping thereby to
obtain for them-selves the name of Catholics; and are so kind as not to exclude
any that professes Christ (even after the Arrian manner) from their Protestant
communion; not doubting but that for a return of civility, them-selves will by
virtue of that general appellation of Christians, be countenanced by the
enemies of the Church of Rome, and protected from it is severity. But the Greek
Patriarch smelt their design; and though a Rebel against the sea of Rome, yet
he condemned the Protestant doctrine, and contemned their flattery; giving them
to understand, that the truth of Religion is never annexed to many dissenting
Churches, and that their agreement in Protestant fundamentalls can not be an
argument of Catholic unity or universality. And to be rid of future
importunities, condemned their opinions as heresies, declaring how different
they are from those of the Greek Church, as appears by his Sententia
definitiva.

Jeremiae Patriarchae Constantinopolotani sententia definititiva de doctrina
and Religione Wittembergensium Theologorum, etc; edit. an. 1586. in this Book,
the Greeks detest the Protestant Religion, whereof see further Hospinian in
Histor. Sacram. part. 2. and Responsio Basilii Magni Ducis Muscoviae etc. an.
1570. it appears by a Treatise set forth even by the Protestant Divines of
Wittemberg entitled Acta Theologorum Wittembergensium, and Ieremiae
Patriarchae Constantinop. de Augustana Confessione etc. That the Greek Church
yet to this day professes and teaches invocation of Saints and Angels ( page
55. 102.128.) Relics, page 244. and 368. worshipping of Images ( page
243.244.247. and 251.) Transsubstantiation ( page 86.96.100.240.318.) Sacrifice
( page 102 104) The signifying ceremonies of the Mass ( page 97.99.100.)
Auricular Confession. in praefat. and in lib. page 87 130. Confirmation with
Chrisme ( page 78.238.) extreme Unction ( page 242.326.) All the seven
Sacraments ( page 77.242.) prayer for the dead ( page 93.102.109.) Sacrifice
for the dead ( page 95.104.) Monachisme ( page 132.257.) That Priests may not
marry after orders taken, ( page 129.) See Sir Edward Sands also in his
relation etc. On the last leaf but five where he confirms all we have related
here of the Greeks concurrence in Religion with the Roman Church. As for the
Protestant Doctors and Prelates exceptions against the Roman Church and
Counsels not being Catholic or Universal, they can be of no force; because
their own Logicians may clear the mistake ^y putting them in mind of the
definition of Catholic or Universal, which is, vnum in multis, one in many;
for ^n^^^rsality requires two, and but two conditions unity, or ide^^ity of
form, and multitude of Subjects. That a Church therefore be Universal or
Catholic, it is necessary and sufficient there be an unity or identity of form
(which is faith) and multitude of subjects, which are the Professors of that
faith. Whether the subject of the form which is called universal, be more or
less (so they be many) is not material as to the nature and denomination of
Universal, or Catholic, though there were but 200. men living, homo (say
Logicians) would be as much Universal as now it is, with so many millions of
men: In like man^er we say, though there were but 200. men in the world
professing the true faith, that faith would be still Universal or Catholic,
because it would be still one and the same in many; and 200. are as properly
many, though not so many, as 200. millions. We grant that it has bin
prophesied the multitude of believers should be very numerous, and spread over
the whole world, and accordingly it has bin fulfilled, and now Roman
Catholics are every where multiplied; yet there has bin a time when the
Catholics were but few, and in the later days they will not be many in respect
of Heretics, but still it was and will be the Catholic Church. Therefore it can
not be an argument that a Church in not Catholic or Universal, because there ar
more Pagans, and Professors of Heresies, then of the true Religion.. Their
being more heretics in number, is consistent with the being of many faithful
houlding the Apostolic faith, and no more is requisite for a Catholic or
Universal Church.

But sure Protestants forget the invisibility of their own, when they except
against the Universality of ours. If theirs was Catholic or Universal when
they were so few, that for the space at least of 1000. years not one Protestant
could be found in the whole world, they have no reason to deny the denomination
of Catholic to the Roman, which always has bin so conspicuous and numerous.
If they will proceed coherently, and say that for those 1000. years before
Luther, there was no Catholic Church, then they must not only reform, but alter
and cut short the Apostles Creed, and blot out (at least for those 1000. years)
that article, J believe in the Catholic Church.

And as Protestants have no reason to believe that the universality or
Catholicism of the Church consists not so much in the number of persons, as in
the antiquity and identity of faith of the Professors with that of the
Apostles, so have they not any reason to object partiality, and illegality
against the testimony and judicature of the Roman Church and Counsels when
they censure Protestant opinions. Not partiality, because when a Judge or
wittness gives sentence or evidence against his own natural inclination and
interest, The Roman Catholic Church is a competent and impartial Judge of
Controversies of Religion.
there can be no suspicion of partiality, nor lawful exception against his
sentence or testimony, as too much favoring himself, or his relations; And
truly if Roman Catholics did judge of controversies of faith according to
their own natural inclination and interest, and had not in their definitions
and testimonies a greater regard to conscience then convenience, they would
never witness or define that Priests ought not to marry, or that Kings and
Bishops ought to be subject to the Pope in spiritual affairs, or that men
ought to abstain from flesh so many days in the week, or that there is no bread
or wine in the Sacrament notwithstanding the appearance of both; neither would
they part with their lands and money upon the score of Purgatory; or maintain
that private men or Churches must not take the liberty to themselves of deciding
controversies of Religion, but on the contrary believe that general Counsels
are infallible even when they define matters contrary to our sense and
inclinations. Roman Catholics are made of flesh and blood, they are naturally
as averse from these thoughts, and submissions, and find as great difficulty in
conforming their judgments and testimonies thereunto as Protestants. Therefore
they cannot be partial in condemning Protestants, for not believing these
things, unless they be also partial against themselves; and nothing but the
evidence of their own obligation ^o believe these things, strengthened by the
grace of God, could prevail with so many learned and sober men as have bin and
are known to be among Roman Catholics, to be partial against themselves, or to
judge and wittness (contrary to their own natural inclinations and temporal
interest) for Popery against Protestancy.

SVBSECT II. Of the Justice and legality of our Roman Censures against
Protestancy. Quid praedi^averin^ Apostoli, quid illis Christus revelaverit etc.
non aliter probari debere, nisi per easdem Ecclesias quas ipsi condiderunt.

NOw as to the legality of the proceedings and censures of the Roman Catholic
Church against Protestancy, it is as manifest as lawful witnesses, and clear
evidences can make any judgment either in law or equity. In all controversie^
both of law and Religion, the Courts and Church must ground their sentences
upon matter of fact. All disputes of faith must be reduced unto, Tertul. l. 1.
d^ praescri. c. 6.
and decided by this matter of fact. Whether Christ our Savior, and his
Apostles taught such doctrine? Whether he revealed the reformed, not the Roman
sense of Scripture? This being a thing don 1600. years since, neither party can
produce new eyes or ear witnesses pretending to an immediate knowledge of what
then Christ and his Apostles preached. That immediate evidence ended with the
beginning of the second age, and we must begin our proof with this last, and
proceed to examine our witnesses by a retrogradation from this present age to
the first, because the only proof of things which are beyond the reach of our
knowledge and memory, is the Tradition and testimonies of others, upon which we
must rely, or resolve not to believe any thing, even of our-selves, as our
names, families, Countries, or of this world, and much less of the next. Let us
begin therefore with the Reformed Protestant Churches, and ask them what
witnesses have they in this 16. Century to prove that Christ and his Apostles
were Protestants, or taught their reformed sense of Scripture? They will
answer, they have as many witnesses as there are Protestants. We demand their
cause of knowledge? such of them as in matters of Religion make any use of
reason, will not pretend that they know it by private revelation, or by their
own proper interpretation of God's Law, (those are neither Court nor Church
evidences) but will answer that their Parents and Pastors told them, Christ
and his Apostles were Protestants and these were told so by others their
Parents and Pastors, until passing some few descents, they come to Luther, or
Calvin, or Cranmer etc. There they must stop; for, Luther, Calvin, and Cranmer
did not pretend that their Parents or Pastors testified to them that
Protestancy was the true Religion, them-selves having bin the first Inventors
or Revivers thereof, after that it had bin (by their own confessions) at least
1000. years buried, and their Church had bin invisible, or enchanted.

It is a remarkable thing that never any ancient Heretic, or modern Reformer
of the Catholic doctrine, could name an inmmedia^ Pre^^cessor, much less any
Church, from which he received his Religion* and reformed interpretation of
Scripture. Opti^^s that ancient Father (^. 2. contra ^arme^.) says, That
Donatus was a son without a Father a Successor without a Predecessor, filius
sine Patre, sequens sine Anteceden^e: the same we may say of Luther, Calvin
Cranmer etc. And seeing there must be a Succession of faith as well as of me^,
and that as one who can not prove his Father or family to be noble by the
testimonies and tradition of others, can not pretend to nobility of descent, or
to right of inheritance, so can not Luther, Calvin or Cranmer and their
followers, pretend to antiquity of faith, or to be of the Catholic family of
Christ without a legal testimony and tradition of their spiritual descent,
which tradition or testimony they confess to be wanting. Mr. Napper in his
Treatise upon the Revelations page 43. The Pop's Kingdom has had power over
all Christians, from the time of Pope Silvester and the Emperor Constantine
for these 1260. years. And page ^4^. From the time of Constantine until these
our days, even 1260. years, the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward
visible Church of Christians. And their chief Doctors ingeniously acknowledge,
that their Churches were either so obscure, or so oppressed, that notwithstanding
their own serious examinati^^, and diligent search into all histories both
sacred and profane, they can not find in the space of at least 1300. years as
much as a record or Tradition of any on person to bear witness that their
faith, sense of Scripture, or Reformation, was preached by Christ and his
Apostles. Sebastianus Francus in ep. de Abrog. Statutis ecclesiast. says
Statim post Apostolos etc. Presently after the Apostles times, all things were
turne^ vpside down etc. And that for certain through the work of Antichrist,
the external Church together with the faith and the Sacraments vanished away
presently after the Apostles departure, and that for these 1400. years the
Church has bin no where external and visible.

Peter Martyr so much commended by Calvin, and sent for by Cranmer to help to
frame the Religion of the Church of England, page 462. of his work de caelibatu
and votis, says; as for the judgment of the Fathers, because our Adversaires
(the Papists) both in this and other controversies are accustomed to appeal to
them, J do not think it the part of a Christian to appeal from the Scriptures
of God, to the judgments of men. And page 476. So long as we go no further then
the Counsels and Fathers, we shall always remain in the same errors.

This Sophister would feign make Protestants believe that the question is,
whether the Fathers sense of Scriptures ought to be preferred before the sense
of the Protestants? them-selves confess that both Counsels and Fathers are
contrary to their interpretation. Whitaker on of the learned Protestants
that ever writ, answering Duraeus, and acknowledging the truth of the
assertion, coms off with this poor evasion ( l. 7. page 478. It is sufficient
for us to know, by conferring the Popish doctrine with Scripture, that they do
not agree, let Histories say what they list. So little do the Ecclesiastical
Annals favor Protestancy, that never any point thereof is mentioned without
mentioning also how it began, and was comdemned as heresy.

Now let Protestants examine our Roman Catholic witnesses; we do not stop (as
they must) at the last age 1500. we produce in every Century of years the most
eminent persons for Sanctity and learning that then lived, who not only
professed our faith living, but also dying, as by the Traditions of all
Christendom, their own writings, and the confession of our Adversaries is
manifest, whereof the Divines of Magdeburg, hertofore quoted, writ copiously in
their Centuries. These Fathers and Doctors of the Church in each respective
Century, delivered the Roman Catholic faith to the next succeeding, not as a
private opinion of their own, but as the public, pure, primitive, Apostolic
says, which they had received as such from the precedent age, confirmed by the
unanimous testimony of their known Catholic immediate Predecessors. What
exceptions or objections can Protestants pretend against the holy and learned
Fathers, so impartial Judges and witnesses? They could not be ignorant of what
was the public and universal faith, or Church in their times; and they were
men of so great integrity, that they would not for any temporal interest
conceal the truth in a matter, whereof depended eternity. They were not angry
(says S. Augustine disputing against the Pelagians, advers. Julian. l. 2. prope
finem and lib. 3. c. 17. and lib. 4. c. 12.) neither at you or us; what they
have found in the Church, that they have holden, they have taught what they
have learned, what they have received from their forefathers they have
delivered to posterity. The most learned Protestants decline the Fathers
judgment and testimony for no other reason but because they find them to be
Roman Catholics in their writings; so that the question is not whether they by
for us, but whether their testimony for us, averring that the Roman Catholic
sense of Scripture is the same which Christ and his Apostles delivered, ought
to be preferred before the contrary testimony of Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, or of
the other Convocations and Parliaments of England of Edward 6. and Queen
Elizabeth, who prove not their reformed sense of Scripture by ancient
tradition, but by a new arbitrary interpretation of Scripture. And in what
Court of Judicature would such an uncertain guess, pass for a legal proof?
Whereas tradition is the only evidence whereby the greatest civil controversies
even of regal successions and titles are decided in the Protestants Courts:
Therefore it ought not to be excluded as superfluous or superstitious from the
Church.

SVBSET III.
AS to their exception that the Roman Catholic Church is but a part, All
Christians were never Judges of Religion, one part always submitted to the
judgment of the other that was in obedience to, and in communion with saint
Peter's Successor the Bishop of Rome.
and ought not to be judge of all other Christians, we answer, that not by all
Christians, but by on part, were all controversies in the Church decided since
the Apostles times and the other part which did not submitt to the judgment of
that one, in matters of faith and discipline, were censured heretics. That the
Judgment and censures in all ages were issued but by on part, and this, the
Roman Catholic party that lived in communion with the Bishop of Rome, and the
Counsels that acknowledged his jurisdiction, we prove by the confessed
examples of every Century.

In the first, the controversy of the legal ceremonies was determined by S.
Peter and the Apostles in a Council wherein S. Peter presided Act. 15.

In the second Century the Christians were divided about celebrating E'aster,
the controversy was decided by S. Victor Bishop of Rome, as S. Peter's
successor; and because the Churches of Asia would not conform themselves to his
sentence, he excommunicated them. ( Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 23. and 24.) And
though S. Irenaeus approved not of S. Victor's severity, yet he never
questioned his jurisdiction or supremacy, or the legality of his censures. And
because some Christians persisted obstinatly in not conforming to the Pop's
Decree of celebrating Easter, they were for that obstinacy declared heretics,
and as such numbered in Catalogues by S. Epiphanius, haeres. 50. S. Augustine,
haeres. 26. and by Tertullian de praescript. in fine, and called
Quarto-decimans.

In the third Century, by the Pope Cornelius and his Roman Council the
Novatian heresy was condemned ( Eusebius. ex versione Rufini, lib. 6. histor. cap.
33.) and though there were not as many Bishops in that Roman Council, as at
Trent, yet the whole Church thought the authority sufficient and legal to
declare the Novatians heretics. The same Pope and Stephen his Successor
condemned such Christians as thought and taught that they who had bin baptized
by heretics, ought to be rebaptised.

In the forth Century, the Arian heresy was condemned by the Council of Nice,
wherein were but 318. Bishops, whose testimony was thought sufficient, and legal
against a far greater number of Arius his faction, because the Councell's
testimony was confirmed by a Tradition, and by the authority of St. Silvester
Bishop of Rome, whose legates presided in that Assembly^ In the same Century was
condemned the Heresy of Macedonius against the Holy Ghost, by a Council in
Constantinople confirmed by the authority of St. Damasus Bishop of Rome.
Photius in lib. de septem Synodis.

In the fifth Century was condemned the heresy of Nestorius in the Ephesin
Council, wherein presided Cyrillus in the name of Pope Celestin. (Evagrius lib.
1. cap. 4.) And a little after was condemned the heresy of Eutiches in the
Council of Calcedon, wherein also presided the Legates of Pope Leo. (Evagrius
lib. 2. cap. 4.) And the whole Council petitioned to the Bishop of Rome for
his confirmation of their Acts. ( tom. 2. Council. and Breviarium Liberati) In
the same fifth age was condemned the heresy of the Pelagians, by authority of
the Bishops of Rome. The Pelagian heresy (says St. Austin lib. 2. Retract. c.
50.) with it is authors was convicted and condemned by the Roman Bishops
Jnnocent, and Zozimus, with concurrence (or at the instance) of the Counsels
of Africa. And Prosper in Chronico an. 420. A Council being holden at Carthage
of 217. Bishops, the Synodal Decrees were sent to Pope Zozimus, which being
approved, the Pelagian heresy was condemned in the whole world.

In the sixth Century many heresies were condemned in the 5. Synod.

In the 7. Century and sixth Synod were condemned the Monothelits, wherein
presided the Pop's Legates, though the Emperor was present, and subscribed, but
after all the Bishops; not as a Judge, but as on who consented and submitted to
their judgment.

In the 8. Century and 7. Synod of 350. Bishops, were declared and condemned as
heretics, they, who opposed the worship of Jmages, wherein also presided the
Pop's Legates, whereof Photius says: This sacred and great Council condemned a
barbarous heresy newly invented by wicked and execrable men. etc. For they did
term the adorable Image of Christ, (whereby erroneous idolatry is excluded) an
Idol, etc.

In the 9. Century and 8. Synod many controversies were decided, and the Pop's
Legates presided. The Emperor was present, and subscribed, but after the Legates
and Patriarchs; and plainly acknowledged that the judgment of Religious
Controversies apertain'd not to him, and that by subscribing, he only testified
his Consent.

In the 10. Century we read of no heresy, but of the Greeks Schism.

In the 11. Century, Pope Leo the 9. in a Council at Vercelli, and Pope
Nicolas 2. in a Council at Rome of 113. Bishops, condemned the heresy of
Berengarius, against the real presence, and Transsubstantiation. (Lanfrancus
lib. 1. contra Bereng.) This Berengarius was no great scholar, as Archbishop
Guido says, but very ambitious, and thought to acquire fame by his new opinion.
After twice recanting and returning to his heresy, in his last sickness
perceiving his end to draw near, John Gerson relates these his last words. My
God. Thou will this day appear to my salvation, as J hope, for my repentance;
or to my damnation, as I fear, for deceiving with pervers doctrine others whom
afterward I could not reduce to the truth of thy Sacrament.

In the 12. Century Jnnocent the second Bishop of Rome, condemned the heresy of
Peter Abaylard. (see S. Bernard. epist 194.) And Pope Eugenius 3. condemned the
error of Gilbert Porretanus in the Council of Rhems. (see S. Bern. sermon. 80.
in Cantica.)

In the 13. Century, Pope Innocent 3. condemned the error of Ioachim the Abbot,
in the Lateran Council. And afterward Pope Gregory 10. in the General
Council of Lions, condemned the Greeks error.

In the 14. Century Pope Clement 5. condemned the errors of the Begards, in the
Council of Vienna.

In the 15. Century the errors of John Hus, and John Whicliff were condemned in
the Council of Constance by Pope Martin 5. And the errors of the Greeks in the
Council of Florence, by Pope Eugenius 4.

Now what reason can Protestants give why Pius. 4. Bishop of Rome, and the
Council of Trent (though of his calling and party) might not condemn the
opinion of Protestants, as lawfully and legaly, as his Predecessors had don in
every age the like opinions of other Reformers? Both condemners and condemned
were Christians, for heretics must be baptized, otherwise they are rather
Pagans then heretics: The condemned Christians were often Patriarchs and
Bishops, sometimes as many as the Condemners; and yet neither could their Plea
of Christianity, or pretense of Scripture, or parity in dignity, or equality in
number, exempt them from the validity and legality of the Roman Censures, unto
which if they did not submit, all the Catholic world held them for obstinat
heretics. Therefore we may not, without contradicting both reason and
authority, the common sense of the Church, and the general custom of Christian
antiquity, allow the exceptions which Protestants plead against the Pope, and
the Council of his Bishops, that forsooth they are but a part of the Catholic
Church, and therefore as party concerned, incompetent Judges and witnesses in
controversies of Christian Religion.

We have seen the weakness and ill success of the protestant design in this
distinction of fundamental and not fundamental articles of faith, and how
they are rejected as heretics by the Greeck Schismatics, and other sectaries
whom they courted to be admitted as a part of their Church, we have also proved
the unreasonableness of their exceptions against the testimony and censures of
the Roman Bishops and Counsels: Now we will view the distinction it self, and
prove that by the protestant doctrine of fundamentalls, the very foundation of
Christian Religion is destroyed, and nothing believed with Divine faith.

SECT. XII. God's veracity is denied by Protestancy, and by the Prelatick
distinction and doctrine of fundamental and not fundamental articles of faith.
THe foundation of Christian Religion is, the belief of God's veracity. The
belief of God's veracity consists not only in acknowledging that whatsoever God
says, is true; (that was never denied by any heretic, and yet all heretics
deny his veracity) but consists in acknowledging also that whatsoever doctrine
is sufficiently proposed as spoken or revealed by God, is infallibly true, and
that God is the Author of the same. To avoid all disputes concerning the
sufficiency of the proposal of God's revelations, we will condescend so far to
our Protestants Adversaries, as to make themselves Judges thereof, provided they
will be so Religious and rational, as to grant, that to Divine Majesty ought
not be denied a prerogative which by the dictamen of reason, the laws of
nature, and the practice of themselves, and of all Nations, is due and
exhibited to Majesty, and Magistracy, and to all temporal Sovereigns; Viz. To
speak and declare their mind by the mouth of others, their inferior Officers
and Ministers; wherefore as subjects do judge it a sufficient proposal of the
regal authority, and confess them-selves are obliged to believe that their
Sovereign speaks and commands, when certain officers (known by the usual marks
and badges of their Master's Sovereignty, and their own military, or civil
charges) propose his orders, either by proclamation, letters patents, or
otherwise: so Protestants will acknowledge that all Christians are bound to
believe it i^ a sufficient proposal of the (...) existence of Divine
Revelation, and that God speaks or commands, whenever his mind is declared to
them by that Church, and Ministers, who bear (at least) as authentic marks
and badges of God's authority, and of their own ministry, to evidence their
trust and jurisdiction, as the Officers of state and Justice do in a Republic
or (...) Government: In a word, all that we desire of Protestants is, that they
will give as much credit and respect to God, as to Princes, and no less to the
Ministers of God's Church, then to Senators, or to the Officers of a King's
Court.

But their fundamental distinction dispenses with all such duties, and leads
them a quite contrary way; (...) not obliged to believe the mysteries of faith
as they are proposed by the Roman Catholic Church (though the said Church be
more authentickly waranted thereunto by God then any Ministers or Magistra^ are
waranted to (...) of state by their Prince) unless it be clearly evident (...)
(evidently credible will not serve their turn) that God revealed what the
Church proposes as his word and command. Such Doctrines of the Roman Church as
they fancy clear, or self evident, either by their own private spirit and
discourse, or by the unanimous and general acknowledgment of all Christians,
such and only such do Protestants believe as points of faith, and call them
fundamental articles, or articles necessary for salvation; all others either
they hold only as probable opinions, and things of indifferency, or reject as
superfluous and superstitious. And because the mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation are generally professed in these parts of Europe by all Christians
(though not by all in the Catholic sense, but with certain interpretations,)
Therefore the learned Prelatick Protestant Writers, both ancient and modern,
reduce all the articles, and the total sum of Catholic faith, and of the
four first general Counsels, to a belief of the Trinity and Incarnation;
that is to some Kind of faith (though it be but the Arian) in JESUS Christ the
Son of God, See Bishop Morton cit. and Bishop Tailor in his Dissuasive page 8.
edit. Dubl.
and Savior of the world, as Doctor Morton Bishop of Duresme, and others
teach, who upon this score maintain that the Arian Churches (and by consequence
all ancient heretics) are to be accounpted members of the Church of God: We
have quoted their words number. 3. of the precedent section.

That no King's Ministers, or Magistrates, have so authentic marks and badges
to evidence in them-selves their Master's authority for exercising their
respective charges, and jurisdictions, as the Roman Catholic Church has of
being entrusted and appointed by God to deliver his Divine doctrine, declare his
sense of Scripture, and decide Religious controversies, is manifest by the
signs and marks of God's Church, compared with the marks, and badges of Princes
Officiers. Omitting many other marks of the true Church, J will touch but
three, which are Conversion of Kings and Nations from paganism to Christianity;
Succession of Pastors, and doctrine, from the Apostles, to this present; and
miracles. All these are visible only in the Roman Catholic Church, and are
more authentic (because they cannot be easily counterfeited) then any human
evidences, even the most esteemed, which is the King's hand and Seal. To say
because some pretended miracles have bin impostures, no miracles at all are
true, or none ought to be credited, is no less unreasonable, then to cry down
all current money, because there is some falls coin, and is as ridiculous and
rebellious, as to disobey and reject all royal commissions and orders of
Council, because some may, or have bin counterfeited, and subreptitiously
obtained. But suppose (as Protestants pretend) that miracles were ceased; I
hope the Conversion of so many Nations and Kings of the Gentiles to
Christianity, and a continual succession of the Roman doctrine and Pastors, are
neither ceased, not counterfeited; no other Church but the Roman Catholic has
these signs of God's providence; and as non can deny but that they are more
convincing arguments, and greater evidences of the supernatural Ministry and
jurisdiction which the Roman Church does claim, then any human signs, badges,
or commissions can be of the Royal authority, exercised by King's officiers
either civil or military, so likewise it must be acknowledged that there is a
cleerer and greater obligation upon men to submit their judgments and wills to
the definitions and Decrees of the Roman Catholic Church and Counsels,
proposing or declaring God's revelations and commands, then there can be upon
subjects to obey the orders of temporal Souveraigns, published, or proclaimed
by their chief Ministers, and subordinat officers.

Protestancy is Heresy.
Therefore as it is notorious Rebellion in subjects against their King's
authority, to contemn his commands when they are proposed by Ministers that
show his commissions, so is it manifest heresy, and a denial of God's veracity,
to contemn or doubt of the doctrine proposed as Divine by the Roman Catholic
Church, so authentickly qualified with the aforesaid supernatural marks: And as
it is want of duty and alleigance in subjects, and a ridiculous excuse for not
obeying Orders, to pretend they have not clear evidence that the King signed
them* or (for all they know) that his Minister, or Officer may be an Impostor,
and his commission or warrant counterfeit, so must it be concluded want of
christian belief, and excess of heretical obstinacy in Protestants, to excuse
their contempt of the Roman Catholic doctrine, and authority, by pretending a
possibility of mistake in the same Church, because forsooth, they are not
convinced of it is infallibility, and authority by a Demonstration, or
revelation so evident, that though they would, they cannot deny it. Such
evidences are not necessary nor even compatible with Christian belief, as shall
be proved herafter: less are sufficient to convince them-selves and all
rational men of a strickt obligation to believe and obey a temporal Prince, and
Magistrate; and sure they are unreasonable if they imagine God deserves, less
belief, duty, and subjection, then Princes. That Protestants believe not their
own Churches, or Congregations, with out doubts and fears of being mistaken in
the reformed doctrine, and authority of proposing the same, we do not admire,
because not any on of their churches does pretend to infallibility, nor could
hitherto, or can yet show any sign or seal of God for their sense of
Scripture, or reformations; but that they should think them-selves obliged to
take a Herald or Trompeters Coat, and a Constable or Cathpol's staff, and
other such badges (so easily counterfeited) for sufficient evidences of the
King's authority, and yet except against the authentickness of the conversion
of Kings and Nations, the Succession and sanctity of Pastors, and doctrine of
the Roman Catholic Church. Which are things that cannot be counterfeited, must
needs be the effect of prejudice and passion, proceeding from want of
christianity, especialy when they see that others as learned, cautious, and
conscientious, as them-selves, after weighing all objections and circumstances,
submit their judgments to the sufficiency of these signs, for making the Roman
Catholic authority authentickly Divine, and that we believe what is proposed,
with out the least suspicion or fear either of fraud or frailty in the Roman
Catholic Counsels, which are the Proposers and Ministers of God's word.

Besides; if Protestants did consider the nature of Veracity,and God's
Providence, Protestancy contradicts God's veracity.
they would never doubt of the application of his power to preserve the Roman
Catholic Church from error, seeing it has so many signs of his truth and
Ministry, as the conversion of Nations, succession and Sanctity of doctrine and
Doctors, miracles, unity of faith, etc. For, Veracity (as Aristotle and all
Philosophers define it) is a Virtue inclining to speak truth: And he is not
inclined to speak truth that countenanceth falsehood in so particular a manner
as God does the doctrine and jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Church. A King
that might, if he would and yet does not hinder his Ambassadors, and Ministers,
or any other persons, from abusing other Princes, or his own Subjects by their
speaking or commanding in his Majesty's name, or at least in speaking
other-wise then he really intended they should, and had prescribed by his
commission or instructions; such a King I say, is not inclined to speak truth,
because he willingly permits his officers, or others that pretend to speak in
his name (or really do speak by his Orders) to utter falsehood, and misinterpret
his words and meaning, notwithstanding that he may easily prevent that fraud
and frailty, and reapeth no benefit by either, an evident argument that he is
not avers to such false practices. No Protestant doubts but that my Lord
Chancellor speaks truly the King's mind and sense when he pursues his Majesty's
speech in Parliament in his Royal presence, and hearing; and to think
other-wise, would be not only to tax my Lord Chancellor with folly, but the
King with an inclination to falsehood, and a fault unbeseeming the dignity of a
Prince, the care and charge of the Country's Father, as also the sincerity and
veracity of an honest man.

The infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church in matters of faith, proved
against Protestants.
Seeing therefore God is as much inclined to speak truth as any thing can be to
love it self (for God is truth by essence) if it be against the dignity of a
Prince, and against the nature of human veracity and honesty, (which is but a
shadow of the Divine) to permit falsehood in Ministers of state or in servants
sent but of ordinary errands, when their Masters can easily prevent it; how
much more repugnant must it be to the nature of God, and to his Divine
veracity, to permit the Roman Church, in his own presence, name, and hearing,
tell lies, and disguise them and it self, with so probable and plausible signs
of his Divine truth, and Commission, as to seal it is doctrine with marks, and
miracles so undeniably supernatural, that the most learned Protestants
acknowledge they are, and can only bewrought by God's power? light can as little
concur to produce darkness, as truth to favor falsehood. Even men that love
truth, hate to hear others tell lies, and do contradict untruths, if
them-selves be present, and quoted for Authors of the stories; They will not
entertain servants given to that vice, nor permit them wear their livery, much
less employ them in matters of concern, wherein they may abuse their Master's
word and prejudice his friends, or Tenants.

Can Protestants then imagine that God does not only permit the Roman Catholic
Church to wear his livery, and his authority, but that he does promote the
stories, and lies of that Church (in case it is doctrine be falls,) for the space
of so many ages with so great signs and testimonies of his Divine approbation,
that the wisest and wairiest men of the world (after much study and
examination) did, and do still prefer it before all other Religions? Do they
think that God is not as much concerned in preventing frauds, faults, and
frailties in his Ministers, and Messengers, as temporal Princes are concerned
in the credit, and truth of theirs? Wherefore if Protestants judge it a breach of
faith, or want of truth and worth in a temporal Prince not to endeavor (to the
utmost of his power) that his Ministers and messengers deceive not his
subjects, and Allies, by mistaking, or misapplying his Commands, or demands;
they can not but see the absurdity of believing that God does permit Ministers,
and Messengers so supernaturaly qualified as those of the Roman Church are, to
err in proposing his revelations unto all man kind; his Veracity being as
highly concerned in the infallibility of the Proposers, as his power makes him
capable of preventing their human mistakes, and of confounding the Devill's
malice.

But Protestants have found out a new device, The Protestant doctrine of
fundamentalls confuted
and defense of their distinction. They grant it is against God's Veracity to
permit the Roman Catholic Church to err in proposing the Fundamental articles
of faith, that is, such articles as Protestants fancy absolutely necessary for
salvation; which are (say they) that Scripture is the word of God, and JESUS
Christ the son of God, and Redeemer of the world, some add the Mystery of the
Trinity: (hitherto we could never obtain from them a more exact Cathalogue of
their Protestant Fundamentals) As for the other doctrines of the Roman
Catholic Church (...) and proposed as Divine, Protestants think they may be
denied and questioned, without any offense to God, denial or doubt of his
veracity. I could never hear any other reason, or disp^rity for this their
distinction, but that the measure of the infallibility of the Church ought to
be our salvation, because it was the end proposed by God in the institution and
constitution of his Church.

In such articles therefore (say they) as are absolutely necessary for salvation,
the Church cannot but be infallible in the proposal; otherwise we could not
believe them (and consequently not be saved) because we can not be sure that
God revealed them.

But this their Fundamental distinction still destroys the foundation of
Christian belief, which is God's veracity. They make their own convenience, and
not God's veracity, the motive of crediting the Mysteries of faith; as if truth
it self, or God's inclination to speak truth, could be greater in on matter
then other; or that the belief of any article could be more Fundamental, or of
greater importance, and necessity for salvation, then to believe that God is as
much concerned and as necessarily inclined to speak truth as well by the mouth
of his Church, as if him-self spoke immediately, as well also in the least
matter, as in the greatest; and by consequence he is as much engaged to
preserve the Church from error in on, as in the other. So that to believe the
testimony or proposal of the Church in a matter absolutely necessary for
salvation, and not to believe it in a matter not absolutely necessary (when
equaly proposed by the same testimony, and authority) is as much as to say,
that God can speak by his Church, little untruths, but not great untruths, or
that he may permit his veracity to be violated, or vitiated in little, but not
in great matters; as if forsooth, the authority and infallibility of the Church
were to be measured by the matter it proposes, and not by the manner and
supernatural marks of the proposal and by the dignity of the speaker.

More over; their pretense of the Churches fallibility in not Fundamental
articles, has no solid ground; for the Protestant Church is either fallible or
infallible in saying so, and in it is doctrine of Fundamentals; if fallible, non
can prudently rely thereupon, either in this, or in any other matters of faith;
if infallible, then the Protestant distinction of Fundamentals must be a
fundamental article of faith, because they admit not any Church to be
infallible in articles that are not fundamental. And yet the same Protestants
say the Roman Catholic Church is also infallible in fundamentals; but the
Roman Catholic, and Protestant Church contradict on the other in this doctrine
of fundamentals, Therefore one of both must err; and that on must be the
Protestant, because it maintains that two Churches teaching contradictory
doctrins, may both be infallible therein. Add hereunto, that if the Roman
Catholic Church be infallible in fundamentals, or in all articles necessary
for salvation, how can Protestants excuse their reformation and separation,
from the guilt of a grievous sin, and schism? so uncharitable a breach is not
justifiable by less then damnable or dangerous doctrine in the Church that is
forsaken; And what damnable doctrine or danger of damnation could, or can be in
adhearing to the Roman Church, it being confessedly infallible in Fundamentals;
that is, in all things necessary for salvation?

If therefore God's veracity is denied (even according to the Protestants
doctrine and distinction) by saying that the Church is fallible in fundamentals,
it can be for no other reason, but because the fundamental articles are
sufficiently proposed by the Church as revealed by God; and seeing the not
fundamental articles are proposed by the same Church and testimony, and (by
consequence) as sufficiently as the fundamental, Protestants must grant that
God's veracity is no less denied by maintaining the fallibility of the Church
in not Fundamentals, then in Fundamentals. So that they must either acknowledge
the infallibility of the Church in all articles and matters of faith, whether
absolutely necessary, or not necessary for salvation; or deny God's veracity,
and the foundation of all Christian belief.

SECT. XIII. The same further demonstrated, and proved, that neither the
Protestant faith, nor the faith lately asserted in a book called sure footing
in Christianity, is Christian belief: where also is treated of the resolution
of faith.
NOt the ma^^er believed, but the Motive and manner of believing, makes a
belief Christian. There may be an historical, or imaginary faith of Christ, as
well as Divine and real; that is, men may believe the mysteries of
Christianity, (...) they believe the roman history, and fancy that such a
belief is not human, but Divine. This we maintain to be the Protestants case
and faith, which is not grounded upon Divine revelation, but upon human
persuasion and upon an imaginary evidence of God's revelation. They assent not
to the mystery of the Trinity, or to any other, because God revealed it, but
because they think it undeniably evident (either by the public confession of
all Christians, or by the private suggestion of their own spirit, or by the
principles of natural reason, or by their pretended cleerness of Scripture)
that God revealed such mysteries as they are pleased to make choice of, for the
Articles or fundamentals of their Reformations. And therefore according to the
diversity of the evidences whereupon they build their faith, the Protestant
sects are framed, and divided, into Prelaticks, whose Motive and evidence is
the concurrence of all Christians in their fundamentals of Christianity; and
into Fanatiks (amongst whom we include Presbiterians etc.) who rely upon the
evidence of their spirit, and the cleerness of Scripture; and into Socinians,
who make evident reason the rule of their Religion etc.

That these Protestant persuasions are not grounded upon Divine revelation, or
upon God's Authority, and veracity, we prove, because it is impossible to make
an authority the motive of our belief, unless we believe all things that are
equaly proposed and delivered to us as depending of, and asserted by that
authority. St. Austin says non can believe that the Ghospel of St. Matthew is
the word of God, unless he does likewise believe that the Acts of the Apostles
is the word of God; because they are both delivered as God's word by the same
authority. The same testimony, and the same visible Church which delivered to
the first Protestants the mystery of the Trinity and Incarnation, as revealed
by God, delivered also to them Transubstantiation, Purgatory etc. as revealed
by God; and they or their followers can not pretend to have any other testimony
for the engagement of God's veracity, in certifying them of the truth, and
revelation of the articles they retain, but the same testimony which delivered
to them the articles they reject. Therefore the reality and Divinity of the
revelation being equally testified and applicable by on and the same testimony
to both articles, as well to the retained as to the rejected, it is impossible
that Protestants can believe those they reta^^^, moved thereunto by God's
veracity, or for being revealed by God; seeing the same veracity, and revelation
is equally and as clearly applied by the testimony of the Catholic visible
Church to the other articles which they reject as not revealed.

If you ask a learned Protestant why does he believe the mystery of the
Trinity, or Incarnation? He will answer (as all Heretics ever did as well as
Catholics) because God revealed it? But if you inquire further, why does he
believe that God revealed it? He will tell you, because it is manifest in (...)

SVBSECT I.
I Am right sorry to number among Protestants and Manichees (who hold also
this error of believing nothing which they did not fancy to be self evident)
the Author of a book called sure footing in Christianity who will needs have it
self evident (by virtue forsooth of tradition) that God revealed all the points
of our Roman Catholic doctrine. Jt's pity he stumbled so irrecoverably at his
very first step, pretending to see so clearly, and tread so surely upon a plain
ground: had he bin as wary in the choice of his principles, as he is witty in
deducing his conclusions, I should have followed him as an excellent Guide; but
he striving to raise Christian faith unto a greater height of evidence then is
consistent with it is nature, and with our merit and liberty, or convenient for
the Government of God's Church, he has fallen into the Fundamental error, and
foundation of Protestancy, but yet with this difference, that albeit he agrees
with Protestants in making clear evidence of the revelation, the ground or rule
of faith, and by consequence in destroying all Christian belief, yet he takes a
contrary way from them: Protestants by reducing their evidence to very few
points, reject most of the articles of the Roman Catholic Church, as
incredible; but the Author of the sure footing, by amplifying, and applying his
evidence to every article of our faith, makes them all more then credible, that
is self evident. He and Protestants agree in the rule, but differr in the
application. Neither of them will believe any thing but what they fancy
evident; but on party fancies all is evident; the other fancies little or
nothing is evident. Jf they understand on another, they may soon come to an
accord, and the sequel of their principle will be, to take away all Christian
belief: for Christian belief must of necessity involue some obscurity in that
Act (or at least formality) whereby we assent unto the mystery believed.
Otherwise if the essence, or nature of Christian faith were consistent with
clear evidence, and with the want of all obscurity, why may it not be said that
the blessed have faith in heaven? nay, why may it not be said that the second
person of the Trinity has ^aith ab (...), if it be sufficient for faith that
on assent^ to truth for (...), and speaking of an other, though (...) evidently
(...), and sees also that the other speaks.

The sure footing therefore does fail and (...) ^eason of the Author's
confounding the evidence of our obligation to believe the articles proposed by
the Church, with the eviden^e of God's, revealing them by the (...) proposal of
the Church. The testimony of the Church confirmed by so many supernatural
signs, makes it clearly evident to us, that we are bound to believe, God
revealed all the doctrine delivered as his* by the tradition and testimony of
the Church; but the tradition or signs of the Church do not make (...) or self
(...) that God has de facto revealed (...), which the Church proposes as
Divine. It is moraly evident that God revealed it, but not Metaphysicaly
evident, according to Schoolmens expression. This moral evidence of God's
revealing what the Church proposes, induces a cl^^r and evident obligation
upon the will and soul of man to adheare* as vnalterably to the doctrine of the
Church, as if we had metaphysical or clear evidence that God revealed the same;
and the motive of our faith, and of this adhesion is God's veracity; because it
is manifest by the very light of Nature that we ought to believe God would not
permit such a miraculous and moral evidence of his own revealing, or speaking
the mysteries of christianity by the mouth of our Church unless he did realy
speak by the same Church. For want of this doctrine and distinction, many
understand not how a man can possibly or at least prudently adheare or assent
to an object with greater assurance then he sees clear reason for. If by clear
reason for an assent of Divine faith, be meant that the truth of the mystery
assented unto, must of necessity be clear to the Assenter either in it self, or
in it is necessaire connection with the Revelation, it is a gross mystake; for
that the difference between an assent grounded upon clear evidence of the
truth, or of reason, and an assent grounded upon Divine authority is, that the
first is a clear intellectual sight of the truth itself, the second is not so,
but a clear sight of our own obligation of assenting to the truth revealed or
related, because we see clear and convincing signs of the sincerity and
veracity of the Author or relator. Now our obligation of believing God to be
the Author of the doctrine of the Church, being evident to ourselves, we are
bound to assent to the same Doctrine according to the evidence of our
obligation, that is with greather assurance then appearance of the truth. The
evidence of our obligation to assent, is a sufficient ground for our assurance
of the truth assented unto.

Wherefore albeit some Catholic Divines have pretended to maintain in their
school disputations, See Ariagae* disp. 4. de fide sec. 4. per totum*
that God by the infinitness of his supernatural power, may concur to an Act
of faith, though the existence of the revelation itself were evident to the
believer; yet (besides that most of them speak irresolutly, and incoherently in
that point) they all grant that our Christian faith must always involve
obscurity in it is assent, and that that faith which would have evidence both of
the existence of the revelation, and of the revealers veracity, would be an
other kind of faith much differring from our Christian and Catholic. Besides:
we ought to consider that it is one thing to dispute in schools of what God
may do, and an other thing to believe in the Church what he has don. In the
schools they dispute even of impossibilities, because they make it their
business to exercise wit in speculations; but in the Catholic Church our
chief business consists in believing and practicing (...)

The reason why Faith does require a mixture of obscurity, or want of clear
evidence* is, because to believe, is to trust him whom you believe for the
truth signified by his words; and if you did see the truth in it self, or know
that it cannot be separated from the words spoken, you can no more trust the
speaker for the truth so connected with his words, then trust him for the
money, you know to be contained in a purse, which he delivers unto your hands:
for though you do not see the money, you see the purse, wherein you have clear
evidence the money is contained. To believe therefore, is to take on's word for
the truth (as you do his bond or bill for money) for which you have no other
security but his worth and veracity; and the greater ons worth, and veracity
is, the more you ought to rely upon it, and doubt the less of his performance;
and therefore if you require any greater assurance, or evidence of the truth,
then his supposed inclination to the same, or his veracity, you do him a great
injury, and resolve not to trust, or believe him. Wherefore God's worth
veracity, or inclination to truth, being infinite, we ought not to exact a clear
sight of the truth it self, nor of any things evidently connected therewith; if
we do, we neither trust nor believe him: his inclination therefore to truth
being infinite, we ought not to retain the least suspicion or fear of being
deceived either by himself, or by the Church whereunto he gives the charge and
signs of declaring and proposing his word to us: because he who is infinitely
inclined to speak truth, is inclined to do it, not only when himself speaks,
but every way that truth can be spoken, or by every person and Organ that may
be prudently taken to speak by his commission. The Roman Church therefore being
prudently taken for the Organ of God's voice, it is as impossible we should be
misledd by it is doctrine, as it is that God should go against his infinite
inclination to truth, or should violat his own veracity. Had God's veracity bin
limited to his own personal, or immediate speech, and not extended to
what-soever he delivers by the mouth and ministry of others and of his Church,
it had not bin infinite, his credit would have ended with Christ's preaching to
the Apostles; and though they were bound to believe their Master, non could be
obliged to believe them. But seeing God's veracity is infinite, and his words
must continue for ever, they can be as little confined to the persons or
Pastors of any on certain age, as infinite veracity to on particular truth, or
infinite excellency and goodness to any one degree of perfection. Now seeing that
God's worth and veracity, or his infinite inclination to speak truth, cannot be
greatet in on matter, nor in on age, then in an other; and that according to
on's inclination to any thing, must be the application of his power to effect
it, we must conclude that God is as much engaged by his worth and goodness, and
as much inclined by his veracity, and as much applied by his omnipotency, to
speak truth by the mouth of the Church, The infallibility of the Church proved
by God's veracity.
as by his own, and in the least matter as much as in the greatest, and in
every succeeding age as in that of the Apostles, and that unless his worth,
wisdom, veracity, goodness, and omnipotency fail, that Church which bears
the miraculous marks of his authority, and exercises his ministry, must be
infallible in proposing and declaring his will and word in all Controversies
whatsoever. So that they who grant the Church (...) infallible only in
fundamental articles of faith, deny God^ ^oodness, worth, veracity, and
omnipotency: and they who believe not the doctrine of the Roman Catholic
Church, as the word of God, (because forsooth, they have not clear evidence,
that it is the word of God) do no more believe, nor trust God in the other they
assent unto, then he who says he believes and trusts a man, whose word or
writing he will not take for 100. pounds, unless he delivers to him at the same
time that sum of money not only sealed, but seen in a bag.

The reason of this last assertion is clear; because one of the differences
between the word of God and the word of men is, that you mistrust men for the
truth, though you hear their own voice, and have evidence that they speak, the
imperfection of their nature, making their speech subject to falsehood, and
themselves to frailty, therefore we may mistrust their veracity, and doubt they
be mistaken, or deceive us, though they pretend and profess to speak nothing
but truth. It is not so with God, whose nature being infinitely perfect, and
truth it self, it is manifest by natural reason that he can neither be
mistaken, nor deceive us by his words, and by consequence if we knew evidently
that him-self speaks, or that the words or doctrine uttered by the Church, are
his, we can no more mistrust or not believe him, then mistrust his Deity, or
fear a flaw in his perfections, and fraud in his proceedings. So that
Protestants resolving not to believe the doctrine of the Church of Rome (made
sufficiently credible by supernatural signs to be Divine) until it be made
clearly evident to them that it is the word of God, resolve their faith into
heretical obstinacy, because they resolve, not to believe or trust God, that
evidence which they exact, not being compatible with the merit, trust,
obscurity, and obsequiousness of Christian belief, nor with the duty of
rational Creatures. Heresy explained by Rebellion.
They may be compared to some Irish or Scotch Rebels, refusing to obey the
King's Lieu-tenant, and Commissioners, because for-sooth they have not clear
evidence, that the commissions and commands are signed by the King, though they
see his Majesty's hand and seal for the authority set over them, which also is
obeyed and acknowledged by the better sort, and greater part of both Nations,
yet the Rebels will not submit to any Orders, unless the King leave England,
go in person to rule them, and satisfy every particular fellow, that he has
named such a Lieu-tenant or Commissioner, or unless his Majesty will immediately
by him-self exercise his royal Jurisdiction, sign and seal his commissions in
their sight. etc.

Some will think there is a great disparity in the comparison; The
unreasonableness of them who pretend a private spirit, and refuse to submit to
the authority of the Church, for want of cleerer evidence then the Roman
Catholic has of God's authority.
for that God may without trouble or prejudice to him-self reveal his will and
pleasure to every particular person, which Kings can no more do, then be in
many places at one time. Therefore what inconveniency can it be that God make
evident to every particular person, either by a clear sign of his presence, or
by an evident proof of his spirit, which doctrine is Divine, which not, without
obliging men to believe that the Roman Catholic or any other Church is
infallible and can not propose falsehood for God's word? To this we answer, that
God might not only reveal his mysteries, to every person, but save us also
without subordination to any Church or Pastors, or dependency of Sacraments;
but all Christians agree that he has bin pleased not to do so, so that the
question is not what he could have don, but what he has don. But it appears by
the light of reason, that there is a certain distance, and decorum due to
Majesty and superiority, by virtue whereof God, (or even a Creature, that is
supreme in any government) may command his inferiors and subjects by subordinat
officers, and warant these officer's authority by some outward signs and
seals of his Sovereignty, which signs (though they may be possibly
counterfeited, yet) oblige the People so governed to obey Ministers so
qualified, as submissively as if him-self had immediately delivered his own
commands. Wherefore though it were possible that a King might without trouble
write, and deliver all his o^ders immediately, or without the assistance of
Secretaries, Ministers, and Messengers, yet it were not fit; And why the
Protestant Doctors that write of this subject, should think fit, that God ought
to deprive him-self of a decency, and decorum (due even to human Majesty) to
humor their curiosity, or to comply with their obstinacy, J can not
comprehended, nor attribute to any other thing but to want of humility, and
excess of heresy, the malice whereof consists in contemning God's authority, and
denying his veracity when sufficiently appearing in the Church; and though not
self evidently, yet so convincingly as to make our obligation of submitting
thereunto, evident. It is therefore agross absurdity to think, or say, that the
reverence due to the Divine authority, obliges us, not to submit, or not
assent thereunto, unless it be more then moraly evident (and by consequence more
them sufficiently evident) unto us, that we can not be mistaken in our
submission, or assent. For, hence would follow, the greater the authority is,
the more slow we ought to be in submitting thereunto, or (which is the same) the
more inclined God is to truth and the more powerful he is to practice the same
and to keep the Church stedy to truth, the more slow we ought to be, in
believing the Church or God's known Ministers and Messengers.

SECT. XIV. Reasons for liberty of Conscience; and how much both Piety and
Policy is mistaken in making Prelatick Protestancy the Religion of the state by
continuing and pressing the sanguinary and penal statutes against the Roman
Catholic faith, and the Act of uniformity against sectaries.
THere is not any thing more damnable to souls, or more dangerous to states,
then to make the laws of the land, the rule of faith, and temporal statuts the
ground of spiritual jurisdiction. It is endeed Christian piety to fence and
favor Religion with Imperial edicts, and Royal Decrees; and therefore it was
prophesied of the Church, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
Mothers; Esaias. 49.28.
but to found the belief of eternal verities and of Christian Religion upon
temporal statuts, and to frame the doctrine of the Church, and the Caracter of
the Clergy according to Acts of Parliament, and to the interest of the Prince
is neither piety nor policy in lawful, and undoubted Sovereigns. What Queen
Elizabeth did to salve the sore of her illegitimacy was as great a prejudice
(and ought as little be made a president) to the royal family of the Stewards,
as Oliver Cromwell's Tyrany; the laws and Religion of both, equaly tending to
it is total ruin, and exclusion from the Crown, with this only difference, that
Queen Elizabeth destroyed the Stewards, by reforming the Old Religion, whereupon
their right was grounded, but Cromwell destroyed them by reforming the New
Religion, whereunto they had conformed, and whereby they endeavored to setle
their Throne.

And indeed Souveraigns can expect no greater security, or better success then
the Royal family of the Stewards has had, whilst the Religion which their
Subjects profess, has no other certainty, or setlement, but what is received
from an arbitrary interpretation of Scripture, confirmed by temporal statuts.
That the Protestant prelatick Religion has no other rule but this, and the
laws of the Lands, is manifest by so many changes of it is articles, liturgy,
caracter, and Translations of Scripture, by public and Parliamentory
authority; That it has no certainty from it is own principle^* is manifest by
the acknowledged fallibility of that Church, and by the liberty of interpreting
God's word, and by the prerogative of judging controversies of faith which the
Tenets of all the Reformations and example of the first Reformers allow to any
particular person, that will claim the privilege of a reformed Christian, or
the spirit of a godly or guifted Protestant.

This liberty of professing, and the uncertainty of protestancy, having proved
in all places and persons whereunto it had access, a seed of rebellion,
destructive not only of the substance of Religion, but of the tie of
alleigance; it was thought necessary for the preservation of Princes, and the
peace of their subjects, to reduce the variety (and regulat the extravagancy)
of the dissenting reformed doctrines, into public professions of protestancy,
as suitable to the interest of the souveraigns, and inclinations of the
subjects, and customs of their Countries, as could be devised. And because the
government of England continued Monarchical, and that Episcopacy does favor
Monarchy, and is essential to Parliaments, the protestancy of the Church of
England was made prelatick, notwithstanding, the incoherency of Episcopacy with
the very foundation of the first and pure pretended reformations. And seeing
there is such antipathy between the caracter of Episcopacy, and the principles
of protestancy, that the Church of England in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
reign durst not claim that caracter, or any spiritual jurisdiction, by
succession from the Apostles, and their successors the ensuing Catholic
Bishops, it was content to receive both, as also the confirmation of it is
prelatick doctrine, from an unheard of spiritual supremacy of a lay Prince, and
from Acts of Parliament; and so was it made the legal Religion of the state,
contrary to the principles both of the ancient Catholic faith and of the new
protestant reformations.

How contrary this setlement of prelatick protestancy by a persecution of
Popery, is to Christian piety, may easily appear to them who will remember
what has bin said hertofore of the sanctity, antiquity, and continual
succession of the Roman Catholic Religion from the Apostles to this present,
and reflect upon the principles, beginning, and progress, of protestancy in
general, and of the prelatick in particular. How inconsistent with policy it
is, to press by the severity of laws a profession so generally dislik't, as the
prelatick (it being contrary to the ancient Religion, and not agreeing with the
new Reformations) experience has demonstrated, when not only all foreign Roman
Catholic Princes and people stood neuters, (not much concerned whether
Protestant Prelacy, or Presbytery should prevail in England; they pitied
indeed the Royal family, and wished them good success against their rebellious
subjects, but this they wished to them as Princes, not as Prelatiks) not only,
Isay, foreign Catholics were neuters, but all the Protestant Churches abroad
were more inclined to favor the Presbiterian and fanatic English and Scotch
Congregations, then the King's Religion; for that they come nearer to them and
to the primitive and fundamental principles of Protestancy.

The reason why the Prelatick persuasion is so odious to the reformed Churches
abroad, and so opposed by Presbiterians and other Protestant Congregations at
home, is, because the formality of it is ceremonies, and the legality of it is
discipline are incompatible with the primitive spirit, liberty, and principles
of protestancy. The protestant Bishops would fain Lord it over their brethren,
not content with the name and power of Protestant superintendents, they strive
to imitat the authory and severity of the Catholic Episcopal jurisdiction, in
their Courts, and do what they can to retain a ceremonious decency in there
Churches, but neither is agreeable with the nature and spirit of the Protestant
Reformations, which consist in an independency and exemption from all spiritual
superiority and ceremony of a particular person being supreme Judge and
Interpreter of Scripture. This spiritual judicature is the spiritual
birthright of every Protestant, and the ground whereupon Luther and his
followers raised their reformations, and their new sense of the Ghospel.
Wherefore the res^rai^ of this Protestant evangelical liberty, and birthright,
by the rigor of our laws in favor of the prelatick jurisdiction, and
discipline, must needs make the lawmakers and their religion as odious to all
zealous Protestants, as liberty of opinion and fancied Scripture are dear to a
stubborn and humor^om peop^^*

Let it then be maturely considered whether any thing can be more dangerous to
the safety of the Sovereign, or to the tranquillity of the state, then to enact
laws in a protestant Commonweal, or Kingdom, whereby the very foundation and
birthright of Protestancy is made penal, and the most Religious observers of
the protestant rule of faith are rendered incapable of all employments both in
Church and state? And that all this violence is practiced to support a Creed,
the 39. articles of a doubtful sense, and a Clergy of a doubtful caracter, even
according to their own prelatick principles, and according to the primitive
principles of protestancy, and to vphould a Church that professes it is own
fall and fallibility, and therefore (for all it self knows) is no true Church,
but may be mistaken in it is doctrine, and lead all that rely upon it is
ministry, and instruction, into eternal damnation, and can give no
satisfaction, or security to such as are of their communion, nor produce any
thing for justifying the severity of these proceedings, but a Parliaments Act
of uniformity, and other temporal statuts. To which every Presbiterian and
fanatic does answer, that laws enacted in favor of Religion, do suppose, not
make, the Religion reasonable; for, though reason be the ground of all human
laws, yet no human laws can be the ground of Religion.

When all this is maturely considered, it will doubtless appear to be a sad
case, that a poor man who desires to be saved, and informed of the true
Church, and of Christ's doctrine, and conform himself thereunto, shall be
compelled by forfeitures imprisonment and banishment etc. to the prelatick
do^trin and Church of England, and shall have no other reason (...) redress
given him for this violence, and punishments, but that he does not conform to
the Religion established by the laws of the Land. So much was alleged for
the Idols, and Religion of the Pagan Emperous, and upon the same ground (of
law) did they persecute the primitive Christians; Doubtless all Quakers,
Presbiterians, and non Conformists think themseves as glorious sufferers, as
the holy primitive Martyrs and Confessors; which persuasion in so great and
zealous a multitude, can not be void of danger, and ought to be remedyed more
by reason then rigor; for though from Roman Catholics (whose principles are
peaceable, and incline them to suffer persecution with patience) no great
prejudice may be feared (if they will be directed by their profession) yet
experience has taught, that all Protestant sectaries have inherited from their
first Patriarchs Luther, Calvin, Crammer etc. the spirit of sedition and
rebellion, which is involved in the very foundation of protestancy; Luther
openly declared so much at the Diet of Worms in presence of the Emperor
Charles 5. (Who had objected against him tumults and disorders as undeniable
effects of his doctrine) misapplying the words of our savior, Non veni pacem
mittere, sed gladium, as if dissension, and rebellion had bin a mark of the
true Ghospel. On the other side, the Presbiterians do imitate the bloody
proceedings and principles of their (...) Fathers Zuinglius and Calvin, in
deposing of Kings, Suinglius lib. 4. Epist.
and Magistrates, and make good the saying of Zuinglius, Evangelium vult
sanguinem, the Reformation must be maintained by blood. So that the sanguinary
statuts in favor of prelatick protestancy, and the bloody principles of
Presbitery in in pursuance of their seditious spirit, clashing together, will
make fine work among Christians and the prelatick Clergy, which ought by their
admonitions and censures, to compose these disorders, and be Authors of peace,
are despised as no Clergy, and their caracter is made the subject of discord,
and dispute. And the Protestant Bishops, which ought to exercise the authority
whereunto they pretend, retire, and recurr to the (...) Courts for the
spirituality, as well as for the legality of their jurisdiction and function,
and confess in plain terms their Churches frailty and fallibility in doctrine,
and leave the state to shift for it self, deprived of th^^^ helps which
Catholic Princes receive from the Roman Church and Clergys censures, wherewith
rebellious subjects are terrified, and (...), or return to their duty.

SVBSECT I.
NEither is the danger of disturbing the tranquillity of the state for
supporting the Prelatick doctrine and caracter by temporal laws, confined only
to Presbiterians and Fanatiks; the Prelatiks them-selves (if interest prevail
not more with them then conscience, and coherency) can not but change their
Religion into a contrary persuasion, when they observe, that the mean between
Popery and Presbytery (wherein they place Prelatick protestancy, and the truth
of christianity) has no solid foundation, or color of reason. For what can be
more absurd then to pretend, that as moral virtue is a mean or mixture of two
extremes, so the truth of Christian Religion is a mean between two contrary
opinions, or a mixture of Popery, and Presbitery, which are two extremes
involving contradictory Tenets. Morality, I confess is a mediocrity and a kind
of Mixture: For, liberality (for example) does seem to participat some thing
of covetousness, and some thing of prodigality, which are extreme different;
but Christianity being truth and Divine truth, is no mean between the two, but
one of the two extremes; it is no mixture, because truth admits no mixture of
falsehood; nor division, it can be but on one side. Therefore when a Presbiterian
or Fanatic says, that Scripture is the only rule of faith, and Judge of
Controversies, the Catholic says it is not; not both, but one of them speaks
truth, Yet the Prelatick would f^ain stand like a Christian moderator or neuter
between both parties, and reconcile their Contradictions, by reducing them to a
third doctrine, or to a mean between truth and falsehood: and the mean is, to
grant both the contradictory propositions, and collogue with both sides.

And indeed that is the mean, wherein Prelatick Protestancy does consist; when
their writers defend it against Presbiterians, they grant the doctrine of
Papists; when they answer and (...) against Papists, they maintain the doctrine
of Presbiterians, for there is no other mean to reconcile, or be reconciled to
contradictions, but to maintain both. And this was the custom of Luther,
Calvin, Cranmer, etc. and is the ordinary practice of the ablest Prelaticks in
their books of Controversy. I remit you to one of their greatest Champions, my
Lord Bishop of Down, in his Dissuasive from Popery; you need not run through
the whole book, read but his first Section, and you will hear him say first,
that Scripture alone is the foundation or rule of faith, and after, that it is
not; Then again, that it is nothing else but Scripture together with the Creeds,
and the four first Counsels. It is as impossible therefore that a (...) man
should be in his judgment a Prelatick Protestant, as it is he should believe
that God revealed contradictions. Wherefore if interest and convenience has not
a greater (...) upon his profession of faith, then conscience, or coherency
(even to the principles of the Reformation) he will not continue a prelatick,
nor make temporal statuts his rule of faith, but will either (according to the
prudent dictamen of a good conscience) become a Roman Catholic, or (according
to the rigor of the purest Protestant consequences) become a rank
Presbiterian, or Fanatic.

I report me therefore to the judgment of all moderat and sober persons, whether
it be piety or policy, to engage the authority of a Protest^^^ sovereign, and
Parliament, in (...) the severity of laws against subjects for not professing
the prelatick Reformation, which the most learned men thereof can not maintain
without granting manifest contradictions, (...) practice without condemning the
fundamental principles (...) Protestancy? I must confess that the Presb^^erian,
Fanatic, or any other arbitrary Religion (that is Religion directed by the
letter of Scripture, subject to every man's private interpretation) will at
length destroy the state, if there be not a limit set to the indiscreet zeal,
and extravagant f^ncies of every particular person, and Congregation that (...)
to the purity of a Reformation, but I can hardly believe that temporal laws
are a proper and efficatious means to refrain that spiritual liberty, which
(according to the Principles of protestancy) is due by the Ghospel to every
Protestant, and not subject to any human authority. Brentius in Confess.
Wittemb. cap. de Sacra Script. and in Prologo. contra Petru^ a S^to.


As for that much celebrated, and generaly practiced expedient and distinc^^on
of Brentius, and the Divines of Wittemberg, saying, that though it belongs to
every private person to judge of Doctrine and Religion, and to distinguish the
true from falls; yet between the Prince and private man is this difference, that
as the private man has private authority of judging, and deciding the doctrine of
Religion, so the Prince has public. And through-out the whole book does
defend that the secular Prince is obliged to force his subjects (even with
punishment of death) to that Religion and sense of Scripture which he judges
true, and also that the subjects are bound to stick to their own contrary sense
of Scripture, and Religion; this expedient, I say, does not prevent the
danger, or remedy the desease of a politic body, sick of protestancy, but
does increase the distemper and renders it incurable. And though in some parts
of our more northern Climat, several Protestant Princes have purchased some
quiet by the severity of their laws, in favor of the sects which they profess,
yet that quiet, proceeding from want of curiosity in the people of examining
the truth, or from want of courage to profess it, we can not expect in the
English Monarchy the like acquiescense, and success; the British Nations are
naturaly serious, and scrupulous in the scrutin^ of Religion, and either
zealous, or seditious in the maintenance thereof. Wherefore it imports no less
then the peace of these nations, that the Act of uniformity be not the rule of
their Religion.

Seeing therefore it is the nature of Protestancy (as of all other Religions,
grounded upon voluntary and private interpretations of an obscure writing) to
breed disorders and confusion in all Commonwealths, wherein the liberty of
interpreting that writing is not restrained by law; and if restrained by law,
the legislative power is opposed, and it is authority contemned as contrary to
the law, and word of God; and this opposition is waranted by the principles of
protestancy, which exempt all reformed Christians from any conscientious
obligation of submitting to Church or state Governors in matters of Religion;
supposing I say, this to be the nature of Protestancy, it is apparent how
contrary it is to policy to enact or continue laws against the profession of
the Roman Catholic faith, which alone amongst all Christian Religions needs
not the support of human laws, or of temporal statutes, to make it the
Religion of the soul, or to setle the Commonwealth, as appears by the fear
of Prelaticks to grant liberty of conscience to Papists. For the space of 1000.
years did our English Ancestors profess the Roman faith, and in all that time
they never had the least contention in the state about matters of Religion; and
in the space of these last 100. years there had bin more Rebellions, more
deposing and murdering of Sovereigns in this one little Island of great
Britanny upon the account of Protestancy, then has bin since Christ's birth,
in the whole world upon the account of Popery.

Wherefore seeing that one of the differences between Popery and Protestancy is,
that although Popery be co(...)y to liberty of opinion, to sensuality, and
depraved inclinations, yet is it so plausible and popular, that Protestants
(notwithstanding the legal incapacities (...) penalties which they lay upon
Papists) are afraid it will spread over the whole Kingdom in a short time (and
therefore call it a growing Religion) it is evident that it increases by the
reasonableness and sanctity of it is principles, and without the help of law, or
countenance of (...) government; nay against the greatest severity of law, and
against the known inclination of the Sovereign, in such a measure, that the
King and Parliament have thought of new remedies against the grouth thereof: But
Protestancy (especialy the Prelatick) notwithstanding all it is liberty of
opinion, and pretended assurance of being saved by only faith without the
trouble of penance, fasting, or other mortifications of the flesh, with all
the favor of the laws, and countenance of the Government, can not be made the
Religion of the state. Of three parts of England the one is Prelatick
Protestant in their judgments: and the two parts which are not, will sooner
become Papists then Prelaticks, Now whether it be sound policy to persecute the
Roman Religion by law, which does increase against law, and to endeavor to
setle by law the Prelatick Religion, which so lately has occasioned the
abolishing of all laws, we humbly submit to the consideration of them who sit
at the helm.

Besides, one of the greatest prejudices, that a Prince or Commonwealth can
suffer, is to be deprived of loyal, conscientious, and able men's services,
either in civil or military employments. By the penal and sanguinary Statuts,
the King and Country deprive them-selves of many servitors of approved loyalty,
wisdom, and eminent abilities, and not only deprive themselves of such
servitors, but by virtue of legal incapacities set upon Papists, enable every
ambitious man, or discontended faction to asperse the King and his chief
Ministers with favoring fo^^ooth Popery, if they do not exercise cruelty, and
the rigor of (...) sanguinary and penal Statuts against deserving persons, or
(...) least if they show them any countenance, how-ever so meriting, and
useful they have bin in the worst of times, and may prove to be again if this
Protestant zeal should prevail; for it is always the forerunner of
rebellion, and is now become so rash, that it attempteth to asperse my Lord
Late Chancellor with favoring Popery, who is a pillar and pat^rn o^
Protestancy. Perhaps his Lordship's gentle nature, great wisdom, justice, and
integrity, might incline him to thinck that laws made by Queen Elizabeth for
excluding the Stewards from the Crown, and for destroying that Religion and
party whereby their title was supported, are now superfluous, and disrespectfull
to the Royal Family, that Reigns; but such as have the honor to know him best,
assure us his L^p is no great friend to P^pists. Lastly, whosoever will call
unto mind the mis-chief which but a few members of the House of Commons of the
long Parliament wrought against the late King, and will observe how popular
others of the same stamp are now, and how apt the giddy multitude is, to be
fooled again into Rebellion by the like madd zeal against Popery, will be of
opinion, that not any on thing can be of so great prejudice to the peace and
prosperity of England, as the continuance of laws, which (if executed) make
the Nation and Government (...)

SVBSECT II. Queen Marys, and the Inquisitions severity against Protestancy,
can be no President or excuse for the Statuts against Popery.
I Will conclude this matter with answering the vulgar Objection made for
vindication of the penal and sanguinary laws of Queen Elizabeth against Roman
Catholics, grounded upon a parity of the like laws executed by Queen Mary and
the Jnquisition against Protestants. The disparity will discover the fallacy,
and dissolve the force of their argument. Neither Queen Mary, nor the
Jnquisition made any laws against Protestants; they were made by the first
Christian Emperors, and accepted by all Catholic Kings into the statuts of
their Kingdoms, and confirmed by their Parliaments. The ancient Christian
Sovereigns not only believed that the Roman faith was the Apostolic, but found
by experience the same Roman Catholic faith had peaceable principles, agreabl^
^o just Government, and therefore they enacted laws of death, infamy,
confiscation of goods etc. against all such as presumed to alter that doctrine,
declaring such as contradicted the Tenets thereof, to be Innovators and
Heretics.

When protestancy began in England, they who preached the new doctrine, (being
conscious of their own guilt, and of having incurred the penalties of these
ancient Christian laws, then in force against Innovators and Heretics, and in
particular against the marriage of Priests with Nuns proceeded other-wise.
Zozomen hist. lib. 6. cap. 3. affirms how that the Christian Emperor
Jovinian who was in course the third Emperor after Constantin the Great
published an Edict that who allured a Nun to marriage should be therefore
punished with the loss of his head. And this law is yet extant C^d. l. de
Episcopis and C^^ricis) But they I say petitio- to the Parliament of Edward ^.
to have those (...) repealed (whereby you may see how they acknowledged their
own doctrine was Heresy) whereupon they were dispensed with to marry, and all the
(...) laws against Her^tick^, and heresi^^* were repealed* Queen Mary
succeeding, restored the ancient laws that had bin repealed by King Ed^^^d 6.
together with the ancient Religion, but she was not the Author of them, as
Queen Elizabeth was of the penal and sanguinary statuts against Priests and
Roman Catholics, which never had bin heard of before her time in a Christian
Kingdom, or Commonwealth.

Jn like manner the Inquisition ma^^ no new laws against Protestants, neither
do they sentence them to death* they only declare, that they are Innovators of
the ancient Catholic doctrine or Heretics; and then the secular Magistrates do
execute the temporal laws in fo^^e against such persons. If protestants had
not found themselves guilty of heresy, why were they so solicitious to have the
lawe^* that had bin ^^acted against heretics, (not lately, but during those
ven^^^ble (...) of the pri^^tive Church) repealed? why did (...) if their
doct^^^ was the ^^me with that of ^he ancient Fathers that lived in times
wherein the Imperial laws were made, and in force? what needed they to except
against laws which had bin enacted to favor the doctrine of those Fathers with
whom they pretend to agree? Queen Mary therefore and the Inquisition, who
proceeded ac^ willing to those ancient ^^wes against protestants, did nothing
but what all Christian and Catholic Emperors and Kings had don for the space
of 1300. years against heretics.

But Queen Elizabeth took the quite contrary way; she observed that according
to the principles of Christianity, as also according to the ancient and modern
laws of England, her self could not enjoy the Crown (having bin declared
illegitimat by sundry Acts of Parliament never repealed) nor the Stewards be
excluded, they being the lawful and immediate Heirs; and because* the Queen of
Scots, from whom they derived their title, was a Catholic, Queen Elizabeth
made her-self and England, Protestant; that is, by Acts of Parliament, she
declared that all the Catholic Emperors, Kings, and Churches, of the world
for almost 1300. years, had bin superstitious and Idolatrous; that the Bishop
of Rome, was Antichrist; the Catholic Clergy, Cheats; the sea of Rome, the
whore of Babylon; spiritual Jurisdiction, a she and secular supremacy; the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, a blasphemy; five of the seven
Sacraments, human invention and corrupt following of the Apostles; Priesthood,
and Episcopacy, nothing but a lay Ministry authorized under the Sovereign's
great se^le; all lawful Priests, and Bishops, Traitors; all Catholics,
Heretics; etc. And all these absurdities were made legal in England, to make
her Father's marriage with Anne Bullen seem lawful, whereas it had bin declared
null and invalid by so many Parliaments of England, that her self durst not
attempt an immediate and clear repeal of Acts so notoriously inconsistent with
the right that herself pretended ^o the Crown.

That (...) and men who expected favors from her) should so metamorphose sacred
things into profane, Scripture into fancy, and illegitimacy into legitimacy, we
do no^ admire, neither is it strange that illiterat people after a Century of
years, continuance and education in such a Religion, should be zealous in the
maintenance thereof, or that a Clergy, which has no other livelihood, nor hopes
of promotion but by justifying these proceedings, should endeavor to continue
her laws against orthodox Christianity, and the known truth, for their own
interest, are frailties incident to men; but that the nobility and Gentry of
England (being so well versed in their own Chronikles, and in the Histories of
other Nations) that persons of so much wit, knowledge, and judgment, should not
when they meet in Parliament, move and resolve to restore Christianity, and
rectify so gross and vulgar mistakes, especialy since the family against whose
succession the statuts had bin introduced, is restored to the Crown; this
(...), or oblivion, I say, of the English (...) and nobility, i^ hardly
excusable. And if the (...) will not be moved out of charity to their fellow
subjects and (...), to abolish the sanguinary and penal Laws against Roman
Catholics, let them do it out of civility to the Royal Family, against whose
party and Title so injust Laws were ^^acted. There is not therefore any thing
(...) more Queen Elizabeth's penal statuts, then to compare (...) wi^h Queen
Mari^^ and the Inquisitions proceedings against Protestants. It Is now time that
we pass from the examination of protestant principles, to the discovery of the
frauds and ^^^^^fications, wherewith the pr^^atick Clergy does disguise them,
and divert their flocks from reflecting upon those sad effects which they have
wrought, and must work, wheresoever they are (...) the Religion of the sta^e.

A TREATISE OF RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT
THE THIRD PART. Containing a plain discovery of the Protestant Clergies
frauds, and falsifications, whereby alone their doctrine is supported, and made
credible. The conscience and convenience of restoring or tolerating the Roman
Catholic Religion* demonstrated.
SECT. I. That either the learned Protestant, or Roman Catholic Clergy are
Cheats, and how every illiterat protestant may easily discern by which of the
two Clergie^ he is cheated: and therefore is obliged under pain of damnation to
examine so near a concern, and to renounce the doctrine and communion of that
Church wherein he is cheated.
(...) of the true Church being so conspicuous and manifest by such eminent and
visible marks, Christ might well forbid the faithful to communicate with
Heretics and Schismatics, for that their conventicles (...) never be mistaken
for the whole, or even a part of the Catholic Church, unless men ^ill be so
simple as to take their ^are word when they say, Hic est Christus, aut illic:
whereas if it were possible for learned men to be innocently mistaken, Christ's
command had not bin obligatory; for, in such ^ case we were not bound to
believe that Christ is rather in one Church then other, seeing each Church had
reason sufficient to excuse learned parties from schism, and ^^resy? But it
being impossible that God should command us to believe on Congregation of
Christians, and not believe others, that pretend also to be the true Church of
Christ, without confirming the testimony and doctrine of that one Congregation,
which he bids us believe and prefer before the rest with such clear signs of
the truth, and so evident marks of Divine authority, that the others, compared
therewith, can have no probability; two things must be granted. 1. (that the
Catholi^^ Church of Christ cannot be composed of all, or any dissenting
Congregations. 2. That the one only Congregation which is the true and
Catholic Church, can never be so eclipsed, but that it must appear much more
eminent in sanctity, miracles, conversion of Nations, and much more credible in
it is testimonies, then any other. Wherefore we conclude that either the learned
protestant clergy or the catholic must be cheats; seeing that notwithstanding
the evident and eminent signs and marks of God's Church can not be found in
both, or in any two Congregations dissenting in their doctrine and rule of
faith, yet each of them make their illiterat flocks believe, that their own is
the true Church of God, whereupon the signs and seals of his authority, and
veracity do clearly shine.

No human art, or industry, if not born-out with more then ordinary and
notorious impudency, can pretend to discredit, or darken the spendor of true
Miracles, Sanctity, Successi^^ (...) become Masters of the Comerce, as shall be
proved. I hope these considerations will invite and incite them to examine which
of both the Clergies, (the Roman Catholic that petitions for, ^r the Prelatick
Protestant that opposes liberty of conscience) are the cheats? And* that they
may find it out without much trouble, I have thought sit to let them know,
there is not any one controversy between them and us, which has not bin
handled in English, and argued to the full on both sides: now the sum of our
disputes being this, whether the primitive Church was Roman Catholic, or
rather Protestant, in the controverted points, as Praying to Saints,
Transsubstantiation, Purgatory, worship of Images, the Canonical letter, and
sense of Scripture, etc. To decide the Controversy, each side quotes the words
of Scripture, Counsels and Fathers, because the true doctrine has bin
preserved, and recorded in these writings. Let him therefore that doubts of the
sense of the Text, and of the sincerity of him that quotes it, compare the
Authors words with the (...) he will infallibly find out who is the Cheat. For
he that does corrupt the words, or change the sense of Scrip^^re, Counsels,
and Fathers, does not stick to the doctrine of the primitive Church*

And because I have spent some time (both before and after my conversion to the
Catholic faith) in examining the falsifications, and frauds of Protestants,
and their objections against Papists in the same kind, I may speak with more
assurance then others who have not so much experience; and do protest that I
never thought it possible (before I found it was so de facto) that men
pretending not only to the name of reformed Christianity, but to the Reality
and Sanctity of an Episcopal caracter, and charge of souls, could be so
vnconsiderable, unworthy and uncharitable in matters of eternity, as I have
^ound the Protestant writers, and in particular the prelaticks of the Church of
England. Let any who desires to satisfy his conscience or curiosity, pervse
and compare either the books of Jevel and Harding; or of Bishop Morton, and
Father Pesons* (...) the nature or essence of a body? Or whether quantity be a
thing distinct from that which we call a corporeal substance.

SVBSECT I. With what impudency and hipocrisy Bishop Ievell and other
prelatick writers began to maintain the Protestancy of the Church of England?
And how they were blamed for appealing to antiquity by some of their own
Brethren.
TO manifest the impudency and hypocrisy, wherewith Prelatick Protestancy was
broach't and imposed upon the layty in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
I will begin with Bishop Jevell's famous challenge, and his Seconds, that
offered to maintain the primitive antiquity of Protestancy, and the novelty of
Popery. His words are. As I said before, I say again, I am content to yield and
subscribe, if any of our learned Adversaries, or if all the learned men that be
alive, be able to bring one sufficient sentence out of any one Catholic Doctor
or Father, or out of any old General Council etc. for the space of 600. years
after Christ, etc Protesting also that he affirms thus much, not as carried
away with the heat of zeal, but as moved with the simple truth, least any of
you should happily be deceived and think there is more weight on the other side
then in conclusion will be found, etc. And then he brake into this vehement
Apostrophe. O merciful God! who could think that there could be so much
wilfulness in the heart of man. Then exclaimes, O Gregory! O Austin! O Hierom!
O Chrysostom! O Leo! O Dionise! O Anacl^tus! O Calixtus! O Paul! O Christ? Jf
we be (...) (...) l. 2. sect. 6. page 112.

See heretofore ^. part. sec. 1. how the centurists and other learned
Protestants confess the Counsels, and Fathers, defended worship of Imamages,
Transubstantiation Purgatory, Indulgences, and all other points of Popery.

Bale in his Act. Romans Pontif. printed at Basil 1558. page 44 45.46. confesses
besides, that St. Gregory held the Sacrifice of the Mass, the doctrine of
Purgatory, etc.

See Bale in his Pagea of Popes page 27. of S. Leo Doct. Humfrey Iesuitissimi
page 1. rat 5. page 626.


acknowledged the impossibility of defending the Protestant Religion by
Tradition, or by any monuments o^ examples from antiquity, or by the sayings of
Fathers and Counsels. Insomuch that Archbishop Whitgift in his defense against
the reply of Cartwright page 472. and 473. does not stick to say, that almost
all the Bishops and learned Writers of the Greek and Latin Church* for the most
part, were spotted with the doctrine of free will* oftener it, of invocation of
Saints etc. And from thence infers that in no age since the Apostles time any
company of Bishops held so perfect and so sound doctrine in all points as the
Bishops of England at this day. And Mr. Fulk in his reionder to Bristow page 7.
I confess that Ambrose, Austin, Hierom (all three Fathers, to whom B.p Jewel
appealed) held invocation of Saints to be lawful. And B.p Bale acknowledges
that St. Gregory (the first of Iewell's chosen Judges) by his indulgences
established pilgrimages to Images; and that St. Leo (an other of Ievell's
Fathers*) allowed the worship of Images.

And Doctor Humfrey, Iesuitismi part 1. rat. 5. page 626. cannot deny but that
S. Gregory taught Transsubstantiation. And Mr. (...) in his Papisto m^t, edit.
1606. page 143. says, We are (...) that the mystery of iniquity did work in
S^* Paul's time, and fell not a sleep so soon as Paul was dead etc. And
therefore no mermail though pervsing Counsels and Fathers, we find the print of
the Popes feet. And Mr. Napper in his Treatise upon the Revelation dedicated to
King James* page 68. and 145. affirms that Popery or the Antichristian
Kingdom did continue 1260. years vniversaly without any debatable
contradiction* The Pope and his Clergy, during that time possessing the outward
visible Church. So that it was not one or two Fathers, or Counsels, but all
Christendom which professed the Roman Catholic says, for these 1^00. years
past. And even Mr. Whitaker himself, lib. 6. contra Duraeum page 123.
(notwithstanding his undertaking to maintain Ievells challenge and bold
assertion) was forced at length to submit, but by a profane expression, saying,
that the Popish Religion is a patch't coverlet of the Fathers errors sowed
together.

(...) have them read their English falsified Scripture (the subject of
controversies, and support of errors) and will not permit them to pervse the
true authentic translation, and all this to the end nothing but fraud and
fancy may be the rule of the Protestant faith. These and all other the like
observations which can not but occurr to them who frequent their Churches, or
company, must needs induce men to suspect the weakness of their cause, and the
guilt of their conscience, though there had bin no evidences, that they are
Falsifiers. But seeing their are as many evidences against them, as there are
Chapters in Catholic Books of controversies, and that the Books are easily
had, and understood, I see not how any Protestant, how ever so illiterat, can
be excused from eternal damnation, by pretending the integrity of his Clergy,
or his own insufficiency to examine their sincerity.

When many accuse a man of high Treason, and offer to prove it to his face, not
only by sundry honest and legal witnesses but under his own hand writing, it
would be censured treachery or great carlesness in the Ministers of state, to
slight such an accusation and evidence, though the person accused, until then*
had bin trusted, and reputed a loyal subject: This is our case with the
Protestant writers: we have no quarrel against them but Religion; we charge
them in public writing with the highest Treason (the murdering of the souls
of Sovereigns and subjects) with corrupting God's word; with rebelling against
the Divine authority, so authentickly appearing in the Roman Catholic Church.
And these Treasons we offer to prove face to face, not only by legal witness,
but by their Bibles and Books. We have no grudge to them but this only of
damning souls, by treacherous dealing; and desire that so important an
accusation may come to a public hearing, If their interest, and industry can
divert the layty from so great a concern, that layty must be treacherous to
themselves, and censured very carless of their own salvation.

And to the end it may not be objected that these are are but (...) words, How
particularly the Protestant Clergy ^s charged with frauds, and falsifications
in maintaining their Religion.
I have resolved to descend to particular crimes. I (...) the persons, their
Books, I quote their own words, I prove them to be no innocent mistakes, but
wilful and wicked falsifications and fraud^; not committed by one, or few
(...) of Religion against us* not in our time* but alway^^ (...) but the whole
body in their (...) only by connivance and permission, but also by
contrivance^* and positive approbation, not only petty (...) differences, but
of ancient condemned heresies, which the Protestant writers maintain as
orthodox doctrine, notwithstanding that (...), S. Hierom, and other Doctors of
God's Church censure the opinions as notorious heresies, and the Authors as
heretics. This is the sum of the Accusations, contained in this third part
of our Treatise: and if we be not mistaken, deserves a Trial, as well for the
satisfaction of private (...) conscience, as (...) for the probability there is
of public convenience, it being very improbable, that I, or any man who
pretends to the least degree of worth, or wit, would charge with so many
particular grievous crimes, so numerous and powe^^ull a party as the Protestant
Clergy is, without (...) undeniable evidences. If the Protestant Clergy be
found guylty, besides the salvation of souls (which will be obtained by
renouncing their errors, and is that we all ought principaly to aim at) these
Nations will be happy in this world by their revenues. If they be not guilty,
they and their Religion will gain great credit, and I nothing but the infamy of
being a notorious Jmpostor. I know not what others may think of me, but I shall
never think that any other can be so witless and wicked, as to take so much
pains as I have don in composing, and be at so great charge of publishing this
Treatise, without manifest profe^ of the truth thereof; for if my allegations be
not true I can have no further design, or hopes, but of infamy to my self, and
of honor, and credit to my Adversaries, and an addition of strength to the
cause I do impugn: all which must follow, and fall upon me, if the learned
Protestant Clergy be not proved to be as great Cheats, as I pretend they are.

But its strange what deep impressions education does make in men's minds, and
how partial and passionat these Nations are tendered by Protestancy. They will
not believe that their Protestant Writers are wilful Falsifiers, as for
example that Doctor Jeremy Tailor (a man that has writ so many spiritual Books
foorsooth, and rules of Morality) is guilty of maintaining the Protestant
Religion by above 150. shameful inexcusable corruptions and falsifications, in
his little Dissuasive. And when he, the Author, his Jrish Convocation, After
Doctor Tailors death his friends have published a second part of his
Dissuasive, which is so weack a vindication of the first, that it needs not
that Reply which is now in hand by E. W. his Adversary.
and the English Protestant Church, that Applauder of the work, are challenged
in print by sundry Catholic Writers to make good any one of those
falsifications, all the world (besides Protestants) observe they have not a
word to answer; and by consequence themselves must now confess, that their
Religion is damnable, seeing it can not be otherwise maintained then by
falsehood; notwithstanding J say there can be no hopes of salvation in such a
Church, no tolerable excuse for such imposturs, yet the writers, and writings
are cried up, and still in credit, because they maintain that mistaken
Reformation wherein Protestant* have bin brought up. And though this particular
case of Doctor Tailors (one of the ablest Protestant Divines now living) is
sufficient to demonstrat the falsehood of all Protestants, and Protestancy in
general, yet for information and proof, that his ^rrors fell not by chance
from his pen, and that he has not changed the arguments, but is constant to
the ancient falsifying Method, the only way of all his Predecessors the
Protestant Writers, I will give particular instances of the most renowned from
Luther to Tailor himself, that is from the very first to the last.

But before I set down the particulars of Protestant falsifications I will
prove in general, that the Roman Catholics can not be prudently suspected of
the like practices, and that Protestants are clearly convicted thereof.

SECT. II. That there can be no reason to suspect the sincerity of the Roman
Catholic Clergy in matters of Religion; and that Protestancy can not be
maintained otherwise then by impostures; whereof there are such evidences, that
to give the Protestant Clergy any credit in matters of their Religion, is a
sufficient cause of damnation.
SVBSECT I.
THE first part of this assertion (...) easily proved; because that which may
prudently induce men to suspect the sincerity of any Clergy in proposing the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, and the true sense of Scripture, is temporal
interest viz, when by changing and corrupting the ancient (...), the Clergy
(...) obtain honors, and conveniences, where of they might despair if they are
raised above the meaness or mediocrity of their birth and fortune: such were
the first Protestant-Bishops, and Reformers, not one of them that J can learn
of, was born a Gentleman; neither could they expect to be raised to any great
employment either in Church or state, unless they had embroyled both, and
fish't in troubled waters; and such also were they who preten^ed to reform the
ancient doctrine in former ages. If we search into the Ecclesiastical history,
we shall find that Heretics always devised novelties, to make them-selves
considerable by dividing the Church into schisms and factions (according to the
vulgar saying Divide and impera) after that they had bin disapointed of some
dignity whereunto they pretended; and therefore Saint Augustine (lib, de
Pastoribus cap. 8.) does attribute all heresies to pride. Theobutes one of the
first heretics, having bin refused a Bishopric (says Aegisippus) began to
corrupt and perturbe the Church. After him Simon Magus broach't his damnable
doctrines, because the Apostles would not sell to him the spiritual caracter of
Episcopacy. Act. 8. Then followed Valentinus, of whom Tertullian gives this
testimony to those of his Sect, Valentinus expected to be a Bishop for his wit
and Eloquence, but being postponed, he broke from the rule of the Church, as
ambitious and revengefull minds use to do. The same says St. Epiphanius
(haeres. 42.) of Marcion; Theodoret of Montanus, Novatian, Arius, and Aerius,
Socrates of Salbatius; Waldensis of Wacleff; the same we say of Luther, Calvin,
Cranmer etc. But the Roman Catholic Clergy are commonly persons of quality
that are not put to the shifts of heretics, that is, of inventing new doctrine;
their birth helps to raise them to the dignity of the Church, and none can be
made a secular Priest, that has not a patrimony wherewith to subsist. Besides,
it is an acknowledged difference between the two controverted Religions, that
the Roman Catholic is so ancient, that even they who charge it with novelty,
can not tell when it began; and grant that it has bin at least these 1000.
years generaly embraced by the visible Church, as the very same which Christ
and his Apostles taught; the Protestant Reformation on the contrary, is so
modern, that they who brag of it is antiquity, can go no further then Luther,
and Calvin, or Cranmer. Hence it must be concluded, that as in temporal
Commonwealths, they can not be questioned as Usurpers, or suspected as Cheats,
whose possession and succession is so ancient that no memory occurreth to the
contrary; and moreover, show public records, and sentences of the Courts of
Judicature, signed with the great seal of the Soveraing in confirmation of
their Estates, and Titles, against diverse pretender^ in sundry ages (...) in
the Roman Catholic Church, the doctrine and dignity of our Bishops having bin
derived (...), and tradition, (...) the contrary, and having bin confirm^^
(...) of general Councels, yet extant upon reco^d (...) heretics, and signed
with God's great seal^, Miracles; there can be no objection, but obstinacy,
against the truth thereof; nor no prudent ground to suspect the integrity, and
sincerity of our Clergy, in maintaining as well their doctrine, as the revenues
which were bestowed upon them for supporting that doctrine and their Ministry.

Men who have such undeniable and public evidences, to show for the truth of
their doctrine, and for their right to the temporalities of the Church, can not
be pres^^ed to forge or falsify scripture, records, Counsels, or Fathers, for
maintaining their right or reverences: they need no such practices, which would
rather prejudice, then profit their cause. To what end should Catholic Bishops
forge records of their Consecration, when their very Adversaries confess the
validity, and legality thereof to be so authentik, that their chief study is,
how to derive their own Caracter from ours! To what purpose should we falsify
the ancient Counsels and Fathers, when all the Protestant writers, who have
any conscience or knowledge, grant they are for us? And (...) such of them as
are versed in antiquity, will not have their reformation tried by Fathers and
Counsels, but by Scripture alone. Why should we corrupt the letter of
Scripture, when our Adversaries grant our latin vulgata, to be the most true
and authentik Translation thereof, as we have proved heretofore? Why should we
alter the Roman Catholic sense of Scripture, that is as ancient as the letter,
and delivered to us by the same testimony and tradition, as God's true meaning?
But the protestant Clergy, who are but vpstarts by brith and doctrine, can not
be great in Church or state otherwise then by inventing and promoting new
religions, and to that end do corrupt the letter, and change the sense of
Scripture, which was delivered to the primitive Church: pretending that the
true Church of Christ was invisible, and that the protestant evidences and
miracles perished by reason of the iniquity of the times, and the persecution
of Popes. But let us come to the trial, and to particular instances of their
false dealing.

SVBSECT II. Of Edward 6. Protestant and prelatick Clergies frauds
falsifications and forms of ordination, their hypocrisy, incontinency, Atheism
etc And whether it be fit to term them, and others like them, Cheats, when
they are convicted of wilful false dealing in matters of Religion?
CIvility is a branch of Charity, and therefore ought to be extended to all men:
but if a man did observe either in Church or Court, that a disguised Cutpurse
o^ Cut-throate does great mischief, I am of opinion the observer is bound in
conscience to advertise both Church and Court of his vilanies, and without any
ceremony to tell every one down right, such a person that you take for a
nobleman, or Gentleman, is a Cheat, and a Murderer, therefore trust him not,
avoid his company. Jf the Protestant Clergy teach, and countenance false and
damnable doctrine, they are Cut-purses and Cut-throaths; they exhaust the
treasure of these Kingdoms, and cheat the King and his Subjects of a very great
revenue, They (...) and writ a book in defense of the real presence; Fox. page
200. vol. 1. number. 2. See hereafter some of his falsifications in particular
objected to him by the Catholic Bishops and Doctors at his trial. Dr. Heylin
ed. 6. page 89 Three Convers. of England Part. 2 page 593.
in Edward the sixts time he professed protestancy, and writ against the real
presence, both which books Bishop Bonner produced in judgment against him: In
the beginning of this young King's reign he seemed to be a Lutheran, but in the
latter end thereof, a Zuinglian; and altered accordingly the Common prayer book
which himself had composed; and changed the 39. Articles of the Church,
according to the humor of that faction which prevailed in the state. He made no
more conscience of condemning to death An Ascue for denying the real presence
an. 31. of K. Henry 8. then of professing himself to be of her belief in the
reign of K. Edward 6. and pressed that young King very importunely to seal a
warrant for burning of her Maid Ioane of Kent (alias Ioane Knell) for that she
denied Christ took flesh of the B. Virgin. But Joane Knell (when Cranmer
pronounced sentence against her) reproached him for his inconstancy in
religion; telling that he condemned not long before An Ascue her mistress for a
piece of bread, and now condemned her self for a pecce of flesh. And as he was
now come to believe the first which he then had condemned, so would he come in
time to believe the second etc. And (...) it is to be observed that Cranmer
persuaded the King to sign the warrant against Ioane Knell when there was no
law in England to put any one to death for heresy, because it was after that
all penal statuts against heretics had bin repealed, and that favor was
granted at Cranmer's and the first reformers, own request, and solicitations,
not daring to profess or preach their novelties before they might be secured by
such a repeal from the severity of the laws.

We have seen heretofore how he divorced K. Henry from Q. Catherin by his own
authority, and married him to An Bullen, And afterwar^ ^^clared in Parliament
that An Bullen was not true wife to (...) King; how he married him to An of
Cleve, See the stat. an. 28. Henr. cap. 7. 1536
and with in the compass of one year came again to the Parliament, and said
she was never true wife to his Majesty (...) in again. Mathews his Bible, and
the Bible of the large volume was the worck of Tyndal, and Coverdale, and
Rogers, well lickt of Cranmer. Stat. anno Dom. 1547^ Ed. 6. an. 1.
And this was objected by Nicolas Heath Archbishop of York and Lord Chancellor
of England in his speech to the Parliament against the bringing in of
Protestancy 1. Eliz. which speech (says learned Knot in his comment upon
Brerely p. 87.) was read by him who told this to Knot, and had seen diverse of
King Edward ^. service books, some with ( is) some with ( signifies) and some
with a blanck in the place. Lastly, how could Cranmer, how could they tha^
^oyn'd with him, be ignorant that th^^r reformed doctrine was plain heresy,
seeing they kn^w it was notorious novelty, and that many points thereof had bin
condemned as heretical by the primitive Catholic Church, and by laws of the
first Christian Emperors? How could they excuse the abolishing of the
Sacrifice of the Mass by their Common prayer, and the caracter of Priesthood
and Episcopacy, by devising a new form of Ordination, contaiing (...) a
syllable expressing the function either of Priest or Bishop* contrary to all
forms and Ritualls both of the Greek, Latin* and all other Christian Churches.

(...) though their Successors (since his Majesty's restoration) have
acknowledged the invalidity of their Protestant forms of ordination by
amending them in their new Book authorized by the late* Act of Uniformity; for
the form of ordaining a Bishop is corrected thus, Receive the holy Ghost for
the Office and work of a Bishop etc. The form of ordaining a Priest, thus,
Receive the holy Ghost for the Office of a Priest etc. yet this correcting
comes too late for the past Ordinations, and unseasonably for the future also,
because none can give a priestly or Episcopal caracter which himself has not,
and though the form thus altered in their late edition be valid in it self,
yet can it not be validly applied by laymen, or (which is the same) by
Ministers ordained by an invalid form.

What could move the present prelatik Church of England to change their form of
ordaining Priests and Bishops after a hundred years and above, but the
evidence, and acknowledgment of it is nullity? espetially if we consider with
what (...) in preaching is extolled by Fox; and yet if you observe his proofs
thereof, you will find that he was rather, a Comedian then a Christian in the
pulpit; where in steed of solid discourses deduced from Scriptures, and
Fathers, he entert^^^^d his Audience with scurilous jests, and some times
grounded his Sermons upon a play at cards, and kept great stir with the King of
Clubs, the Ase of hearts, and the like foolish ^taff^ good enough for the
Heresies he displayed; other times (...) raised at the ^ass, calling the real
presence the Maribone (...) and this so ridicolously, that none but children
applauded (...) profane way of preaching; by what Fox himself con^ess^^ (...)
his way, you may fancy him to be another Hugh P^^^^. But from his Sermons let
us go to his virtues. Notwithstanding his great zeal in preaching and
promoting the (...) recanted his doctrine thereof twice, once before Card^^^l
(...) second time before Archbishop Warham, and others (...) K. Henry 8.
declared against the Popes supremacy* (...), at the procurement of his Vicar
General (...) of his Phisi^^an D.r Butte^ was named to the Bishopric of (...)
but soon deprived thereof by the same (...)* as an unguilty and profane fellow,
his impiety was proved by many instances, whereof one was, eating of flesh on
good friday, without any pretext of sickness. After King Henry 8. (...) he
sided with Hooper and Rogers for Puritanisme against Cranmer and Ridley, who
were then great stiklers for the prelatick discipline, thereby to domineer over
the Ministers who had bin in Germany; and so would Latimer also, if they both
had not opposed his restitution to the Bishopric of Worces^^^.

Thus kept under by his two great Adversaries, he (...) thought by the Duchess
of Somersett a likely person (in hopes of recovering his ancient dignity and
reverences) to inveigh against her Brother in law the Lord Admiral (whom she
mortaly hated) and to reprehend publikly in the pulpit his ambition, charging
him also with dangerous designs against his Majesty and the Protector; and
though the Lord Admiral (...) to be restored to Worcester; but after Ridley was
in possession of the sea of London, he laughed at Latimer, and joined with (...)
to keep him humble without Bishopric or benefice, (...) has bin said. After
K. Edward 6. death* Ridley was very (...) against Q. Mary, and preached against
her title, adding ^ith all she was so earnest a Papist, that she refused to
hear (...) to her; which injury notwithstanding she would have ^ardon'd him,
if he had given any signs of true repen^^^^^ (...) a fair trial, and
confutation of his heresies, he (...) of a bag of powder which his Brother in
law delivered (...) at the stake, the sooner to be dispatched of his torment;
(...) Fox says the design took no effect, his martyrdom was (...), which
happened by accident, and that he cried (...), and desired the people to let
the fire (...).

(...) of this man^s spirit by a part of his farewell to the (...) London, set
down by Fox thus. Fox page 1942.
Harken (...) of Babylon, thou wicked limb of Antichrist, (...) sta^est thou
down, and make havoc of (...) Prophet's (...) etc. Thy God which is thy work
of thy words, and whom thou say thou have power to make; that thy d^^f and
dumb God, I say, will not in deed, Fox in a marginal not upon this last part,
says Bishop Ridleyes profecy upon the Episcopal see op London.
nor can not make (...) to escape the revengfull hand of the high and almighty
God etc. O thou wh^rish Drabbe, thou shall never escape. In steed of my
farewell to thee now, I say, Fie upon thee, fie upon thee filty Drabbe, (...)
all thy false Prophets.

Of Hooper, Rogers, Poynet, Bale, and Co^erdales hypocrisy, and impiety.
JOhn Hooper (by Fox his relation) was a Priest in Oxford, in the days of King
Henry 8. (infected with Lutheranisme by books that came from Germany) and lived
in (...) when he was arraigned for his heresies, he spoke to he Lord Chancellor
and Judges so grossy, carnaly, and absurdly of his marriage with the Burgundian
wench, that his (...), though he se^s not down his words, yet acknowledges
that the whole Court cried tha^^ upon him, calling him beast, etc. we shall
hear more of this man in the following story of his Camerade Rogers.

John Rogers was a priest also (says John Fox) in the time of King Henry 8.
when Luther's doctrine began first to be (...) in England, which he having read,
Rogers.
and finding himself by the spirit thereof inclined to some novelties in
Religion, and to marry, he went into Flanders, and there became Chaplyn ^^ the
English Merchants in Antverp: there also he fell acquainted with William
Tyndal, and Miles Coverdale, two other English Priests of the same humor, and
retired thither for the (...) and; Rogers and Coverdale, assisted Tyndal in
falsifying the Scripture, and setting forth his English Translation, afterward
condemned by Act of Parliament, for erroneous, false, and wick^^* After that
Tyndal was burned in Flanders, in the year 1536. Rogers repaired to
Wittenberg in Saxony, to live with Martyn Luther, by whom he was confirmed in
his Religion, and provided of a duch wife, which, as Fox testifyeth, brought
him forth no less then eight children in very few years; with which load of
wife and children after both King Henry 8. and Luther were dead (for they dyed
both with in the compass of one year) Roger^ returned into England toge^ther
with Friar Martyn Bucer, and his wench; resolved to accommodat them-selves in
all points to the Protector's will, and to any Religion that should be
established by the laws of the land; and accordingly they forsook the Doctrine
of their old Master Luther, and embraced that of Zwinglius, as being the more
favored and countenanced by the Protector.

Both Hooper and Rogers came with hopes of ruling the Church of England,
because they thought them-selves more learned in the Reformation then Cranmer,
and Ridley, who (...)

As Ridley had bin intruded into Bonners Bishopric of London, so Poynet was
thrust into Gardiners of Winchester, Of Bishop Poynet.
^ better Scholar (says Heylin page 161.) then a Bishop. He had taken a wi^e
in Edward 6. time, and not content (...) (du^ing her life) married another,
Schism Angl. page 216.
whose Husband (...) Butcher actualy living; whether she had left her husband
for some discontent, or disease, I do not know; but between the Bishop and the
Butcher became a great suit in law about the woman, that the Bishop kept and
claimed as his wife; but at length he was forced to restore her to the Butcher;
which Bishop Gardener hearing from some of the Lords, he replied that their
Lordships (he hoped) would command Poynet to restore him his Bishopric, as
they had ordered him to restore his wife to the Butcher: It seems in those
primitive times of Protestan^^, the purity of the reformed doctrine was
practiced in mar^^ages, as well as in other matters; for though Bishop Poynet,
received not the benefit of that Protestant liberty which he sued for, and his
Lordship knew was due by the principles of that Religion, yet it was granted to
Sir Ralph Sadler, Schism Angl. Ed 6. page 194. and 19^.
by common consent of the English Church and Parliament: for one Matthew Barrow,
having bin through jealousy driven beyond seas for some time, his wife married
her Lover Sir Ralph, the husband returns and claims his wife, but sentence was
given in favor of Sir Ralph Sadler, John Bale writes thus of him self Cent. 5.
fol. 245. when I was a boy of twelve year^ old at Norwich, I was thrust into
the He^^ of the white Monks, ^ Carmelites The word the lord a^^pearing I saw
mine own deformity (to wit of being a Priest and a friar) I did presently the^
scrape out the cursed caracter of the horrible beast, for that I took unto me a
most faithful wife Dorothy, and this not from any man, nor by any man's help,
but by the special gift and

Word of Christ. This friar makes Chirst it (...) woer for him to marry a Nun;
and yet he calls our S. Austin and his chaste Monks, together wi^h the whole
primitive Church of England, a Carnal Synagogue.

Osiander in Epitom. cent. 9 10. ^1. page 454. act. 15. Melan^^^on in disput. de
cura Magistrate. etc. Stows Annals pa. 550. Schism An. page 17.217 Of Coverdale
and his Bible.


who was declared to be her lawful husband, and Matthew Barrow lest at liberty
to marry whom ^e pleased: This decree is agreeable to the principles of
Protestancy, as may be seen in this Treatise ( part. 2. Sect. 2. ^num. 3.)
neither is it credible so learned a Protestant Bishop as Poynet, would contest
in a legal way with the Butcher, for a thing not allowed by the reformed
Church, whereof he was so eminent a Prelat, and one of the first English
Reformers.

John Bale Bishop of Ossory was a Carmelite friar, who hearing of the liberty
which the Protestant Reformation gave to Priests and Religious persons to
marry, forsook his Monastical and Catholic profession, and made a formal
abjuration (...) of the Bible, condemned by act of Parliament, and Fox (page
1427.) sets down the proclamation of K. Henry 8. and the public instrument of
the Bishops, prohibiting again (an. 1^46) Tyndal and Coverdales Translation of
the new Testament; notwithstanding all this, Coverdale the corrupter of the
Bible, was by Cranmer's means made the Corrector of his own and Tyndal's
Translation (which went by the name of the Bible of Matthew.) And he set out the
same again, with little or no alteration of the Text, and it was called the
Bible of the large Volume, See Fox page 1362. and 1363.
with which work the honest party of the Clergy, were as much offended aswith
Mathew's Bible, as being the same or at least no less fraudulent and falls, and
yet it was not corrected in K. Henry 8. days, and was imposed upon England as
authentic Scripture, in K. Edward 6. and Q. Elizabeth's reigns; and is that in
substance which was reprinted by order of the Convocation an. 1562. by some
caled the Bishops Bible. This Bible thus caled, as also of the large Volume,
page 1362.
was printed first at Paris ( Fox relates the story) That some heresies having
bin discovered therein, Coverdale was sent for, who did oversee the printing of
his own and Tyndal's work; but having some warning of what would follow, says
Fox, he with other English, posted away from Paris as fast as they could, to
save them-selves, leaving behind them all their Bibles, of the great Volume,
etc. but after they had recovered some of the same Bibles, which the Lieutenant
Criminal of Paris had not burnt with the rest (moved thereunto by covetousness)
they reprinted the same Bible in London, but yet not without great loss and
trouble, for the hatred of the Bishops, namely Stephen Gardener and his
fellows, who mightily did stomach and malign the printing thereof. This is Fox
his own story of the English Translation of Scripture, which Protestants hold
to be the true word of God, though it was burnt as falls and heretical in
France, and condemned as such by act of Parliament in England, and two Thousand
falsifications discovered in the new Testament (...) by learned* (...) Bishop
of D^resme.

Schism. page 217.
Sanders ^^counts how Miles Coverdale hearing that the University of Oxford was
much bent against (...) reformation in Edward 6. (...)* and that (...) ^aught
at Coverdale for keeping (...) have bin his wife; he came to confute and to
conv^^^ (...) famous University, and there in the pulpit told his audience, he
would (...) of the Controversy of the Real presence: having therefore first
vehemently inveighed against such as murmured at his keeping a woman* which he
termed va^ (...), he added, that he ought to be credited in the dispute of the
Eucharist, for that having inquired into the diversity of opinions, and
examined the Catholics Transubstantiation, the Lutherans Impa^ation, the
Zuingli^ns ^^re figurative presence, the Calvinists addition to (...) certain
efficacy, and energy of grace, he could deli^er (...) them what he had found
out at last after 14 years stud^ (...) matter: having spoken thus in very good
earnest, most then thought he was distracted, for non in his (...) could
seriously endeavor to persuade Christians to build their (...) upon a f^llows
fancy (...) confessed, him-self knew not what to believe for the space of 14
years until that present* wherein at length he professed to take a new way of
his own, different from all others that until then had bin professed either by
Roman Catholics, or others. But if Protestants take his false Translation for
(...) word of God, with (...) doubt they will not scruple to take his
fantastical opinion for the sense of Scripture, and rely upon his fond
Interpretation of these words, This is my body.

These were the prime Apostles and first Founders of the Protestant Church of
England* this the Scripture which they delivered to the people for God's word;
These the men whose sincerity the English Clergy does now defend, imitat, and
rely upon; men, who to enjoy Benefices and women, persuaded silly souls to
become the Devill's Martyrs in Q. Mary's days; making them believe that Tindal
and Coverdales fal^ Translations were the very word of God, and every on's
private Interpretation the right sense of the holy Ghost. This the poor people
erroneously and obstinatly maintained, after that such of these their Masters
as could escape, fled begond the seas, and left their Proselits in the lurch,
when them-selves could not any longer enjoy Bishoprics and wenches here in
England, Ambition and sensuality led them into novelties, which most of
them-selves knew to be heresies, though once engaged therein (according to the
custom of heretics) many refused to recant, and would needs cast them-selves
into the fire, to dye, forsooth, with their honor which they vainly imagined
lay at the stake, and could not be preserved, if them-selves were not tied to a
stake. Fox tells us how Laurence Sanders a Priest was so fond of his wench and
child, that seeing his little son, rejoiced more to have such a boy, then if
2000. pounds were given him etc. saying what man fearing God, would not lose
his life present, rather then by prolonging it here, he should adjudge this boy
to be a bastard, his wife a whore, and him-self a whore-monger, yea (says he)
if there were no other cause for which a man of my estate should lose his life,
yet who would not give it to avouch this Child to be legitimat, and his mothers
marriage to be lawful and holy; upon such motives was the obstinacy of this
Clergy grounded in dying. How little the poor Tinkers, Tanners, Cobblers,
Spinsers, and simple women could say for the errors in maintenance whereof they
would needs dye, you may guess by their incontinent Priests, and their
Patriarch, Fox page 136^ first edit,
and Apostle Cranmer's answers for his new says; which I will copy out of Fox
himself, who excuses the weakness and absurdity thereof, by saying (page 2053.)
that he believes the Notary (who was Bishop Ievell chosen by Cranmer him-self)
did conceal the Archbishop's answers, to favor the sea of Rome. But then Fox
ought to have supplied Ievell^' defect, and have showed how Cranmer might, (and
probably did) answer the popish arguments; and not con^^^t him-self with
telling us that the reporter leaves the (...) raw and weak on Doctor Cranmer's
side. Thus then says Fox.

SVBSECT IV. Talk between Doctor Martyn and the Archbishop, related by Fox.
DOctor Martin. You have told here a long glorious tale etc. you say you have
once sworn to K. Henry 8. against the Pope's Jurisdiction, and ther^^^e you may
never forswear the same etc. Here Mr. Cranmer I will ask you a question or
two; what if you made a^ Oath to a Harlot to live with her in continual
adultery, ought you to keep it?


Cranmer. I think no.


Doctor Martyn. Herod did swear what soever his har^^^ asked of him, he would
give her, and he gave her John Baptist's head etc. Then Mr. Cranmer, you can no
less confess but that you ought not to have conscience of every oath, but if it
be just, lawful, and advisedly taken.


Cranmer. So was my oath.


Martyn. That is not so; for first it was unjust, for it tended to the taking
away of an other man's right: It was not lawful, for the law^ of God and the
Church were against it. Besides, it was not voluntary, for every man and woman
were compelled to take it.


Cranmer. It pleases you to say so.


Martyn. Let all the world be Judge, But Sir, you that pretend to have such a
conscience to break an Oath, I pray you did you never swear and break the same?


Cranmer. I remember not.


Martyn. J will help your memory; did you never swear obedience to the Sea of
Rome?


Cranmer. In deed I did once swear unto the same.


Martyn. Yea that you did twice, as appears by records and writings here
ready to be showed.


Cranmer. But I remember J saved all by a Protestation that I made, by the
Council of the best learned men I could get at that time.


Martyn. Hearken good people what this man says, he made a protestation on
day, to keep never a whit of that which he would swear the next day: was this
the part of a christian man? But will you have the truth of the matter? King
Henry 8. even then meant the lamentable change, which after you see came to
pass: and to further his pitiful proceedings from the divorcement of his most
lawful wife, to the detestable departing from the unity of Christ's Church,
this man made the foresaid protestation; and on the other side he let not to
make two solemn oaths quite contrary, and why? for otherwise by the laws and
Canons of this Realm, he could not aspire to the Archbishopric of Canterbury.


Cranmer. I protest before you all, there was never man came more unwilling to
a Bishopric then I did to that: In so much that when King Henry 8. did send
for me in post, that J should come over, I prolonged my Journey by seven weeks
at the least, thinking that he would be forgetful of me in the mean time.


Martyn. You declare well by the way, that the King took you to be a man of a
good conscience, who could not find within all his Realm, any man that would
set forth his strange attempts, but was enforced to send for you in post to
come out of Germany; what may we conjecture thereby, but that there was a
compact between you (being then Queen An's Chaplyn) and the King: give me the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, and J will give you license to live in adultery.


Cranmer. You say not true.


Martyn. Let your protestation joined with the rest of your Talks, give
Judgment. (...). Of that your execrable perjury, and his colored, and too
shamfully suffered adultery, (...) heresy and all mis-chief to this Realm.

And now to answer (...) of your Oration wherein you bring (...) God's (...) you
have it on your side, and no man else, and (...) the Pope has devised a new
Scripture contrary to the Scriptures of God, you play here in as the Pharisees
did, which cried alwais Verbum Domini, Verbum Domini, when they mean nothing
so. This bettereth not your case, because you say, you have God's word for you:
for so Basilides, and Photinus the Heretics said, that they had God's word to
maintain there Heresy. So Nestorius, so Macedonius, so Pelagius, and briefly
all the Heretics that ever were; yea and so the Devil being Father of
Heresies, alleged God's word for him, saying, Scriptum est, it is written: so
said he to Christ mitt^ to deorsum, cast thy self downward, says he; and so
taught you to cast all things downward, down with the Sacrament, down with
Muss, down with the Arms of Christ; and up with a Lion, and a Dog, down with
Abbyes, down with Chauntrers, down with Hospitalls and Colleges, down with
fasting and prayer, yea down with all that is good and Godly etc. And therefore
tell us not, you have God's word, for God had given us by his word a mark to
know that your teaching proceeded not of God, but of the Devil etc. For Christ
said there shall come against his Church r^vening wolves, and false Apostles:
And by their fruits ye shall know them. What be their fruits St. Paul
declares, After the flesh they walk in concupiscence, and vncleaness they
contemn Potentates etc. Whether these be not the fruits of your Ghospel, I
referr me to this worshipful Audience; whether the said Ghospel began not with
perjury, proceeded with adultery, was maintained with heresy, and ended in
Conspiracy.

Now Sir, two points more I marked in your raging discourse that you made here:
the one against the holy Sacrament, the other against the Pope's Jurisdiction,
and the Authority of the Sea Apostolic. Touching the first, you say you have
God's word with you, yea and all Doctors. I would here ask but one Question of
you: whether God's word be contrary to it self, and whether the Doctors teach
doctrine contrary to them-selves, or no* For, you Mr. Cranmer, have taught in
this High Sacrament of the Altar three contrary doctrins, and you pretend in
every one Verbum Domini the word of God.


Cranmer. Nay I taught but two contrary doctrins in the same.


Martyn. What doctrine taught you when you condemned Lambert the Sacramentary in
the King's presence in Whitehall?


Cranmer. I maintained then the Popish doctrine.


Martyn. That is to say the Catholic and Universal doctrine of Christ's Church;
and how when King Henry dyed? did you not translate Justus Jonas Book?


Cranmer. J did so.


Martyn. Then there you defended an other doctrine touching the Sacrament: by
the same token, that you sent to Lynne your printer, that whereas in the first
print there was an affirmative that is to say, Christ's body realy in the
Sacrament, you sent then to your printer to put in a Not, whereby it came
miraculously to pass, that Christ's body was clean conveyed out of the
Sacrament.


Cranmer. I remember there were two prints of my said Book, but where the same
( Not) was put in, I can not tell.


Martyn. Then from a Lutheran you became a Zwinglian, which is the vilest
heresy of all in the high mystery of the Sacrament, and for the same heresy you
did help to burn Lambert the Sacramentary, which you now call the Catholic
faith and God's word.


Cranmer. I grant that then J believed otherwise then J do now, and so J did
until my Lord of London Doctor Ridley did conferr with me, and by sundry
persuasions and authorities of Doctors, ^^^ew me quite from my opinion.


Martyn. Now Sir as ^ouching the last part of your Oracion, you denied that the
Pope's Holiness was supreme head of the Church of Christ.


Cranmer. J did so.


Martyn. Who say you (...) head?


Cranmer. Christ.


Martyn. But whom has Christ (...) here in earth his Vic^^ and head of his
Church?


Cranmer. No body.


Martyn. Ah, why ^ould you not King Henry this when you made him supreme head?
and now no body is. This is treason against his own person, as you then made
him.


Cranmer. I mean not but every King in his own Realm and Dominion is supreme
head, and so was he supreme head of the Church of Christ in England.


Martyn. Is this always true? and was it ever so?


Cranmer. It was so.


Martyn. Then what say you by Nero: he was the mightiest Prince upon the earth
after Christ was ascended. Was he the head of Christ's Church?


Cranmer. Nero was Peter's head.


Martyn. I ask whether Nero was head of the Church or no? If he were not, it is
falls that you said before, that all Princes be and ever were heads of the
Church within their Realms.


Cranmer. Nay, it is (...) for Nero was head of the Church, that is, in worldly
respect of the temporal bodies of men, of whom the Church consists: for so he
beheaded Peter and the Apostles. And the Turck too is head of the Church of
Turkey.


Martyn. Then he that beheaded the heads of the Church, and crucified the
Apostles, was head of Christ's Church; and h^ that was never member of the
Church, is head of the Church, by your new found understanding of God's word.

After th^se and diverse other questions to the same purpose, Doctor Brooks
Bishop of Gloucester spoke thus to Cranmer, you have bin conferred with all, not
once, nor twice, but often times, you have bin often lovingly admonis'd, you have
often bin secretly disputed with and the last year, in the open schools, in open
disputations you have bin openly convicted, you have bin openly driven out of
the schools with hisses; your Book which you brag you made seven years ago,
and no man answered it, Marcus Antonius has sufficiently detected, and
confuted, and you persist still in your wonted heresy; Wherefore (being so often
admonished, conferred withal, and convicted) if you deny you to be the man
whom the Apostle notes ( haereticum hominem) hear then what Origin says, who
wrote above 1300. years ago, and interprets the saying of the Apostle in
this wise (in Apologia Pamphili) Haereticus est omnis ille habendus qui Christo
se credere profitetur, and aliter de Christi veritate sentit quam se habet
Ecclesiastica traditio. He is to be deemed an heretic who professes to
believe in Christ, and yet judges otherwise of Christ's truth then the
tradition of the Church does hold etc. Wherefore I can no other but put you in
the number of them whom Chrysostom spoke of saying, Hear o thou Christian man;
will thou do more then Christ? Christ confuted the Pharisees, yet could he not
put them to silence: and fortior es tu Christo? and art thou stronger then
Christ? etc. Thus much have I said, not for you M.r Cranmer, for my hope I
conceived of you, is now gone and past, but in some what to satisfy the rude
and unlearned people, that they perceiving your arrogant lying, and lying
arrogance, may the better eschew your detestable and abominable schism.

Two things I wish the Reader did observe in this conference, 1. What a fair
Trial Cranmer and all other protetestants had before they were sentenced to
death for heresy in Q. Mary's days: they were heard speak for them-selves, and
reason for their opinions in public; such as desired it, had time and Books
given them to answer; and further time to correct their answers; whereas
Catholic Priests are not permitted to reason for their Religion in public by
word of mouth, much less are they allowed time or books to defend the same by
writing. 2. How little the most learned protestants could or can say for their
pre^ended (...)? and by consequence how obstinat they (...) upon that account;
and how well Origens (...) of heretics agreed, to Cranmer, Ridley, and the
rest of their learned Martyrs, and to all the Protestant Clergy, seeing they
reject Ecclesiastical Tradition, and that sense of Scripture which the Church
delivered from age to age, following their own private fancies, and fond
Interpretations. But from their Martyrised Clergy, let us go to the Confessors
and Doctors of their Church in Q. Mary's days, who were the same that revived
protestancy in Queen Elizabeth's reign.


SECT: III. Of the Protestant Clergy in Queen Mary's Reign, the same that
afterward founde^ Qeeen Elizabeth's Church. The^^ frauds, Factions, Cheats, and
changes of the English Protestant Religion during their Exile in Germany.
AS many of the English Protestant Clergy of King Eduard 6. as escaped the
severity of the ancient laws made against Heretics, which were revived by
Queen Mary, retired themselves to Germany and Zuitzerland, but found not that
pity and welcome they expected from their Brethren of the Reformation; The
English had made a Religion of their own, which was neither fully Lutheran
Zwinglian, nor Calvinian; their Liturgy was dislick't by all; See Dr. Heylins
Ecclesia resta (...) Queen Mary page 80.
only their doctrine against the Real presence of Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament was approved by some Zuinglians, but so condemned by the Lutherans,
that their Martyrs who suffered in England upon that score, were called the
Devill's martyrs by other Protestants; and they who harbored any of their
banished Clergy in Germany, Melancton in epitom 8. vbi vociferantur quidam,
Martyrs Anglicos, esse Martyrs diaboli. Jbid. pa. 80
were hated by their reformed-neighbors. For stopping the course (says Heylin)
of these uncharitable Censures, it was thought fit to translate from English
into Latin, Cranmers Book of the Sacrament, and forthwith see it printed; but
he does not tell us which of Cranmer's Books; that of Henry 8. or that of King
Edward 6.? We may be sure if he means Cranmer's Book of King Henry 8. time his
book and words were altered, that they might agree with the Lutheran
Consubstantiation in Germany, which Cranmer durst not defend in his Book of
Henry* 8. date; and his Book of Edward 6. was wholly Zuinglian or
Sacramentarian, which could not please Lutherans. So that the good English
Church and Clergy in Germany, made them-selves and Cranmer Lutherans, to avoid
persecution, and obtain favor in their sufferings, after having maintained the
quite contrary doctrine in their own Country, and exhorted their flocks to dye
for that Religion which them-selves now disowned.

This is not all, the like course was taken also at Geneva (says Heylin) by
the English exiles, Jbidem
by publishing in the Latin tongue a discourse writ by Bishop Ridley on the self
same argument (the Sacrament of the Altar) to the end it might appear unto all
the world how much their Brethren had bin wronged in these odious calumnies. So
that the English Protestant Clergy in Germany, among the Lutherans printed a
Book, and in Geneva a Calvinian discourse concerning the real presence, and
owned both as the doctrine of the Church of England; for Ridley (as you may
observe in his disputation at Oxford set down at large by Fox in his Acts and
Monuments) was a Calvinist in that ^oint. Was not this a Holy Church that
taught contrary (...) at least doctrine so uncertain that it might be applied
(...) contrary Tenets? was it not a sincere and sacred Clergy, that could fra^^
them-selves and the profession of their (...) to all (...) how ever so
disagreeing? But let us proceed.

The greatest number of the^e exiled Confessors were received in Franckford
upon condition they should conform them-selves unto the French Hugenots in
doctrine and ceremonies, Heylin. Ecclesia restaurata in Queen Mary pa 39 and
seqq.
which the holy men did so readily, that Doctor Heylin (who relates all these
passages) doubts whether the conditions were imposed upon them by the
Magistrates, or ^ought by them-selves. The chief heads of this English
Congregation at Francford were Wittingham, Williams, Goodman, Wood, and Sutton,
to whom afterward^ came Knox and White^ead. The first thing they did was, to
alter and dis-figure (says Heyl^^) the English Liturgy, which proceeding was
not approved of by Grindall, Horn, Sandys, Chambers, and Pakhurst: Calvin
therefore was consulted as their common Father, his answer was, that in the
English Liturgy, he had observed many (...) fooleries: that being, therwas not
manifest impiety in it, it had bin tolerated for a reason, because at first it
could not otherwise be admitted: but however though it was lawful to begin
with such beggarly rudiments, yet it behooved the learned, grave, and godly
Ministers of Christ, to endeavor farther, and set forth something more refi^ed
from filth and vncleaness.

How great a Cheat Calvin was, had bin partly said heretofore, but whosoever
desires to be fully informed of his particular villainies, and hypocrisy, let
him read his life written by Ierom Bolseck Anno 1577. There he will find how
Calvin continued to practice his execrable Sodomy, adultery etc. How he
compassed the Heretic Servetus his death under the pretense of Heresy, though
Calvin him-self wrote a book a little before to prove that no Heretic ought to
be put to death for his Religion; but the true cause o^ his quarrel to Servetus
was the frauds and falsifications that Servetus had discovered in Calvin's
Institutions, and published them. How he banished from Geneva diverse Ministers,
and Gentlemen that did not favor his way, and how he forged letters, and
suborned an Italian, to make Peter Wald^^^^^, and the Bal^asars, Traitors; but
they cleared them-selves, and the Lords of Bern gave public Testimony of their
innocence, and of Calvin's knavery. How this Cheat (to make him-self famous)
devised diverse letters and other works in praise of him-self, and published
them under the name of one Galatius, and others. But Peter Veretus Minister of
Lausa^a found out the truth, and threatened to discredit Calvin, who (to pacify
Veretus) writ to him that it was expedient by such means to get in credit for
their cause, and that he meant shortly to do as much in the commendation of
him, and Farellus also, and so stopped his mouth. How Calvin after that he had
broken and defaced the Jmages of Christ, and Saints in Geneva, caused his own
picture to be set up in diverse places, and used also to give little pictures and
Images of him-self to Gentle-women and Gentlemen to carry about their necks.
And when on told him that some thought much of this, he answered, he that
cannot abide it, let him burst for envy. And twenty more the like. But from
their Apostle Calvin, let us return to his flock the English exiled Clergy.

This Sentence of Calvin (says Heylin) was of such prevalency with all the
rest of that party, Heylin cit. page 61.
that such who formerly did approve, did afterward as much dislike the English
Liturgy; and those who at first had conceived only a dislike, grew afterward
into an open detestation of it. But in the end, to give content to such as
remained affected to the former Liturgy, it was agreed upon that a mixed form,
consisting partly of the order of Geneva, and partly of the Book of England,
should be digested, and received till the first of April, consideration in the
mean time to be had of some other course which should be permanent, and
oblidging for the time to come.

Here the Reader may observe the hipocrisy, and impiety of this Protestant
Cler^^* In England they imposed this Liturgy upon the whole Kingdom, as
agreeable to the word of God, and the work was pretended to have bin composed by
the assistence of the Holy Ghost (words of the Statut whereby it was made legal)
and thousands of Catholics were slain in many shires of England by the
Protector's forces, because they would no^ accept of it in steed of the Mass;
and now they who preached, and pressed this violence against Recusants, contemn
and reject their own doctrine and discipline. But as soon as Queen Elizabeth was
in possession of the Crown these very men who in Germany had so often changed,
and condemned their English Liturgy and Religion, now (to become Bishops)
turned again in England with the times, and were the chief (...) of that
Church. Page 60. Queen Mary.
Horn was named to the Sea of Winchester, Grindal to that of London, Sandys to
Worcester, Parkhurst to Norwich; and Whitehead was offered (if you believe
Heylin) the Archbishopric of Canterbury etc. And being thus exalted, were
never contented, until they had penal and sanguinary Statuts enacted against
Priest^ and Popish Recusants, for not conforming to that doctrine and Liturgy
these godly Prelates had so much slighted and altered in Germany, and postpon'd
to ^^lvin's discipline: and were ready to do the same or wors again in England,
if occasion had bin offered.

After that the English Liturgy had bin thus forsaken and despised in Germany,
D.r K^x, who had bin Schoolmaster and Almon^er to King Edward 6. arrived at
Franckford* and could with no patience (says Heylin) endure the rejection of
that Liturgy, in the drawing up whereof him-self had a principal hand, and
therefore disturbes the new discipline; Wittingham and Knox procured an Order
from the Magistrate against Kox his des^ign; but Kox accuses Knox for treason
against the Emperor, and therefore Knox is commanded by the Senate to depart
from Franckford* Kox procures Whitehead to be chosen for the principal Pastor,
appoints two Ministers for Elders, and four Deacons for Assistants; then gives
an account to Calvin, excusing him-self that he had proceeded so far without
his consent. By the way you may see that Kox was then a good Calvinist in
discipline, though afterward he became a Prelatick 1. Eliz. when he got the
Bishopric of Ely. Whitehead not able to rule such a contentious Congregation,
resigned his place to Horn, between whom and on Ashley were such factions and
divisions, that Horn with his Elders were forced to forsake their Offices; and
Ashleys party got the better, Heylin cit. page 63.
and composed a Book of discipline, according to the rules whereof the
Congregation was governed. The Magistrate not able to agree the difference,
sends for Cox and Sandys to compose it, but to no purpose: They who stood for
Ashley's new discipline, got the power into their hands, whereupon Horn and
Chambers depart to Strazburg. Such were the troubles and disorders (says
Heylin) in the Church of Franckford, occasioned first by a dislike of their
public Liturgy, before which they preferred the nakedness and simplicity of
the French and Genevian Churches, and afterward continued by the opposition
made by the general Body of the Congregation against such as were appointed to
be Pastors and Rulers over them.

An other argument of the sincerity, and Religion of this Clergy is, that
during the Reign of Queen Mary in England they taught and printed that the
Government of women is against the Law of nature, and not to be endured by
Christians; but as soon as she dyed, they writ and preached the quite contrary
in favor of Queen Elizabeth, whom they were not content to make temporal head
of the commonwealth, but supreme Governess of the Church in all Spiritual
affairs; we have seen their proceedings in Queen Mary's days, now to Queen
Elizabeth's.

SECT: IV. Abominable Frauds, and willful Falsifications of the Protestant
Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's reign, to maintain their doctrine, set forth under
the name of an Apology, and defense of the Church of England.
AFter that Queen Elizabeth (by giving hopes to the Earl of Arundell that she
would marry him, Schism Angl. page 107.
and by promising* other favors to the Duke of Norfolck) had by their
solicitations gained most of the nobility, Dr Heylin 1. Eliz. page 107.
and the Lords and Gentlemen who had the managing of elections in their several
Counties, had retained such men for (...) of the House of Commons, as they
conceived mo^^ likely to comply with the Queens new design in reviving that
Religion, which but five years before, them-selves and the whole Kingdom had
rejected as damnable heresy and groundless novelty, devised by some l^w'd
revolted Friars* and Priests* and had observed how all sober and conscien^ious
men we^^ troubled to see so shameful a change, introduced only for maintaining
the weakness of a title against the clear right of the Stewards; and fearing
least this scruple might spread, and work upon the consciences of the illiterat
multitude, D.r Heylin Eccl: restaur. Q. Elizabeth page 103.
it was thought fit to command Bishop Jewel (the fittest man for so impudent
an undertaking) to assert the antiquity of the particular Tenets of the New
Church of England; and so in form of a Challenge against all Roman Catholics
he published at Paul's Cross that the Religion which the Queen and Parliament
had then established by Law, was no novelty, nor new invented sense of
Scripture, but the same which our Savior and his Apostles delivered to the
Church, and all Orthodox Christians held for the first 600. years; which thing
he undertook to demonstrat by undeniable Testimonies of the Holy Fathers that
lived in those six first Centuries.

The words of this Challenge we have set down heretofore, part. 3. Sect. 1.
as also the confutation thereof. One Rastal having writ against this challenge,
Jewel together with the rest of the Bishops, and learned Protestant Clergy,
composed that famous Apology for the Church of England both in Latin and
English; it came out first in the name of their whole Church, though I believe
Jewel had the wording of it, because afterward his name was set to it, and to
the defense thereof; but without doubt all the able men of the English Clergy
had their hands and heads in the work. Against it diverse appeared in print,
Stapleton, Sanders, and Harding: whereupon (says Dean Walsingham in his search
of Religion page 166.) Mr. Jewel within few years after set forth the reply to
D.r Harding, which was esteemed to have bin made by joint labors of the most
learned men in England, both in London, and the Universities.

But in these their labors they were convicted of a thousand and odd
falsifications, Harding in his rejoind erto Mr. Iewel's reply 1556. in his
epistle to the Reader.
and yet (says Harding) of 26. articles, only five have passed our
examination: Imagine then what number is like to rise of the whole work; I will
mention but one or two of every controversy, I hope that is sufficient to
prove, that no one point wherein Protestants differ from Roman Catholics, can
be maintained, even by the most learned Protestants, without frauds, falsehoods,
and impostures, And do choose to instance particulars out of this Apology, and
defense of the Church of England, because it is not only the work of their
first Bishops and Clergy, Dr. Heylin in his Eccles. restaurata hist. Q Eliz. p.
130. and 131
and the very bulwork of their Church, but (as D.r Heylin truly says) the
Magazin from whence all the Protestant Controversies since that time have
furnished them-selves with arguments and authorities. We will omit most of
their corruptions of Scripture in the Apology because we have convicted them
el^^where of that crime; but that they may not imagine we what matter even in
this work of theirs, let the curious read (...) Epistle to M.r Jewel, set
before his return (...) vntruth^, where he tells him, you have falsified and
mangled the very Text of Holy Scripture, namely of Saint Paul, in one Chapter
nine times; as the reader may see in the third article of his Book fol. 107.

SVBSECT I. The Protestant Clergy convicted of falsehood in their Apology
concerning Communion under one kind.
BIshop Jewel and his Associats maintain with most Protestants, that to
receive the B. Sacrament (...) one kind only, is against the institution of
Christ^ and therefore could not be allowed nor practiced by the Church, nor ever
was, during the first six hundred years. So that the Controversy between the
Church of England, and Harding, is, whether in the first 600. years after
Christ any Communion were ministered under one kind, Eusebius. in Hist. Eccles. lib
6. c. 36. Jewel reply page 134.
or no* which they (under the name of M.r Jewel) deny, against whom Harding
gives an instance out of the Ecclesiastical History of one Serapian, that was
Communicated in his death under one kind only. Mr. Jewel seeing him-self
convicted, replieth; That it is not our question, we understand not of private
Communion, but of public in the Church; and yet in the first proposing of the
Question there was no mention of the Church, or Public; and the whole
controversy between Catholics and Protestants is, whether with out breach of
Christ's Institution, any man might communicate under one kind only.

Then Mr. Jewel is demanded whether if it may be proved that sick persons have
received the Communion under one kind in the Church, it will satisfy him? where
to he answers, no: saying, the only thing that I denied is, that ye are not
able to bring any one sufficient example, or authority, Jewel page 132.
that ever the whole people received the Communion in open Church in one kind
within that time; then he is urged further, whether if it can be proved that in
closs chapels, and Oratories, in wilderness and caves, in time of persecution
the communion was practiced under one kind, this would satisfy him, for so
much as this proves Christ's Institution not to forbid Communion under one
kind? But M.r Jewel leapeth also from this, saying, the question is whether the
Holy Communion were ever ministered openly in the Church? It being manifest that
for the first 300. years until Constantin's time, the Christians in most
places, particularly at Rome, had no open Churches, but private Oratories, and
caves. At length being demanded whether Infants receaving the Communion under
one kind openly in the Church, was a sufficient example? Jewel answers, Mr.
Harding makes his whole plea upon an Jnfant, and yet of Infants, as he
knows, I spoke nothing.

Mr. Harding presses him with the example of the two disciples, Luc. 24.
Chrysostom. ho. 17. in Math. Aug. de consensu Evang. l. 3.6.25. de sermon. 140.
Theophil. alii
to whom Christ our Savior did give the Communion under one kind only at
Emaus, as by the Text of Scripture, and Jnterpretation of ancient Fathers is
plain, he alleges also the examples of S.t Ambrose, and S.t Basil, who
received the Sacrament under one kind, though they were Priests. Whereunto M.r
Jewel answers, this is not to the purpose, for the question is moved, of lay
people, M.r Harding brings examples of Christ, and two disciples who were of
the number of 72. and therefore it may well be thought they were ministers, and
not of the lay sort, I demanded of the layty, M.r Harding answers of St.
Ambrose, and St. Basil which were Bishops. Which evasion is not only
fraudulent, but foolish, as if, forsooth, Priests and Bishops might receive and
communicate under one kind, lay men might not: But any weak answer is sufficient
for credulous people to persist in obstinacy.

At length being convicted by his Adversary of an example where the layty and
whole people received openly under one kind, and in the Church, he answers,
this is not sufficient, for, says he, the point demanded is, that the
Sacrament was never ministered unto the people under one kind onl^ in any
Congregation, or in open order and usage of any Church, and that it will not
follow that this was the common order of the Church. By which new addition of
Common, Order, and Usage, the whole state of the Question is changed, and Jewel
convicted as you see* of many frauds, and falsehoods. And not only he, but all
the Protestant Clergy, who notwithstanding the acknowledged evidence, and their
conviction (by these examples and many others, whereof they are not ignorant)
that Christ did not command the Communion to be given under both kinds to the
Layty (nor even to Priests when they do not o^^er Sacrifice) yet are they so
inconscionable as to impose upon illiterat people, that they ought not to be of
the Roman Catholic Church, because we deprive them (contrary to Christ's
Institution and precept) of one half of the Communion, without which they
cannot be saved.

SVBSECT II. How Jewel and the Church of England make the very same Holy
Fathers they appealed unto in other matters, wicked Heretics, because they
condemned Priests marriage.
JEwel's Adversaries having quoted against his bold assertions the
unanswerable sayings of sundry Fathers of the first 600. years condemning the
marriage of Priests and Votaries; the English Clergy, (by Jewel's pen) rather
then acknowledge their error, and relinquish their wenches, Jewel def. of the
Apology fol. 222.
and pretended wives, resolved to declare the holy Fathers Heretics, saying,
diverse of the holy Fathers have written over b^sely, J will not say vildly and
scandalously, of the state of matrimony in general, calling it in all kind of
men, fornication, an evil thing, and like to adultery: Therefore J say they may
much less be taken as indifferent Judges in Priests marriages. So that the
Church of England in their Apology, and Protestants now a days would fain make
the ancient Fathers, and all who write against the marriage of Priests, to be
those heretics St Paul said would teach doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4.^ and 3.
and speak against marriage in general; witness Jewel with the first Bishops
and Clergy of Queen Elizabeth. But because Jewel, and his fellow Bishops would
not seem to want examples of holy Bishops that were actualy husbands, they
corrupt the Ecclesiastical History, and belly the Authors thereof ( Niceph. lib.
10. Hist. c. 10. Zozon. lib. 5. c. 11. Cassiod. lib. 6. cap. 14.) and pretend
that they recount how Eusychius Bishop (says Jewel) of Cesaraea, dyed in
martyrdom, Apol. defenc* page 176.
having married a wife a little before; whereas the said Authors have not on word
of his being Bishop, or Priest; but rather do evidently show that he was a lay
nobleman, Patricius Cesaraeae Cappadociae, a Sentaor's son of that City,
highly commended, for that having newly married a wife, yet was so constant in
his martyrdom. In like manner do they falsify ( Apol. 2. c. 8.) St. Gregory
Nazianzen, Pretending he says, speaking of his own Father, that a good and
diligent Bishop does serve in the Ministry never the worse for that he is
married, but rather the better; and this falsification being objected by
Harding, Jewel and his Camerades, prove it by pretending that St. Gregory
acknowledged his mother was his father's Teacher, and leader in Ecclesiastical
functions (as perhaps some Protestant Bishops wives are) whereas it is evident
that the Saint spoke of his father when he was not a Christian, and because he
was converted by his Mother, a^ St. Monica converted St. Austin's Father, see
Harding detect. fol. 63.

SVBSECT III. Bishop Jewel and his Associats wickedness in Charging Cardinal
Hosius and all Catholics with a contempt of Holy Scripture against their own
knowledge, and after that they had bin admonished of the imposture.
CArdinal Hosius in his Book de expresso verbo Dei, as also in an other de
haeresibus, against Brentius; complained of the multitude of Sects and Heresies
sprung up in our days, all of them pretending Scripture for their ground. So
far forth that Luther him-self seeing the event thereof, said the Bible was now
become liber haereticorum, the Book of Heretics: and then further the same
Cardinal showing that there was a new later brood sprung up of Zuinck feldian
Heretics, who by pretense of Scripture did take away all authority of written
Scriptures, persuading men only to attend to inspirations and inward
revelations, alleging for that their doctrine the words of the Psalm, J will
hear what the Lord speaks in me, and many other such Texts misconstred; Mr.
Jewel and the English Protestant Clergy would needs publish this as Hosius his
own words, sense, and meaning, with great outcries and invectives against both
him, the Pope, and all Catholics, as though we had bin of opinion that all
written Scriptures were to be rejected: (as may be seen in his Apology both in
Latin and English, and Doctor Harding's confutation of the same:) and
notwithstanding that before this Apology was printed in Latin they were told of
his mistake, yet they would needs have it pass.

And when the said Apology was translated into English, they were put again in
mind of his malicious and fraudulent dealing, and earnestly desired to correct
this wilful mistake, but they rather did aggravate the calumny then confess
their error; for they commanded it should be printed, and sought by some
additions in the English Text more then was in the Latin, to justify this
former villainy; Harken says the Apology how holily, and how Godly on Hosius
writes of this matter, a Bishop in Polonia, as he testifyeth of him-self,
Jewel Apol cap. 19 divis. l. and in defen. fol. 517.
a man doubtless well spoken, and not unlearned, and a very sharp and stout
Maintainer of that side. Thou will mervail I suppose how any good man could
either conceive so wickedly, or write so dispitefully of those words, which he
knew proceeded from God's mouth, and especialy in such sort as he would not
have it seem his own private opinion alone, but the common opinion of all that
Band. He dissembleth, J grant you indeed, and hides what he is, and sets
forth the matter so, as though it were not he and his side, but the Zuink
feldian Heretics that so did speak: We (says he) will bid away with the
Scriptures, whereof we see brought, not only diverse, but all contrary
Interpretations; we will hear God speak, rather then resort to the naked
elements, or bare words of the Scripture etc.

Having written this and other such speeches as proceeding from Hosius; Jewel
and his Camerades conclude thus. This is Hosius his saying, uttered together
with the same spirit, and the same mind, wherewith in times past Montanus and
Marcion were moved etc. And then exclaims against all Papists in these words?
what shall J say here, O ye principal posts of Religion? and ye Arch-Governors
of Christ's Church? Is this your reverence which you give to God's word? to bid
them avaunt away etc. no mervaile if these men despise us and all our doings,
which set so little by God him-self, and his infallible saying. Thus they write
and inveigh against Hosius, and all the Roman Church, even after they knew, and
had bin twice admonished that the whole ground was falls and forged by
them-selves.

Hosius his own words are, there is sprung up a certain new kind of Prophets,
who have not bin afraid by the authority of Scripture, to take away all
authority from the Scripture. Behold whither Satan at length has brought this
matter etc. And after, Nihil Scriptura sanctius, etc. Nothing is more holy then
Scripture, nothing more noble or excellent, there is nothing next to God
himself more worthy of all veneration and reverence: but what thing can there
be so holy, which the enemy of mankind may not abuse to man's destruction etc.
Thus Hosius: how hardly his words could be wrested, or mistaken by Jewel and
his Confederats, all the world may see, and ought to detest a Reformation, that
can not be otherwise maintained, then by such palpable impostu^es.

SVBSECT IV. Falsifications and Frauds against the Bishop of Rome his supremacy.
JEwel and his Associats cyting a Constitution of the Emperor Justinian,
against the Pope's supremacy, say: Reply page 239.
The Emperors words stand thus, Sancimus etc. Senioris Romae Papam, primum
esse omnium Sacerdotum: Beatissimum autem Archi-Episcopum Constantinopolios
novae Romae secundum habere locum: which words Mr. Jewel Englisheth thus, We
ordain that the Pope of the elder Rome shall be the first of all Priests, and
that the most holy Archbishop of Constantinople, which is named new Rome, have
the second place. Of which Mr. Jewel and the English Church infer, that the
Pope's Authority, and preeminency in those days consisted only in sitting in
the first place; and that this dignity also was given him by the secular power
of the Emperor: First, Jewel and his Camerades, by ^n etc. did hope to make
the Emperor spiritual head of the Church, and by consequence derive the same
prerogative to all secular Princes in their own Dominions; for they
fraudulently omitted the words whereby the whole matter is cleared; the words as
they stand in the Constitution of Justinian, are these: Sancimus secundum
Canonum definitiones, sanctissimum senioris Romae Papam, primum esse omnium
Sacerdotum etc. we do ordain, according to the determination of the Canons etc.
But had they not concealed these words, they had discovered the weackness of
their doctrine of the Queen's supremacy, because those few words according to
the definition of the Canons, import, that this ordination or declaration of
the Emperor was grounded upon the authority of the Canons of the Church, which
he did but confirm, and command the execution of the Decrees and Declarations
of Counsels by his Imperial power.

The second fraud is, that they translate, primum esse omnium Sacerdotum, thus,
that he shall be the first of all Priests:, whereas the Emperor uses the
present tense, declaring that the Pope is the Chief of all Priests, not shall
be. By Iewel's falls Translation they intended to impose upon such as
understand not Latin (or at least are so careless as not to compare this Text
with the English) that Popes had not bin the first or chief of all Priests
before that Decree of Justinian; and that spiritual supremacy came to them by
virtue thereof.

Not content with this fraud, they add an other in the very next words of this
Constitution, which are these: We ordain also that the most Holy Archbishop of
Justiniana the first, which is our Country, shall have for ever under his
Jurisdiction the Bishops of the Provinces, of Dacia, Dania, Dardania, Mysia,
and Panonia, and that they shall be invested by him, and he only by his own
Council, and that he in the Provinces subject unto him, shall have the place of
the Apostolic sea of Rome etc. Out of which words Mr. Jewel and his English
Prelatick Clergy infer thus, Here we see the Bishop of Iustiniana set in as
high authority and power with in his own Jurisdiction, as the Bishop of Rome
with in his. But had they bin as honest as the Protestant Layty take them to
be, all the world might have seen the Roman truth, and their falsehood; for they
deceitfully cut of the ensuing words that expound and declare the whole matter:
the words cut of are, secundum ea quae sanctus Papa Vigilius constituit; we
ordain that these things shall be don and observed* according to that which the
Holy Pope Vigilius had constituted; so that as in the former decree the
Emperor professes him-self to have ordained according to the definitions of
the Canons, so here in particular he professes to have confirmed the
Constitutions of the holy Pope Vigilius, who had made the Archbishop of
Iustiniana to be his legate, and to hold the place of the Apostolic^ Sea of
Rome in those Provinces: not unlike to that of St. Gregory, Bid lib. 1. cap.
27.
who according to venerable Bede in his history, gave the like Authority to St.
Augustine our first Archbishop of Canterbury, by which Concession they have
always bin called Legati nati sedis Apostolicae.

Not content to conceal the words and the truth of Imperial Decrees, and
Ecclesiastical Histories, Jewel and the English Clergy were neither ashamed nor
afraid to corrupt Scripture to the same purpose against the Pope's supremacy.
For, pretending that the words of Christ to St. Peter, Thou art a Rock,
Scripture corrupted.
and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and again, feed my Lambs, feed my
sheep, were spoken as well to all the Apostles as to St. Peter; in the Apology
of the Church of England, is quoted for proof hereof an other saying of our
Savior, Quod vni dico, omnibus dico, that which I say to one, I say to all,
which sentence is not found in Scripture, but an otherlike it, though to an
other purpose, to wit, about the watchfulness which our Savior would have all
men use for the day of Judgment Quod vobis dico, omnibus dico, vigilate: Math.
13.37^
That which I say to you (here present) I speak to all (both absent and to
come) be watchful of this day, whereof Mr. Jewel, and his Colleagues could not
be ignorant; and yet thus he insulted, Mr. Harding affirms, That to the rest
of the Apostles it was not said at all feed ye etc. to Peter and to non else was
it said feed my Lambs, feed my sheep: yet Christ him-self says quod vni dico,
omnibus dico, that y say to one I say to all: And quoted for it Marck the 13.

SVBSECT V. Frauds and fond devices of the protestant Clergy of England to deny
and discredit the Sacrifice of the Mass.
DOctor Harding having proved out of the Testimony of Leontius Bishop of Cyprus
that John the holy Patriarch of Alexandria said Mass, and received alone, Jewel
and his Camerades answer thus. A straight case for Mr. Harding to run to
Alexandria a thousand miles beyond all Christendom so seck his Mass. As if at
that time Alexandria were not almost in the amidst of Christendom, or though
it had bin in the amidst of Infidells, as if that could be an argument of any
force against the truth of Christian doctrine, which was no less pure when it
was preached and practiced amongst Jdolaters, then at this present among
Christians.

Doctor Stapleton confuting some objections of the English Apology against
Harding, quotes both his words and Iewell's thus; St. Andrew the Apostle (says
Mr. Harding) touching the substance of the Mass, worshipping God every day with
the same service as Priests now do in celebrating the external Sacrifice of the
Church. Mr. Jewel thus answers; The 6. untruth, S. Andrew said the Communion,
not the Mass. Mr. Harding* says further, They shall find the same most plainly
treated of and a form of Mass much agreeable to that which is used in these
days, set forth by St. Dyonise scholar to St. Paul. Mr. Jewel, The ninth
untruth, It is the very form of the Communion, and nothing like the private
Mass. Mr. Harding again: I referr them instead of many, to the two Fathers
Basil and Chrysostom. whose Masses be lest to posterity in these times. Mr.
Jewel, the 11. untruth; they contain the very order of the Communion. Mr.
Harding yet further. Among all other Fathers Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus is not
to be passed over lightly, who at large expounds the whole Mass used in
Jerusalem in his time, the same which now we find in old St. Clement long
before him and others. Mr. Jewel, the 12. untruth, It is the very express
order of the Communion. And after this ^^^^ulous manner of contradicting
without confuting Doctor Harding's particular instances, Jewel exclaims, O Mr.
Harding is it not possible your Religion, Staplet. return fol. 32 and 33.
may stand without lies? so many untruths in so little room, without the shame
of the world, without fear of God etc.

His fond fraud is detected, and his untruths returned upon him-self by D.r
Stapleton, who tells Bishop Jewel, that in the Catholic sense the Mass and
Communion are the self same thing in substance, the Communion being a principal
part of the Mass, without which there is no sacrificie: for which cause the
Priest always communicates either alone or with others, when company does
offer it self, or are prepared for it, and consequently it is a fraud says he
( M.r Jewel) to put a contradiction between Communion and private Mass, as
though the one could not stand with the other; saying that the forenamed
Fathers which are cited to have said Mass, said the Communion, and no Mass,
where as we (says M.r Sta^^^ton) hold that they did both, and said the one
and the other, that is, they celebrated the daily sacrificie and therwithall
did communicate.

But if M.r Jewel mean of the English Communion, where in no external
Sacrifice, nor real presence of Christ's body is acknowledged or believed, then
proves D.r Stapleton, that the foresaid Fathers cannot possibly be understood
to speak of that Communion, for that in their said Liturgies they do make
express mention of the Real presence of Christ's flesh therein, and of the
offering up (as the express words of S. Andrew are) of the Sacred body and
blood of Christ our Savior in Sacrifice unto God his Father. And moreover in
St. Dionise his Mass there is express mention of Oblation and Consecration of
the Mysteries, of prayer for the Dead, of Altars, Censing, Jn vita St. Andreae
pet Presbiter^^ Achaiae.
Communion and memory of Saints; all which things are not in the English
Liturgy or Communion, and much more. He shows the same in the Mass or
Liturgies of St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom; where, after the Oblation made of
the Sacrifice, commemoration is made also of the blessed Saints in heaven, and
namely of our B. Lady, and St. John Baptist, and of the Saint of the day, and
of prayer for the Dead: which last clause St. Cyrill does explicat more
particularly, saying: when we offer up this Sacrifice, after (the Oblation) we
make mention of those which have departed this life before us; And first of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, that by their prayers and
intercessions, Almighty God may receive our prayers, And then we pray for the
Holy Fathers and Bishops departed, and lastly we pray for all men which among
us have deceased, believing it to be a great relief of souls for whom the
intercession of that Holy and dreadful Sacrifice, which is laid upon the
Altar, is offered.

These are the words of St. Cyrill, whereupon Mr. Stapleton demands: Is this
the express order of your Communion? Here you see (says he) is Oblation,
Sacrifice, Altar prayer to Saints, prayer for the Dead, and is all this don in
your English Communion? And now I hope we may with more reason exclaim against
Jewel and the Church of England* then they did against (...), is it not
possible your Religion may stand without l^es?

SVBSECT VI. Prelatick Falsifications and Corruptions of Scripture to make the
Pope Antichrist, and Succession of Bishops, a mark of the Beast.
ONe of the things which most troubled Bishop Jewel, and the first Protestant
Prelates of Queen Elizabeth, was there notorious want of Episcopal Caracter, and
succession derived from the Apostles; all the true Bishops of England refusing
to ordain them, after that them-selves had bin violently deprived of their Seas
by the Queen's Command, See heretofore part. 1.
for not conforming to her she supremacy, and new doctrine. Mr. Jewel therefore
and his Camerades, observing how much their cause was prejudiced by this want
of Succession, published and preached many things to discredit the same; and to
that purpose in the defense of the Apology of the Church of England, th^^ write
thus. By succession Christ says that desolation shall (...) the Holy place,
See the defense page 132.
and Antichrist shall press into the room (...): and for proof they note in
the margent, Mat. 24. And in the same defense ( page 127.) they say, of
Succession St. Paul says to the faithful at Ephesus, I know that after my
departure hence ravening wolves shall enter, and succeed me, and (...) of your
selves there shall (by succession) spring up men speaking perversely. Whereas St.
Paul has never a word of succession (...) succeeding, neither is there any
mention of succession in Matthew 24. But the quite contrary is evident by the
nature of the thing it self, for that Antichrist entering by violence, shall
(...) dissolve all lawful succession of Priests, and Bishops continued from
the Apostles time to his time, then enter himself by succession; which point
seems to have bin foretold by St. Paul S. Cyprian lib. 1. ep. 6. ad magn,
Novatian is not in the Church, nor can he be computed a Bishop, who succeeding
to none and contemning the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition, is ordained
by him-self. And a little after, He who succeeds no body, and begins from
him-self is a stranger, and profane.


to the Thessalonians Optatus lib. 2. cont. Parmen; There (...) of their own
heads without Divine disposition (...) them-selves over rash people assembled
together, who make them-selves Prelates, without (...) of ordination, and take
upon them the name of Bishops, and Bishoprics without having received them
from any. S. Austin ex quaest. in nov. and (...)* Tostam. 100. says of
Heretics, They pertur^e the order begun from the Apostle Peter, and observed
until this time by a continuation of succeeding Bishops; they set up an Order
for them-selves without a beginning. And tom. 7. contra epist. Manich. cap. 4.
Tenet a^ ipsa Petri Sede etc. vsque ad pr^sentem Episcopatum successio
Sacerdotum. See Jren. l. 3. adversus haeres. c. 3.


when he says, that except defection (or Apostasy) go before, (which is an
open breach from orderly succession and subordination) the man of sin shall not
be revealed. So that Succession which by all the ancient and Holy Doctors is
believed and defended to be a mark of the true Church, is affirmed by Jewel
and the first Protestant Bishops to be a mark of Antichrist, and to prove this
their non sense, they are pleased to falsify Scripture; and all this was don,
because they knew them-selves wanted succession and imposition of Episcopal
hands, and were made Bishops only by the Queen's letters patents, and
dispensation with the inhability of their very state and condition, and
legitimated, or made legal by an Act of Parliament 8. Elizabeth 1.

SVBSECT VII. Prelatick Falsifications to prove that Popes may, and have
decreed Heresies.
IN the Apology of the Church of England part. ^. cap. 5. Jewel and the
English Clergy affirm, that Pope John 22. held a wicked and detestable opinion
of the life to come, and Jmmortality of the soul, which accusation they had
out of Calvin, whose words are, that Pope John affirmed man's soul to be
mortal; This being proved to be a lie, by Doctor Harding; Jewel and his Clergy
replied in the defense of the Apology thus, Gerson writes in Sermons Paschali;
Pope John 2^. to have decreed that the souls of the wicked should not be
punished before the day of the last Judgment, by which words, Defense Apolog.
page 6^7.
as you shall see, instead of clearing one falls accusation against John 22 they
bring in another; for Gerson has no such words; but the true controversy was
indeed, whether the souls of the just (not of the wicked) should see God face
to face, before the day of Judgment, or not; wherein Pope John being Reader of
Divinity in France, before he was Pope, inclined to the negative part: the
Controversy was decided after Pope John's death i^ the extravagant of Pope
Benedictus.

Not content with this Jmposture they add an other greater in confirmation of
their former Charge, fathering in the same and these ensuing words upon the
Council of Constance Quinimo Ioannes Papa 22. yea Pope John the two and
twentieth, In appendic^ Conc. Consta. in primis. page 29.2.
held and believed obstinatly that the soul of man did dye with the body, and
was extinguished as the souls of the bruit Beasts. And more over he said, that
a man once dead, is not to rise again, no not at the last day.

First this Testimony does not touch Pope John 22. at all but an Antipope John
usurping the Popedom, and calling him-self John 23. and this a hundred years
after Pope John 22.

2. These words are not words of the Council, but words of an accusation used
by a certain man that did accuse him in the Council of Constance, under the
name Baltazar de Cossa calling him-self John 23. where laying against him 35.
articles, concerning his wicked life, before he took upon him the said name of
Pope, which Articles were proved, but not this point of Heresy.

SVBSECT VIII. Prelatick Falsifications to prove that Popes have insulted over
Kings.
THe Apology of the Church of England does set forth how a Pope commanded the
Emperor to go by him at his horse bridle, and the French King to hold his
stirrup, and the like, which Mr. Harding proves to be lies; then it says that
the Pope hurled under his table Francis Dandalus the Duke of Venise, King of
Creta and Cyprus, fast-bound with chains, to feed of bones among his dogs. But
neither Francis Dandalus was Duke of Venice, when he was sent to the Pope in
this Embassage, neither was he King of Creta nor Cyprus, that name (of King)
not being tolerable in the free State of Venice; and as for the Duke at that
time, his name was Johannes Superantius, and Dandalus was but a private man,
sent Ambassador to Clement 5. then Pope to obtain the revocation of an
Jnterdict, which was laid upon the said City; and finding the Pope some what
hard to yield to his supplication, he devised of him-self this Stratagem, to
cause an Iron chain to be put about his own neck, and to creep in upon his
hands and knees while the Pope was at dinner, and there lay down under the
Table, Justinian. l. 4. Histor. Venet. Bemb. Hist. Venet. Sabel. Decad 2. l
1.^20. and Ennead. 9. lib. 8.260.
and would not rise until he had obtained pardon and remission for his
Country: and this Doctor Harding proves out of the principal Authors and
writers of the Venetian Commonwealth.

SVBSECT IX. Prelatick Falsifications to prove that S. Austin the Apostle of
our English Saxons was an hypocrit, and no Saint; as also to discredit
Catholic writers.
BIshop Jewel and his Prelatick Clergy in their reply to the Objections
against their Apology for the Church of England (page 185.) speak thus of St.
Austin the Monk and Apostle of England: He was a man, as is judged by them that
(...) and knew him, neither of an Apostolical spirit, nor any way (...) to be
called a Saint, but an hypocrit, and a supperstitious (...), cruel, bloody,
and proud out of measure. There is no ^riting extant of any man, that saw him
and knew him alive, but only of St. Gregory the Great, Gregory l. 7. epist 30.
Indict. ll. Bid l 2. c. 3. Hist.
who commended him exceedingly; and of Saint Bede that lived not very long after
him, who writes also much of his Sanctity and miracles: who then (...) those
who lived with him and knowing him, did Judge him to be so bad a man? Jewel
cites only in the margent Greffey of Monmouth, who lived near six hundred
years after St. Austins days.

Bishop Jewel and his Camerades say also that Ioannes de Magistris (he would
have said Martinus) writ in his Book de Temperantia, that fornication is no
sin; but this Author houlds the quite contrary, and proves it by six several
conclusions, 1. Cor. 16.
and by St. Paul saying that it excludes from the Kingdom of heaven; but yet
for that he says in the beginning, Apol. of the Church of England part. 4.
Arguitur quod non, it may be objected to the contrary, the Apologists
foolishly and fraudulently accuse (in this Author) Roman Catholics with
damnable doctrine. Much more might be said of their falls dealing in this
Apology, defense, and reply, of the Church of England; but we remit the curious
to Doctor Harding, Stapleton etc.

SVBSECT X. Of the protestant prelatick Clergies frauds, and falsifications of
Scripture, and alterations of their 39. Articles of Religion, to make the
people believe that they have true Priests and Bishops in the Church of England.
THe point most insisted upon by Dr. H^rding, Stap^^t^n etc: and all (...)
Catholic (...) their Boo^^ (...) the (...) and (...) of the Church of England*
was, that it could not (...) Church, because it had not any one true Bishop,
and according to St. Hierom (says Harding) (...) non est quae non habet (...),
which word (...) signifies Bishop as well as (...)* That the Church of England
had (...) (in the beginning of Queen Eliza^^^^ Reign, whom Harding and
Stapleton writ against it) as much as one Bishop validly consecrated, they
proved; because not one of them was consecrated by a true Bishop, or by
imposition of Episcopal hands: and if they durst say they were* Harding and
Stapleton challenged them to name him. Who has laid hands on you? how and by
whom are you consecrated (says Harding and Stapleton? How chanced then ( Mr^
Jewel) that you and your fellows bearing your selves for Bishops etc. have
taken upon you that Office without any Imposition of hands? J ask not who gave
you Bishoprics, but who made you Bishops? Me thinks Jewel and his Camerades,
the first Protestant Bishops, might easily have answered, by only naming the
person who consecrated them, and the place of their consecration: But not a
word of this point. Jewel indeed once attempted to answer something, Jewel
defense of the Apology page 130.
but it had bin better for himself and his Companions, he had said nothing,
for, his silence to the question might have bin interpreted a slighting of the
demand, by the Bigots of his Church, that endeavor to make the most palpable
absurdities probable answers in this and other Controversies.

Jewel therefore says, himself was a Bishop by the free and accustomed
Canonical election of the whole Chapter of ^^lesbury; but to the question how
he, or Parker, together with the first Bishops, were consecrated; or by whom?
not one (...). After having first contented himself (and by conse^^nce
Archbishop Parker and his other Camerades that were ^^^stioned) with a bare
election of the Chapter, instead of an Episcopal consecration, yet he adds our
Bishops are made in form (...) Order, as they have bin ever, by free election
of the Chapter, (...) consecration of the Archbishop, and three other Bishops.

Here we may observe both fraud and folly: because he does not answer to the
question: his adversary asks him how himself and the first protestant Bishops
(whereof Archbishop (...) was one, and the chief) were consecrated, and by
whom? (...) lieu of answering, Archbishop Parker, my self, and the other (...)
Bishop were consecrated by such a man, and in such a place, (...) his
Adversary, our Bishops are made by consecration of the Archbishop etc. Perhaps
he meant that Archbishop Parker con^^^rated himself, by imposition of his own
hands: therefore Harding tells him, and how I pray you was your Archbishop
himself consecrated. (For that was the question and main point of the
Controversy) what three Bishops were there in the realm to (...) hands on him?
etc. There were ancient Bishops enough in England, who either were not
required, or refused to consecrate you. (He alludes to the Bishop of Landaff,
who refused to consecrate them at the nags-head, and to the Irish Archbishop
Creagh, who refused also to lay hands on them, though they offered him his
liberty, being then prisoner in the Tower, if he would do them that favor.

What Parker, Horn, Jewel, and none of the first Bishop^ could do, but some
five or six years after their pretended conconsecration; their successors of
the Church of England have don, above fifty years after. They showed in the
year 1613. a Register not only with the names of Parker's Consecrators, but
with a description of the tapestry on the east side of the Chapel, read
(...), Sermon, Communion, concourse of people, etc. at the solemnity of his
consecration at Lambeth forsooth, and yet neither Parker himself, nor any
Protestant, or Catholic ever heard of such a solemnity, Consecration, or
Consecrators, when both parties were so highly engaged about the names, of the
place and persons; and made it the subject of printed Books* and all this
their contest was in a time that it might have been soon ended by (...), or
Horn's only writing (in their answers to (...) of their Adversaries) the names
of (...) place of their Consecration, without troubling themselves with copying
(...) of the Registers, the richness of the tapestry, or the color of the
cloth, etc. menmentioned by M.r Mason, to make the fable credible by so common
and ordinary stuff, seeing he durst not venture upon more individual
circumstances.

But because no Protestant can believe so great (...) was kept about ^^thing,
M.r Mason, Primat Bramhall, D.r Heylin, and all other modern prelatick writers,
endeavor to persuade the layty of the Church of England, that the dispute
between Harding and Jewel, Stapleton and Horn, was not about the validity, but
concerning the legality of the first Protestant Bishops consecration; because,
forsooth, Bishop Bon^er, in his plea, and Controvertists in their books, only
pretended that there was no law 1. Eliz. to warrant Edward 6. form of
consecrating Bishops; Q. Mary having repealed the same with the book of
Ordination, which Stapleton and the rest fancied was not revived with that of
the common prayer 2. Elizab. by act of Parliament. But though this evasion has
bin sufficiently confuted by the Author of the nullity of the Prelatick Clergy
and (...) of England against Primat Bramhall, yet I admire he omitted these
ensuing words of D.r Stapleton's, which demonstrate our Catholic exceptions
were not grounded upon Stapleton's persuasion of the want of Laws or statuts
then in force, for confirming the form, or Book of Ordination; but they were
^^ther grounded upon a clear evidence that though the said form and Book of
ordination was legal then, yet there had bin (...) Consecration at all
performed.

For thus says D.r Stapleton to Horn pretended Bishop of ^^^chester, It is not
the Princes only pleasure that makes a Bishop, Stapleton Counterblast fol.
30^.30^.
(...) there must be free election, without either forcing the Clergy to (...),
or forcing the Chosen (it seems Horn paid a good sum (...) his Bishopric) to
filthy bribery, and also there must follow a (...) consecration, which you and
all your Fellows do lack, and ther^^^^ you are indeed no true Bishops, neither
by the law of the Church, (...) yet by the law of the realm, for want of due
consecration, expressly required by an act of Parliament renewed in this
Queens d^yes, in suffragan Bishops, much more in you; An. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
By which words (...) appears that the exception was not grounded upon D.r
Sta^^^ton or any other Catholics persuasion that Q. Elizabeth had not
sufficiently renewed the book and form of ordination, by (...) act of
Parliament 1. Eliz. but on the quite contrary; and that though there was an
act, yet the Bishops could not be va^^^ly consecrated according to that Act of
Parliament (that Stapleton says was renewed 1. Eliz.) for want of a true Bishop
to ^^ercise that function, not for want of any Law to authorize ^piscopal
consecration; all the Catholic Bishops who were named in her first commission
having refused to act by her order and her Majesty's Dispensation (in her
second commission) not only with her own statute, but with the very state and
condition of the Protestant Consecrators, who were not Bishops, could not be of
force to give them a spiritual caracter.

Wherefore M.r Parker, Grindall, Horn, Jewel and the rest of the first Bishops,
who understood better their own condition then their Successors would seem
now to do, resolved in their (...) 1562. to publish the 39. Articles made by
Cranmer and his Junra, but with some alteration and addition; especially to
that article wherein they speak of the Sacraments* for whereas Cranmers 25. or
26. article says nothing of Holy orders by Imposition of Hands, or any visible
sign, or ceremony required therein, Parker and his Bishops having taken upon
themselves that calling without any such ceremony of Imposition of Episcopal
hands, declared; that God ordained not any visible sign or ceremony for the
five last commonly called Sacraments, whereof Holy Orders is one. This
alteration and addition you may see in D.r Heylin's appendix to Ecclesia
restaurat^, page 189. And by order of the same Convocation was printed the
Scripture, and in that their edition of 1562. Ordination by imposition of hands
was translated ordination by election, as you may see part. 1. and part. 2. of
this Treatise. And though Cranmer cared as little for any visible signs or
ceremonies in ordina^^^^ (...) the other first Protestant Reformers, and
according to their (...) had abjured the Priestly and Episcopal caracter which
he had received among Catholics* (...) you may gather by his own words related
by John Fox in his degradation, Acts and Mon. page 2016.
thus: Then a Barbar dipped his hair round about, and the Bishop scraped the
tops of his fingers were he had bin anointed, wherein Bishop Bonner behaved
himself as rougly, and unmannerly, as the other Bishop was to him soft and
gentle. Whiles they were thus doing, All this (quoth the Archbishop) needed
not, I had my self don with this (...) long ago. Albeit I say Cranmer cared not
for any Episcopal Ordination which he had received in the Catholic Church, yet
he did not think to make the denial thereof an article of the Protestant faith;
but Q. Elizabeth's English Church in their Convocation 1562. seeing they could
not obtain the Episcopal caracter by Imposition of true Bishops hands, thought
(...) to make it a part of the Protestant belief, that no such visible (...) or
ceremony was necessary, or instituted by Christ; and therefore concluded holy
Orders was not a Sacrament. And though the prelatick Clergy now teach and
practice the contrary, and (...) K. Iame's reign Ordination by imposition of
hands was restored to the Text of Scripture, and by consequence ordination by
election, declared to be a Cheat, or corruption; yet this change of the matter
does no more make them now true Priests and Bishops, then their last change of
their form of Ordination, since the most happy restoration of K. Charles the
2.

SVBSECT XI. In Advertisment to the Reader concerning Bishop Jewel.
BEcause Jewel was the most famous and learned man of the Church of England,
Eccles. Polity l. 2. sec. 6. page 112.
in so much that M.r Hooker terms him the worthiest Divine that Christendom
bred for (...) hundred years past, and that his Apology and defense of the
Church of England was the work of that whole Clergy; and that Withaker after
Iewell's death, said to Campian, Whitaker in respons. ad rat. Campt. rat. 5.
page 50.
Jewell's chal^^^ge and speech concerning the first 600. years was most true,
and (...) all the Church of England did stand to it; and that Heylin (...) all
the Protestant Controversors since Jewel take from his Apology and defense,
their arguments and authority; Because (...), the man is such a pillar of
English Protestancy, and most (...) that Religion pin their Faith upon his
sleeve, and work; and think the Holy Ghost directed his pen, in his Apology and
defense of their Prelatick Church, I thought fit to let them Know, that they
who were intimatly acquainted with him, give this testimony of him; he was
first a Catholic, and continued so until Protestancy was made the religion of
the state in Edward 6: Reign; then he turned Protestant, and remained so until
Queen Mary's days, then he abjured protestancy as heresy, and seemed to be so
forward and zealous in professing the Roman faith, that he was permitted to be
one of the Notaries of Cranmer, and Ridleys di^^putations in the University*
Dr. Heylin Eccl. restaur. q. Eliz. page 130.
D.r Heylin says all this his forwardness in Popery proceeded from fear.

When Queen Elizabeth succeeded in the Kingdom, Jewel embraced her Religion
and writ what you have seen against our Religion, which himself had twice
professed as the only Catholic: This much is confessed on all sides. Chark or
Fulk (I know not which of them is Author) in the Answer to the Censure ( Edit.
1583. fol. 78.) complains that as Papists say Luther was the son of an Incubus
or the Divill, and dyed drunk* Oecolampadius was killed by the Devil, or by
his own hands; Peter Martyr, had a familiar; Martin Bucer consulted with his
Cow and his Calf; so they say that Jewel had all his knowledge from his Cat,
or from a Weesel, and dyed recanting his opinions, embracing a Popish Cross,
with protestation that he sinned against his own conscience and knowledge.

That Jewel sinned against his own conscience and knowledge, is (...) by his
falsifications which we have set down, having bin himself a learned man, and
besides having bin advertised of them by others, and therefore his mistakes
could not proceed from ignorance. And that he said to some of his friends who
put him in mind of his false dealing, the Protestant Religion could not be
otherwise defended, we have heard credibly reported, as also how he replied to
his Amanuensis, that excepted against some of his falsifications, that not one
Reader amongst a thousand would examine his corruptions, and Translations, or
compare them with the Text, all which makes it ^^^dible enough that he went
against his knowledge; but for my own part I am not beholding to the relation
of others for my ill opinion of Jewel, I am convinced that he was a wilful
falsifier, and Impostar, and do Judge his own writings to be the best evidence
thereof; If he recanted at his death, I hope he was saved, though he has bin
the damnation, I fear, of millions, that have bin seduced by his Books. And as
for his cat, and his Wesel, I dispute not whether the Devil used to conferr
with him in such shapes; But I am sure the substance of his Apology, and the
manner of defending his doctin, could proceed from no better Author; and I
believe every rational man will be of the same opinion, if he peruse and examine
his works.

SVBSECT XII. Examples of learned Protestants converted to the Roman Catholic
Religion by observing the Frauds, and falsehoods of the Apology of Jewel, and
of the Protestant Clergy for the prelatick Church of England.
THough it is to be feared that millions of souls have perished by the
falsifications and frauds of Jewel, and of the Protestant Clergy, in
publishing and maintaining (even to this day) their Apology and defense of the
Church of England, yet many have bin saved by occasion of the notoriousness of
the falsehoods therein contained. I will spe^^fy only three, mentioned by the
learned Author of the three conversions of England, who had it from their own
mouths; ^^mitting others (says he) which for just respects may not be named.
Hear his own words.

The first is S.r Thomas Copely, Three Convers: in the relation of the trial
made before the French King. 1600. page 55.
who oftentimes has related unto me with much comfort of his soul, how that
being a zealous Protestant, and very familiar to the Earl of Leicester, in the
beginning of this Queens days, when M.r Iewell's Book was newly come forth,
and being also learned himself in the latin tongue, took pains to examine
several leaves thereof, and finding many falsehoods therein, which were
inexcusable (as they seemed to him) he conferred the same with the Earl; who
willed him that the next time M.r Jewel dined at his table, he should take
occasion after dinner to propose the same; which he did soon after; and
receiving certain trifling answers from M.r Jewel, Jewell's answer to excuse
his wilful falsifications.
he waxed more hot, and urged the matter more earnestly* which Jewel
perceiving, told him in effect, that Papists were Papists, and so they were to
be dealt with all, and other answer he could not get: which thing made the good
Gentleman make a new resolution with himself, and to take that happy course
which he did to leave his Country and many great Commodities which he enjoyed
therein, to enjoy the liberty of conscience for salvation of his soul.

The second example, which I remember of my own knowledge, is M.r Doctor
Stevens, a learned man yet alive, who being Secretary, or Chaplyn to M.r Jewel
(for I remember, not well whether) and a forward man in Protestant Religion at
that time, espied certain false allegations in his Master's Book, whilst it was
yet under the print in London, whereof advertising him by letters. (for that he
supposed it might be by oversight) the other commanded notwithstanding the
print to go forward, and passed it over as it was, which this man seeing, that
had a conscience and sought the truth indeed, resolved to take another way of
finding it out: and having found it in the Catholic Church, where only it is
to be found, he resolved also to follow it, and so he did, and went voluntarily
into banishment for the same, where yet he lives unto this day in Finance,
with good reputation both of learning and godliness.

The third example that I call to mind, is the worthy man before named M.r
William Reynolds, who being first an earnest Professor and Preacher of
Protestant Religion in England, he fell in the end to read over M.r Iewell's
book, and did translate some part thereof into latin, but before he had passed
half over, he found such stuff as made him greatly mislike of the whole
Religion; and so he leaving his hopes and commodities in England, went over the
sea into these parts, and the last year of Iubily, to wit 1575. he came to
Rome and brought that book with him, and presented both himself and it to the
Tribunal of Inquisition, of his own free motion and accord etc. And himself
after absolution received from his former errors (which he with great humility
and zeal required, and myself also at that time did speak with him in that
place) he returned into France and Flanders, and there lived many years with
singular edification for his rare virtue, and learning, and how heartily indeed
he was converted, may well appear by his zealous writings, both in Latin and
English in defense of Catholic Religion. Thus much the Author of the three
Conversions.

I am credibly informed by a person then present, that Primat Bramhall and some
of his Majesty's Chaplains (who now are Bishops (persuaded or endeavored to
persuade our most gracious Sovereign Charles 2. (who was then at Bruges) that
this Doctor Reynolds was made a Papist by disputing with an other Doctor
Reynolds whom he intended to make a Protestant, And that the Roman Catholic
Doctor Reynolds, at the same time turned Protestant. Some think this story was
feigned to make the King believe that there is as much to say for the
Protestant religion, as for the Catholic: And to the end his Majesty might not
reflect upon the falsehood of a Religion forsaken out of mere conscience by
it is greatest Doctors, when they were most applauded, and when they had reason
to expect the richest Benefits, and greatest honors.

From the Apology of the Church of England, we will pass to John Fox his Acts
and Monuments, a Book no less commended by the Protestant Clergy then the
former, because by frauds and lies it serves their turn to fool the well
meaning Layty, who take it to be a true Ecclesiastical History of the
persecuted Church of Christ.

SECT. V. Frauds, follies, and falsifications of John Fox his Acts and
Monuments, and of his Magdeburgian Masters in their Centuries; the little
sincerity of the English Church and Clergy in countenancing such falls dealing.
AFter that Luther and Calvin's desperate shift (of the invisibility of Christ's
Church for more then a thousand years before their pretended reformations) had
bin evidently confuted, The Magdeburgian writers Centur. 2. and 3. cap. 4.
condemn. the Fathers for asserting the Sacrifice of the Mass etc.
as not only impossible, but as repugnant also to Scripture, which compares the
Church to a City placed upon a mountain, and a shining Sun etc. Their
scholars undertook to show a succession of the Protestant Church; and to that
purpose some drunken Germans (as any sober man must judge them to have bin by
their writings) whose names were Flaccus Illyricus, Joannes Vigandus, Matheus
Judex, and Basilius Faber, met together in some warm stoue of Magdeburg, and
there tippling took upon them to Judge of the writings, doctrine, and miracles of
all the ancient Fathers from the first Century to the last: Of the very next
Century to the Apostles these merry Companions were pleased to give this
Censure in the very title of the Chapter, Inclinatio Doctrinae complectens
peculiares and incommodas opiniones, stipulas, and errores Doctorum quae palam
quidem, hoc est, scriptis tradita sunt. The declining of Christ and his
Apostles doctrine, containing the peculiar and incommodious opinions of Doctors,
Centur. 2. c. 4. Centur. 3. c. 4. p. 77. Centur. 4.
their errors, straw, and stubble, which were left publicly by them, that is
to say, in their writings. And thus they Censure St. Iraeneus, Tertullian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Methodius, etc. saying they abuse and wrest the
Scriptures intolerably, and grossly to favor popish opinions. These four merry
saxons reprehend Ignatius St. John's scholar for using the phrase offerre and
sacrificium im^olare: St. Cyprian for saying, sacerdotem vice Christi fungi,
and Deo patri sacrificium offerre. St. Martial scholar of the Apostles saying,
sacrificium Deo Creatori offertur in Ara. Martial in Ep. ad Burdegal: and so
all other points, wherein Protestants and Catholics do disagree, calling the
ancient Fathers stubble Doctors: the same they say of St. Basil, Lactantius,
Gregory Nissen, Hilary, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Ephrem, and Hierom etc. and pretend
their doctrine to be against Scripture, and the Miracles they relate to be
either forged, or Diabolical, or at least wrought by God to punish the
credulity of Christians: But the errors of ancient condemned Heretics, to be
the true and sincere primitive faith, and produce no other proof for this their
drunken foolery, but their own presumption, and private interpretation of
Scripture.

Wherefore Valentia, Valentia his comparison of Protestant writers, and the
Magdeburgians.
(a learned Jesuit) compared these Magdeburgian Centurists, (and indeed it is
the case of all other Protestant writers) to fellows accused or suspected of
theft, heresy, or any other crime, who willingly present themselves before the
Magistrate, or Senate of the City; And there first of all for their clearing,
should bring in for witnesses against themselves the best, learned, most grave,
and most honest men of all that City, to testify that they indeed are Thieves
and heretics, or the like, but yet having so don, would endeavor to refute all
these again, by only saying, that these men so highly esteemed and commended
for their integrity, spoke rashly and incommodiously, and knew not what they
testified against them, or at least were in a dream; and that the accused
persons alone ought to be believed against them all. Might not these men be
thought mad, or drunk, that would take such a course of defense? And yet this
is the course and case of the Magdeburgians, who citing first the gravest and
most ancient Fathers of Christendom against themselves, do reject the same
again with this only Jest, and contumely, that they speak incommodiously,
ignorantly, and were stubble Doctors, Cent. 3. c. 4.
opiniones incommodae, naevi, stipulae, etc. Doctorum. Cyprian, say they;
speaks without Scripture, Cyprian does feign superstitiously, Cyprian does
Judge naughtily, Tertullian does err. Few in ancient times did write
perspicuously and with Judgment. Magdeburg. in praef Ep. dedic. ad Eliz. Angl.
Reg. in Cent. 4. Cent. 2. c. 4. page 55.
And of the whole multitude of Doctors of the second age, which was nearest to
the Apostles, they are pleased to say, Albeit this age was nearest to the
Apostles, yet the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles began to be not a little
darkened therein, and many monstrous and incommodious opinions are every where
found to be spread by the Doctors thereof. Then of the third age they say, the
further that we go from the Apostles age, the more stubble we shall find to
have bin added to the purity of the Christian doctrine. So that you may see what
these four drunken Germans judge of succeeding ages, of the greatest Doctors,
and of the whole Catholic Church, and what credit their writings deserve.

John Fox in his Acts and Monuments does imitat the example of these Dutch
drunken Centurists his Masters, not only in this impudent foolery, but also in
their fraudulent dealing of concealing and cutting off many of the Testimonies
of the Holy Fathers, least the multitude and cleerness of the authorities
should give our Catholic cause too much credit: but he dissenteth from the
Magdeburgians in saying, that the true Church of Christ is both visible, and
invisible; visible to them that are in her, and invisible to them that are out
of her. So that according to Fox, Fox in his protestation to the Church of
England, page 2. and 3.
heathens and heretics, (that are out of the Church) can not see her, nor be
converted, or convinced by those visible and supernatural signs, wherewith God
has made her remarkable and conspicuous, to the end that such as are not in
her, may see her, and be converted; a thing so much inculcated by the ancient
Fathers, that they say very few, or none of the meanest capacities, can be
excused by invincible ignorance from damnation. But let us see what an
Jmaginary Church of Protestants he fancies and builds in the Air.

And first we may observe that for the first twelve hundred years after Christ
(not finding as much as one Parish of Protestants in the whole world) Fox does
not name any Church or Congregation but the Roman Catholic. But from Pope
Innocentius the 3. time downwards, Fox begins, and brings forth for the
true Church a rablement of condemned Sectaries, dissenting in opinions, and
professions, not only from the Catholic, but also from the Protestant
reformations; and divided among themselves, cohering in no other form, or
succession, but that one sprung up by chance after the other, which (as his
adversary tells him) he tieth together in a Catalogue, or list, as Sampson's
foxes were, by the tails. Fox in Protest. ad Eccl* Angl.
This list or Catalogue he sets down in his protestation to the Church of
England; telling first that even during the time of the last 400. years from
Pope Innocentius downwards, the true Church of Christ (he means the Protestant
which until then had bin wholly invisible) durst not openly appear in the face
of the world, being oppressed by Tyrany. But yet that it remained from time to
time visible in certain chosen members that not only bare secret good affection
to sincere doctrine, but stood also in the defense of truth against the Church
of Rome. But if his Protestant Church was invisible to them that were out of
her, and by consequence to Papists, it needed not fear their Popish Tyrany, by
which it could be no more prejudiced then Spirits, or men shut up in enchanted
Castles. In which Catalogue (says Fox) first to pretermit Bertramus, and
Beringarius which were before Pope Innocentius. 3. a learned multitude of
sufficient witnesses here might be produced, whose names are neither obscure,
nor doctrine unknown; as Ioakim Abbot of Calabria; Almaricus a learned Bishop
that was judged an heretic for holding against Images: besides the Martyrs of
Alsatia, of whom we read 100. to be burned by Pope Jnnocentius in one day. Add
likewise to these the Waldenses, and Albigenses; Besides diverse others standing
against the Pope an 1240. etc. Then he adds to these some private persons (for
the most part Catholics) as Dantes the Jtalian Poet, Armacanus, Occham, etc.
and finaly embraces in his Church the Lollards, Wickleffians, Hussits, and all
other Sectaries until he comes to Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, etc. all of
them disagreeing in opinion, and every one pretending his own opinion to be the
true Catholic faith. And this is the visible succession of Fox's Church, and
the subject of his Ecclesiastical History: whereby he pretends to no greater
antiquity then of 400. years, nor can he prove any other unity of faith, then
their impugning the Pope and the Roman Catholic Doctrine, not unanimously,
Tretemius in verbo Bertramus,: Sand de visibili Monarchia haeres. 133. Gerson
lib. contra Romant. Extravaga^t de Trin: Guido Carmel. Caesarius Gadnin. lib.
6. hist. Franc.
but some one point, some another, disagreeing in most among themselves. I will
briefly refute these his lies, and reveal his fraud. Bertram was a Monk, lived
and dyed a Roman Catholic above 800. years agone; after his death some of his
followers forged a little pamphlet in his name, savoring or favoring the
Berengarian heresy: but the fraud was presently discovered, and rejected.
Berengarius recanted his heresy, and dyed a penitent Catholic. Ioachim an old
man half out of his wits, was censured by the Pope for certain fond prophecies,
and some errors also about the Blessed Trinity. Almaricus was never Bishop, but
only of Fox his making; he was condemned for many other heresies besides
holding against Images, as for teaching there is no resurrection of Bodies at
all. 2. That there is no paradise, nor hell. 3. That the body of Christ is not
in the Sacrament. Naucler. in hist.
4. That God spoke as much in Ovid, as in Austin etc. As for his Martyrs in
Alsatia, they who relate that story say: certain Heretics to the number of 80.
were burned in Argentina in Zwitzerland, Tritem. in Chron. Monast. Hirsang:
Genebr. in Chron. an. 1215. Sylvius lib. 4. de Orig. Bohem. cap* ^5. Vsparg. in
Chron. an. 1212. Guide. Carm. in haeres. Waldens. Antonin p. 3. sum. tit. 11. c.
7. Caesar. 5. did. dialog. hixemb. haeres. Albi Prascol and Sander ibide^.
for that they denied fornication to be any sin at all, for that it is a
natural act. etc.

As for the Waldenses or poor men of Lions, they held doctrins which
Protestants do not own. 1. That all carnal concupiscence and conjunction is
lawful, when lust does burn us. 2. That all oaths are unlawful. 3. That no
Judgment of life and death is permitted to Christians. 4. That the Creed of the
Apostles is to be contemned etc.

The Albigensis were another Sect of heretics, rising some 30. or 40. years
after the Waldenses an. 1216. and their beginning was at a Town called Albigium,
near Tolosa. They agreed with Protestants in the denial of the Popes
supremacy, purgatory, and some other points, but differed in many; as first,
they held with the Manichees that there are two Gods, one good and another
evil. 2. They denied all resurrection of the body: and that it was in vain for
Christians to use any kind of prayer at all* and 3. That external baptism was
an idle ceremony, and to be rejected as superfluous. 4. they held the
transmigration of souls etc.

As for Wickleffs opinions, by Fox his own relation (page 400.) they are
different from the Protestant articles. And the Lollards held that Lucifer with
the rest of his Angels were injuriously thrust out of heaven by Michael and
his, Tritem in Chron. an. Dom. 1315.
and consequently to be restored again at the day of Judgment; and that Michael
and his Angels are to be damned. That our Lady could not bear Christ and
remain a Virgin. That God does not punish any wickedness don under ground. And
therefore in caves and Cellars they were accustomed to exercise all abomination.
And Tritemius relates how one Gisla a young woman of their sect, coming to be
burned for heresy, being asked whether she were a Virgin or no? she answered
that above ground she was, but under ground not.

These and the like impurities and impieties John Fox would fain impose upon
Protestants as the primitive Christianity, and doctrine of the true Church: the
Wretches that suffered for maintaining these blasphemies, are Fox his Martyrs;
and their obstinacy in dying for these fooleries, together with the
propagation of Luther and Calvin's sensual Tenets, and some dreams and fancies
of cracked brain fellows, are the Miracles of his Church. Three Miracles he
notes in Luther,; To stand against the Pope (says he) was a great Miracle; Fox
page ^93*
to prevail against the Pope a greater; to dye untouched, may seem greatest of
all etc. Which three Miracles he may find in Marcion, Mahomet, Cromwell, and in
every Rebel or Malefactor that has escaped the fire, or Gallows, by fortune,
favor, or faction. Then he adds: another time as Luther was sitting in a
certain place upon his stool, a great stone was in the vault, over his head
where he did sit, which being stayed miraculously so long as he was sitting, as
soon as he was up, immediately fell upon the place where he satt, able to have
crushed him all in pieces if it had light upon him. Now if Fox did prove that
this great stone was stayed miraculously from falling upon Luther, something it
were; but how can he make that appear? he may as well maintain that every
stone, or tyle falling from a decayed building, was miraculously stayed from
falling upon every man's head that passes under, and escapes such casual and
daily dangers.

But to the end you may be rightly informed of John Fox his judgment and spirit
in discerning and describing supernatural things; I will relate a miracle or
revelation that happned to himself, in his own words. And first you must know
that he was resolved to prove by Scripture that Pope Boniface 8. was
Antichrist, and to that purpose quotes a Text out of the 20, chapter of the
Apocalips, and then makes his account thus. The binding up of Satan after
peace given to the Church (counting from the 30. year of Christ) was an. Dom.
294. which lasted for 1000. years, until an. 1294. about which year Pope
Boniface 8. was made Pope etc. This he endeavored to confirm out of the 13.
Chapter of the Apocalips, where it is said, that power was given by the dragon
to the Beast (to wit to Antichrist) to speak blasphemy and to do what lists
him for 42. months; which make (as all men know) 3. years and a half: and is
the time allotted by S.t John (according to all the ancient Fathers
^nterpretations) to the reign of Antichrist, in the end of the world: But John
Fox will needs have the number of the 42. months to import 294. years, that is,
every month 7. years, or (as he fantastically calls it) a sabbath of years;
Acts. and mon. page 9^.
for proof whereof he describes a revelation of his own thus. Because the matter
(says he) being of no small importance, greatly appertains unto the publik
vtility of the Church, and least any should misdoubt me herein to follow any
private interpretation of my own, I thought Good to communicate to the Reader
that which has bin imparted to me in the opening of these mystical numbers in
the foresaid Book of Revelation contained, by occasion as follows etc.

As I was in hand with these Histories etc. Being vexed and turmoiled in Spirit
about the reckning of these numbers and years, it so happened upon a Sunday in
the morning, lying in my bed, and musing about these numbers; suddenly it was
answered to my mind, as with a Majesty, thus inwardly saying within me, Thou
fool, count these months by Sabbaoths as the weeks of Daniel are counted by
Sabboths. The Lord I take to witness, thus it was; whereupon thus being
admonished, I began to reckon the 42. months by Sabboths, first of the months,
and* that would not serve; and then by Sabboths of years, and then I began to
feel some probable understanding, yet not satisfied herewith, I repaired to
certain Merchants of my acquaintance. (Of whom one is departed, a true and
faithful servant of the Lord, the other two yet alive, and witnesses hereof)
to whom the number of these foresaid months being propounded, and examined by
Sabboths of years, the whole sum was found to surmount to 294. years,
containing the full and just time of the foresaid persecutions, neither more
nor less etc.

And thus you have the revelation made to John Fox, which he says that he
relates unto us, for that we shall not misdoubt the truth thereof, nor think
that he follows any private Interpretation of his own, but that it came from
God immediately: as if every fanatik did not fancy and pretend the same. And
this is the dream of John Fox in his bed.

The second ridiculous point is that he went to three merchants to conferr this
revelation and that they approved there of. The third point is open falsehood,
and folly, where he says that this number of 294. contains the full and just
time of the first persecutions of Christians under Pagan Emperors, neither more
nor less; seeing that from Christ to the victory of Constantin against
Maxentius, there are assigned by Eusebius 318. years, and yet did not this
persecution cease then neither; but continued under Licinius, and other
Tyrants, for diverse years after, see then how just these numbers fall out,
neither more nor less: all which being considered, I find no one thing so true
or credible in all this revelation (says the Author of the three Conversions,
who confuted Fox his Acts and Monuments) as those words of the spirit unto him,
saying, Thou fool: for* that this makes him a fool indeed by revelation.

What credit Protestants give to Fox his revelations I do not know, but sure
Iam, they give too much to his relations: notwithstanding the absurdity of the
whole work in composing a Catholic Church of condemned heretics, without
subordination or succession; and making wicked Malefactors, C^^^st's Martyrs;
the Protestant Clergy (who could not be ignorant of so abominable a deceit)
cried up the book as a most godly and sincere history, and by public authority
endeavored to make it authentic, placing one in every Parish Church like a
fifth Gospel, recommending the reading thereof to all persons both in their
houses and Congregations. All this was don with design to make the Roman
Catholic religion odious, and to exasperat the generality of the people
against the Priests and professors of the same. And though judicious Readers
may easily discern in perusing the Book, the weakness of the Author, and of the
cause he undertakes to maintain, yet the vulgar sort are much taken with both,
and doubt not but that Protestants have as much reason to put Catholics to
death, as Catholics had to punish those mad fellows whom John Fox calls
Martyrs, and would needs die rather then recall those blasphemies against God,
or submit their fond opinions to that sense of Scripture which our Savior and
his Apostles delivered to the Church; and had bin derived by the public
Testimony and undeniable Tradition both of holy Fathers and general Counsels
from one age to an other until this present.

To the end silly seduced souls may see their mistake, and how little credit
John Fox his Protestant Church and Martyrs deserve, compared with the
Roman Catholic, I will set down his Calendar.

SVBSECT I. The Foxian Calendar.
THe number of all his saints are 456. whereof Bishops Martyrs 5. to wit,
Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, and another whom I remember not. What little
credit they deserved, we have showed heretofore, every one of them changing his
religion with the times; and their opinions having bin confuted as heresy in
universities by public disputations. Bishops Confessors 1. Virgin Martyrs
none. Maid Martyrs 3. Kings and Queens Martyrs and Confessors 1. (who was
Edward. 6.) other men and women Martyrs 393. other men and women Confessors 5^.
These were of diverse sects and opinions, and contrary in many points one to the
other, as for example, Waldesians and Albigensians 13. Lollards, and
Wickleffians 36. Hussits and Lutherans 78. Zuinglians and Calvinists 268.
Anabaptists, Puritans, and doubtful of what sect. 59.

Again of these were husbandmen, Weavers, sawyers, shoomakers, Curriers, smiths
and other such like occupations 282. poor women and spinsters 64. Apostata
Monks and Friars 25. Apostata Priests 38. Ministers 10. public Malefactors,
and condemned by the laws for such 19.

(...) of age, running away from his Master, and finding an old English Bible
(sincerely translated you may be sure) lying in (...) the Chapel of
Burntwood, fell to reading thereof, and thereby presently became a Protestant in
diverse opinions, and would needs burn for the same.

Rawling White is recounted by Fox to have bin an old poor fisherman in Wales,
Page 1395. and 1555. Fox page 1414.
and hearing of certain new fresh doctrine to be had out of the Scriptures in
English, and grieved that himself was not able to read them, he put his little
boy to school to learn to read, which being somewhat instructed in that art,
he caused him to read Scriptures unto him, and profitted so much therein with in
a little time, that the old fisherman began to be a preacher, and so leaving his
occupation, went up and down Wales with his boy after him bearing the Bible,
out of which he took upon him to preach at every town and Tavern thereof,
seeking thereby to pervert such as were no wiser then himself, nor could he be
restrained from this folly until the Bishop of Cardiff apprehended him, Fox
page 1558.
whom afterward they were forced to burn, for that he stood obstinat in his
fantastical opinions, which were extravagant, and ^^^rce agreed with any sect
of Protestancy. We have seen heretofore how Laurence Sanders the married Priest
seeing a little bastard of his, was so tenderly affected thereunto, as in great
vehemence of spirit he said to the standers by, what ma^^ of my vocation, would
not die to make this little boy legitimat, and prove his mother to be no whore?
And indeed such of the Protestant Clergy as were executed, were brought to the
stake for the love they had to their wenches and bastards, and because they
thought it was against their honor to recant. It Is remarkable that of some
hundreds of Heresiarchs who have since the preaching of the Apostles risen
against the doctrine of the Catholic Church, not above two or three (whereof
Ber^^garius was one) would recall their opinions: no marvel therefore if
Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley etc. should be so obstinat.

These motives and persons I say, well considered, rational Protestants will
find no parity between Foxian and Catholic Martyrs, nor any reason to
persecute Priests and Papists by their new Statuts, because Protestants, and
sectaries were persecuted by Q. Mary, Difference between the persecution of
Catholics and Protestants.
and other temporal Sovereigns according to the ancient Laws of all
Christendom. They will find a parity between Fox his Martyrs and Fanatics; for
the old Protestants were looked upon in those days when they first began, as
themselves look now upon fanatiks and Quakers; only with this difference, that
these may complain of harder measure now received from their prelatick
Brethren, then prelatick Protestants from papists; because prelatiks have
nothing against presbitery, (...) etc. (...) that their doctrine, and
conventicles are prohibited by the tem^^^al l^^es of the Land, which can not be
a competent rule of faith; they can not condemn them by, any P^^^^stant general
Counsels, ancient Tradition, or by the primitive Protestant principles, or by
any sense of Scripture ever yet held to be Catholic by the visible Church of
Christendom; whereas Roman Catholics did, and may censure prelatick Protestants
by every one of these rules, and do demonstra^^ that their prelatick
reformation is contrary to all the Testimonies and evidences of Christian and
Catholic antiquity.

SVBSECT II. VVillfull falsifications committed by John Fox in his acts and
Monuments.
FOx having searched and inquired after Protestants, and their Church, and not
finding any one person he durst call by that name for the first 1200. years
after Christ, and that particularly here in England the Roman Catholic
Religion (as his learned adversary proves) had continued the very same
(notwithstanding many temporal changes) from our first conversion until K.
Henry 8. and Q* Elizabeth's reigns, and was that very faith which we papists now
profess; rather (...) Fox would confess this truth, he resolved to falsify and
corrupt venerable Bede's Ecclesiastical History, Bid (...) 4* cap. 5.
and a provincial Synod of the English Clergy held at Hartford by Theodo^^^
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 673. the decrees whereof he does so
alter, that comparing them with themselves ^s they are in Saint Bede (whom Fox
pretends to follow) they do not seem to be the same: and this he does also to
discredit the Catholic Church of England, charging it with decreeing a
condemned heresy about keeping of Easter. Bid lib. 4. hist. cap. 5.
The first decree of this synod was (says Fox) that Easter day should be
vnformally kept and observed throughout the whole realm upon one certain day,
videlicet Prima 14. Luna mensis prioris. That is to say, upon the first 14.
moon, or day of the moon of the first month, to wit of March: which is just as
the Jews do observe it, contrary to the Council of Nice.

Well then, let us see what the words of Saint Bede himself are in this synodical
Decree, Primum Capitulum, says he, relating it out of the words of the Canons
themselves, vt Sanctum diem Paschae in communi omnes servemus, Dominica post
14. Lunam primi mensis. The first article of our decrees (says the Council)
is, that we do all in common observe the holy day of Easter upon the sunday
next after the fourteenth moon of the first month. This is quite contrary to
that which Fox relates, he putting out Dominica which makes or marreth all
the matter, and then for post decimam quartam lunam, written at large in Bid,
he puts in, prima 14. luna, short in numbers, only to make it more obscure,
adding prima of his own, and putting out post, from the words of this Council,
more over he adds of his own, these words, upon one certain day, which the
Decree has not, meaning thereby that this 14. day must be observed with such
certainty as it may not be altered or differred to any Sunday, in which
consists the heresy of the Quarta decimans, and thereby to make the ancient
Church of England in St. Theodores time, guilty of that heresy.

To favor the doctrine and practice of Protestants in putting away their wives
for fornication* and marrying an other, he quotes the tenth Decree of the same
synod, and sets down such words only as seemed to authorize his error; and
then, breaks off, Fox 112.
as if the Decree ended there. Thus he cites the Canon, Tenthly, that no man
put away his wife for any cause, except for fornication, (...) the rule of the
Gospel: and there stops: Bid lib 4. hist. cap. 5.
whereas the Canon is, Nullus conjuge^^ propriam nisi (vt sanctum Evangelium
docet) fornicationis causa relinquat. Quod si quisquam propri^m expulerit
^^njugem legiti^o sibi matrimonio conjunctam, si Christianus esse recte
voluerit, nulli* (...): sed ita permaneat^aut propriae reconcilietur Conjugi.
Let no man leave his own wife, but only, as the holy Gospel teaches us, for
the cause of fornication* and if any man should put away his wife, that is
joined to him by lawful marriage, if he will be a true Christian, let him not
marry another, but either remain so in continency, or be reconciled to his own
wife again.

He wastes much paper in discrediting Pope Gregory the 7. by Protestants
called Pope Hildebrand) whom notwithstanding, Fox page 164
the chief writers of his time exceedingly commend for a Saint, and a learned
man; as you may see in Bellarmin. But Fox says, Anton. part. 2. tit. 16. c.
1.. 21.
Antoninus writes that Hildebrand, as he lay a dying, desired one of his
Cardinals to go to the Emperor, and desire him forg^^^ness, absolving both him
and his partners from excommunication etc. Which he relates to the end his
Reader might think that the Pope went against his conscience in excommunicating
the Emperor; and that St. Antoninus believed the same story to be true: whereas
St. Antoninus his words are, that it was reported how Gregory 7. had sent a
Cardinal to the Emperor, and to all the Church, to wish him Indulgence; which
yet for many causes (says Antoninus) I do not believe to be true. These words
honest Fox omitteth. And it is recorded by an Impartial German Author that
Pope Gregory 7. last words, lying on his deathbed in Salerno, were these,
Dilexi Iustitiam (...) iniquitatem, propteria morior in exilio etc. Naucler.
generat. 37.
I have loved (...) and hated iniquity, and for this do I die in banishment.
Being driven away from his Sea by the violence of the Emperor.

I read and find (says Fox) that in a Council holden ^t Rome by Pope
Hildebrand, and other Bishops, they did (...) three things. 1. That no Priests
hereafter should marry wives. ^. Th^^ all such as were married should be
divorced. 3. That none h^^^fter should be admitted to the order of Priesthood,
but should (...) perpetual chastity. But he quoteth not one Author for (...)
three lies; and in the lines immediately following, where (...) down in English
the Copy of Pope Gregory 7. Bull (...) this matter, he sufficiently proves his
own sayings to be lies: for thus says the Bull: If there be any Priests,
Deacons or (...) deacons, that will still remain in the sin of fornication
(which (...) is not applicable to marriage) we forbid them the (...), till they
amend and repent. But if they persever in their sin, we charge that none
presume to hear their service. And ^^cordingly it (...) the Canon. Officium
Symoniacorum, Distinct. 23. c praeter. verum apud Anton tit. 16. Tritem. in
Chron. an. 1075. Origin. hom. 23. in lib. nu. Eusebius. lib. 1. demonstrat Evang.
c 9. Marianus Scotus in Chron. an. 1096. and 1. ^. 4. council. page 79.
and in (...), scienter nullo modo recipiatis. And Tritemius relates the
matter thus. Pope Gregory forbad men to hear the m^st of such Priests, as were
known to have Concubines. But Fox (...) other Protestants would needs face us
down that Hildebr^^d was the first who prohibited Priests marriage: whereas
Origin above 1400. years ago tells even of the Greek Church: (...) solius est
offerre Sacrificium qui perpetuae se devoverit castitati. To him only belongs
to offer sacrifice, who has vowed himself to p^^petual chastity. And Eusebius
one of the first Council of Nice, (...) of them who were made Priests, being
married, that it becomes them to contain themselves for the time to come from
all dealing with wives. And Marianus Scotus speaking of Gregory 7. and of that
Roman Synod, being in his own time, says: Pope Gregory 7. having made a Synod,
did according to the decree of St. Peter, and St. Clem^^t his successor, and of
other holy fathers, forbid unto Clergy men etc. to have wives, Distinct. 32. vt
supra etc. nullus. John Fox in his Acts and monuments is endless in lies. In
setting down the differences in doctrine betwee^ his and the Roman Catholic
Church, he is convinced to have made above 120. lies, in (...) leaves: to wit,
from the 12. to the 14. see Persons in his relation of a trial held in France
about religion page 60. which he offers to prove one by one, If any of John
Fox's friends will ioyn issue with him, upon that point he is of opinion that
the lies of the Acts and Monuments will surpass those of John Sleydan's
History, and of which eleaven thousand were gathered by German writers Fox in
his protest. page 10. Fox page 314. of the old edition. In that of 1632. It is
page 728.
or dwell with women. And Pope Alexander 2. and Pope Nicholas. 2. Predecessors
to Gregory 7. made the same decree that Hildebrand did, as appears in their
Canons yet ex^ant.

It were both endless and needless to set down all John Fox his wilful lies,
the fraudulent and ^^olish tricks and devices wherewith he and the Protestant
Clergy abuse the layty and illiterat people, making (...) believe that in all
ages there has bin a Church teaching and professing the Protestant doctrine:
and because some of the heretics (to (...) ^^ckleffians, Hussits, (...)
Lollards) whom he names Martyrs, and witnesses of his Evangelical truth, were
condemned not (...) by the Church* but by Acts of Parlia^^nt, he tell^^h you
that though the statu^s (...) persons, preaching diverse sermons, (...)
herelies, (...) doctrine, and (...) errors, to the blemish of Christian faith
etc* yet notwithstanding whosoever reads histories, and the (...) of (...)
see these to be no false teachers, (...) the (...) etc. and to have taught no
other (...) then now (...) their own preachers in (...). And (...) Sr John
(...) is produced by Fox as a witness for the Protestant (...) and a chief
member of that Church, and he in his professi^^ (...) faith, said* (...) Church
I believe to be divided into three sorts, or compan^^^ (...) now in heaven etc.
the second sort are in (...) of God; and a full delivera^^e of pain. The (...)
earth etc. John Fox to this speech of Purgatory adds (...) parenthesis of his
own, as if it had bin part of Oldcastles profession of faith ( if any such
(...) Scriptures) fearing his Reader might take notice how Sr. (...) was no
Protestant. And such frauds he uses in most other occasions, as you may see in
the three Conver^^^ns of England writ to confute his acts and Monuments; and
from whence we have borrowed most of what has bin said concerning Fox and his
Martyrs. Now we will treat of others no less falls and deceitful in maintaining
the Protestant Religion.

SVBSECT. III. Doctor Chark's falsification of St. Austin, and how he excuses
Luther's doctrine of the lawfulness of adultery, and incest.
DOctor Chark was so great a pillar of protestancy in Q. Elizabeth's days, that
he was thought the fittest man to dispute against learned Campian in the Tower;
but (...) behaved himself in that occasion very insolently, igno^^^^, and
uncharitably, he writ a ^ook in answer to the (...), which was published of
himself, Luther, Calvin, Beza, (...) ^any other falsifications of Mr. Chark, to
defend (...) Protes^^nt doctrine, his adversary objects (page 122.^ that (...)
St. Augustin's Text about the doctrine of con^^^scence* where the Censure had
alleged besides the Testi^^ny of many other Fathers, one most plain out of
that great (...) saying; concupiscence is not sin in the regenerate, lib. 1. de
nupt. and conc. c. 23. and 25.
if consent (...) yielded unto her for accomplishment of unlawful works: Mr.
(...) alleges another authority out of St. Austin in the same (...)* that
does, as he says, expound his meaning; for thus (...) writes: Augustin's place
is expounded by himself afterward, saying, concupiscence is not so forgiven in
baptism, that it is not sin, (...) that it is not imputed as sin; where the
word sin in the first place is put in by Mr. Chark; for that St. Austin's words
are, D^^itti Concupiscentiam carnis in Baptismo, non ut non sit, sed ut in
peccatum non imputetur; quamvis reatu suo jam soluto, manet (...);
Concupiscence is forgiven in Baptism, not so that it is not (or remain not in
the regenerat) but that it be not imputed as (...)

SVBSECT. IV. Falsifications of Cranmer and Peter Martyr against
Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass etc.
AFter that Cranmer had bin publikly convinced both by Scripture, and Fathers,
(...) his disputation at Oxford (^s will appear to any that will read even his
friend (...) concerning that subject) the Catholic disputants obje^^ed
falsifications, and corruptions of his in the Books which (...) had composed
against the real presence; one was, that whereas (...) Martyr, who flourished in
the beginning of the second (...), answering to them who said the Christians
adored bread, (...), we do not take this for common bread and drink, but like
as ^^sus Christ our Savior Incarnat by the word of God, had flesh and (...)
Salvation; even so we be taught the food wherewith our (...) and blood is
nourished by alteration, Fox page 1617.
when it is consecrated by the (...) of his prayer instituted by him, to be the
flesh and blood of the same Jesus Incarnat. Cranmer thus translated the words
of that ancient Father, Bread water and wine are not to be taken as other (...)
and drinks be, but they be ordained purposly to give thanks to (...), and
therefore be called Eucharistia, and be called the Body and blood of Christ, and
that it is lawful for none to eat and drink of them but that profess Christ;
and live according to the same; and yet that meat and drink is changed into our
flesh and Blood, and nourishes our bodies: Fox page 1605.
After Cranmer's confessing that the former Catholics Translation was the
right, he excuses his villainy, saying, he did not translate Justin word by
word, (whereas he set down all as Justin's words) but only gave the meaning; let
any Protestant be Judge whether he gave Iustin's meaning. You have corrupted
Emissenus (says Doctor Weston to Cranmer) for instead of cibis sati^ndus, that
is, to be filled (...) has pro omni paena, for all pain, your Book omitteth
many things there.

Thus you see Brethren (says Doctor Weston) the truth steadfast and invincible:
you see also the craft and deceit of heretics. And thus concludes Fox himself
the disputation with Cranmer.

Doctor Chedley did also object to Cranmer his corruption of St. Hillaries
words, putting in, vero sub Mysterio, for vere sub mysterio, by which the whole
sense was altered; because vere sub mysterio shows that we do truly receive
in the mystery of the Sacrament. Christ's flesh and blood; and vero sub
mysterio, Fox page 1602.
proves only the reality or verity of a Sacrament or a mystery, not of the body
and blood of Christ. To this after many excuses Cranmer answered, that the
change of one letter for an other was but ^ small matter. But Weston told that
Pastor was a Bishop, and ^^stor a Baker, and yet there was but one letters
change.

As for Peter Martyr's falsifications they appear sufficiently (...) the places
themsel^^^ which Fox alleges for him out of (...) or twelve Fathers, in his
disputations at Oxford an. 1549. whereof the reader will scarce find one truly
cited in all respects, but that either the words next going before, or
immediately following (making wholly against Protestants) are pur^^sely left out,
and others put in, or mistranslated; as has bin evidently demonstrated part.
3. c. 19. and 20. and 21. of the ^^eatise of the three conversions of England;
and therefore we ^^^^eare what every one may see in a Book no less obvious then
profitable.

SECT VI. How some Protestant (...) in Q. Elizabeth's time, seeing their fellows
were proved Falsifiers, waved the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers, and (...)
the others continued their former course of falsifying both Fathers and
Counsels.
THE discovery of Iewell's (...) other men's falsificati^^^, made some
Protestant writers more wary, and take an other course for defense of their
Religion* which was to recurr to the letter of Scripture, con^^^ning the true
sense thereof delivered by (...)* and practice of the Catholic Church, doctrine
(...) primi^^ve Fathers, and General Co^^cells; but these vpstarts knowing
their new fancies (...) agreeable thereunto Instead of the ancient faith of
Christendom, they resolved to mai^^ain (...) condemned heresies, following in
this manner of proceeding their first Apostles Luther, Calvin, etc. who would
admit of nothing but the (...) of Scripture interpreted by themselves, after an
(...) manner. We will instance (...) three, Doctor Wi^aker, Archbishop
Whitgift, and Doctor Fulk, omitting many others.

Doctor Whitaker in his answer to Doctor Sanders demonstrations (page 21.)
says, we repose no such confidence in the Fathers writings, that we take any
certain proof of Religion from them, because we place all our faith and
Religion, not in human, but in divine authority: if therefore you bring us what
some Father has taught, or what the Fathers vniversaly all together have
delivered, the same (except it be approved by Testimony of Scriptures) it
avails nothing, it convinces nothing. For, the Fathers are such witnesses as
they have also need of the Scriptures to be their witnesses, if deceived by
error. etc.

And Yet this same Whitaker undertook to maintain Bishop Jewell's Challenge by
Fathers, and Counsels.

Archbishop Whitgift was no less but rather more injurious; for in his defense
of the Prelatick Church against the Puritan Cartwright (page 402. and 473.) he
is not ashamed to say, that all the learned Bishops and learned writers of the
Greek and latin Church, for the most part, where spotted with the doctrine of
free will, Invocation of Saints etc. And thence inferrs that in no age since
the Apostles time any company of Bishops held so perfect and sound doctrine in
all points, as himself, and his fellow Bishops of England. To what impiety and
impudency are men driven by defending heretical novelties? Doctor Fulk against
Doct. Bristows motives page 54.
Doctor Bristow alleges the Testimonies of S. Epiphanius, S. Hierom, and S.
Austin, condemning the heresies of Aerius, Iovinian, and Vigilantius against
fasting days commanded by the Church, prayer for the dead, prayer to Saints,
against the honoring of their Relics, against preferring Virginity before
Matrimony, etc. Doctor Fulk answers that Epiphanius and Augustine were
deceived in recording those for Heresies which are not; and that Hierom rather
raild then reasoned; and that Vigilantius was a good man, and his opinions
sound. (...) Chrysostom is alleged for the Mass, saying the Apostles ^^creed,
Fulk against Bristow's motives page 35.
that in the Sacrifice of the Altar there should be made prayers for the
departed. Fulk answers: where he says it was decreed by the Apostles, he
must pardon us for crediting him, because he cannot show it us out of the Acts
and writings of the Apostles. And diverse other Fathers being quoted to confirm
St. Chryso^^^m's testimony, Fulk says: Fulk against Allen page 303.
who is witness that this is the Tradition of the Apostles* you will say
Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Hierom, and a great many more: But I would learn
why the Lord would not have this set forth by Matthew, Mark, Luke, or Paul? why
they were not chosen scribes hereof, rather then Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom
Austin, and others such as you name.

This desperate shift of slighting the ancient Fathers Testimony was the
ordinary way of answering Catholic Books for many years: but some of the
Protestant Writers observing how the wise and well meaning persons of their own
Religion were not satisfied therewith, and that there could no reason be given
why any Christian should rather believe a Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza,
Peter Martyr, Thomas Cranmer, Chark, Fulk, Whitaker, or Whitgift, then a
Cyprian, a Tertullian, Basil, Hierom, Chrysostom, an Ambrose, or an Austin,
especially in a matter of fact (such as our controversies are, to wit, whether
the Apostles and the true Church taught this or that sense of Scripture, and
doctrine) seeing these holy and lea^^ed Fathers lived in the primitive times,
and more then 12. or 13. hundred years nearer to the Apostles, then the
aforesaid Protestant Doctors, and by consequence might be more easily and
exactly informed. Some of the Protestant Writers, I say, observing how much
their cause was prejudiced by this conte^^^^ of antiquity* and Fathers,
resolved (...) more to try Iewell's Method, and see whether their impudency in
falsifying, might have better success then his, either for want of courage and
means in Catholics to manifest their corruptions, or for the hopes they had to
discredit our Testimony, and suppress such (...) as we should venture to print
and publish against themselves, and the states Religion which they maintained.
But no sooner came any Protestant Book to sight, but by God's assistance it was
answered with all possible speed, and it is falsifications discovered, and some
of our Catholic writers made it their business to manifest the frauds and four
beries of Protestant Controversor^; one of ours says, To declare that this
spirit of falls dealing, Persons in his quest. and sober Rock. p. ^96. against ^
p Morton*
joined with necessity, and misery of their bad cause, is common not only unto
him, ( Morton) but unto many of his brethren, and must needs be unto all them,
whenever they take pen in hand to defend the same, for that one ly cannot be
defended without an other; therefore I do produce ten several witnesses, two of
them called Bishops, M.r Jewel, and M.r Horn; five inferior Ministers, M.r
John Fox, M.r Calfeild, M.r Hanmer, M.r Chark, and M.r Perkins; and might have
named five times more, three lay men also and Knights, that have written
against us, Sir Francis Hastings, S.r Philip Mornay, and S.r Edward Cook,
alleging not one, but sundry examples out of each of their works; and might
enlarge myself to a volume in that argument, if I would say what I have found
in their and their Brethrens works in this kind etc.

Any man who desires to be rightly informed in this important matter of the
Protestant Clergys true, or falls dealing in religion, may peruse and conferr
the Books on both sides, I will not detain my Reader longer with Q. Elizabeth's
Writers, being to treat of the same again, when we answer the like objections
of Protestants against Catholic Writers: yet J can not omit to let him see in
one person the hypocrisy of many, in one, I say, that professes (as commonly
they all do) so much sincerity in treating of Controversies, as might seem to
excuse the necessity of any further inquiry, if his fourberies had not bin
manifested to the world, not only by his accusers, but by his own answers; so
weak and impertinent they are, that they conclude nothing but his obstinacy in
^^thering to his former errors, though he be evidently convicted of being an
Impostor. The writer I speak of is Willet, Willet page 263.
who (as you have seen heretofore) makes this protestation. I take God to
witness, before whom I must render account etc. that the same faith and
religion which I defend, is taught in the more substantial points by those
Histories, Counsels, Fathers, that lived within five or six hundred years
after Christ. And page 264.) it is most notoriously evident that for the
grossest points of popery, as Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass,
worshipping of Images, Justification by works, the supremacy of the Pope,
prohibition of Priests marriage, they (Papists) have no show of any evidence
from Fathers within five hundred years after Christ. And yet this very man
being pressed with St. Augustine, and the Church in his time holding of popish
doctrine, does grant it, and says, that can not prejudice protestancy, for that
the pure time of the primitive Church extended not much beyond the age of the
Apostles. Willet in his Tetracty^^ns defense.
So that he whom before you heard take God to witness that the Church was so
pure for the first five or 6. hundred years, that Papists had no color for
their Tenets, in Fathers, or Counsels, now does confess not only that St.
Austin, but the whole Church was infected with popery not long after the age of
the Apostles.

The honest Willet divides his book of answer and satisfaction into four
several parts, See Walsingham's search falsities objected to Willet^
in the first he sets down 13. untruths objected by his adversary as
notoriously wilful; in the second as many objected contradictions; in the
third, the like number of falsifications of Authors, and in the fourth thirteen
corruptions of Scripture: I will mention but two or three, and leave my Reader
to judge of the man's honesty by his answers* page 29. his adversary does
object against him these words of his, taken out of his Synopsis page 609. The
Mass promises sufficient redemption to the wicked that have spent their life
in drunkeness, adultery etc. if they come to the Church and hear Mass, and take
holy Bread, and holy water, etc. though they never pray, nor repent, nor hear
the word preached. Which words being confessed by Mr. Willet to be his, his
adversary does accuse him of wilful lying, or intolerable ignorance, for that
in no Roman Catholic writer in the world, shall he find this proposition, or
the parts thereof.

Willet answers not to the particular charge, but takes occasion for more then
a dozen pages together, to prove that the Roman doctrine does not favor virtue,
or good manners, more then the Protestant, nor yet so much; alleging for his
proof, that, to hold the Commandments to be impossible, and that the first
motions of concupiscence be sin without consent, and that a man is sure of his
predestination by faith; and the like Protestant doctrins, are causes of much
virtue among them, as the contrary doctrins held by Papists, are causes of
wicked life on their parts. So he answers to his accusation with so manifest
an absurdity as to say, that men are inclined to observe God's Commandments by
holding it impossible to keep them, whereas (if they be not mad) that principle
must dissuade them from attempting any such observation, seeing it is a madness
to endeavor an impossibility, and to believe that God does command things
impossible. Of their assurance of predestination, and justification, we have
proved heretofore, how inconsistent it is with good works, moral virtue, See
heretofore part. 1. and 2.
the salvation of the soul, and tranquillity of the state.

And as for their making the first motions of concupiscence a sin without
consent, it is the sink and source from whence Protestants suck most of their
errors. From hence they infer, that all the best actions of man are infected
with mortal crime, because they pass through the stinking Channel of human
corruption, hence they deny the merit of good works wrought by grace, hence the
impossibility of fulfilling God's Commandments for that every action of the
just is of it is own nature a transgression of his Laws. Hence no inherent but a
vain imputative Justice, hence the justification by faith alone; hence no
freedom of will to perform any moral good; no liberty in man to cooperat with
God when he first moves, awaketh and calls him out of the state of sin etc.
But let us return from Willet's absurdities to his falsifications.

I let pass his falsifying S. Bernard to make him say, that the Pope is
Antichrist, Willet Synopsis page 219. and in his defense page ^ 142.
by applying the words of the Apocalypse. The beast to which a mouth was given
speaks blasphemies, does sit in Peter's Chair; it being evident that Saint
Bernard applied those words not to any true Pope but to an Antipope called
Petrus Leonis, because he entered by violence into that Sea. I likewise
pretermit his fraud and folly in saying, Bern. ep. 126 St. Bern. 66* in Cantis.
your doctrine in prohibiting and restraining marriage to your Clergy, how it
helps to holiness* (...) Bernard w^ll (...) saying. Toll de Ecclesia (...)
etc. Whereas S. Bernard speaks in defense of the (...) against (...) Heretics
of his time (...) never dreamed (...) marry, himself having bin a votary and
unto (...) Monk.

Letting (...) I say th^se, I will only mention how he accuses all Catholics
of heresy, for defending the lawfulness of the vow of voluntary (...) against
us, that it was the heresy of the (...) and (...), Willet in his Synopsis page
297. Aug ^p. 106 and lib. 5. contra Haustum.
to persuade men to cast away their riches; S. Austin and all other Authors
tell us, that the said Pelagians and Maniche^s were not condemned of (...) for
persuading men to give away their riches, but for maintaining that all rich men
were bound to forsake all their riches, (...) that otherwise they could not go
to heaven: But now (...) show the sincerity of the English Protestant Clergy
since the beginning of King James his reign until this present.

SECT. VII. Falsifications and frauds of the prelatick English Clergy to
maintain protestancy, since the beginning of King James.
SVBSECT I. Their corruptions of Scripture (for maintaining their caracter)
continued in the Bible, though commanded by King James it should be reviewed
and corrected.
THe English Protestant Translations of Scripture had bin so cried down as falls
and corrupt, by Catholics, and acknowledged such by many learned Protestants,
that King James commanded a review and reformation of those Translations which
had passed for God's word in King Edward 6. and Qveen Elizabeth's days; the work
was undertaken by the Prelatick Clergy, not so much for zeal of truth, as for
a show of compliance with his Majesty, who protested in the Conference at
Hampton Court, he never had seen an English Bible truly translated. And because
the Catholics insisted much upon two main points in their former
Controversies, wherein they observed the illiterat sort of people had bin most
abused by the English Translators of Scripture, to wit, by their translating
Jmages for Idols, and Ordination by Election, for Ordination by imposition of
hands, (by the first whereof the Roman Catholic Religion was generally held by
the simple sort to be Idolatry; and by the second* the Protestant Prelatick,
Clergy were mistaken for Priests and Bishops, (...) never had received any
Episcopal, Ordination* but what they challenged by the Queens (...), election,
and by an act of Parliament 8. Eliz. 1.) because I say these two ^^^sifications
were so palpably fraudul^nt, and so frequently objected, they were for mere
shame corrected in the new Translation, se^ forth by order of King James. And
then appeared the forged Register of Mason to supply the (...) of that
falsification, and to make the world believe, that the first Protestant
Bishops, Parker, Jewel, Horn, (...) had bin consecrated by imposition of
Episcopal hands with great solemnity, and all due formalities at Lambeth:
whereas for the space of above ^0. years before that time (as has (...) said
^^^tofore) no man could tell, or hear where, or by whom these men had bin made
Bishops, (for at the Nags-head they were rejected by L^^daf; and S^ories
consecrating form (in the same place) was ridiculous) notwithstanding that it
had bin, the greatest controversy between Catholics and Protestants, and the
name of the place, and (...) continually demanded in print. If an authentic
Register* (...) my credible witness had bin produced when some such (...), was
called for by D.r Harding, and (...) 50. ye^rs before Mason appeared in print,
the dispute had bin ended (...) great honor of the Prelaticks, and Confusion
of the (...): but they were answered only with an Act of Parliament (8. Eliz.
1.) declaring that whatsoever had bin don in virtue of the great soul of
England and the Queens supremacy, was well don, and should stand legal, and
valid.

The falsification of Images for Idols was corrected it is true in the new
Testament, but in the old ( exodus 20.4.) and in the ten Commandments, and
Catechisms for Children, they (...) corruptions, translating graven Images, for
graven thing, against all Texts, Hebrew, Greek, and La^^n; for that the hebrew
word pesel is the very same that sculp^^^ in latin, that is, a graven or carved
thing, and the Greek (...) eid^^lon an Jdol. So that by this false and wicked
practice, (...) Protestant Clergy does still endeavor to discredit the Ro^^n
Catholic Religion, and thereby continue their own au^^ority, and Beneficies,
making the layty believe (contrary to their own consciences, and corrections in
the new Testa^^^^) that popery is Idolatry, for admitting worship of Images;
(...) if Image and Idol were the same thing, and equally forbidden by
Scripture, and God's Commandments.

To confirm their flocks in this persuasion they tell them the reason why
Catholics leave out some repetitions of the first Commandment in their
Catechismes, is, because they know that to worship Images, is against
Scripture; whereas in our Latin and many vulgar Roman Catechismes, nothing is
omitted; and in such short ones, wherein all the words are not expressly
mentioned, it is don only, not to charge Childrens memories with more, then with
the substance of every Commandment; and the substance of the first consists in
the first ^ords thereof. In the last Commandment also we put in brief only
these words. Thou shall not covet an other man's goods, Omitting Oxes, and
Asses etc. If our design had bin to corrupt (...) conceal the words, and sense
of Scripture in the first com^^^dement (in favor of Images) we would not have
set down the Text so clearly in any of our larger Catechismes, and much less in
our Latin and vulgar Translations of the Bible. Catholics do not take away the
second Commandment. Se the Remish Test. anot. upon 20. Exodus 4.


Hence it follows that we do not take away the second Commandment, as
Protestants object, who begin the second precept from these words. Thou shall
not make to thee a graven thing etc. which we make part of the first, and with
S. Austin (q. 71. in Exodum) we divide the first table into three precepts
directing us to God; the second into seven, belonging to our selves upon this
reason among others, because to make or have any graven thing or similitude of
any creature to the end to adore it as God, were indeed to have a strange God,
which is forbid in the first words of the first Commandment; and so all that
follows to the commination and promise, forbids false Gods, and appears
to be but one precept in substance. But the desire and internal consent to
adultery, and theft, differ altogether as much as the external acts of the
same sins; and therefore seeing adultery and theft, are forbidden by two distinct
precepts, the prohibition of the internal desire does also require two precepts.

To maintain their heresies against the single life of Priests, as also against
the excellency of Virginity, vows of Chastity, free will, and the possibility
of Keeping God's Commandments* they corrupt the Text of Math. 19.11.
translating contrary to all Copies both Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. All men can
not receive this saying, in steed of all men do not receive this saying* for we
may have the gift of continency if we will: S. Austin (lib. de gratia and lib.
arbit. c. 4.) faith, whosoever have not this gift given them, it is either for
that they will not have it, or that they fulfill not that which they will; and
they that have this gift or attain to this word, have it of God and their own
freewill. And Origin explaining this very text ( tract. 7. in Math.) says,
this gift is given to all that ask for it.

To authorize the Protestant error of Justification and Salvation by faith
only, set down as an article of says in the 39. of the Church of England, they
translate Luc. 18.4^. Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee; instead of
Receive thy sight, thy faith has made thee whole; it being clear that the
blind man who answered Christ's question, desired corporal sight, and that our
Savior accordingly granted what he asked in the same manner, and with the same
words he did to others that he cured of the same disease; ( Mark. 10.52. Luke
8.48. and 50.) which places are corrected and rightly translated, but as they
did in the translation of Images for Idols, leave some places uncorrected, so
they thought fit to do in this particular, to the end some places or other of
their Scripture might remain still ^^^tore against Popery: as ( Romans 11.4,)
they translate for B^al; the Jmage of Baal etc.

Acts 19.24. they translate for Temples of Diana, Shrines* (...) make shrines
of saints Bodies, and of other Relics, odious; and ( verse. 35.) they add
Image to the Text (which is not in any Copy Greek, or Latin) to condemn the
worship of Images. And ( Chap. 20. v. 28.) to attribute the rule and Government
of the Church to the King principaly, and more properly then to Bishops,
Instead of rule the Church of God, they translate take heed therefore unto your
selves and to all the flock* over the which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God. And with the same fraud and flattery they
translate (1. Pet. 2.13.) Be subject to every human Creature for God, thus,
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, as though it
were all one to be subject and obey every temporal Prince in things lawful,
and to obey every ordinance, and by consequence in spiritual, as well as in
temporal matters. In the same place also whereas in K. Edward 6. days the
English Bible had; To the King as chief head; in Q. Elizabeth (who affected not
the title of head of the Church) as having preemi^^^^; because King James
insisted much upon a spiritual supremacy, they translated to the King as
supreme. To maintain this error that Priests may have wives, they translate. 1.
Cor. 9. v. 5. for woman, wife, as if St. Paul had bin married, whereas it is
evident in the 7. chapter of this same Epistle v. 8. that he was not married, I
say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they abide
even as I. And the same word which here they translate wife, in cap. 7. v. 1.
they translate woman, because St. Paul says there it is good for a man not to
touch a woman, but here to translate wife was not for their purpose. In the
same Epistle cap. 11. v. 2. contrary to both Greek, and Latin, they translate
for Keep the Traditions as I have delivered them to you; Keep ordinances etc.

1. Cor. 15. v. 10. they add to this text, I have labored more abundantly then
all they, yet not I, but the grace of God with me, they add, I say, the grace
of God (which is) with me. (...) that where the Apostle rather said, the grace
of God laborred which him, and consequently he with the grace of God which
proves (...), they by adding ( which is) to the Text, (...) have it seem that
the Apostle did nothing at all, but was moved like a thing without li^e or
will, and thus they prove by Scripture the Protestant errors. Ephesians 1. v.
6. For, he has gratified us, (...) ^^lde us gracious, or conduct us with
gra^e; they translate, (...) has made us accepted in the beloved, against
inherent grace* in favor of the Protestant error of imputative justice.

Epist. Philip. cap. 4. v. 3. For, sincere Companion help those women etc. They
translate true yoke fellow help those woman, t^ make men believe that St. Paul
had recommended those persons to his wife who indeed had none 1. Cor. 7. v. 8.

Nothwithstanding the discipline of the Church of England is contrary to that
of the Calvinists, because reason o^ state, and the constitution of Parliaments
requires Bishops; yet the doctrine thereof is Zuinglian, and Calvinian in most
points, and Doctor Abbots Archbishop of Canterbury (who had the greatest hand
in correcting the Bible by King James his order) was Calvin's great admirer,
Calvin's Instit. lib. 2. c* 16. ser. 10. and in Catechism.

That Christ despaired see Calvin in Math. c. ^7. ^. 46. and 47.(...). Calvin's
words are, sed ab^^^dum videtur, Christo elap^^m desperotionis vocem? Responde^
hanc desporationem (...) sensu carnis profecta^^ And again: sed videmus omni ex
part fuisse v^xatum, vt desperation^ obrutus ab invocando Deo absisteret, quod
era^ saluti renunciare.

Knot in his protestancy condemned page 89. S. Chrysostom upon that place of
Esaias, I will break the brazen gates and br^ise the Iron bars in pieces, and
will open the treasures darkened etc. so he calls Hell, says he (Ho^^.
Christus si^ Deus 1.5.) for although is unto hell, (...) is held the holy
souls and precious vessels, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob St. Hierom. in c. 13.
esau says, hell is a place wher^^ souls are included either in rest, or in
pains, according to the quality of their deserts. Se^ St. Austin in psalm. 85.
v. 13. Hebrew 9. v. 8. heb. 10.20.

Doctor Gregory Martyn in his discover^ page 10.


as may be seen in his books. One of Calvin's blasphemies against Christ is,
that he feared and suffered the pains of hell, nay and despaired upon the
Cross* (and in that sense does explain his descent into hell, admitting of no
other) That this blasphemy might be authorized by Scripture, Cranmer, and the
whole Clergy and Church of England after him, in their edition of Tyndal, and
Coverdales Bible an. 1562. in the epistle to the Hebrews chap. 5. verse. 7.
corrupt St. Paul's words speaking of Christ praying upon the cross, He was
heard for his reverence, thus, he was heard in that he feared, to maintain
their blasphemous paradox that our Savior should have feared and felt the
pains of hell upon the Cross.

To confirm also this wicked doctrine, and confute Lyn^^ (...) j^^trum, and
Purgatory, Dr. Abbots, Archbishop of Cant. and the other Translators of the
Bible, corrupt 1. Pet. 3. v. (...) for whereas the words of Scripture are
quickened (or alive) (...), (or soul) in the which spirit coming he preached
(...) also that were in prison: They translate, quickened by the spirit; by
which also he went, and preached unto the spirits (...): This Translation was
so gross that Doctor Montagu^, ^ishop of Chichester and No^wich, reprehended
for it Sir Hen^^ will, to whose care the translating of St. Peter's epistle
committed; but Sir Henry Savill told him plainly that Doctor Abbots, and Dr.
Smith Bishop of Gloucester, corrupted and altered the Translation of this place,
which himself had sincerly performed. In pursuance of this their Calvinian
he^^sy, and corruption, they pervert the Text of Genesis 37. v. 35. translating
grave for hell; Protestants denying more places for souls after this life then
heaven for the just, and hell for the wicked; and being ashamed to say that the
holy Patriarch (...) was damned, or that he despared of his salvation, when he
said, I will go down to my son into hell, mourning, Genesis 37. (...) 35. They
translate, I will go down into the grave unto my (...)* mourning; and rather
then confess a third place (and by consequence Purgatory) after this life, they
father nonsense upon Jacob, and the Holy Ghost, as though Jacob thought that
his son Ios^ph had bin buried in a grave, whereas Jacob th^ught and said
immediately before ( verse. 33.) an evil beast has devoured him. And therefore
he must necessarily have me^^^ that he would dye, and go where he thought the
soul of his son Joseph to be; which was neither in heaven (for then he would
rather have ascended thither Joyful, then descended to any place mourning)
neither did he mean the hell of the damned, for that had bin desperation; but
to a low place where the lust souls then remained, which was called Ly^n^^^
Patrum, or Abraham's Bosom; the way of the holies as Saint Paul speaks, being
not yet made open, because our Savior Christ was to dedicat and begin the
entrance in his own person, and by his passion to open heaven. Tertullian (lib.
^^ advers. Marc^^^.) says, I know the bosom of Abraham was (...) heavenly
place, but only the higher Hell, or the higher part of hell* from which speech
of the F^ther^ (...) afterward that other ^ame Lymbas Patr^^^ that is, the very
(...), or uppermost and outmost part of hell, where the Fathers of the Old
Testament rested.

The words of St. Peter. 2. (...). 1. v. ^5. And I will do my dilige^^^^ to
have you often after my decease also, that you may keep a memory of these
things* seemed to Protestants so plain in favor of his praying for the
Christians after his decease, that King James his Translators change them into
these, Moreover I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have
these things always to remembrance.

We ask Protestants why do they wrest this place of the Psalm, and corrupt
Scripture against the honor which ought to be given to Saints? Psalm 138. Thy
friends O God are b^^ome exceeding honorable, their prin^edo^ is exceedingly
strengthened which is Saint Hierom's translation from the Hebrew, confirmed by
the great Rabbin R. Solomon, and the Greek Text^ and never excepted against by
any learned Father of the Church until the Protestant Translators were pleased
to alter it thus; How precious are thy thoughts (...) O God, how great is the
sum of them; as if multiplicity of thoughts were an admirable excellency in
God, whereas his (...) admit^s not many* but rather one comprehensive knowledge
without composition and therefore the Holy Ghost would not have said of them (in
the next verse) that they are more in number then the Sands which expression
may be properly applied to the Saints, but not to Gods thoughts. To this demand
Protestants answer first, that the Saints do not hear us, and yet they grant
that Devils and evil Spirits hear witches, Conjurers, or Magitians when they
are called upon; and shall we think, that the evil Spirits are enabled by
nature, The Saints in heaven do hear our prayers.
and permitted by God to. hear, what they are invited to work mischief^, and
that the Blessed Spirits are deaf, and have their power of doing good
^^strained, when we devoutly pray unto them? They tell us we injure Christ by
praying to Saints. If it be no injury to Christ's merits and mediation, to pray
unto holy men upon (...), or to recommend our selves unto their prayers, why
should it be an injury to pray to the Saints who are in heaven? Jf the Apostles
and Martyrs (says St. Hierom against Vigil^ntius dwelling in corruptible
flesh, could pray for others, (...) they ought to be careful for themselves,
how much more af^^^ their Crowns, Victories, and Triumphs? They tell us that
according to Esaias (63.) Abraham knows us not, and Jsrael is ignorant of us;
we answer with St. Hierom, that those holy Fathers knew not the Jews with the
knowledge of approbation or liking, because they had abandoned the law of God;
Hieron. ibid.
so our Savior says the foolish Virgins were not known, nes^io vos.

Doctor Reynolds gives a reason why we pray to the living and not to the
departed. Because says he, Reynolds (...). de Ido. Romans Eccl. c. 3.
the living may understand our griefs either by word or message, the Saints can
have no notice of them. Therefore they cannot make particular intercession for
us, or we use any supplication to them. But these two ways of knowledge are
not proper only to the living in this world; The Saints of heaven also
understand our afflictions by word and sight, Ambr. l de viduis. Hierom. l.
contra vigilan.
when being (as St. Ambrose and St. Hierom teaches they may be) by incredible
swiftness and celerity of motion every where present and conver^^^^ amongst us:
being as St. Ambrose adds, beholders of our life and actions, they see our
distress, and hear the complaints we make. They know our estate by message
also and report of others; by the report (says Saint Austin) of the souls
that depart from hence, August. l. de cura pro mortuis*
and by report of the Angels God's trusty messengers, and our faithful
Guardians, who have daily intercourse between them and us. Besides, the Saints
resident in heaven have certain knowledge of our actions and thoughts, as far
forth as it may be needful for us, and expedient to them, according to that of
St. Gregory, what can they be there ignorant of, where they know him that
knows all things. Every Saint (nature not being abolished, but perfected by
grace) has a natural desire to know the state of their friends, to understand
the (...) they make unto them, and therefore (to fulfill the (...) of (...))
they must have notice of them. (...) in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a
sinner, and by (...) are not ignorant thereof. How can we Jmagin (...) Blessed
parents, and other relatio^^ of sinners can be ignorant of their repentance.
Naz. orat. fun. sor. Gorg. Aug. l. de cura pro mortuis. St. Gregory lib. 5. c.
30. ex^poundeth this of Job. 5.1. that Saints were to be invocated in a Good
cause. And it is clear by the 72. Interpreters, saying, Jnvocate if any will
answer thee, or if thou can behold any of the holy Angels. Theodoret. q. 67.
in exodus N^zia. orat. (...) Basil. Hierom. in Epitaph. Paul^. Nyssen. Orat. in
Theodor. Aug. de Bap. l. 7. c. 1. Athan. Sermon. de Deipara. Aug. Sermon. 18 de
Sanctis Ephrem orat in ^^ud B. Virginis.
Therefore St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Austin say, that God opens and
reveals to the Saints (...) to his entire friends whatsoever is behoofull for
them ^o know. And according to this not only the holy Doctors of the Christian
Catholic Church but the Jews did invoke Saints departed. Jacob said, the
Angel which has delivered me from all evils, bless these children. (Genesis
48.) Job was councelled to pray to the Saints, Call if there be any who will
answer thee, and turn to some of the Saints. (Job. 5.) Moses entreated the
patronage of the Patriarchs in these words, Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel
thy servants. The like did Daniel (Dan. 3.) Take not away thy mercy from us,
for Abraham, thy beloved, and Isaac thy Servant, and Is^^el thy holy one; and
King Solomon, Remember O Lord David, and all his mildness; which God himself
approved 4. Reg. 19. I will guard this city for my own sake, and for David my
Servant's sake. St. Gregory Nazianzen implored the help of St. Basil; St.
Ierom of St. Paul^; St. Gregory Nyssen of St. Theodore; St. Austin of St.
Cyprian; St. Athanasius prayed to our Blessed Lady thus, Jncline thy ear to
our prayers and forget not thy people; O Lady, Mistress, Queen^, and Mother of
God, pray for us. And St. Austin, O Blessed Mary receive our prayers, obtain
our suits, for thou art the special hope of sinners. St. Ephrem invocateth her
by the name of hope, refuge, advocate, safety, and Mediatrix of the world. And
must we prefer Doctor Abbots, and the English Clergyes corruptions before all
these evidences of Scriptures and Fathers? To conclude this matter, J admire
how Protestants can Imagine that Cranmer, Abbots, and their Camerades, who
conspired to falsify Scripture, or the Ministers that continue to preach their
falsifications, for true scripture, did or do scruple to maintain their
pretended E^^^^opal caracter (...) the forged Registers which Archbishop (...)
produced to the Priests in prison, of Parker and the (...) Protestants Bishops
ordination at Lambeth. I hope men (...) contrive, continue, and countenance so
horrid a (...) (...) the corrupting of public Scripture, may be presumed
(...), and foist into private Registers a fictitious consecration, thereby to
enjoy their revenues; but as it was never heard of before Archbishop Abbot's
time, Council. Calcedonense. act. 11. Fl^via^us post mortem vivit, Martyr pro
nobis Oret.
so was it no sooner pro^^ced then suspected and contradicted by ancient and
consci^^tious persons, who lived in London when this Consecration at ^ambeth is
pretended to have bin celebrated, and yet they never heard a syllable of so
rare a novelty, notwithstanding their continual inquiry into a matter, wherein
both Catholics and Protestants were so much concerned.

Let this suffice for a taste of those innumerable corruptions and
falsifications which yet are continued in the English Bible, though reviewed
and corrected by King James his command, and passes now current in these
Kingdoms among Protestants, for the word of God, whereas it is the word and
work of men; not only by reason of their false Translations but much more of
their ungodly and fond interpretations, contrary to the true sense of Scripture
delivered by the holy Ghost in the primitive Church, and ever since continued
by tradition among Catholics, and visible in the writings of the Fathers and
General Counsels.

The Prelatick Clergyes design in this new Translation was, to keep (as J said
before) their authority, and the Church Livings which they had usurped, by
gaining Credit for their new Episcopacy and ceremonies against puritans, or
presbiterians; and for their Protestant doctrine against the Catholics; but
fearing that their corruptions would be observed by both parties, in their
epistl^ dedicatory to King James, they desire his Majesty's protection, for
that on the one side we shall be traduced (say they) by Popish persons at home
or abroad, who therefore will (...) Jnstruments to (...) God's holy (...) the
people, when they desire still to keep (...); on the other side we shall be
(...) who run their (...) ways etc. But truly I (...) no reason why they
should Iud^^ so rashly of Roman Catholics, (...) to persuade the King, and the
whole world, that we are so impious and envious, as to conceal from the people
the light of the Gospel, seeing we stick to the old letter and sense of
Scripture; without altering the Text, or rejecting any parts thereof, or
devising new Interpretations* and we are daily employed not only in preaching
and explaining God's word in Europe, but forsake our own Countries and
conveniences, and travel with great difficulties and dangers both by Sea and
Land, to Asia, Afrik, America, and the Antipodes, with no other possible design
but to publish the doctrine of Christ, and enlighten the Nations of Gentill^ who
are in (...): ignorance: And as for their self-conceited presbit^^ian (...)
Brethren, who run* their own ways in translating and interpreting Scripture,
we do not excuse them, but only say, that we see no reason why prelaticks
should (...) for a fault whereof themselves are no less guilty. Do not
prelaticks run their own ways, as well as those other Sectaries, in
translating the Bible? Do they stick to either the Greek, Latin, or Hebrew
Text? Do they not leap from one language and Copy to an other; accept and
reject what they please? Do they not fancy a sense of their own, every jot as
contrary to that of the Catholic and ancient Church, as that of their
Brethren, the Presbiterians, and others, is acknowledged to be? And yet they
are nether more learned, nor more skillful in tongues, nor more godly then
those they so much contemn, and blame.

But to the end every Christian may more clearly discern (...) Cheat, and
divert himself with some variety in the method of this tedious, but convincing
argument, I will give (...) a brief relation of a remarkable passage, much to
the (...) purpose, which happned in the beginning of King James (...) Reign; by
which he may in one man's case, see the (...) and sincerity of all the
Protestant prelatick Church and (...) in King James his time; and Judge what
satisfaction (...) may have in this world, or whether they may expect (...) in
the next, by relying upon the authority and (...) of the Prelatick Protestant
Church of England.

SVBSECT. II. Of Deane VValsingham's search into matters of Religion before his
change to the Catholic: how he repaired for a Resolution of his doubes to King
James, as to the head of the Church; who remitted him to the Lord of
Canterbury: and he to other men; and how after finding no satisfaction, he
betook himself to the reading of Catholic and Protestant Authors for
discerning on what side was the true or false Dealing.
I Will reduce into as narrow a compass as I can, Deane Walsingham's relation
which he dedicated to K. James; concluding his epistle with these words most
humbly on my Knees I beseech your Royal Majesty, to pardon me this (...)
resolution, whereunto I protest, upon my soul and Conscience, that no earthly
motive drew me, but only my love and obedience* (...) to him that is King of
all Kings etc. That (...) ( page (...), as you have seen* to change my
Judgment, and yield to the manifest evidence of truth, which I found to be on
the Catholic side, and nothing (...) shift^, and deceits on the contrary. This
(...) speak here, Good (...), as in the sight of Almighty God, and as in truth
of conscience I have found* and no way out of passion, or evil affection, or
wordly respects: in which every man will easily see how much I prejudice my
self by this new course taken: But that both reason and Religion, prudence, and
all true piety does ^^^quire, that the everlasting salvation of our souls
should be preferred before all other human respects whatsoever: which is the
true and sincere cause of this my resolution. And this I desire thee (Good
Christian Reader^) to believe, and assure thy self to be most true, as a^ the
last day, when we shall all appear before the Tribunal of (...) Savior, and
all hearts be made known, will evidently appear.

In his preface to the Reader he gives an account of his Protestant education
and Religion, wherein (...) was so zealous, that he took all occasions to deal
with others either for their confirmation, or gaining to (...)* and to this
effect was wont to send Books of that profession to any that would read them.
By which occasion it fell out, that one of his ac^quaintance that seemed
backward in the acceptance of a Book, was content to receive it from him upon
condition (says he) that I should promise him to read an other Book he would
lend me, whereof I accepted. This book was inittuled a Defense of the Censure
given upon two books of William Chark, and Meredith Hanmer, Ministers; which
book I little esteemed at that time, thinking it should serve me for some
disport, especialy for gathering out some absurdities against Papists, wher^ith
I did Imagine all their books to be abundantly stuffed. But finding whersoever I
lighted, certain passages which I could (...) well digest, and many proofs
alleged whereunto I could (...) ^^swer* I cast ^t often aside; and then took it
in hand again (...) ^oon after I felt my self so strangely troubled and
tur^^^led in Judgment and conscience upon the reading thereof, (...) my soul
had taken pills indeed, and could not bear (...). I conferred diverse of my
difficulties with (...) ^^nisters, without specifying that I had them out of
such (...), but they could give me very little satisfaction, or (...) at all.
Whereupon I made diverse Iourneys to London, (...) to see Books of sundry sorts,
as also to confer with (...) of my friends. And having wearied my self in
this sort (...) the space of diverse mo^thes, at last I betook my self to a
^ore strange resolution, but yet such as then seemed to (...) most necessary
for appeasing of my mind; and this was, (...) so much as I had taken two or
three several times the oath (...) supremacy, first to the Queen, and
afterward to his Majesty that now reigns, I (...) persuade my self that my
best comfort of conscience would come from the superior powers; but especialy
from his learned Majesty, who governed the Crown, as from God's Lieutenant and
substitute in all causes and affairs whatsoever.

Wherefore after much deliberation, not daring to conferr ^ith any Papist, or
almost to entertain any Good thought (...) them, or of their Religion, I
determined with my self to ^ake a short memorial unto his said Majesty, and to
deliver him the sum of my afflictions and doubts, together with the ^^ok it
self, which had bin the cause thereof; and to entreat him by his supreme
authority to give order for my sound satisfaction therein; and so binding up the
old book in the comeliest manner I could, I got me to London, and thence to
Greenwich and there after many difficulties of audience, I exhibited the same
together with my Memorial, both tied and conjoined in one, as his Majesty was
going to the Chapel upon Good friday in the morning in the year 1604.

Deane (...) difficulties (...) Book.
MY (...) the Author's complaint that Catholics ^^ving (...) offers of some
j^st trial of their and (...) Religion in England, either by public
disputation* free writing* or printing, they could never yet be admitted unto
any; which made me much to mervaile, upon what cause or ground this should be
so long denied; for that supposing our Protestant Religion to be true, as I was
persuaded, I could not see why this p^^blick trial might not be, and ought not
to be granted. Moreover I saw, and considered, that whereas his Majesty soon
after his coming into England, was resolved graciously to hear the differences
that were between his own subjects, and to that effect yielded for three or
four days most honorable audience in his own person, to hear and Judge the
contentions between the Protestants and puritans; yet notwithstanding in this
conference the Papists had no place at all; which was marked by many, and
diverse also spoke thereof. Wherefore upon these considerations I was much
troubled, doubting lest this straitness used in not admitting Papists to any
kind of this equal offered trial, might have some mystery in it; and that all
things went not so clear indeed on our side, as I had hitherto believed.

See the defense page 28.
My second* difficulty was about the trial of spirits, whether they be of God,
or no? the Author of the Defense joining roundly with M.r Chark* offered to
stand to all lawful trial whatsoever; and thereupon takes in hand to prove
that Protestants have no sure ground or way to try an heretical, or Catholic
spirit; and that Catholics have many, whereof he sets down nine, showing
first that the only way offered by Protestants, of only Scripture, is no way at
all; and that, for diverse reasons; one among the rest, that all heretick^* both
old and new, have professed this way etc. which, (...) it were admitted to be
the best, and that Scripture (...) neither corrupted in the letter, nor
perverted in the (...) by Protestants, yet could not that way of trial,
advance (...) advantage their cause; because the Catholics have express (...)
of Scripture for themselves, and Protestants no express (...) for their Tenets.
As for example, Catholics have (...) This is my Body, for Transubstantiation (
Mat. 26.) (...) man is justified by works and not by faith only (Jacob. 2.)
for ^^^tification by Good works. Whose sins you forgive are forgi^^^ etc.
(Joan. 20.) for absolution. The doers of the Law (...) be justified. (Romans 2.)
for the possibility of observing the Commandments. vow ye and render your
vows (Psalm. 75.) for votaries. Keep the traditions which you have learned
either by word or epistle (^. Thessalonians. 2.) for unwritten Traditions etc.
Protestants have not one express text in all Scripture for their Tenets.

My third difficulty was about the first beginners of our Protestant doctrine,
to wit Luther with his scholars Zuinglius, C^^oldstadius, Oecolampadius,
Calvin, Beza, etc. for that albeit Religion is not to be measured by the life
of the Teacher, yet I considered, that whenever God did send any men
ext^^ordinarily to reform his Church, they were always com^only of more
eminent virtue in their lives, then others, as (...) seen by all the Patriarchs
and Prophets, by St. John Bapti^^, and others in succeeding ages. But now for
these men before named, Luther and the rest, this writer of the Defense does
show by very great testimonies, that they were men far inferior unto the
common sort of honest men; that Luther had his reformation against the Mass,
Intercession of Saints etc. from the Devil, from whom also Zuinglius received
his opinion against the real presence, and Transubstantiation; that Calvin
followed therein Zwinglius, and we in England embrace the same. That Hierom
Bolse^ Doctor of Physi^ many yeare^ in Geneua, and other places round about, in
(...) time, when himself was a (...) things both of (...) his falsehood* might
be so easily (...) As that John Calvin was (...) with a burning ^^^ron for
(...) in (...) who preserved (...); Defense of of the Censure fol. 81.82. etc.
and that (...) was testified by public record of the said City of Noy^^^*
and that this was registered by Monsieur Bertilier Secretary of the Council of
Geneva under a public and sworn (...) hand; he relates many things of Calvin's
excessive ambition* intolerable hypocrisy, delicat niceness, and lascivious
carna^^^.

Defense of the Censure fol. 86.87. etc.
As for Beza who lived when Bolsek's book was written, he reports many
enormous things, as that he kept both a boy and a Queen, Andebertus, and
Candida: that he ran away with a Taylor's wife that dwelt in Calen^^r street in
Paris, ^he robbing her husband to accompany him and that he continued the like
life after, keeping an harlot called (...), together with his own wife, and
killing his own Child begotten upon her, to cover the sin, by letting her blood
above measure, and many other soul things, which I avoid to name for
loathsomness.

My fourth difficulty was tha^ the Defense of the Cens^^^ shows how our
Church of England does receive and (...) for Brethren such as could never
agree, nor cannot at the day, Defense page 73.
in sundry substantial points of doctrine, as the book proves by their
confessions, protestations, and writings one against the other* as also by
sundry Synods, and Protestant Counsels, Luther epi^t. Harnagi^in. tom. 7.
Wit. fol. 380.
wherein the one has condemned the other. And namely he cites this saying of
Luther among many other. I do protest before God and the world, that I do not
agree with them "(the Sacramentarians, which is our Religion of England.) (...)
will, while the world stands; but will have my hand^ (...) the blood of those
sheep which these heretics do drive (...), and kill.

(...) it was possible that Luther, (...) with God's holy spirit (...) so
manifestly condemn us (...), for (...) heretics, that hold him for (...), and
(...) very same doctrine, as doctrine (...) for pernicious heresy* This (...) I
might have some (...)*

(...) fifth difficulty was M.r Fulk, and our Protestant (...) contempt of the
holy Fathers, and of Traditions: (...) I fell upon this account, Answer to M.r
Charks preface p. 25.
whether it were more (...) me to adventure my soul with Fulk, and our (...),
or with the ancient Fathers, and whether it (...) probable that they should
know what passed in (...) Church better then St. Cyprian, St. Austin etc. (...)
troubled me as I thought every day a year (...).

(...) was about M.r Chark: against whom (...) was written, who seemed to me
(...) very (...) impugning the same, for that (...) not (...) to any of the
difficulties, as to (...) seemed, and much less in his reply to the defense
(...) afterward I (...) to see.

The substance of Dean Walsingham's memorial to the King.
(...) a certain memorial (as I may call it) wherein I (...) comprehended as
compendiously as then I could, some chief (...) principal causes of my doubts,
and difficulties before (...), and contained in that book, desiring his
Highness, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Mr. Doctor Covell
told me it was your (...) should go home until your Grace sent for (...) said,
J gave no such order, Doctor Cavell is (...) said, J understood your Grace so.
(...) Lord tu^ning (...) to the Knight, How loath the Protestant Clergy is that
the King or (...) persons should examine their doctrine or way of defending it.
said with an angry (...) as soon as J came to the Court to day the first word
(...) spoke unto me, he asked me what I had don with him, (...) book* you are a
fellow indeed, we have dealt (...) thou art a bold Companion to deliver such a
book (...). Then J began to speak, and to yield my reasons (...) but my Lord
proceeded in his wrathful speeches, and (...) and angry words, he added, I
will even send (...) thou art worthy to be set on the pillory, and to (...) for
a libelling Knave as thou art. I answe^^^ (...) your Grace, J hope I have not
deserved (...). I have set my hand to that which I (...), I desire, my Lord,
but to be taught the truth. (...) said thou be taught? thou art a foolish bold
knave, (...) as thou art, before I have don with (...).

(...) Lord had chafed and spoken largely his (...) he had put me in a bodily
fear, What cheating and unconscionable ways were taken to fright Dean
Walsingham from examining of the truth.
the Knight (...) Corner began to speak and say, my Lord he will be (...); Mr.
Walsingham I dare say, is sorry for his (...) you shall see he will conform
himself as he should. (...) yet still continued in his rough and angry (...), no
man forsooth, will serve you but the King to (...) allpunc; I answered, may it
please your Grace to (...) reasons why I came chiefly to the King: then said
(...) Lord; why what have thou to do with the King? what (...) if thou were
hanged like a foolish Knave as thou art? (...) other such like vehement and
threatening speeches; (...) the end he said, come near (for that all this (...)
stood a loof.)

And then he called for his Secretary or Notary saying, (...) indignation to
me, Come, come you hither, I will examine (...) (...) (...) (...) Lord, ^ will
write to the Commissary that he shall not (...) or hinder you in any thing, and
so calling for pen (...) his letter, the sum whereof was this.

(...) the Bearer hereof seems to be somewhat (...) toward popery* we will
that you appoint some (...) and learned Divine who may conferr with him, and
(...) his doubts: but let all things be so don as (...) not be discouraged, nor
his infirmity divulged* (...) said my Lord, you see what I have written, (...)
(...) any way prejudice you etc. I doubt not but (...) come again, you will be
well resolved, and (...): I hope so my Lord, said I; you go to (...) my Lord?
yes and it please your Lordship (...) that is well, said my Lord. And thus
having (...) my Lords letter, he bid me farewell: and then (...) leave of
Doctor Covell, he spoke very kindly to me, (...)* I hope when you come again
Mr. Walsingham, you (...) of another mind, and all shall be well. And so from
(...) I passed to London, and from thence the next day (...) Country, somewhat
to satisfy my friends, and to (...) what the rumors raised about me.

(...) Walsinghams address to Mr. Rolfe, (...) of St. Albans: And of his (...)
with Doctor Downham, and an other (...) the Protestant Clergy; and his perusal
of Mr. (...) Books recommanded to him by my Lord of (...); and of the answer of
the Defense (...) the Censure.
MR. Walsingham thus dispatched without any Satisfaction of his doubts, Search
into Religion page 53.
he began to distrust and suspect the Protestant Clergy and Religion: but
howe^^^ (...) (...) that I had read the (...) of the (...) had driven me into
many doubts, (...) I declared how that Book (...) whom (...) to be a man of
God) to have (...) the Church of Rome, Page 65. of Walsingham's search.
by the ins^igation of the (...) had much Conference etc. which of true, surely
(...) to be of some better faith and Religion (...) have the original and
beginning from the D^vil. (...) common practice of the Papists to (...) of God,
and I think I ha^^ the answer to that book. (...) (said Mr. VV^lsingham) have a
sight of that (...) And now being dinner time Mr. Doctor said he (...) with Mr.
Archdeacon, and so he left me, not (...) it seemed, to have any further
conference with (...) made me conceive an hard opinion of Mr. Doctors (...) and
(...), who perceiving in what state I was, (...) ^dolatry, Antichrist etc.
would seem so willing as he (...) withdraw himself: But meeting Mr. Rolfe, he
wished (...) any wise so expect Doctor Downham, which J (...) (...) with him to
his house in Company of one or two (...) more.

(...) Mr. Walsingham came to Dr. Downham house at (...) showed him some of
Luthers works, Search Walls* p. 71.
wherein he (...) worst things there he had noted out of the defense (...)
Censure, and the Doctor always dive^ted him from the (...) of the truth and
from comparing his notes with the (...) The next day morning an other Minister
came to (...), whom he made acquainted with Mr. (...), who thereupon desired
(...) have some conference (...) perplexed soul; and having related to that
ancient (...) doubts, the remedy he applied was to inveigh (...) the Papists
obstinacy, untrue dealing, Jndulgences etc. (...) word to answer Mr.
VValsinghams difficulties: who (...) the answer to the defense of the Censure,
took his (...) of Doctor Downham.

(...) men by the Jnstigation of some who were far blinded with (...) against
them.

Mr. Bell's second Book called a Survey of Popery, Mr. (...) perused, because
he had promised, and took no (...) some corruptions he had found therein of St.
Chrysostom, (...) of Nice, St. Austin, St. Gregory etc. with a (...) to show
them to my Lord of Canterbury, who did (...) esteem the Author, and extol the
Book. He read (...) third book of Mr. Bell's, called the downfall of popery,
(...) he found also many falsifications to maintain (...), and against popes:
whereof one was this. Antoninus (...) bishop of Florence affirms (says Mr.
Bell (page 40.) (...) Pope Martin the fifth dispensed with one, who had
contracted (...) ^^^summated matrimony with his own natural and full sister
(...) Father and Mother, Antonin. 3. part. act. 1. c. 11.
citing these words of Antoninus (...), cum quadam ejus Germana, which he
englished as (...) have heard, his own natural and full sister etc. cutting of
(...) the sentence that ensued, and confuted his falsification, (...)
cognoverat fornicarie, whom he had known in fornication: (...) the sentence in
Antoninus is, that Pope Martyn the 3. (...) a great suit and long deliberation,
did dispense with one (...) married with the sister of her, whom he had known
in fornication, that is to say, with his concubines sister: which dispensation
(says Antoninus) was hardly granted: and one their reason of the grant was
(says he) for that the par^^^^ could not be separated without great scandal,
nor were fit to enter into Religion.

Now as to Mr. Chark's answer or reply to the defense of the Censure, which
Doctor Downham had lent unto me, Search page 77. Mr. Walsingham found no
satisfaction in the answer of the defense of the Censure.
I found therein no satisfaction, for I saw in effect (says Mr. Walsingham)
nothing but a colerick Jnvective against the Author of the defense, telling him
first and facing him down that the cause why there was no public disputation,
was in him and his fellows, as being afraid to come to that trial. Which kind
of answer contented me not, for that I expected he would have said, that
disputation should be procured, and that he and all the rest of our Clergy
would ioyn in that suit to her Majesty that then was. Secondly, to all the ways
set down by the defense for trying of a Catholic and heretical spirit, he said
only, that he and his, would be tried by Scriptures; whereas the Controversies
would be about the sense and Jnterpretation of Scripture.

Thirdly, to that of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, their lives and
doctrines, which principaly I desired to see discussed, he seemed to me to
answer scarce any thing to the purpose, but ran into a great exclamation of
popish slanderers, and against the absurdities of Indulgences etc. which were
not now in question: he ought to have examined the place out of Luther's own
writings about himself and others, both for life and doctrine: but this was not
don, only in general he would seem to excuse matters, or rather to divert the
reader from attention unto them with this flourish of words. As for Berengari^s
(says Chark) Huss, Wicleff, Luther, etc. we measure them according to those
times wherein the Lord stirred them up, Search. page 78.
and according to that measure of grace and light he bestowed upon them, and
whatsoever were their Jmperfections, therein we do not justify them, but give
God the praise of his work, and leave them to their place as men; yet we may
and will thus far defend them against that doggish tooth of your^^ that in the
principal points of faith, whereupon depends salvation, they were found with
Athanasius, and all other holy men of God. These words J say, may be as well
applied (as an Apology) to Turks, Jews, and all heretics, as to Luther,
Calvin, Beza, Cranmer; for Turks, Jews and all heretics agree with Catholics
and Athanasius in some points of faith; though in their imperfections (as
blasphemies, Iudaisme, Turcisme, heresy etc.) They do not agree with
Athanasius, and therein we do not justify them. Were not this a good excuse
thought J with my self? And is it not a goodly Church that admits of such
companions, and fraternity? says Walsingham. What he meant ^^en he said in
the principal points of faith whereupon depends salvation, I could not tell,
seeing he gives no certain rule to know them. And besides I considered that
Luther and (...) Lutherans do affirm in their Books, even to this day, that we
^scan^ants of England are damned heretics, for denying the real pre(...). And
on the contrary side we say that they are good protestants, (...) holy men, and
our Brethren, though they hold the real presence, which we deny, and condemn
for Idolatry. To all the rest of my difficulties J found in effect no
substantial answer at all.

Mr. VValsinghams last appearance before my Lord of Canterbury and his Doctors.
THe prefixed time of my appearance drawing near, I repaired to London, and
upon the last day of Easter term I went to Lambeth to present my self to my
Lord, who was not yet come from Westminster, though in (...) absence there
sat, as I understood, diverse Doctors, and Pr^lats about matters of Religion in
his house at Lambeth. At length my Lord came home, and a great train with him,
coming out of his garden he cast his eye upon me, and presently said unto me
with a friendly countenanee, and somewhat a low voice, now Mr. Walsingham how
do you, are you satisfied? To whom I answered, no truly my Lord, I am not yet
satisfied, whereunto he replied nothing, but went and sat down at his table in
the parlor, together with his Doctors and Prelates about him, whither after a
little time, I was called, and then my Lord began to explain my case unto them,
how I desired to be satisfied in matters of fact contained in the defense, what
pains his Lordship had taken with me, and others at his appointment, and
finaly that he had delivered unto me two books of Mr. Bell's, written against
the Papists, to satisfy me withal; and then he called me closs unto him at
the tables end, and asked me very seriously whether J had read them, and what I
thought of them?

To this I answered that I had read them over with diligence, and that my
Judgment was that the Author was a golden Bell, but his sound like as of a
brazen Candlestick, which I said in respect of the many golden advices,
inferences, Corollaries, and the golden sentences, which he mentioned so often
in his books; but that his sound was no better then of brass, according to the
Apostle's similitude, for that he seemed not only to have no charity in his
writings, but neither truth nor sincerity in his Allegations.

The Archbishop hearing me call him a golden Bell in the first part of my
answer, seemed much contented, saying, that is well, but hearing the second,
demanded? why so? And Doctor Barlow Dean of Chester (afterward Bishop of
Lincoln) looking back upon me with more displeasure, as it seemed, then the
rest, said, why, what say you to Mr. Bell? and all the other Doctors in like
manner cast their eyes upon me. How the Archbishop of Canterbury and his
Assembly of Divines would not conferr Dean Walsingham's notes of Bell's
corruptions with the Fathers quoted, notwithstanding the books were in their
presence, or on the next room.
But I gave the reason (...) mentioned. And then my Lord answering, and willing
me to show wherein I had made that observation, J laid forth upon the table
before them the two books that I had perused, turning to the places of St.
Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and other Fathers, which I pretended to have bin
untruly alleged by him, presupposing that my Lord would presently h^^e
commanded the said Fathers works to have bin brought forth out of his study,
and the places quoted to be examined in all their presence: but no such matter
ensued: for my Lord having slightly looked over the places in Bell, as he
cites them, he laid them down again, and the Doctors took them up to peruse,
in which mean space his Lorship began to talk somewhat privately and mildly with
me concerning things, objected by the defense of the Censure against Luther etc.

My Lord began to talk unto Doctor Barlow, who this while with the rest was
looking on Bell's Books, and began to speak somewhat concerning them, seeming to
maintain somewhat a good opinion of Bell's fidelity, which yet appeared not to
be great with my Lord himself, as by some conjectures I gathered. But none of
them, as I said, so much as once offered to call for the Fathers works
themselves, to examine the places, which was my desire. But after some few words
to and fro among themselves, my Lord commanded me to stand a side whilst they
talked.

Whereupon I retired my self by little and little down to the lower end of the
parlour, that they might confer more freely; they talked together of this and
other matters: and after some little time etc. my Lord began to speak with a
high and angry voice, concerning me, and my affairs; and looking toward me
complained of my importunity and obstinacy, and said to the Doctors, that he
would send me to prison, and thereupon calling for his pursuivant, or apparitor,
(which presently appeared) said, let a mittimus be made to send him to the
Chink etc.

But then came unto me from the other side of the parlour the Knight of the
Corner mentioned before, Perkins.
who out of ^^ew of great compassion and extraordinary friendship, began with
diverse temporal reasons to persuade me not to meddle further in these matters,
but accommodat my self to my Lord's will, and I should find his Grace a good
Lord unto me, and ready to perform as occasion should be offered etc. After a
little time they rose from the table, and standing on foot, my Lord showed
himself much displeased, talked again of me and of my business, threatening to
send me to prison; but after that again he retired himself into a window
together with Doctor Barlow, who having conferred some little space together, my
Lord called me unto him, and insinuating unto me that the said Doctor had
entreated for some favor toward me, said, well, Mr. Walsingham, J am content
you shall conferr these places with Doctor Barlow, who will take some pains
with you to resolve you; and then turning unto Mr. Doctor, he said unto him,
you can show him (Mr. Deane) Chrysostom both in greek and Latin, (and so might
his Grace also, but durst not) willing me to repair unto him for conference,
and dismissed me, with saying only that J should return unto him in the end of
the next term; and indeed his dismission was such, and with such countenance
and speech, as it seemed to me he could not well determine what to do with me,
being weary of me, and of my suite, and that he would have bin content to be
handsomely rid of me.

Upon the next day J repaired to Westminster to Mr. Doctor Barlow, who after
even song went up with me to his study, and there at my request opened first
one of St. Austin's Tomes, wherein the Book de bono viduitatis is contained, and
there sought for the place before named, cyted by Mr. Bell, and falling upon
the words alleged by him, read them, and would have seemed to defend them, as
there they lie. But when J pressed him to have him go forward, and to read the
words ensuing, which do explicat St. Austin's meaning, and wholly overthrow Mr.
Bell's purpose, he was unwilling at that time to pass any further, especialy
his man coming to tell him that it was now supper time: and so with courteous
words, he dismissed me, saying nothwithstanding that if at any other time I
should come unto him, he would be glad to spend an hour, and take (...) some
further pains with me. But J thought with my self, to what end should J come
unto him, and trouble both him and my self, as J had don many others in the
same cause before: for that I seemed to perceive now how little they were able
or willing to give me that satisfaction in these points, which I demanded about
my doubts, and scruples; and with this I departed from him, not meaning to
return again for the present, but to take some other course as afterward I
did: which was, to examine books on both sides for finding out truth or falsity,
beginning first with the writings of the protestants, and afterward of
Catholics.

This is the substance of the historical part of Mr. VValsingham's search into
Religion. In the progress of his book he sets down those frauds, and wilful
corruptions which he found in perusing the works of Luther, Calvin, Jewel,
Fox, ^^^low, Willet, Chark, Fulk, Hastings and other protestant ^^iters: and
acknowledges the truth and sincerity which he (...) with, in the Catholics;
whereupon he resolved to re^ounce protestancy, and the conveniences that thereby
he might ^^pect, preferring the good of his soul, which he believed could not
be saved out of the Roman Catholic Church, before all temporal respects. To
satisfy his friends, and the world, in this resolution, he published the
foresaid Treatise, and became a Catholic Priest, and by his good example and
pains taken in this Kingdom, converted many of his seduced Countrymen. He
lived to be of very great age, dying but few years since, bidding always those
with whom he conversed, not to credit, or trust any of the protestant Clergy in
matters of Religion, how ever so sincere they may seem to be in other affairs.

SVBSECT. III. Reflections upon Mr. VValsingham's relation.
THe first Reflection is. How education, and a persuasion of the truth grounded
thereupon, can not be safely or prudently relied upon in matters of that one
only faith, without which it is impossible to please God, and be saved;
especialy when we acknowledge the fallibility of our Church, and have reasons
to suspect our Clergys sincerity. The protestant Church of England does
acknowledge it is own fallibility, and that Clergys interest and intrigues in
upholding a Religion whereby alone they may live above the meanness of their
parentage, and patrimony, together with our Catholic continual exceptions and
proofs against it is novelty, and libertinism, and the public offers of learned
disinteressed, and conscientious persons to demonstrat how much lay-Protestants
are abused by their Clergy, and mistaken in their fancied Scripture and
reformed Doctrine (in case the state will give way to a fair trial) does leave
no room for the illiterat layties ordinary excuse, to wit, that they are not
obliged to study Controversies, or read the Fathers; so much is not exacted of
them, they are bound notwithstanding to examine (every one according to his
capacity) which of the two Clergys, Protestant or Catholic, do corrupt and
falsify Scripture, the Fathers and Counsels; or if that diligence be not
compatible with the means, and condition of many of them, no more is required
of such, then to observe which of both parties and Clergyes hinders, or is most
backward in coming to a public trial thereof, this (being but matter of fact,
discernable by the eye, without Metaphysical speculation, or historical
erudition) can not in conscience be rejected or neglected by any Christian,
learned or unlearned. Though Mr. Walsingham was a protestant Divine, yet he
never had read any Catholic Books, and by consequence was (before he lighted
upon the defense of the Censure) as ignorant in our Tenets as any
lay-protestant, and as avers from reading our Controversies: yet being a
conscientious, and judicious person, he thought himself bound under pain of
damnation, to examine whether what that Book said of Protestants, was true:
Particularly when he reflected upon their putting of, and declining all public
disputations concerning Religion, and their persecuting such as offered to
dispute.

2. Reflection. How easily a company or Corporation of necessitous and mean
persons do conspire and concur in a beneficial fraud; and how difficult it is
to make them confess a fault, in the maintenance whereof their fortunes are
concerned, and by consequence how accomptable the protestant layty is to God,
for not mistrusting and examining the truth and sincerity of their own Clergy,
being so indigent and so interessed persons, and so confidently charged and so
frequently caught with falsehoods? what fraud can be more visible then to make
men believe that so infamous and dissolute persons as Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, Cranmer and Beza, etc. were Saints, sent by God to restore his Church
unto it is primitive doctrine, and spirit? or that they, and all protestants do
agree in all matters of faith, against Papists. Their dissentions, vices, and
wickedness are so manifest, that they can not be denied without impudency, and
without giving the lie to the whole world, and contradicting their own
writings. And yet the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Junta of Divines, would
face down Mr. Walsingham, that there was no such matter; and because the poor
man humbly petitioned to have the matter decided, by comparing their own books
(which were in the next room) with his notes, he was censured and called a
foolish bold Knave, impudent fellow, s^^cy Companion etc. and threatened with
prison and pillary. And for that they durst not betray the weakness of their
cause by so public and violent proceedings against a known protestant, who
desired to continue one of themselves, if protestancy did not prove to be a
mistake of Christianity, the Archbishop (to be shut of him) sent him to the
Commissary of St. Albans to be resolved, forsooth, whether Luther acknowledged
in his Books that he began the protestant Reformation, and impugned the Mass,
adoration of the Sacrament, Invocation of Saints etc. moved thereunto by the
devill's arguments, in a real conference between himself and satan; as if this
passage and others of Luther's and Calvin's works were not to be found in
London, or in his Graces Library at Lambeth, as well as at St. Albans? And
after that by his own importunity Mr. Walsingham had obtained of Doctor Covell
to show him Luther's book wherein he acknowledged this conference and conviction
of the Devill's arguments, Subsect. 2. number. 19.
that the Doctor should interrupt him, and divert the whole discourse with a
rush, you see I have this book and many such like.

3. Reflection. By what particular indirect means, cavills, and Calumnies, the
Archbishop himself endeavored to maintain the protestant Religion, and
discredit the Catholic, delivering to Mr. Walsingham Mr. Bell's libell against
the Jesuits, as an invincible fortress against the Roman faith; and his other
book full of corruptions and falsifications, as a very sincere and solid piece;
which falsifications being showed to them all sitting in their Junta, and
Judgment about that affair, the Archbishop durst not send into his study for
the Fathers works that were affirmed by Mr. Walsingham to have bin corrupted by
Bell and Calvin, Subsect. 2. nu. 40.
etc. His Lordship's confessed practice also of burning Catholic Books argues
the weakness of the protestant cause, and proves how much they are afraid their
own false dealing, and the impiety of their principles should be discovered.

4. Reflection. That Mr. Walsingham's case has bin and is revived and practiced
now every day, when any conscientious protestant begins to doubt of the safety
and sincerity of his Religion. The protestant Clergy tells him that he is in a
sure way of salvation, and yet this assertion is against one of their articles
of faith, to wit, that which acknowledges their Church is fallible in
proposing Christ's doctrine and the true sense of Scripture, and by consequence,
(for all they know) themselves may be in damnable errors. Then they tell him
the Papists are Jdolaters, worship Antichrist, etc. that our Books of
Controversyes are full of lies, and fables; and to make good these their
impostures, they not only corrupt our Authors, but translate into English all
infamous libells, though they treat not of controversies, as the Jansenists
Letters, Palafox his relations: and for the renegat Fr. Paulo his history of
the Council of Trent, See in the epistle dedicatory to the King edit. Angl.
they swear it is the most exact and sincere work of this age, whereas Cardinal
Palavicino, in his answer to the same, and in the very beginning, has set down
300. of Fr: Paulo's untruths in matter of fact, so palpable* that they seem
inexcusable in him, and render others guilty of unpardonable rashness, and
obstinacy, who credit so mistaken or malicious an Author, and prefer his bare
word before the unanimous Testimony of all Christendom, that has accepted the
definitions of the Council as Catholic truths; which they would never have
don, had they bin such as Fr: Paul^ describes. Js it likely that the Bishops,
Ambassadors, and Prelates, of so different nations, and subjects to Princes of
so contrary Interests, who were present at the Council, and recommended to
their flocks, and friends the decrees of Trent as sacred, would conspire to
cheat and damn their Souveraigns, relations, and neighbors? Or that they knew
not better how matters went in the Council, or were not more impartial in
relating them, then one Apost^ta Friar, or those persons from whom he pretends
to have received his papers and intelligence? with such pitiful frauds and
fashoods are many poor protestant souls deluded, and seduced into eternal
damnation; which they deserve for believing their own Clergy without any
further examination of the scruples and doubts which common sense and natural
reason does raise in every one of them that converseth with Roman Catholics,
or observes the incoherency and inconstancy of protestancy, together with it is
singularity and pride of Spirit, contemning the primitive true sense of
Scripture declared by universal Tradition, and the unanimous consent of all
orthodox Fathers and Councills. Perditio tua ex te Jsrael.

5. Reflection. One of my Lord of Canterburyes reasons to Mr. Walsingham against
crediting the Popish book was, do you not know when two men go to law together,
one will speak the worst he can by the other? And though this ought not to be
practiced in law suites, much less in controversies of Religion, yet seeing my
Lord would have protestants read our books with that prejudice, reason does
dictat that theirs ought not to be read without caution; especially Seeing
every protestant ^eader makes himself supreme Judge of Controversies of
Religion, and no Judge ought to give sentence before both sides be heard.
Suppose therefore that the protestant and Catholic Clergy are engaged not only
in a dispute of Religion, but in a suit of Law, to wit, whether the revenues of
the Church of the three Kingdoms belong of right rather to the present
possessors, then to the ancient proprietors? neither party (say you) ought to
be Judge in his own cause, who then must decide the business? The Layty;
Content, let my Lord Chancellor of England (notwithstanding his known
Jnclination to favor and promote protes^^^cy) be named head of a Committee, for
examining, and deciding the question. Let it be tried in publik Court, which of
the two parties are guilty of counterfeiting evidences? that is, of changing
the ancient letter and sense of Scripture, and of corrupting and falsifying the
Catholic Fathers and Counsels. It is but matter of fact, and may be soon
resolved. We have given our charge against our Adversaries long since, in our
printed Books, and in this do renew the same. Let the Court command them to put
in their answer.

And because the Protestant Clergy has always endeavored to make us odious
and obnoxious to the state, as unnatural subjects and ill patriots, and will
strive now to persuade the world that our zeal in manifesting their frauds and
falsifications, proceeds not from a desire of manifesting the truth, but from
covetousness of possessing their lands, we doubt not but that in case reason
and equity appears to be on the Catholic side, the Catholic Clergy will
resign unto his Majesty all their claim and right to the Church livings of the
three Kingdoms, to be freely disposed of in pious and publik uses, as he and
his Parliament will think most fit for the honor of God, and defense of this
Monarchy against foreign enemies, and seditious subjects. Wherein we do no more
then duty, and our Brethren did in the like occasion in Q. Mary's reign. And as
our offer can have no design but duty, so this Trial can not be against
conscience, and may prove to be of great consequence, both for the salvation of
souls, and satisfaction of his Majestyes subjects. It can not be against the
tenderness of Protestant consciences, because Roman Catholics (who pretend to
a greater certainty of doctrine, as believing the Roman Catholic Church to be
infallible) have admitted of such a trial in France an. 1600. in presence of
the King, (then a Catholic) the princes, and of all the Court; and has bin
translated into English in the third part of the 3. Conversions. In hopes that
Protestants may be moved by such an example, and follow the same Method, I will
set down the sum of the Trial.

SVBSECT. IV. A brief relation of a Trial held in France about Religion, whereof
the Lord Chancellor of France was Moderator.
IN the year 1600. there came forth a book in Paris under the name of Monsieur
de Plessis, a Hugonot, and Governor of Samur, against the Mass; which book
making great show (as the fashion is) of abundance and ostentation of Fathers,
Counsels, Doctors, and stories for his purpose, great admiration seemed to be
conceived thereof, and the Protestants every where began to triumph of so famous
a work, (Just as our prelatiks have don of late, when Doctor Jeremy Taylor's
Dissuasive from Popery was published in Ireland, printed and reprinted in
England) whereupon diverse Catholic learned men took occasion to examine the said
book, of Plessis, (as others have don lately with Doctor Tailors Dissuasive)
and finding many most egregious deceits, shifts, and falsifications therein, P.
Fronto Duceus Burdeg.
diverse books were written against it, and one in particular by a French
Jesuit, discovering at least a thousand falsehoods of his part. And the Bishop
of Eureux (afterward Cardinal Peron) Protested upon his honor in the pulpit,
that he could show more then 500. Falsifications in the Book for his part.

Hereupon the Duke of Bovillon, Monsieur Rosny, Mr. Digiers and other
Protestant Lords, began to call for a trial of the truth, for that it seemed to
touch all their honors, as well as that of their Protestant Religion. It were
to be wished that some of our English Protestant Nobility and Gentry did imitat
the French Hugonots, rather in this example of the sense they showed both of
honor and conscience, then in the fashion of their clothes, cringies and
congies. The English Protestants* have more reason to vindicat Doctor Taylor's
Dissuasive from the aspersions of frauds, and falsifications laid to that
Bishop's charge, then the french Hugonots, had to vindicat de Plessis his Book,
which was but the work of a Layman, or at least not set out by order of the
Hugonot Clergy, as Bishop Taylor's Dissuasive was resolved upon, and published
by order of the Protestant prelatik Convocation of Ireland, and both the book,
and Tailor the Author, or Amanuensis, so much applauded in England, that the
Dissuasive has often bin printed at London, and the Dissuader's picture (in
his Canonical habit) placed in the beginning of his book, with a stern and
severe countenance, as if he were sharply reprehending St. Ignatius and his
learned Jesuits, for cheating and selling of souls; of which crime they are
accused with Mottos set under and over their pictures, after Taylor's preface.
If you add to this insulting dress the impudent drift of the book, which is to
dissuade all the Irish, and English Catholics from popery, you will find that
the credit and Religion of prelatik Protestants is more deeply engaged in
maintaining the truth of Bishop Taylor's cause, then the French Hugonots in
vindicating Monsieur de Plessis, and defending his book against the Mass. But
to our story.

Though Plessis had challenged Peron to prove the falsifications that Peron had
laid to his charge, yet when he saw that Peron accepted of the challenge,
Plessis began to shrink and seek delays, but by the King's express command
both parties appeared before his Majesty at Fontainbleau, where Plessis came
with five or Six Ministers on his side, to which sort of people, it seems, he
gave too much credit, and upon their word, took all his arguments, as appears
by the words of Peron. After that Peron had offered to show 500. enormous and
open falsifications in his only book of the Mass, he adds; and moreover, I
say, if that after this our conference ended, he will take upon him for his
part to choose amongst all his citations of his Book or Books, any such
authorities as he thinks most sure against us, I do bind my self for
conclusion of all, to refute the whole choice, and to show that neither in his
said Book against the Mass, nor in his Treatise of the Church, nor in his
Commonwealth of Traditions, is there to be found so much as any one place
among them all, which is not either falsely cited, or impertinent to the matter,
or unprofitably alleged etc. neither do J hereby pretend to blame him for any
other thing, then that he has bin over credulous in believing the false
relations and Collections of others that have endeavored to abuse the industry
and authority of his pen.

This disputation (says Peron in his answer to Plessis Challenge) shall not be
like to others in former times, wherein were examined matters of doctrine, and
the truth thereof, etc. In examination whereof the shifts and sleights of the
Disputers, and other disguising of the matters, might make the truth uncertain
to the hearers. But all Questions in this disputation shall only be questions
of fact, whether places be truly alleged or no? for trial whereof it shall only
be needful to bring eyes for Judges to behold whether the citations which we
do accuse of falsehood, be so indeed in the Authors as Plessis has alleged in
his Book: And yet of the overthrow of these so many Falsifications gathered
together, ensues the overthrow and dishonor of the cause which is defended by
such weapons. And consequently we are much bound to the holy providence of of
Almighty God, Apply this to Bp. Tailors Dissuasive, whereof himself says in
his preface he was but the Amanuensis, all the Protestant Church of Ireland in
a solemn convocation having laid their heads together for composing so
substantial and convincing a piece.
that he has permitted in this last assault of Heretics, the Ministers of
France, to have laid all the heads of their falls Impostures and deceitful
dealings upon one Body, to the end they may be all cut off at one blow: and
that the simple people by them abused, seeing discovered the false and
unfaithful dealings of those upon whose fidelity they grounded their faith,
may forsake them hereafter, and return to that faith which is the pillar and
sure ground of all truth. This is an excellent Method, and Peron's words may be
very well applied to B. Taylor's Dissuasive from Popery. But to our relation.

The Judges of the conference were besides the Chancellor of France, who was
Moderator, the president de Tou, a near Kinsman to Plessis, Monsieur Pitheu,
his great friend, and Monsieur le Fevre Master of the Prince of Conde, all
Catholics. On the other side for the Protestants were named the president
Calignon Chancellor of Navarre, and Monsieur de Fresne Conaye president, and
Monsieur Causabon Reader to his Majesty in Paris, all earnest and learned
Protestants.

The day before the trial, Peron, to deal more plainly and like a friend, sent
unto Plessis 60. places taken out of his book, upon which he meant to press
him, and as his words are to begin the play, of which 60. Plessis choose out
19. that seemed to him most defensible. But the next day the trial being begun;
after Peron had declared there were four thousand places falsified in Plessis
his Book, only 9. of the 19. could be examined, though they sat 6. hours, and
all Judged against Plessis by common consent; whereupon Plessis fell sick that
night, vomiting blood etc. and could be never got to proceed in the trial, and
went from Paris to Samur without taking leave of the King, or seeing the Lord
Chancellor. This proof of wilful Falsifications (whereby alone it seems
protestancy can be maintained every where else as well as in England) occasioned
the conversion of very many in France, as the King's Lieutenant in Limoge, and
his wife, with diverse of the nobility, and no few Ministers, whereof one was
Tirius a Scotchman, master of a College in Nismes; and an other who was Nephew
to John Calvin.

The Copy of a letter written by a person of quality about this conference.
SIR. Here has bin some four days past a great Conference at Fontainbleau
between Monsieur Peron Bishop of Eureux, and Monsieur Plessis Mornay Governor
of Samur. The King with many Princes were present, and Judges chosen and
appointed for both parties. In the end Plessis Mornay was utterly disproved and
confounded by a general consent of both sides, and shamed; in so much as the
King rose up from his place, and swore Ventre Gry he had heard and seen enough
of Plessis falsities, and that by Act of Parliament he would cause his books to
be burned, saying that himself had all his youth time bin abused and carried
away with their corruptions etc.

The Hugonots are struck more dead with this accident then if they had lost a
battle of 40. thousand men, and Plessis Mornay himself is fallen sick upon it,
vomits blood, and looks like himself etc. Paris 10. May. 1600.

King Henry 4. letter to the Duke of Espernon upon the same subject.
MY friend. The Diocese of Eureux has overcom Samur; and the sweet manner of
proceeding that has bin used, has taken away all occasion to say that any
force has bin used beside the only force of truth. The Bearer hereof was
present at the combat, who will inform you what mervailes J have don therein.
Certainly it is one of the greatest blows that has bin given for the Church of
God this long time for the manifestation of this error. By this means we shall
reduce more in one year of them that are separated from the Church, then by any
other way in fifty years. There were a large discourse to be made of each their
actions, but the same were too long to write. The Beare^ will tell you the
manner which J would have all my servants to observe for reaping fruit of this
holy work. Good night my friend. And for that I know what pleasure you will
take hereof you are the only man to whom J have written it, This ^. of May 1600.

HENRY.

The Authors falsified and the sentence given against Plessis.
THe (...) places or Authors corrupted by Plessis and his Minist^^^, went (...)
about the real presence* Durandus against Transubstantiation; St. Chrysostom
against prayer to (...), twice. (...) against prayer to Saints. St. Cyril
against worshipping the holy Cross. The Code or Imperial (...) to the same (...)
against honoring our B. Lady. (...) against worshipping of Images. The
particulars whereof, may be seen in the printed Acts of this Conference, and in
the three Conversions part 3. translated into English. But to satisfy the
curiosity of many* J will copy the abridgment of the Judges sentence, which was
delivered immediately after Conference by the Secretaries to diverse persons of
quality. Upon the first two places of Scotus and Durandu^ the sentence was,
that Monsieur Plessis had taken the objection for the resolution. Upon the
places of St. Chrysostom, That he had left out that which he should have put
in. Upon the fifth place of St. Hierom, That he ought to have alleged the
passage entire (...) it was in the Author; upon the six place of St. Cyril,
that (...) passage alleged out of St. Cyril was not to be found in him. The
seventh place out of the Emperors Theodorus and Valens, (...) Plessi^ had
alleged truly Crinitus, but that Crinitus was abu^^^. Upon the eight place out
of St. Bernard, That it had bin (...) Plessis had cited the place distinctly as
it lay in the Author, with (...) of any thing in the midst. And finaly upon the
ninth (...) out of Theodoret against Images, That the passage alleged (...)
not to be understood of Images, but of Idols; and that this (...) by the words
which Plessis had omitted in his allegation. (...) this suffice for French
falsifications, let us return to the English, whereof there is such abundance,
and so great variety, that J can hardly resolve which to (...) upon.

SECT. VIII. Protestant falsifications to persuade that the Roman Catholic
doctrine is inconsistent with the Sovereignty and safety of Kings, and with
civil Society between Catholics and Protestants.
THe Protestant Clergy seeing their frauds and falsifications of Scripture,
Fathers, and Counsels clearly discovered, and that after Queen Elizabeth's
death they had no reason to make Catholic Religion odious to the line of the
Stewards (our Tenets favoring their right against the deceased Queen, and other
Protestants pretenses) resolved upon an other way to secure their
Church Livings against the title and claim of the Roman Clergy; which was, to
maintain in their Books, that it is impossible for a Papist to be a good
Subject, because (say Protestants) it is a principle among them, that in some
cas^^ the Pope may depose a King: So that now the Protestant preachers are
become shrewd Politicians, and defend their doctrine and revenues by reasons of
state. One of the chief of these Church-Polititians was Thomas Morton, late
Bishop of Duresme, more famous for his wicked impostures, then for his many
volumes. He began with a Treatise of Rebellion and Equivocation, which having
bin answered, and restored upon himself and his Protestants in the beginning of
K. James his reign; and his wilful falsehoods laid open to the world, he set
forth a pamphlet, which he called a preamble of his (promised, but never
performed) Reply; and in that Preamble omits almost all the material
accusations and objections of his adversary F. Persons: and to such few as
himself had attempted to answer, he added new lies and impostures, or laid the
fault of his own former falsifications, upon his Brethren, who joined with him
in the work, as every one may see in F. Persons Quiet and sober Reckning with
Mr. Morton, out of which we will borrow some few examples.

Bishop Morton's falsifications about the lawfulness of Killing a Tyrant.
AN other like trick he plays us (says Persons) abusing a place of Doctor
Boucher the French man, Persons sober reck. page 318.
de Justa abdicatione etc. thereby to make all Catholics Odious, as allowing
his doctrine. He cites Bouchers words thus. Tyrannum occidere honestum est, quod
cuivis impune facere permittitur, quod ex communi consensu dico. And then he
Englisheth the same thus; any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant, which I defend
by common consent. But he that shall read the place in the Author himself,
shall find that he holds the very contrary, to wit, that a private man may not
kill a Tyrant that is not first Judged and declared to be a public enemy by
the Commonwealth. And he proves the same at large out of Scripture, and by the
Decree of the Council of Constance. But the words which I say by common
consent, are added by Morton, and not (...) be found in the Author. Morton
excuses his fraud and folly by saying the like are in other Chapters as Mirum
esse in affir^^^^do consensum, which words are of other matters, and spoken
upon other occasions, and not annexed to the former sentence of Doctor Boucher.

B^^ Morton's Falsification of Catholics against the Sovereignty of Princes;
and how he excuses himself with saying he received it from the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
BIshop Morton in his Book of Discovery page 8. set down this false proposition;
That all Catholic Priests did profess a prerogative of the people over
Princes; for proof thereof he cites this position of Mr. Reynolds in the place
aforesaid, Reynold. de justa Reip. auctoritate c. l.
Rex humana creatura est, qaia ab hominibus constituta: and englisheth it in
this manner, A King is but a creature of man's creation, where you see first,
that in the Translation he adds, but, and man's creation of himself, for that
the latin has no such adversative clause as but, nor creation, but rather the
word c^^stitution. Secondly, these words are not the words of Mr. Reynolds, but
only cited by him out of S. Peter. And thirdly they are alleged here by Morton
to a quite contrary sense from the whole drift, discourse, and meaning of the
Author, which was to extol and magnify the authority of Princes, as
descending from God, and not to debase the same. For proof hereof whosoever
will look upon the book, and place it self before mentioned, shall find that
Mr. Reynolds purpose therein is, to prove that albeit earthly principality be
called by the Apostle humana Creaturae, yet that it is originally from God, and
by his commandment to be obeyed.

Morton's Answer.
Page 100.
THis allegation is of all which yet J have found most obnoxious, and liable
unto taxation; which (God knows that J lie not) J received from suggestion,
as the Author thereof R. C. can (...). For (...) that time I had not that
Ros^^ns, alias Reynolds; neither by that present importunity of occasions could
J seek after him, which I confess, is greatly exorbitant, for I received it as
a testimony debasing the authority of Kings: so (...)

When J was advertised (says Persons) that R. C. did signify Ric. Cant. J was
driven into a far greater mervaile, how Mr. Morton could be permitted to
publish such a manner (the thing having to pass the view of R. C. his officers)
and how he could presume to have more care of his own credit, An imposture
continued against the Catholic doctrine by the national Synod of the Church of
England. see inf.

See constitutions Ecclesiast. printed at London by Barker an. 1604. Can. 30.
The whole Convocation of the Protestant Clergy convicted of falls dealing
against Catholics.


then of the others that is head and Cheiftain.

But though the Archbishop of Canterbury did suggest this calumny to Morton,
it is probable he did not English (...) for him, but left that labor to
himself. The truth is, the Archbishop, and Morton, and all the Protestant
Clergy were resolved to make Catholics and their Religion odious by any means
whatsoever; and finding they could not do it with truth, it was judged
convenient for preserving above two Millions Sterling. per an. for themselves and
their Children, to effect it by falsehood.

And to the same intent and purpose did their whole prelatik Synod held at
London 1603. (Can. 30.) contrive and conspire in a notable cosenage, trumpery,
and calumny against the Roman Catholic doctrine; when giving the reason (to
satisfy puritans) why they retain the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism?
they said they do it, because the same has bi^ ever accompanied (among the
prelatick Protestants) with sufficient cautions and exceptions against all
popish error and superstition; and forsooth, that the world may understand from
what Popish error they have freed the same, they signify, that the Church of
England since the abolishing of popery, have ever held and taught, that the
sign of the Cross used in baptism, is no part of the substance of that
Sacrament, and that the Infant baptized is by virtue of baptism (before it
(...) signed with the sign of the Cross) received into the Congr^gation of
Christ's Flock, as a perfect member thereof, and not by any power ascribed to
the sign of the Cross etc. ^^erupon they conclude, that the use of the sign of
the Cross in Baptism, being thus purged from all popish superstition, and
(...), and reduced in the Church of England to the primary (...) of it etc. is
to be reverently retained and used. Thus teach (...) in their foresaid Synod.
And yet it can not be showed (...) as in one particular Roman Catholic Doctor
or (...), that the sign of the Cross is an essential or substan^^^^ (...) of
Baptism. Witness K. James, See the sum of the Conference page 37. Thirdly
printed an. 1604.
(nay the Bishops th^^selves that make this their imposture the ground of a
(...) of their Church) who in the Conference of Hampton (...) said, that he
understood by the Bishops, yea and (...) it himself to be true, that the
papists themselves did never (...) any (...) or spiritual grace to the sign of
the Cross in Baptism* Is it possible that lay people can be so ignorantly
de^^t, and dull, as to let a Clergy enjoy millions of reve^^^ upon such
notoriously falls, and forged evidences?

The protestant Falsification to persuade that the Canon law does warrant
deposition of Kings by the Pope.
MAster Morton in his discovery page 34. has these words. Extravag. communium
de Major. and obedientiat. vnam sanctam.
Except (says the Romish pretense) there were a way of deposing Apostata
Princes, God had not provided sufficiently for his Church. And for this he
cites the Constitution extravagant of Pope Bonifacius, and says, this
objection is in your extravagants, and so it may be called, because it rangeth
extra, that is without the bounds of God's ordinance. etc.

Here first this sentence is not in the Popes extravagant at all, but only in
a certain addition to the ordinary Gloss, or Commentary of John Picard; which
addition was made by Petrus Bertrandus a late writer. Secondly, this Commentary
says nothing of deposing Apostata princes, but only affirming the foresaid
opinion of Canonists to be true, that Christ was Lord absolutely in his life
over all, not only in spiritual authority, but in temporal also, he infers
thereby, Christ should not have sufficiently provided for the Government of his
Church and Kingdom upon earth, nisi vnicum post se tal^^ Vicarium reliquisset,
qui haec omnia posset, except he had left some such one Vicar after him as
should be able to perform al these things, according as necessity shall
require; which later clause Mr. Morton cut of, as he added the other about*
Apostata Princes.

Bishop Morton in his preamble page 110. does answer thus. For citing the
extravagant of the Pope, an ingenious reader would have understood a figure
called Synecdoche, where the part is put for the whole, as when we say, this
man shall not come under my roof, meaning by roof which is but a part of my
house, the whole house it self: so here by extravagants might have bin meant
the whole body of their Constitutions, which contain both extravagants and
Glosses. etc.

This is the first part of his answer, that we must understand him by a figure,
pars pro toto, as if a man should say in divinity, the Scripture has this or
that, because Tyndales Glosses, or some Commentaries, or annotations upon it
have. But indeed here is no Synecdoche, but only the figure of plain lying;
for, neither are the extravagant Constitutions of Popes, parts of the Glosses,
nor are the Glosses parts of the Constitutions; and much less may additions, or
annotations be accounted any part at all of the same.

The second part of his answer is no less fraudulent. Preamb. p. 11.
Pope Gregory 13. (says Morton) has ratified the foresaid Glosses and
annotations, with privilege, and authority equivalent and answerable to the
authority of the Decretals and extravagants themselves; whereof he infers,
that whether a man do cite ^^cretals, Extravagants, Glosses, and annotations,
all is one, for that all have equivalent authority.

Pope Gregory 13. being demanded license to print the Canon law a new; prefixed
an epistle before the decretals of (...) with this title, ad futuram rei
memoriam, wherein he (...) license to Paulus Constabilis to review the same, and
to (...) printer to print it exactly according to the Roman exem^^^, saying
among other things, thereupon. Vt hoc Iuris Ca^^^ci corpus fideliter and
incorrupte juxta exemplar Romae impres^^^ ^mprun^ possit: That the Canon law
may be faithfully (...) without corruption printed, according to the Copy set
(...) at Rome. So that Mr. Morton will needs have this (...) of printing, an
equalling the credit and authority of all (...) things printed. As for his
adding the words Apostata princes, (...) ^yes, though they be not in the text
of the Glosses, yet (...) matter handled in that Gloss may be extended to them.

Protestant Falsification, to persuade that Catholics may cheat any
excommunicated persons of their lawful debts.
WIll you hear a case or two more (says Parsons) out of the Canon law, how
dexterous Sir Thoma^ is in corrupting that which he loves not. You (...) read
in the fourth page of his pamphlet or preamble an ancient decree (for so he
calls it) alleged by him out of Gratian in the Gloss, determining that
though a man has sworn to pay money to one that is excommunicated, yet is he
not bound to pay the same, and he cites the latin text thus: Si juravi me
soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui excommunio^tur, non teneor ei solvere. If I have
sworn to pay money to any man that is excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it:
adding this reason, quia qualitercunque poss^mus, debemus ^exare malo^* vt
cess^nt a m^^o, because we ought to vex evil men by what means soever we may,
to the end they may cease from doing evil.

The truth of this matter is, that these words be not found in any text of law,
or decision of any pope, or Council; but words of the Gloss that contein only
a certain objection upon a Clause of a Canon, concerning promise to be observed
to one that is excommunicated, after the promise was made, and the objection
(...) doubt is made in these word^ by the Author of the Gloss or Commentary
(...) quid (...) si juravi etc. But what will you say if J have (...) to any
person, or have promised the same under (...), and in the mean space be to whom
I made the (...) excommunicated, am I bound to pay the same or not (...)
question, and then he argues on both sides, and (...) for the negative,
videtur quod non, it seems J am not (...) the Canon law says ( causa 25. q.
6.) that we ought (...) wicked men etc. But afterward coming to give his (...)
solution, he says thus, veriu^ credo quod licet ille non habeat (...) petendi,
tamen debet ei solui. I do believe the truer opinion to be, that albeit be,
that is so excommunicated, have no right to demand his money, yet is the other
bound to pay him; so that Morton* imposes upon his (...), the objection for
the resolution, cutting of deceitfully the first words, sed quid dici^, si
jura^^ etc. and alleging the reason of the objection quia qualitercunque
possumus etc. for the reason of the solution. Morton answers, the truth is I
took these allegations upon credit etc. of one Stock a learned preacher (says
he) of London. Preamb. page 104.
And Stock begins his recognisance thus, I Richard Stock brought this
allegation with some others, to the Author of the discovery etc. So like honest
fellows they divide the same between them, Stock for his fraudulent lending,
and Morton for his beggarly borrowing, and without doubt improving of the
fraud: it being incredible (...) Stock would deliver it as Morton sets is down.

Bp* Morton's Falsification, to persuade that Cathotholiks hold it lawful to
murder and massacre Protestants.
IN the 6. page of Morton's discovery, he has this grievous (...) out of the
Canon law against Catholics. (...), felij vel consanguinei non dicuntur, sed
juxta legem, sit (...) super (...), vt fundas sanguinem ipsorum. And then he
(...) thus, Apud Great. Gloss. in decret. lib. 5. ex decret. Greg. 9. (...).
cap. legi. Which words he englisheth thus, (...) termed either Children, or
kindred, but according (...), thy hand must be against them to spill their
blood. (...) in the Margent he sets down this special prin^^^ note, The
professed bloody Massacre against the Protestants with^^^ distinction of sex or
Kindred.

First of all is to be considered that this Gloss or (...) of the Canon law,
which here is both untruly cited, (...) maliciously applied, is upon a Canon
beginning, si quis Episcopus; which Canon is taken out of the third Council of
Carth^ge, wherein the famous Doctor St. Austin was present, and (...) device of
the Canon is, that if any Bishop should institute heretics or pagans for his
heirs, whether they were Kinsmen or (...); ei Anathema dicatur, let him be
accursed etc. now the (...) yiedling a reason of this severity, says, Quia
isti haeret^^ ^am non dicuntur filij vel consanguinei, vnde dicitur in lege, si
(...) tuus, and amicus tuus, and vxor tua depravare voluerit veritatem, sit
manus tua super illos; For that these heretics are not n^w called Children or
Kinsfolks, therefore as such they cannot be made Inheritors by eccles^astical
men. Whereupon it is said in the law (of Deuteronomy) if thy Brother, or friend,
or wife will go about to deprave the truth, let thy hand be upon them. And
presently he cites to the same effect the authority of St. Hierom in an other
Canon and volume of the law, where the holy Doctor excusing to his friend
Riparius a Priest, his earnest desire and zeal to have Vigilantius* the heretik
punished by his Bishops, alleges diverse examples of severity in like cases
out of the Scriptures, as of Phinees, Elias* Simon Chananaeus; St. Peter, St.
Paul, and lastly cites also the aforesaid words of God's ordinance in
Deuteronomy, If thy Brother, thy friend, thy wife, etc. shall go about to
pervert thee from God's true worship etc. hear him not, nor conceal him, but
bring him (...) Judgme^^ and let thy hand be upon him first, and then after the
hand of all the people etc. which is to be understood accordi^^ (...) the form
of Law appointed afterward in the 17. Chap^^^, that he be orderly brought
forth to Judgment, and (...) sentence is past against him, he which heard or
(...) commit the sin, and is a witness against him, must (...) the first stone
at him, and the rest must follow. And this also does the ordinary Gloss of
Lyranus, and others upon those texts of Scripture declare.

And now let the Judicious Reade^ consi^^^ how many corruptions this Protestant
Bishop has used to (...) forth to his purpose this one little distracted Text
for proof of professed bloody massacres, in ended by Catholics against
Protestants. For first, he corrupts the words of the Gloss, leaving out the
beginning Quia isti Haeretici, which (...) to the understanding of the Author's
meaning; as also he lest out the reason ^^ledged by the Gloss out of God's own
words in Deuteronomy, to wit the wilful corruption of his truth. Then he
corrupts the meaning both of the Gloss and Canon, depraving that to a wicked
sense of bloody massacring without distinction of sex or Kindred, which the
Canon and Council of Carthage with St. Austin, meant only of civil punishment
against heretics, to wit, that they should not be made heirs to Ecclesiastical
men. He perverteth in like manner St. Hieriom's intent, which was that heretics
and namely Vigilantius, for denying the lawfulness of praying to Saints,
worshipping their Relics etc.) should be punished but by order and form of
Law and not that any one shall Kill an other, and much less by bloody
massacres. Lastly he presumes to re^ort the very words of God himself in the
Law, by translating fundas sanguinem ipsorum, (...) their blood, in steed of
shed their blood, for that to spill (...) is always in Scripture taken in the
worst sense, for murth^^^ng or killing unjustly.

The good Bishop remits us for an answer to the allega^^^^ of this place of
Gratian, to his friend Stock once more. (...) Stock does not take upon him to
justify any thing therein (...) then the citation to be true, which
notwithstanding is (...) as every one may see in the Text. Morton in his
preamble denies the foresaid Canon to have bin decreed in the (...) Council of
Carthage. therefore (says he) must his (...) own terms of falsehood, fraud,
treachery, (...) upon himself. But let any one peruse the said Council, (...)
he will find decreed in the 13. Canon. Vt Episcopi vel Cleric^ etc. That
neither Bishops nor Clergy men shall bestow any of their goods upon any that be
not Catholikly Christians, though they be their Kinsfolks. And the Council of
Hippo where St. Austin was Bishop, which Council professes to m^ke
Abbreviationes Concilij Carthaginensis tertii, an abridgment of the third
Carthage Council, has this Canon, That Bishops and Clergy men shall bestow
nothing of their goods upon any but such as are Catholics.

Bp. Morton's Falsification to assert the King's supremacy.
POpe Leo writing to a true Catholic Emperor (says Morton) has these words.
You may not be ignorant that your princely power is given unto you, not only
(...)

extinguished: The oblation of Sacrifice (the Mass) is intermitted, the
hollowing of Chrysm is ceased, and all (...) Mysteries of our Religion have
withdrawn themselves from the parricidial hands of those heretics that have
mur^hered their own Father^ and Patriarch Proterius, burned his (...) and cast
the ashes into the air.

This then was the cause and occasion wherein the holy (...) Leo did implore the
help and secular arm of Leo the (...), for chastising these turbulent heretics,
for the (...) of the Church. And is this all that is exacted of (...) by the
Supremacy? Is this the substance of the (...)? we know the English Prelatik
Clergy are now asha^^^ to acknowledge that their own spiritual caracter and
juris^^^tion is d^^ived from Queen Elizabeth's she supremacy; but (...) they
did own (8. Eliz.) what now they (...) every man may see how vngratfully and
confidently (...) contradict what is extant in the Act of Parliament 8. (...)
and in their Episcopal Oath of homage, wherein it is (...) that all spiritual
Jurisdiction, supreme power, order, (...), and authority, over all the state
Ecclesiastical of their (...), is in the Kings of England: and that in (...) of
the prerogative they may by their Letters patents (...) only authorize
Archbishops, and Bishops to consecrat (...) Caracter, but that they may
authorize any (...) not Bishops to consecrat and make any men (...)
Archbishops, as appears by the words of the (...) and hereupon all
ambiguities of Archbishop Parker* (...) Cammerades consecrations, were
answered* and they (...) declared to be Bishops, because the Queen had in her
let^^^^ patents dispensed with all causes of doubts, imperfection, (...)
disability that might in any wise be objected against the same, and with the
very state and condition of the Consecrator^* who indeed were no bishops as
has bin proved. See heretofore.


It being then manifest that none can give what himself has not, if the Kings
of England can give to a lay man or to (...)

(...) falsifications set down together by Bp. Morton to prove that we hold
Popes can not be deposed nor be Heretics.
THe Authors of the doctrine of deposing Kings in case of heresy (says Morton)
do profess concerning Popes, Full satisfa. page 38.
(...) that they cannot possibly be heretics, as Popes, and consequently can
not be deposed: Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 2. Carer. l. 1. c. 24. Azor. l.
5. ^. 14. Gratia^ Can. si Papa did. 40.
not says Bellarmin by any (...) ecclesiastical or temporal, no not by all
Bishops assem^^^^ in a Council: not says Carerius, though he should (...) any
thing prejudicial to the universal state of the Church; (...), says Azorius,
though he should neglect the Canons ^cclesiastical, or pervert the laws of
Kings: not, says (...), though he should carry infinite multitude of (...) with
him to hell. And these forenamed Authors do (...) for confirmation of this
doctrine, the universal (...) Romish ^^^ines and Canonists, for the space of
(...) years.

(...) these (...) are as many notorious and shamless lies, (...) be (...), and
Authors named by Morton. For first, (...) which he mentions there in the
Text, to (...) Bellarmi^^, (...), Azor, and Gratian, Bellarm. l. 2. de Pontif.
^. 30.
do expressly (...) hold the contrary to that he affirms out (...) that they
teach and prove by many arguments, (...) may fall into heresies, and for the
same be (...) the Church, or rather are ipso facto dep^sed, and (...) to
declared by the Church. But yet not content with (...) Morton cites other
four or five Authors in the Margent, (...), Valentia, Salmeron, Canus,
Stapleton, and Costerius; all (...) in the very place by him cited* are
expressly against (...) And is not this strange dealing? Js it not a strange
Religion that must be supported by falsehood? Are not they strange men, that
give a Million Sterling. per an. to a Clergy for thus deceiving and deluding their
Flocks, and damning their souls (...) (...) (...) (...) opinions, or against
the practice of the Church even (...) general Counsels, accepted and connived
at by the tempo^^^ Sovereigns themselves the effects of such opinions may be
(...) securely suppressed by s^lencing the Doctors* then by (...) the doctrine.

(...) popular and plausible ^n opinion it is, that God (...) his Church and
people, to defend themselves, (...) their little Children from being erroneously
(...) the force and violence of an heathen or heretical (...) may be seen in
the Author* that treat of this (...) that if it be not lawful to oppose the
change (...) without (...) the sin and scandal of (...) would have (...)
greater regard to the (...) one* or few Princes* then to the eternal salva^^^^
(...) souls; And though it were granted (...) were come (...) of discretion,
did run (...) the rigor of persecutions, (...) any other Religion (...) heresy
(...) the Prince does introduce (...) their succee^^ng posterity) must perish
(...) not appearing in their defense, (...) change of true Religion.

(...) innocent posterity from (...) answers (in his Treatise of (...) under
colo^^ of Religion ^dit. (...) nothing so likly to entail true (...) posterity,
as their Ancestors (...) their sufferings, wh^^ they shall hear, and be
assured (...) Testimony, th^^ their fore^fathers thus hoped in God, (...)
choose to dye, or suffer, rather then to rebel (...) the King. Besides (says
(...)) the gratest preju^^^^ which that posterity can suffer by their Ancestors
non ^^^^^tance, is (...) be brought up in a contrary Religion, to hear that
(...), but sure not to have their ears deaf^^ against all (...), when they
shall be represented. He (...) (...) they, whose predecessors were most zealous
(...), and suffered for their faith. The first Earl of South-(...) suffered
much for opposing Seamor, when he, and (...) planted Protestancy in England.
And yet we see (...) influence this has upon his posterity; and this is (...)
of most of the Nobility, and even of the Royal (...).

(...) the Doctor says, Posterity have not their ears (...) other Religions
when they shall be represented. (...) and England they have. It Is treason by
the law (...) with any of our King's Subjects concerning the truth (...) Roman
Catholics Religion: and we know what other (...) taken not only to deaf, but to
blind them from (...) the evidences produced against the falsehood of (...) with
Protestants may consider such as we present (...) book. Doctor Hammond could
not be (...) much himself contributed to make his Country-(...) and blind in
Religion, especialy after that Mr. (...) exposed his mistakes, or wilful
falsifications, to the (...). But (...) return to the question.

(...) granted and maintained by Protestant Authors (...) Sovereign, or bloody
Tyrant (whose (...) and practices reach no further then the body) (...)
resisted, and deposed, they will find (...) to give a reason why the soul may
not claim (...); unless they believe that the soul is (...) that there is no
such thing as Eternity.

Besides; such Catholics as maintain that the Pope in case (...), and
persecution, may depose Kings, or at least (...) that ipso facto they are
deposed by God (who gives (...) their power and Jurisdiction not to destroy*
but to edify) (...) them to flatter the Pope thereby, for that they make (...)
himself more subject to deposition, then Kings; because the Pope must be
deposed for any heretical opinion he (...); Kings (say they) can not, unless
they force their subjects (...) (...) considerable parts and Princes of
Christendom; that our ^^^^rnment and people seem to apprehend their own (...)
against us Catholics does make us the object of a (...), and does gain for
themselves nothing but a (...) enmity of such powerful Monarchs as have any
sense, (...) the Roman Religion.

^^condly, Though a King should persecute Catholics, and (...) and sanguinary
laws compel his Subjects to profess (...), if this persecution be pleasing to
the generality of his (...) the Pope's Censures and sentences can not be of
much (...) prejudice, or deprive him of his dominions; and as (...) Apostolik's
temporal power, it neither is so (...) it self, nor so applicable to these our
remote (...) to deserve to be made the object of our Protestant (...), or
fe^rs; we see how little Q. Elizabeth valued (...); because she had the
affection of her (...) we search into history, we shall find that the (...)
Rome his censures never prejudiced any Sovereign (...) not first lost the
hearts of his own people. The Pope (...) aw (by his sentences and
excommunica^^^^ (...) of the Italian Princes, and Commonwealths; (...) have
demonstrated how vneffectual his (...), even against those petty Princes, and
(...); what need therefore powerful and (...) Princes and nations fear a
Jurisdiction they (...), seeing* the so much talked of papal (...) so little
prevail against Catholics that own it? (...) other reason why the Popes
spiritual supremacy is not (...) dangerous, is, because they who acknowldge the
power, (...) themselves the liberty of judging of the lawfulness of (...)
^pplication, and to know whether it be justly exercised by (...); whose
censures and sentences are limited to so (...) causes, and conditions known to
every Catholic Lawyer (...) Divin, that they can hardly disturb a state, if
any of the previous admonitions and requisite formalities be omitted; (...) were
acknowledged) would employ it now as willin^^^ to the advantage of the english
Monarchy, as his (...) did in the reign of Q. Mary, by condescending that (...)
Church revenues may be spent in more pious and publik (...) then they are at
present.

Notwithstanding the visible advantages which (...) unto all Catholic
Sovereigns by admitting the (...) of the Pope's spiritual Jurisdiction in their
Kingdoms and ^^minions, and the little or no danger which thereby can come (...)
^^otestant Princes; yet because Q. Elizabeth was proceeded (...) by the Sea of
Rome (whose case was very different from (...) of the Stewards, undoubted
heirs of the Crown) no (...) of England (says the Protestant Clergy) must
trust (...) Roman Catholics; so many and so malignant are (...) suggestions
and suspicions which these Ministers endeavor (...) in privy Counselors, and
the members of Parliaments (...), (and all this to reap the benefit of the
Church lands (...) ^^^^selves) that a fancyed possibility (without any (...))
of disturbing the peace and Government, is preached (...) printed by these Sir
Polls, to be a sufficient reason of state (...) Roman Catholics incapable of
serving the state; (...) which is wors, they have lately endeavored (by their
(...) in Court, Country, and Parliament*) to question the (...) prerogative,
and his Councell's prudence for publishing (...) (which he had promised at
Breda) in favor of (...) conferences: so conscious they are of their own guilt,
(...) they doubt not but the least countenance showed to (...), will discover
the frauds whereby themselves deprive (...) estate of so vast a revenue. And
because the chief Ministers (...) state are (out of their piety, or policy)
inclined to (...) moderation toward tender consciences, and the Protestant
(...) dare not oppose it directly, they cease not (by means of some false
Brethren, and debaucht Friars) to render all good intentions for our relief
vneffectual, by inculcating the necessity of a publik instrument, not much
differing from the Oath of alleagiance which they framed in King James his
reign, that instead of acknowledging the Kings temporal Sovereignty* gives him
an unheard of jurisdiction over souls; or at least, (by reason of the ambiguous
and offensive wording thereof) does engage even Catholics as will take it* in an
endless quarrel with their spiritual Superiors, without rendering thereby any
service to their temporal Sovereign, but rather making themselves unfit to
appear for his, or their own right in Ecclesiastical Catholic Courts.

Therefore as well to satisfy the State concerning our allegiance and fidelity
to our King, as to avoid the obloquys* and artifices of the Protestant Clergy,
we humbly offer to his Majesty and his Ministers (...), that we shall swear or
sign any instrument or engagement (...) fidelity to him, which Catholic
Subjects swear or sign to their Catholic sovereigns. To exact more strict
obedience from so inconsiderable a party as we are under a Protestant Prince,
against the Bishop of Rome's pretention, then any Catholics of the world think
fit either in conscience or pruden^^^ to give to their own (...), seems not
necessary, and would savor more (...) presumption in us against the Church of
Rome, then of affection to the Crown of England.

3. They who teach that Kings (...) d^posed for heresy, maintain they may be
also d^posed (...) Tyranny; and notwithstanding that (...) their Sovereigns
taxes, Tyranny, then their opinion^* (...); yet because Popes seldom
countenance Subject^ complaints and proceedings against their Princes pretended
Tyranny, none fears to be deposed as Tyrants. How little Popes have intermedled
with Protestant Princes (if not persecutors) is visible to the whole world; If
therefore Catholic Kings apprehended no danger or prejudice from the Bishop of
Rome his censures against Tyranny (because they are so sparing of them)
notwithstanding the inclination of their Subjects to solicit and obey such
Censures, I see no cause protestants Kings have to fear Cens^^^s for heresy,
whereof the Sea Apostolik is no less sparing. (...) he answered that Catholic
princes (by the principles of (...) Religion, or at least by reason of the
probability and p^^sibility of the opinions against heresy and Tyranny) must
(...) the hazard of being thaught deposable in those cases: we (...)
protestants to consider, whether it be reasonable in them (...) of us poor
English, or Irish Subjects, a Declaration (...) those opinions which the most
powerful Catholic (...) of Christendom dare not contradict (for fear either of
(...) Christianity, or of undergoing the censures of the (...) Consistory)
notwithstanding their temporal concern (...) countenance a persuasion that
seems to check their regal (...)?

Never any King had, or can have, more reason to (...) Bellarmin's opinion, or
other such like, then the French (...) since the loss of Navarr, and the
Troubles of the (...) yet whenever the Parliament of Paris, and the (...) of
Sorbon censured the same opinions, the King and (...) of France were so far
from giving them thanks, that (...) disowned and declared void their Censures,
condemning (...) for intermedling in the matter, and under pain of his (...)
indignation, and of being held for seditious, and (...) of the publik repose,
commanded them and all (...), not to move or dispute any questions of that
nature, (...) the right either of Popes, or of temporal Sovereigns, Bouchet in
Sum. Beneficial. tit. puissance and edit. Paris. 1628. a page 812. vsque ad 853
and page 844. vsque ad 847.
(...) be seen at large in Monsieur Bouchet, a French Author, (...) Richerist,
and therefore not to be suspected of favoring (...) Sea of Rome. And as for the
Church of France, it is so (...) from such disputes as every one may Judge by
Cardinal (...) Oration in name of the whole Clergy to the states of th^^
Kingdom. Two years ago Monsieur Talon (the Kings Att^rney) objected to some
Doctors of Sorbon, that their Faculty held the doctrine of the deposition of
Kings; but they declared that though some particular members of the University
had long since taught the doctrine, yet the Faculty never resolved the question.
True it is that the Kings of France permit not their Subjects now to preach or
publish any such doctrine, and Judge that prohibition to be a sufficient security
against it; and I see no reason why protestant Kings should not think the same
a sufficient security for themselves: and questionless they would, did not
over-offi^ious persons misinform the Ministers of state, by imposing upon them
that the Church of France does practice such Oaths, engagements, or
Rem^^strances as the Parliament of Paris (a secular Court) would fain have
pressed upon the French Clergy king since, and the Jansenists lately; but now
dare not mention any such thing* the Pope having lately censured their
presumption of intermedling with matters above their jurisdiction; and the King
not giving them thanks for their officiousness.

Protestants can not clear their Religion from the doctrine, and danger of
deposing Sovereigns, and disposing of their Kingdoms.
NOw that we have cleared ((...) Roman Catholic Religion from the aspersions of
our (...), and showed how (...) dangerous the Pope's spi^^^ual supremacy can be
to the temporal Sovereignty, even of protestant Princes I would willingly
understand how the protestant and prelatik Clergy, can vindicat their own
principles (...) from deposing of as many Monarch^ and Magistrat^ (...) did not
conform to their Reformations whersoever they p^^vailed? Let them name but one
protestant Kingdom, Principality, Commonwealth or City, wherein protestancy
has not bin promoted by rebellion, and exclusion of the lawful Sovereign or
Magistrate? let them read the Histories of Germany, Geneva, France, England,
Holland, Suethland, Suitzerland, Valleys of Sa^^y, Scotland, etc. (...) they
will find that as we do not exaggegrat, so they can (...) excuse the crime, or
except any of this number from notorious guilt thereof. So universal a
conspiracy against lawful S^^eraigns in nations so distant and different,
agreeing almost (...) nothing but in the fundamental grounds of protestancy,
(...) particularly in their maxim of the lawfulness to raise (...) settle the
reformation upon the ruins of all superiority, (...) spiritual and temporal
that will not submit to the arbi^^^^^ interpretation of Scripture of every
Protestant prevailing (...)* must needs be a convincing proof, that nothing can
(...) allied to rebellion then the Protestant Religion; which (...) content to
depose only Catholic Kings for Popery, does (...) the same authority against
their own protestant Kings (...) they conform not even their reformed Tenets to
the (...) fancies of an illiterat giddy multitude.

And even the Cavaleers (the wisest and most faithful (...)) have given
sufficient ground for men to suspect, (...) think it no discredit to their
prelatick Religion, nor (...) to themselves, to trouble and question their
Kings (...) he and his privy Council should think fit to use a (...)
moderation toward Papists; their late speeches in the (...) of Commons against
his Majesty's Declaration is too clear (...) for this censure. Let themselves
now be Judges, (...) the Roman Catholic Religion, notwithstanding its (...)* of
the Popes spiritual supremacy, be not more (...) ^o Kings, then the best
Protestant Reformations, and (...) the Papal spiritual Jurisdiction over souls
be not (...) with a temporal Sovereignty in Kings over their (...)* They will
find this difference between both Religions, that the Roman Catholic admits of
and submits to Sovereignty however so addicted the Sovereigns are to
Protestancy, even the most precise Papists allow not of resistance against the
royal authority in any case, but only in that of forcing conscience by
persecution: but both Presbyterian and Prelatik Protestants think it lawful to
depose their Sovereigns if the Sovereigns (...)

SECT. X. That Protestants could never prove any of the wilful falsifications
wherewith they charge Roman Catholic writers; but themselves are convicted of
that Crime whersoever they attempted to make good their charge against us.
SOME Protestants (either out of ignorance or malice) confound our Index
expurgatorius with wilful falsifications of ancient Fathers, and modern
Authors; whereas the said Index is a professed correcting (not of the Fathers,
but) of modern Authors opinions, and Comments; no concealed corrupting of their
writings. It does not change any thing in ancient Fathers works, though
Protestants themselves confess (...) of them have ambiguous and erroneous
sentences, but such are either sufficiently explained, or corrected by
themselves in other ^^^ces, or condemned by the ancient Church, and the gene^^^
concurrence and consent of the other Fathers teaching and ^^^^ifying the
contrary to be Catholic doctrine. So that we (...) excuse our Adversaries
either ignorance or impudence when they say we make the Fathers speak what is
most pleasing to us, by our Index Expurgatorius. Of the index expurgatorius.
This you may see solidly proved against Bishop Tailors Calumnies, and
falsifications in his Dissuasive: and the thing is evident by the Index it
self, and the rules thereof. Kemnitius and other Protestants object some few
texts of Scripture in the vulgar latin which they pretend were changed by us,
and corrupted: But Cardinal Bellarmin answers to all the objections so well,
Bellarm. l. 2. de verbo Dei cap. 12.13.14.
that nothing can be replied, and all the world must confess we Roman Catholics
translated not any thing in that version to favor our Religion against
Protestants, seeing our Latin Vulgata has his used in the Church 1^. hundred
years before their pretended reformation was heard of Jewel, Morton, and
others object that Zozimus, Hardings detection l. 4. fol. 249. Aug. l. 2. de
gratia Christi c. 2 and 6. and contra Dic. Epist. Pelagij c 4. Council. Afric.
ep. ad Bonifacium. See Baronius tom. 5. Stapletons return of untruths art. 4.
p. 29. Sanders de visib. Monarch. l. 7. p. 356. Bellarm. l. 2. de Romans Pontif.
c. 24. and 25. Aug. ep. 261.
Bonifacius, and Celestinus, (three Popes that lived in Saint (...) ^ime) and
are much commended by him for holy men) forged, a Canon of the first Council
of Nice in favor of their own supremacy; but they are sufficiently cleared from
that aspersion by all Catholic Writers; who agree in this; that the heretics
did corrupt and Conceal some Canons of that Council which are now wanting. But
as for that of appeals to the Pope (which was the (...)) it is in the Canons
of the Counc^ll (...) ways held (especialy in the west Church) for (...) of
the (...) Council, because the same (...) both; And St. Austin himself did
appeal to (...) those three Popes (whom Protestants would (...) make (...)) in
the cause of (...) Bishop of (...) in his own Epistle about that matter.

Bellarmin accused by Sutcliff of (...) the general Council of Calcedon (...)
favor of the Pope's s^^remacy) one of the four first, and received in England
by act of a Protestant Parliament.
MR. Sutcliff in his Challenge and defense of the same, charge Cardinal
Bellarmin with many falsifications, Walsingham's search page ^07.
which you may see re^orted upon himself in Walsingham's Search of Religion; I
will relate but one which is the third in Sutcliff's order; In the same Book
and Chapter (says Sutcliff) Bellarmin falsifyeth the acts of the Council of
Calcedon. Bellarm. l, 2. de Romans Pontif. cap. 13.. 7.
And for proof of this falsification he says, whereas Bellarmin (...) that the
Council acknowldedged and called Pope Leo (...) Ecclesias, Head of the Church.
Which name (says Bellar^^^) the Council of Calcedon (about 1200. years past)
does (...) an epistle to Pope Leo, saying, quibus tu velut membris (...)
praeras, over whom you as head over the members do bear (...) And in the first
action of the Council the Roman Church (...), the Head of all Churches;
Sutcliff letting pass this last, (...) upon the words, quibus tu velut membris
caput praeeras, saying, that, this is referred to certain Priests of Leo his
order, in which Rank he showed himself principal etc. so as he says that these
words of the Council do acknowledge only that Leo (...) of certain Priests,
but not of the Bishops gathered (...) in that Council. But this is a foolish
fancy and (...) fraud of Sutcliff, as appears by the very letter and (...) of
the Council to Pope Leo, who after praising God (...) favor and providence in
gathering together, and (...) themselves at Calcedon, preferring the notifying
of their (...) of faith, before their Country, and labor some Journey; add,
Tom. 2. Council. ed. venet. page 342. extat. Epistola concilij ad Beatum Papa^
Leonem de omnibus gestis etc.
over which Priests (or Bishops assembled in this Council) you did preside as
head over the members by those which (...) your place, to wit, by his legates,
of whom Leo said in his Epistle to the Council, In these Brothers Paschasius
and Lucen^^^ Bishops, Boniface, and Basilius Priests, who are directed by (...)
Apostolic Sea, your fraternity may think that I preside in the (...)* And
these legates, though two of them were but Priests, took place of all Bishops,
and were acknowledged of so absolute authority, that they pronounced sentence
against D^^scorus the Heretik thus in the Popes name: The most holy Pope Leo
head of the universal Church, by us his Legates, the holy Synod consenting,
being endued with the dignity of Peter the Apostle, who is called the
Foundation of the Church, the Rock of faith, and Doorekeeper of the heavenly
Kingdom, have deprived Dioscorus of Episcopal dignity, and all priestly
function. Now this Council of Calcedon having bin received in England by act
of Parliament (1. Eliz.) and never yet repealed, I see not how Priests can be
legaly punished, or Catholics persecuted for acknowledging the Pope's spiritual
Jurisdiction in these Kingdoms, and maintaining that he is head of the Catholic
Church, St. Peter's Successor, and Christ's Vicar upon earth; much less how
could Doctor Sutcliff charge Bellarmin with falsifying the Council that
con^esseth the same doctrine in so clear terms.

SVBSECT. I. How Protestants are convicted by Bellarmin of holding twenty
ancient condemned heresies, and how Sutcliff, and Bishop Morton to clear them
of six only (fourteen it seems they c^^fess) do falsify the Fathers, and
Catholic Authors about the worshipping of Images.
CArdinal Bellarmin (lib. 4. de notis Ecclesi^ cap. 9.) proves that Protestants
are heretics, because they hold many old heresies condemned as such by the
ancient Catholic Church, whereof he sets down twenty. One is that of Xenaias a
Persian, who (says Bellarmin cit.) was the first that did openly affirm, the
Images of Christ and his Saints ought not to be worshipped, as wittnesseth
Nicephorus lib. 17. cap. 27. Doctor Sutclif says that Nicephorus is falsified:
Sutcliff challenge 2. part. 2. fol. 159. Niceph. lib. 17. c. 27.
which is most falls, for that Nicephorus writing many horrible things of this
Xenaias; as that he feigned himself to be a Priest, yea and got a Bishoprik
before he was baptized, amongst others says. This Xenaias did first of all
others (O audacious soul and impudent tongue) belch out that voice, that the
Images of Christ, and those that have bin acceptable unto him, are not to be
worshipped. And this he said so, is a truth so undeniable and generaly received,
that even the Protestant Authors that write the Ecclesiastical history, confess
it, as Functius in his seventh book of Commentaries upon his Chronicle an.
494. says. Porro is Xenaias primus in Ecclesia bellum contra Imagines indixit.

Two Pelagian heresies imputed to Protestants, and how they falsify to clear
themselves of the one, and say nothing of the other.
Whereas the Pelagians (says Bellarmin, Aug. l. 6. contra Julian. c. 2. and 3.
and 4. ad Bonifac. c. 2. and 4. Hierom. l. 2. contra Pelagian.
according to St. Austin and St. Hierom) taught two heresies among others, 1.
That every sin though never so little, is mortal. 2. That there is no original
sin in man, especialy in Infants of Lawful parents; The first, all ^rotestants
teach; the last Zuinglius, Bucer, and Calvin; but with this difference, that
Zuinglius does absolutely deny original sin to be in any man; Bucer and Calvin
do only deny the same in the Children of the Faithful, whom they say to be
born Saints and saved without Baptism. Now Doctor Morton not being able to deny
the first heresy to be common to Pelagians and protestants, would feign make
Bella^^^^ a falsifier in the second, setting down Bellarmin's words both in
Latin and English corruptly, and contrary to his plain (...) (as may be seen in
Bellarmin's Text) thus, Preamb. page 63.
The Pelag^^^s did teach that there was no original sin in men, and especialy
in the Children of the faithful, the same does Bucer and Calvin teach; as
though he had said, that Calvin had denied with the Pelagians that there is any
original sin at all in men, much less in the Children of the faithful: and had
made no distinction between Zuinglius and Calvin's, and Bucers opinions. And
Morton by this fraud would make his Reader believe he had cleared Protestants
from both the pelagian-heresies, whereas he cleeres them not from either. Hear
Bellarmin's own words, which are: Pelagiani duo inter alia docebant. 1. non
esse in hominibus peccatum originale and praecipue in filijs fidelium etc.

Hoc docet Zuinglius, Bucerus, Calvinus, lib. 4. instit. c. 15.. 20. Nisi quod
Zuinglius negat simpliciter peccatum originale in quolibet homine etc. Bucerus
autem and Calvinus, solum in filijt fidelium negant peccatum originale, quos
dicunt Sanctos nasci; salvari etiam sine Baptismo. Vide. Belar. de notis
Ecclesia cap. 9.. 14.

Two Novatian heresies imputed to Protestants, the one they answer with
silence, the other with falsifying.
Whereas Cardinal Bellarmin to prove that Protestants do agree with the old
Novatian (...), alleges two particular instances, the one in denying the
power of the Church to remit sins by priestly absolution, or the Sacrament of
Penance; the other in denying the use of holy Chrism in the Sacrament of
Confirmation: Preamb. page 63 See Parsons sober Reckoning with Morton a page
159. vsque 166. Belarm. lib. 4. de notis Ecclesiae cap. 9.. Novatianorum.
Bishop Morton having nothing to answer to the second, replyeth only to the
first by an equivocation and falsification; for he endeavoreth to confound the
Sacrament of penance with private repentance, or sorrow, sighs, tears etc. for
sins; and makes believe that Bellarmin contradicts himself when he grants that
Protestants admit the later, though they reject^ the Sacrament of penance* and
to embroyle the Reader, and excuse the Novati^ns as if they held but one error,
cuts short Belarmin's words, praecipuus error, and post Baptismum; Novatianorum
praecipuus error erat etc.

The Manichean heresy against Free will imputed to Protestants, and how
pitifully answered by Bishop Morton.
ST. Hierom, and St. Austin; Hierom in. praefat. Dialogorum contra Pelagianos.

Aug. de haeres. c. 46.


(says Belarmin) accuse the Manicheans for condemning the nature of man, and
depriving it of free will, and ascribing the original and beginning of sin unto
the nature of man, and not to free will. The same is taught openly by all
Sectaries. Thus Belarmin. Morton sets down St. Hierom. and St. Austin's words
as if they were Belarmin's, being loath to have such great Fathers tax himself
and his prelatiks with heresy. Belarm cit. Preamb. page 64.
Then he says Belarmin accuses Calvin of this heresy, whereas Belarmin
accuses all Protestants or sectaries, not only Calvin; and accuses Calvin in
particular of an other Manichean heresy, to wit, of reprehending and condemning
Abraham and other Saints of the old Testament, to which Morton answers
nothing. Lastly he thinks to excuse Calvin and free him from the Manichees
heresy, by saying that Belarmin himself confesses he granted free will to man
in his first Creation, though he lost it by sin: as if it were not also the
Manichees heresy to deny free will to man after the fall of Adam.

How Bp. Morton answers to Belarmin's imputation of Arianism unto Protestants.
BElarmin quotes St. Epiphanius and St. Austin charging the Arians not only
with the heresy of denying the son to be equal with the Father; Belar cit.
Ariani.
but also with denying unwritten Traditions to be the word of God; and says
that all the sectaries or Protestants of our times teach the second error,
though not the first, at least so clearly. The honest Bishop Morton
acknowledges the second, because he says nothing to the charge; and cavills
about the first; quoting an other Book and Chapter of Belarmin, wherein he
charge Bullinger. But as for rejecting unwritten Traditions Morton seems to
be well pleased with the charge and rest contented therein, not only with the
sense of the Arians, but of Nestorius, Preamb. page 64.
Dioscorus, and Eutiches, whom Belarmin couples with Protestants both for
contemning doctrine delivered by Tradition, and for their sacrileges against the
Sacraments, Altars, Priests, Monks, Votaries etc. saying that Protestants do
commit the very same villainies against these sacred things and persons, that
D^natists and all those other heretics had exercised. To all which Morton
answers with silence.

How Morton falsifyeth and abuses Belarmin, who imputes the denial of Christ's
real Presence in the Sacrament to Protestants.
Belarm l. 1. de Eccles. c. 1.
Immediately after the Apostles, St. Ignatius the Martyr says that the Simonian
and Menandrian heretics did not admit Eucharistias and oblaciones, for that
they did not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ,
which sentence (says Belarmin) is quoted by Theodoret in 3. Dialog. out of St.
Ignatius his Epistle to the Christians of Smirna, where notwithstanding it is
not now found. Belarmin is of opinion that these ancient heretics denied the
real presence rather as a consequence drawn from their denial of the
Incarnation, then as doubting of the signification or efficacy of Christ's
words; and that they differed in this from Protestants, that these deny
Christ's flesh to be in the Sacrament though they acknowledge he had true
flesh, but the ancient heretics deny Christ's flesh to be in the Sacrament
because he had no flesh. And here Morton pretends that Belarmin contradicts
himself, and withal abuses Calvin; who, as Morton says, does grant the real
presence, nay that Belarmin confesses he grants the same.

But Morton corrupts and abuses Belarmin both in the allegation and
Translation. In steed of Belarmin's words by us here cited, he puts in only
these as Belarmin's, which sentence is (...) by Theodoret in 3. Dialog. but is
not now to be found in Theodo^^^. Making the Reader believe by falsifying
Belarmin, That the Testimony of Theodoret was not to be found in Theodoret; and
^herfore he left out the mention of St. Ignatius his Epistle (...); whereas the
Testimony is in Theodoret now (...) both in Greek and Latin, though it be not
in St. Igna^^^^ his Epistle.

As for Belarmins contradicting himself in saying that Calvin does admit, and
deny the real presence, Valentia tom 4. disp. 6. q. 3. p. 1.. Item. Belarm. de
Euch l. 1. cap. 1. Belarm cit. cap. 1. Calvin's contradictions and non sense in
the mystery of the Eucharist. Calvin in fine consens. cum Pastor. Figurinis.
Calvin in 26 Math. and lib. 4. Instit. c. 17.5. Lib. Instit. cap. 17.. 5.10.
and 32. Lib. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 5.31. Ibid. 33.34
it is no contradiction of Belarmins, but a true assertion of Calvin's
Contradiction^* For both Belarmin and Valentia convince him of most evid^^^ and
palpable contradictions in this matter, he seeking to say something different
not only from Luther, but also from (...), and Zuinglius, thereby to make a sect
of his own, but yet not finding wherein to subsist or be permanent, speaks
non-se^^^* and Contradictions: for proof whereof Belarmin does set down seven
several propositions of his about this matter, each one of them different from
the other, and some of them so contradictory, as by no possible means they may
be reconciled, or stand together. As first, That the flesh of Christ is only
(...) heaven, and that in so certain and determinat a place, as it (...) as
distant from the bread, as the highest heaven is from the earth: and then, this
notwithstanding, he says, that in the supper the true body of Christ is
exhibited unto the faithful, and not only a sign. Yea that the very substance
of Christ's Body is given. (...) to that again he says that notwithstanding the
distance betw^^^ the Body of Christ, and the Sacramental signs, yet are they
joy^^d together by so miraculous and inexplicable means, as neither tongue nor
pen can explicat the same; and then further, That we must not believe that this
conjunction is by any real coming down of Christ's Body unto us, but by a
certain Substantial force derived from his flesh by his Spirit. Where he
seems to say that the conjunction is made, not in the substance, but in some
essential quality. And so in the fifth place more clearly he says, that it is
made by apprehension of faith only, whereby he contradicts all that he said
before of real and substantial conjunction. Ibid.. 2.5 lib. de Caena cap. 3.
And in the sixth place he confirms more the same by saying; that wicked m^n
receive not the Body at all, quia Corpus Christi solo ore fidei accipitur, for
that the Body of Christ is only received by the mouth of faith. And in the
seventh and last place he concludes, that this Sacrament does not give the
Body of Christ, or faith unto any that has it not already, but only (...)
testify and confirm that now it is there, and is but a sign or seal (to use
his words) of that which is there already. See Belarm. lib. 1. de Euch. cap. 1.
per tot. and in fin.
And this being the variety and vanity of Calvin in this matter, it proves not
contradiction in Belarmin, but in Calvin himself* whose inconstancy and
contradictions all they who ^^plain the belief of the Church of England imitat
in this (...), as every one may see in primat Usher, Bishop (...) (in his
Treatise of Transubstantiation) and others.

And now to conclude this matter, we may ask Protestants, Zozomenus lib. 7.
hist. cap. 12.
as the Emperor Theodosius did (...) Reformers and Innovators of his time,
whether they believed the ancient Fathers held the true doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and they answering affirmatively, he replied, Examinemus ergo
doctrinam vestram ad illorum scripta, Let us examine your doctrine by their
writings; Let us Judge that to be heresy, which they placed in the Catalogue of
heresies; and if so, Protestants must not blame us when we call them heretics,
for maintaining Justification by only faith, with the Simonians, and E^nomians;
God to be the Author of sin, with the Florinians; that women may be, and are
Priests, and Popes, with the P^putians; that concupiscence is a sin, with
Proclus 1 that the true Church was invisible, Belarm. lib 4. de no^is Ecclesiae
cap 9
with the Donatists; that men must not fast the Lent, pray nor offer sacrifice
for the Dead, with the Aerians; That Saints ought not to be prayed unto,
themselves nor their Relics honored, nor their Images worshipped, with
Vigilantius etc. These and other ^rotestant doctrins are recorded as heresies
by St. Irenaeus, St. Epiphanius, St. Hierom, St. Austin, and other Fathers, as
you may see in Belarmin; and the prelatick writers confess their Testimony, but
contemn their authority.

F^lsifications objected against Cardinal Baronius by Mr. Sutcliff.
THat sincere Protestants may see how little their Clergy can say against
Catholic Authors writings in this point of wilfully falsifying Fathers or
others, J will set down (...) some of the principal falsifications objected
against (...), whose work of the Ecclesiastical History depending al^^^^ther
upon the true quotations of the holy Fathers, and (...) Authors, might be the
subject of Protestant cavills, had (...) bin very sincere; yet notwithstanding
all his ingenuity (...) terms him a Cardinal forger, and liar, and one of all
(...) that ever he read that most impudently abuses and (...) scriptures
contrary to the intention of the holy Ghost etc. (...) his preface, and then
sets down 52. falsifications and (...) of his.

The first wilful falsification wherewith Sutcliff charge (...) is, that in
the first page of his first Tome he places the Image of the Roman Church in
form of a woman with a heavy wodden Cross on her shoulders etc^ This is a
notable lie (says Mr. Sutcliff) for that the Roman Church that now is
possessed of the triple Crown, was never subject to the Cross of Christ Jesus,
for that the Pope claims a power above all Emperors, lives in delights etc.

His second charge of wilful falsification is, that whereas the said picture
had two great keys of the Popes cellar (as Mr. Sutcliff says) hanging down
under it, he lies impudently, says Sutcliff, where he signifies that Christ
gave the Keys to the Pope and his adherents etc.

His third charge is, that whereas the said picture had written under it on the
one side vicit. haereses, and on the other side subegit Gentes, Mr. Sutcliff
objecteth this for a wilful falsification, saying that this later Roman Church
has not subdued heresies, but is overgrown it self with heresies.

The fourth charge of wilful falsification is, that Mr. Sutcliff supposing
Baronius and the Pope do mean to worship that wodden Cross laid upon the
pictures shoulders, he says, that if Baronius mean the true Church, he lies,
for that the true Church did never worship any wooden Cross.

The fifth charge is about these words subegit Gentes under the picture, this
is a lie (says Mr. Sutcliff) for that Saracens, Turks, and Gentiles, have
prevailed against the Pope and his followers etc. regaining the Holy Land.

The sixth charge is that the holy Ghost hovereth over the triple Crown, the B.
Virgin sits with her Son in her lap; St. Peter and St. Paul support the
worship of our B. Lady; which are all (says Sutcliff) notorious lies, for that
Christ is no longer an Infant etc. And are not these substantial charges of
wilful falsifications to be placed in the first rank? Had he found matter to
discredit Baronius he would never detain, nor divert his Reader with the
picture, but would have entered presently into the History.

But now in his seventh charge, he will not trifle. Sixtus the Fifth (says
Sutcliff) in his decretal epistle prefixed before Baronius his books, says,
that he faithfully and diligently reported the story of the Church etc. Now you
must know that this Epistle made decretal by Sutcliff, is only a license and
privilege for Baronius to print the Book. Whereas our beloved Son Antony
Cardinal Garaffa (says the Pope) Prefect of the Apostolic Library, has
related unto us, that the first volume of our Ecclesiastical History is now
ready to be set forth, and that it is a work no less learnedly then faithfully
written etc. we do give you leave to print the same etc.

With his eight charge of wilful falsification, he is resolved to destroy the
whole work of Baronius. The year (says Sutcliff) and precise time of Christ's
Nativity being the ground of all his work, it must needs follow that if he
fail in that, then his whole Book is nothing but a pack of lies: but that he
has erred in that point, is very probable; for that Epiphanius says our
Savior was born when Augustus and Silva^^^ were Consuls: but Severus writes
that he was born when Sabinius and Ruffinus were Consuls; but Baronius
follows neither of these two, but Cassiodorus. Is not this a wise charge of
falsifying? And yet Sutcliff is mistaken in his charge though it be nothing
material to the History of the Beginning and progress of Christian Religion,
Conversion of Nations, Counsels; Apparatus ad Tom. 1. page 49.
condemnation of heresies etc. Epiphanius is of Baronius his opinion as well as
Cassiodorus, Chrysostom, Orosius, Beda, and most of the ancient writers. All
his other Charges are very foolish, not considering whether Baronius relate
things of himself, or from others, and when Sutcliff denies the authority, he
does not confute it with better authority, or reason, but by Scoffing and
contempt, and yet he accuses Baronius of lies and forgery, because he relates
what other men of credit, and great authority say in matters of History or
doctrine. Sutcliff page 199.
As for example he accuses Baronius of wilful lying for that out of Euthymius
he relates that Dives (Luke 16.) was called Ninensis who also held it was a
story, and not a parable. Then his 50. charge is, Baronius would make his
Reader believe that our Savior did celebrate his passover in S. John
Evangelist's house, but Simon Metaphrastes denies it, which is alleged by
Baronius as a grave witness. His last two charges are. Sutcliff page 279.
1. Baronius says Missa is derived from the Hebrew or Chaldee word: but
Belarmin his fellow tells him he is deceived. 2. Baronius does report* out of
Gregory of Tours this ^able, that diverse making thongs did put them about the
pillar whereto Christ was tied when he was scourged, and the same did heal
diverse diseases. And with this sound charge he ends his 52. of wilful
falsifications against Baronius.

What I desire the Protestant Reader should observe in the charges of wilful
falsifications and lies which they print against our Catholic Authors is, the
difference between our charges against them, and of theirs against us. We
charge Protestants with heresies, and with corrupting Scripture, Fathers, and
Counsels, to prove heresies, and we demonstrat the same so home, that either
they omit to answer the corruptions and falsifications objected, or answer them
with adding new falsifications to the old, as has bin manifest hitherto; but
the Protestant writers objections against us are either frivolous, impertinent,
or forged by themselves. And when they can find no matter to carp at in such
works as those of Baronius and Belarmin, wherein there is such a multitude and
variety of quotations, and relations, it may be well imagined how little they
will find in modern Catholic writers, who for the most part borrow from those
two Cardinals what they say in Controversies of Religion. Had Luther, Calvin,
Beza, Kemnitius, Melancton, and Jewel, bin as sincere in their writings
against Catholics, as Canisius, Coccius, Bellarmin, Gualterus, Peron, and
Baronius are against Protestants, we could not have discovered so many palpable
falsifications in the later Protestant writers as our Books manifest to the
world; whereof I have said more, J fear, then my Readers will have patience to
peruse. Yet I shall entreat them for the Conclusion of this matter to permit me
to mention somewhat of Luther's, and Calvin's sincerity, the two chief Apostles
of the Protestant Reformation; and of two others, the most eminent Prelates and
writers of the Church of England, Usher and Laud, one called the Irish Saint,
the other the English Martyr. When such Primats are proved Falsifiers, we need
not examine further the writings of the Inferior Clergy, and petty Ministers,
but remit the ^ealous defenders of their sincerity to such Books as discover
their frauds, and are easily found, whereof we have given heretofore a Catalogue.

SECT. XI. Calumnies and Falsifications of Luther, Calvin, Archbishop Laud, and
Primat Usher to discredit Catholic Religion, against their own knowledge and
conscience.
LUther ( in postilla ad Evang. Dominicoe Annuntiationis) says, Instit. lib.
2. cap. 20.
Among the Papists every one makes recourse unto Mary, expecting from her more
favor and grace then from Christ himself. Calvin says, every Papist has
chosen peculiar Saints to whom he has devoted himself as to so many helping
Gods, (...) are their Gods now according to the number of their Cittyes, as the
Prophet vpbraided the Jsraelits, but according to the number of their very
persons.

This our Popish Babylon (says Luther) has so far extinguished faith in this
Sacrament (of Penance) as with a shamless forehead she denies faith to be
necessary; Luther de Captiuit. Babylon and in cap. 15* Joan. and in 6. art.
against the execrable Bull etc. Melancton disp. de paenitentia. prop. 7.
nay further she has with an Antichristian impiety defended that it is an
heresy, if any man affirm faith to be necessary: His Scholar Philip Melancton
says the same, The School-Doctors have foolishly and wickedly taught that sins
are forgiven without faith. Without doubt the illiterat Protestants (who all
take Luther to be a Saint at least do not believe him to be an Jmpostor)
question not but that Roman Catholics are such men as Luther, Calvin etc.
describe them; and will not so much as turn to the Council of Trent, or to any
other Book where our Tenets are to be found; Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 8.
there they might see that we hold faith to be the beginning and foundation of
man's salvation, Catech. ad Paroch. de paen. Sacram page 290. Luther lib. 1. de
natura hominis art. 4.

Luther. lib. contra Ambr. Cathar. Luther. in Council. Germ. cap. de
Anti-Christo.


and the root of all Justification, without which it is impossible to please
God etc. And in him that does repent, it is of necessity that faith go before
penance.

Concerning the necessity of Grace, Luther, says, The Papists do teach that a
man may keep the Commandments of God with the proper forces of nature, without
God's grace.

Concerning the immortality of the soul he says, The Papists at this day do
not believe at all the Immortality of the soul. And again in the Lateran
Council that was celebrated in the year 1515. in time of Pope Julius, it was
first of all known and decreed, that the resurrection of the Dead was to be
believed. Of this wicked Friars corruptions of Scripture see Zuinglius tom. 2.
ad Luth. de s^c. fol. 412. and many more Authors. As for Fathers and Counsels
he did not value them so much as to trouble himself with falsifying, or
corrupting their writings, though sometimes (to impose upon illiterat people
that the holy Fathers were heretics, or ignorant) he endeavors in his
writings, to discredit their persons, and condemn their doctrine. See what he
says of them hertofore part. 1. and 2.

SVBSECT. II. Of Calvin's calumnies against Catholics and their Doctrine.
MR. Walsingham in his search ( page 152.) acknowledges he had such an opinion
of Calvin's Sanctity and sincerity, that having read in his Institutions cap.
11. lib. 1. That in the first 500. years after Christ there were never any
Images in Christian Churches, both himself and other Ministers did often
allege the same as a certain truth to such as knew less then themselves; but
perceiving that the Papists laughed at them for it, he began to doubt, and
after examination of twenty Authors or witnesses within the first 500. years
which Coccius cites against Calvin, he found them truly cited, and Calvin a
Liar.

How little Calvin valued the practice or doctrine of the ancient Church, he
declares lib. 3. Instit. c. 5.. 10. where he says: when the adversaries
object against me that prayer for the Dead has bin used above 1300. years, I
ask them again by what word of God, revelation, or example it (...) bin so
used? etc. But the very old Fathers themselves that prayed for the dead, did
see that herein they wanted both Commandment of God, and lawful example. So as
(...) accuses all the holy Fathers (because they were Papists) of superstition.

In all the Hymns and Litanies of the Papists (says Cal^^^) there is never any
mention of Christ: Calvin lib. 3. Instit. c. 20. ^. 21.
but whereas always they pray to dead Saints, the name of Christ never
occurreth. And yet this Impostor could not be ignorant that our Litanies begin
Kyrie eleison, Christ eleison, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us, Christ audi nos, Christ exaudi (...) etc. And our hymns he knew were made
by St. Ambrose, St. Gregory, Prudentius, Sedulius, and other ancient Fathers,
and conclude, Gloria tibi Domine qui natus es de Virgin etc.

In the very same Book and Chapter Calvin affirms that is the third Council
of Carthage, wherein St. Austin was present, it was forbiden that we should say
Sancte Petre ora pro nobis, which is false: it was indeed decreed, Quod cum
Altari assistitur, semper ad patrem dirigatur Oration, That when the Priest did
assist at the Altar, he should offer his prayer and sacrifice to God the Father.

The Papists do shamefully and impiously define (says Calvin) that daily
penance must only be don for venial sin. Calvin Instit. lib. 3. c* 4.. 1.
As though we taught that for mortal sin penance was not necessary. Jn the
same place he says the Papists speak not at all (when they treat of penance)
of the internal renovation of mind, which brings true amendment of life: and
again ibid. 29. they hold that they are reconciled once only by the grace of
God when they are Baptized, post Baptismum resurgendum esse per satisfactiones,
but after baptism a man must rise again (from sin) by satisfactions. Whereas
this impudent fellow knew well enough that we hold all rising from sin, or
reconciliation unto God, whether before or after baptism, must be by Grace; and
that satisfactions only are for temporal punishments, after the guilt of sin is
remitted by Reconciliation.

In his institutions (l. 4. c. 7.) he says that Pope John 2^. affirmed men's
souls to be mortal, See part. 2.
and to perish together with the Body until the day of resurrection, which
calumny we have confuted hertofore.

In the same Institutions (l. 4. c. 13.. 12.) talking of Monastical life and
Evangelical Counsels, he writes in this resolute manner, Nulli vnquam veterum
hoc in mentem (...) etc. It never came into the cogitations of any of the
ancient Fathers to affirm^, that Christ did council any thing, but rather they
do all cry with one voice, that there was never any one least word uttered by
Christ* that is not of necessity to be obeyed etc. out of which words he
infers that there is no state of perfection to be aspired unto more one then
other, nor any thing left us by way of Council, but that all is commanded by
way of precept. 3. Cor. 7.
And yet St. Paul says (and by consequence with him all the ancient Church and
Fathers) talking of virginity, I have no precept of our Lord, but I give
Council etc.

In the said institutions lib. 4. cap. 19.. 11. Calvin says of the Papists,
praeterita aqua, and nullo numero habita, vnum oleum in Baptismo magni faciunt.
They letting pass and esteeming nothing at all the water of Baptism, do only
magnify their oil of Chrism. And yet he knew well that the Roman Catholics
hold the use of water to be most absolutely necessary to the Substance of
Baptism, and not the holy oil. I hope Protestants will reflect upon these
things, and consider whether it be probable or possible that God would send
such men as these two Impostors, to reform his Church; men without conscience,
(...), sincerity, or christianity.

SVBSECT. III. Frauds, falsifications, and calumnies of Primat Usher against
the real presence and Transubstantiation.
THe Popes name (says M^ Usher) in whose days this gross opinion of the oral
eating and drinking of Christ in the Sacrament drew it is first breath, was
Gregory the (...). In a man of less erudition and learning then Mr. Usher,
(...) assertion might be called a simple mistake, but in him, it (...) be a
notorious fraud, and wilful falsification of as many (...) Fathers, as he had
perused, and (to his knowledge) delivered the doctrine of the real presence, and
Transubstantiation. In particular he does corrupt Justin the Martyr his words
to Antoninus the Emperor, as Cranmer had don formerly, Cyprian ser. de caena
Domini.

See St. Cyril of Jerusalem Cateches. Missagog 4. S. Ambros. lib. 4. de
Sacram. c. 4. and de ijs qui Mysterijs initiantur c. 6. St. August. vide
Canonean do consec, did. 2.


whereof (...) have treated part. 3. and remit the Reader thereunto, as also to
Malones reply against Usher's answer page 236. St. Cyprian (...) before Gregory
2. many hundred years, and yet Mr. Usher (...) not be ignorant how he declared
the belief of the Catholic Church in these words, This bread which our Lord
gave (...) his Disciples, being by the almighty power of the word changed,
(...) in outward shape, but in nature, is made flesh. St. Austin also was a
long time before Gregory 2. and he cleers all doubts both of the Mass and
Transubstantiation, thus; This is that which we say etc. to wit, that the
Sacrifice of the Church does consist of two things, that is to say, the visible
form or species of the elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord
JESUS Christ, the Sacrament and the thing of the Sacrament. Knowing and
believing (says St. Cyril Hierosol.) most assuredly, that what appears bread
is not bread, though it seem so to the taste, but it is the body of Christ; and
what appears (...) the taste does Judge it to be, but the blood of Christ.

Mr. Usher's Falsifications against Confession.
ST. Basil (says Mr. Usher) makes the groans of the heart to be a sufficient
Confession; so does St. Ambrose the tears of the penitent. Tears, says he,
does wash the sin which the voice is ashamed to confess. Weeping does provide
both for pard^^ and for shamefactness. And St. Austin, Answer 85.
what have J to (...) with men that they should hear my confessions, as though
they should heal all my diseases. Mr. Usher not content to impose this
sentence upon the mistaken Protestants as if it had declared the superfluity
and novelty of Sacramental Confession, whereas St. Basil speaks of David, and
St. Ambrose of St. Peter, (who by tears obtained pardon for his denying Christ)
before the (...) of Confession; not content I say to misinterpret their
meaning, he corrupts the words by a falls translation, to make good his own falls
Interpretation, adding the word our twice to the (...), for our shamefactness,
and for (...), endeavoring thereby to draw the meaning of the Fathers from David
and St. Peter unto all others, even after the Institution and precept of
Sacramental Confession. And as for St. Austin he speaks of that public
Confession which in his Book he made of such sins as had bin forgiven him in
Baptism, and therefore needed not to be confessed to a Priest.

It is a strange thing how learned Protestants well versed in the Fathers date
impose such wrested Texts upon men who are resolved to examine them, and to let
the world see what the Fathers have clearly delivered, Mr. Usher could not be
so ignorant as now his partners would have him seem to be, (...) positive
doctrine of these three Fathers concerning Con^^ssion. St. Basil declares his
own belief and of the whole Church, St. Basil. in Regulis brevioribus.
Interrogatione 288.

St. Ambrose l. de paenit. cap. 6.

St. Austin hom. 49. c. 3. Aug. lib. de vera and falsa paenitentia cap. 10. and
cap. 14.


(...) words. Sins must necessarily be opened unto them, unto whom (...) of
God's Mysteries is committed. St. Ambrose; If (...) to the justified, confess
thy sin, For a shamefast confession (...), dissolueth the knot of iniquity St.
Austin exhorting to confession says, Is it therefore said without cause,
whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven? are the Keys
thereof without cause given to the Church of God? etc. who so does repent, let
him repent thoroughly: let him show his grief by tears; let him present his life
to God by the Priest, let him prevent God's Judgment by Confession. etc. And
therefore he that will confess his sins for the obtaining of Grace let him seek
out a Priest who has skill to bind and loose etc. let him consider the quality
of the crime, in place, in time, in continuance, in variety of persons, and
with what temptation he fell into sin, and how often etc. All this variety must
be confessed. And is it not very strange that Mr. Usher should quote these holy
Doctors against themselves, and his own conscience? But the Protestant Religion
cannot (...) otherwise maintained, nor the prelatick Clergy enjoy two millions
sterling of yearly revenue. All the other Fathers speak after the same manner:
as for example, St. Gregory of Nyssa, St. Gregory Nyssen orat. in eos qui
durius alios judicant, Petro Francisco Zeno. Interpret.
(...) the Priest for a partner and Companion of thine affliction, as (...)
Father; show unto him boldly the things that are hidden; (...) the secrets of
thy soul, as showing thy secret wounds unto thy physician. He will have a care
both of thy credit, and of thy (...).

Against Absolution of sins.
MR. Usher page 138. of his answer to the Jesuits Challenge is not ashamed to
accuse the Roman Catholic Church with this notorious calumny, holding (if you
believe him) that the sinner is immediately acquitted before God (by the
Priest's absolution) how soever that sound conversion of heart be wanting in
him, (...) otherwise would be requisite. And grounds upon this imposture his
bringing many ancient Fathers to prove against Papists, that it is not in the
power of the Priest to absolve a sinner who has not true faith, and repentance
in his soul; as if this were not the express doctrine of all Roman Catholics.
And upon this same imposture he groundeth also his foolish expression, that our
High Priest fitteth in the Temple of God, Page 128.
as God, and all his Creatures as so many Demy-gods under him. If what he
lays to our charge were true, he might have raised us a degree higher, for
that God himself does not absolve men from their sins, if they do not repent;
or if sound conversion of heart be wanting.

Page 125. and seq. he would fain persuade that loosing of men by the Judgment
of the Priest, is by the Fathers generaly accounted nothing else but a restoring
of men to the peace of the Church, and an admitting of them to the Lord's table
again. And that in the days not only of St. Cyprian, but of Alcuinus, Deacons
in the Priest's absence were allowed to reconcile penitents. St. Ambrose l. 1.
de paenit. cap. 2. and ser. 10. in psalm. 128.

St. Hierom. in proverb. cap. 11. says, it is to be observed that although
there be no hope of pardon after death, yet be there so^e who may be absolved
after death from such light sins as they carried with them out of this life.
They may be absolved I say, either by suffering punishment, or else by the
prayer, alms, and masses of their living friends. But to whom soever these
things are don, thy are don to them before the last Judgment, and for lighter
faults.

De hac quaestione nihil Ecclesia definiuit, sunt autem multae opiniones.
Belarm. lib. 12. de purgat. cap. 6. initio.

page 178. and passim. St. Bernard ser. 66. in Cant. St. Gregory Nyssen. orat.
de mortuis. Purge me o Lord in ths life etc. that I may not stand in need of
that ame^ding fire which is for those who shall be saved, but so as by fire.
Aug. in psalm. 37. It is manifest that they (aged persons dying in smaller sins)
being purged, before the day of Judgment, by temporary pains which their souls
do suffer; they shall not be delivered to the punishment of eternal fire. Aug.
l. 20. de Ciuit. cap. 13. Usher's Answer page 179.

Answer page 182. See Sir Edward Sands in his relations cap. 53.54.


But this fraud is discovered, (I can not presume him ignorant) for that
neither St. Cyprian, nor Alcuinus do speak of reconciling penitents in the
Sacrament of penance, but only of releasing them from Censures, and temporal
penitences, or punishments, wherewith they had bin bound by the positive and
public Decree of the Church, which might be performed not only by a Deacon,
but by a letter to the penitent, though never so far of and absent; And
therefore can not be an absolution from sins, which requires the penitent's
presence, and appertains to the office of Priesthood inseparably, Jus enim
hoc solis sacerdotibus permissum est, says St. Ambrose.

Against Purgatory.
MR. Usher having seen how plainly the doctrine of Purgatory, (that is a third
place for purging of venial sins, (...) satisfying for mortal sins whereof the
guilt but not the whole (...) punishment is pardoned) is delivered by the
primi^^ve Church and Fathers, and that the examples and histories (...) so
great and holy a Doctor as St. Gregory to that purpose, (...) be well denied,
does fraudulently change the state of (...) ^uestion, to make his Readers
believe, that the dispute (...) the Popish Purgatory, is not whether sins and
souls (...) be temporaly punished in the other life, but whether (...) are
punished by material fire, or whether the place of (...) punishment be a part
of Hell? Whereas all the world (...) we leave these things to be disputed in
schools, and (...) not determined by the Church.

Whereas page 176. of his Answer, Mr. Usher says, neither (...) it to be
passed over, that in those apparitions and revela^^ons related by Gregory,
there is no mention made of any (...) Lodge in Hell appointed for Purgatory of
the (...) ( which is that which the Church of Rome now striveth (...)) etc. And
by this imposture of his, that in the time of Otto (...) Frisingensis and other
modern Authors (who dispute whether (...) ^^rgatory was a place or part of
hell) would fain make Pro^^stants believe that the Roman Catholic doctrine of
Purgatory (...) not ancient: whereas he could not be ignorant that St. Berna^^
(who lived before Otto Frisingensis) rehearsing and refu^^ng the heresies of
the petrobusians, says; They do not believe that there remains any Purgatory
fire after death, but will have the soul as soon as it is out of the body, to
pass either to rest, or else to damnation, but let them inquire of him who said,
that there is a kind of sin which shall not be forgiven in this world nor the
world to come, to what end did he say this if there be no remission nor
cleansing of sin in the other world?

But others much ancienter spoke clearly of Purgatory. St. Gregory of Nyssa;
The Divine providence has ordained that man after sin should return to his
ancient felicity, either purified in this life by prayer etc. or after his
death cleansed in the furnace of Purgatory fire. St. Basil. in cap. 9. Esaias.
St. Cyril Alexandr. in Joan. 15. v. 2. St. Gregory Nazian. St. Ambrose, St.
Austin, St. Hierom, Origines, Tertullian, St. Hilary, and most of the Fathers,
whose sayings Mr. Usher did see in Belarmin, and yet without mentioning any
particular, tells us, that the Testimonies which the Cardinal brings, belong
to the point of praying for the dead only (as if praying for the ease and
relief of the dead did not necessarily conclude Purgatory) or unto the fire of
affliction in this world, or unto that of the last day, or to the fire of Hell,
or (mark the (...) absolute and rational answ^^) to some other fire, then that
which (...).

Mr. Usher concludes his controversy of (...) with these words, and so unto
this day the Romish Purgatory is rejected as well by the Gracious, as by the
(...), and Russians, the Cophites, and Abassins, the (...) and Armenians,
together with the Syrians and (...) subject to the Patriarchs of Antioch, and
(...) and Palestian^ unto the East Indies. This is strange (...) in maintaining
a falsehood contradicted both by the Protestant relations of the Eastern
Religions, and by the Declaration^ of the Patriarchs and other learned Writers
of the (...) Provinces.

Against Worshipping of Saints and their Relics.
THe Jesuits (says Mr. Usher page 420.) were wont indeed (...) men commonly
with an idle (...), and l^^ria, but now they confess it to be the (...) of the
most and wisest, that it is one and the self same virtue that contains both
latria, and Dulia. Here Mr. Usher is convicted of two notorious frauds; 1. To
make his illiterat Reader believe that no act appertaining to the virtue of
Religion, can any way relate unto Creatures, though it have the Creator for
it is prime motive, he seems to suppose that the Jesuits now recant, and grant
that the honor which Catholics give to Saints, as they are God's (...), can
not be an act of Religion, Hieremias Constantinopol. Resp. 1. c. 12. and 13.
Gabriel Alexand. ep. ad Clem. 8

Hypathius Ruthenorum legatus in professione fidei. Graeci Venetiad Card.
Guisianum. q 10 Zaga Zab^ Ethiop. in Confessione fidei Aethiop. Gennadius
Scholarius etc. Purgatorio sec. 1. and 5. Answer page 420 Reply against Harding
p. 379.


whereas there is no (...) difficulty nor dispute in that a man should honor God
(...) his Saints, by two distinct acts of the same virtue of (...), then in
that the love of God, and of our neighbor, (...) two acts of one virtue,
called Charity. The second (...) he would fain persuade, that latria, and Dulia
is a (...) distinction, and delusion of the Jesuits; and that no (...) worship,
however so inferior, can be communicated (...), without committing of Idolatry.
But the Church (...) England by the pen of it is defender Bishop Jewel, tells
(...), we only adore Christ as very God^, but we (...) the Sacrament, we
worship the word of (...) all other like things in such religious wise to
Christ (...).

(...) Church and Fathers (not only the Jesuits) (...) distinction of Latria
and Dalia, that is, suprem, and (...) religious worship: the suprem* that is,
Latria, is due (...), as the suprem civil worship to the King^: the (...)*
which is Dulia, is due to Saints, Bishops, Priests etc. (...) of that religious
and supernatural excellency, or (...), which God has given them. And to Saints
we pray (...) God's servants, not as to Gods, as Mr. Usher would (...)
Pro^estant^. We are calumniated by him as St. Hierom, St. Austin, and all
Catholics were by Vigilantius, and Faustus Manichean Heretic. St. Austin his
words are. St. Austin contra Faust. Manichaeum lib. 20. c. 21.
The here^^ck Faustus does calumniat us, because we honor the (...) or relics
of Martyrs, affirming that we have them for our Idols. The Christian people
does celebrat with religious (...) the memories of Martyrs, thereby to stir up
them^^^ves to their imitation, and that they may be assisted with their
prayers, and made partakers of their merits. But with the worship termed in
Greek latria, and which the latin language can not express in one word, Answer
page 377. Matthew 4. v. 10,
(it being a certain subjection and servitude due properly to the Deity only,)
we do not honor any but God alone etc.

(...) Coilyridians, who holding our Lady for a Deity, St. Epiphan. Haeres. 79.
parag 6. and 7*
adored her (...) latria, and offered sacrifice unto her. And yet he does (...)
how St. Epiphanius in that very disputation inveighed (...) against such as did
not honor our Lady with due (...), but let our Lord be adored, says he; (...)
none adore her as God: for though she be (...), and most worthy of honor, yet
not worthy to be (...) wit with latria, And the same Saint condemns as (...)
those who do not give due honor to the mother of God, (...) who give her that
of latria. For as these (says he) (...) Imaginations of Mary do sow pernicious
(...) in men's minds, Ibid parag. 2.
so these others inclining too much to the (...) to be in the wrong. So that we
see (...) of Latria and Dulia is no Idle invention of the (...) necessary
doctrine of the ancient Fathers.

Against prayer to Saints.
MR. Vhser in his answer to the Jesuits challenge, treating of this controversy,
proceeded with the same fraud he used in that of Purgatory. Finding that the
ancient (...) prayed to Saints, and that God wrought many mira^^^ at their
shrines, and Relics, he endeavors to change the (...) of the question, and
place the whole controversy in points (...); making his Reader believe, that we
Roman (...) now a days do not believe as the ancient Church, but (...) that
the souls of Martyrs are present at their shrines, (...) when miracles are
wrought; and other things (...) the manner of their intercession, and knowledge
of our (...), and prayers; so that says Mr. Usher (page 405.) to (...) good
the Popish manner of praying unto Saints, that (...) at the first was but
probable and problematical (to wit (...) sayings of the Master of the
sentences, Scotus, Biel, and other school Divines) must now be held to be de
fide.

This calumny and fraud is clearly confuted by the words (...) Concede nobis
Domine quaesumus, veniam delictorum, and (...) sanctis quorum hodie solemnia
celebramus, talem nobis (...) denotionem, vt ad eorum pervenire mer^amur
societatem. (...) ^orum merita, quos propria impediunt scelera; excuset (...)
accusat quos actio* and qui ijs tribuisti coelestis palmam (...) nobis veniam
non deneges peccati: Grant us O Lord we (...), remission of our sins, and by
the intercession of the Saints (...) solemnity we celebrat, bestow upon us such
devotion that we (...) serve to attain unto their fellowship. And immediately
fol^oweth; let their merits help us that are hindered by our own sins. (...)
their intercession excuse us, who are accused by our own (...): and thou o Lord
who have bestowed upon them the palm (...) heavenly triumph, deny not unto us
the pardon of our sins. (...) (page 408.) quite omitting the first part of
(...), translateth the later part as if it were rather an (...) then a
supplication, thus, can their merits help us, (...) own sins hinder? can their
intercession excuse us, Usher translates But thou o Lord, and adds
interrogations to help his fraud.

Adjuvent nos eorum merita quos propria impediunt scelera; excuset intercessio,
accusat quos actio: and qui eis tribuisti caelestis palmam triumphi, nobis
veniam non deneges peccati.


whose (...) does accuse themselves? But thou who have bestowed upon (...)
palm of thy heavenly triumph, deny not unto us the (...) sins. You see how he
adds interrogations, and makes (...) on his own head, and not only translates
the latin (...) fraudulently, but changes the whole sense, and (...) into the
Text At instead of and, and tu, which is not (...) latin; and makes the whole
order,, of the (...) as also that of the Benedictin Monks, heretics, as (...)
of that which no Roman Catholic ever called in (...). What credit, think you
does such a man as this deserve (...) collections of antiquities, when they
agree not with his (...) Protestant Religion? he who venters to contradict a
(...) so generaly known, and to corrupt a writing so common (...) in so many
Libraries and Books, what will he not (...) or has not don, in Papers and
Copies which he fancies (...) must take upon his sole word and Testimony?
Whosoever desires to have a full view of Primat Usher's insincere dealing in
maintaining protestancy (which we attribute more to the (...) of the Roman
Church (whose words he quotes) were of (...) that (as the Greeks expressed
themselves) it was a (...) not simply fundamental. Page 24. against Fisher.


(...) for his Lordship's backwardness in denying the Greeks (...) Church (that
is, of accusing them of heresy) (...) forsooth, they seem to maintain the
equality and (...) of the persons; so great a prelat and writer ought (...)
known that a Church may be a falls and heretical (...) for denying the
generation and procession, as well as (...) the equality and consubstantiality
of the persons: (...) indeed can the one be denied without denying the other.
(...) task is, to examine the Bishop's sincerity, not his (...)

(...) first fraud is, to pretend that Catholic Authors (...) him in the
Protestant distinction of fundamental and (...) articles; whereas we hold every
article (by (...) motive, though not of the matter) to be (...) that is, of
necessity the matter (how ever so small) (...) believed by us under pain of
Damnation, whenever (...) proposed to us as revealed by God; or (which (...))
whenever we know any matter to be either (...) Scripture, or declared by
Catholic Tradition, or (...) by the Church, we are bound to believe it, and
can (...) if we deny or doubt of it. So that doctrine which (...) grievous ^rror
in the greek Church, we must call it plain (...) which makes them no Church:
because their error has (...) heresy by the Church.

(...) second fraud in this matter, is, that he conceals from (...) the true
state of the question, and abuses the (...) ^uthors he cites, as if they had
understood it as his (...) does set it down, or had excused the modern Greeks
(...), and argues with their sayings and authority in favor of p^^^estancy. The
question is, whether the modern Greeks (...) that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the son as well as (...) the Father. The Bishop pretends they do, and that they
(...) (...) pain of Damnation, and proved this saying by these words (...)
Austin, this is a thing founded; Aug. sermon. 14 de verb^ Apostoli. in fine.

Laud page 33


An erring Disputant is to be (...) with in other questions not diligently
digested, nor yet made firm (...) authority of the Church; there, error is to
be born with but (...) not to go so far that it should labor to shake the
very (...) of the Church. The Bishop says this can not be (...) of the
definition of the Church (though St. Austin (...) expressly of the authority
thereof) but of Scripture. Ibid.
But (...) afterward the words might be understood of the (...) of the Church,
or general Counsels; to the end that (...) might not imagine St. Austin thought
such definitions were (...), or unquestionable, he adds, Page 34. B. Laud.
But plain Scripture with (...) sense, or a full demonstrative argument must
have room (...) a wrangling and erring disputer may not be allowed it. And
(...) neither of these but may convince the definition of the (...) if it be
ill founded. E. Quae quide si tam manifesta mon^ratur vt in dubium venire non
possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in Catholicateneor. Ita si
aliquid apertissimu^ in Evangelis. St. Aug. contra Fund. c. 4.
And to show that this is no fancy of (...), but the doctrine of St. Austin, he
quotes his words (...) see them in the margent with an F. referring the word
(...) to Scripture. So that if you believe the Bishop and rely (...) his
quotations, St. Austin doubted not but that the (...) of the Church in general
Counsels may be contrary to (...), and confuted by full demonstrative
arguments.

I confess that when I read this page and part of Bp. Laud's (...) with Fisher,
I found my self much troubled, until (...) the matter, and then I resolved
never more to (...) him, or any Protestant writer, however so Saint-like or
(...), by report, or in appearance. The truth is, St. Austin (...) place cited
by the Bishop, has nothing at all either (...) Scripture, or evident sense, or
demonstrative argu^^^ts; but addressing his speech to the Manicheans, he writes
(...), Apud vos autem vbi nihil horum est quod me invitet ac (...), sola
personat veritatis pollicitatio, and then follow the words (...) by the Bishop,
quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur etc. (...) truth so bragd of and
promised by the Manicheans to (...) demonstrated, in that epistle called
Fundamentum, says St. Austin, if it be demonstrated to be so clear etc. is to
be preferred; where you see St. Austin's quae, referred not to Scripture, but
to that fictitious truth which the Manichees pretended to be in their doctrine.
Nay St. Austin is so far from doubting of the infallibility of the Church, and
general Counsels in that very place quoted by the Bishop, that he disputes ex
professo against the possibility of its erring, or of its definitions being
contrary to Scripture, and says, that if the doctrine of the Catholic Church
could be contrary to Scripture, he should not be able to believe rationaly, and
infallibly, either the one or the other: not the Scriptures, because he
receives them only upon the authority of the Church; Not the Church, whose
authority is infringed by Scripture, which is suposed to be brought against
her. Si ad Evangelium me tenes, ego ad eos me teneam, quibus praecipientibus
Evangelio credidi; and his jubentibus tibi omnino non credam. Quod si forte in
Evangelio aliquid in apertissimum de Manichaei Apostolatu invenire potueris,
infirmabis mihi Catholicorum authoritatem, qui jubent vt tibi non credam; qua
infirmata, jam nec Evangelio credere poter^; quia per eos illi credideram: ita
nihil apud me valebit, quicquid inde protul^ris. Quapropter si nihil manifestum
de Manichaei Apostolatu in Evangelio reperitur, Catholicis potius credam quam
tibi: si a^tem inde aliquid manifestum pro Manichaeo legeris, nec illis nec
tibi: illis qui^a de te mihi mentiti sunt: Tibi autem, qui eam scripturam mihi
profers, cui per illos credideram, qui mihi mentiti sunt. Aug. cont. Epist.
Fundament. cap. 4. Wherefore St. Austin does not suppose (as the Bishop
pretends) that Scripture or reason can be contrary to the definitions of the
Church; he professedly teaches the contrary in the very place cited, and uses
the alleged words quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur etc. only ex
suppositione impossibili, in the same manner as St. Paul speaks (Gal. 1.) Jf
an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, then we have taught you, let him be
accursed. St. Paul well knew it was impossible that an Angel from heaven
should teach contrary to the Ghospel; and so did St. Austin that the
definitions of a general Council should be contrary to Scripture, or reason, as
appears by his own discourse against the Manichees.

Vincentius Li^inensis abused by Mr. Laud, to prove the fallibility of the
Church, pretending, that learned Father supposed and said she might change into
Lupanar errorum; a strumpet or stews of errors.
BUt A. C. tells us further ( says Mr. Laud) that if one may deny or
doubtfully dispute against any determination of the Church, then may he also
against an other, Page 38.
and so against all; Vincent. Lirin. cap. 23.24. he says the Pelagians erred
in Dogmate fidei, and yet they erred not in a prime maxim, but in a
superstructure. Vin. Lirin. cont. haer. c. 31. Impiorum and turpiumerrorum
lupanar: vbi erat ante castae and incorruptae Sacrarium veritatis.
since all are made firm to us by one and the same divine revelation,
sufficiently applied by one and the same full authority of the Church; which
being weakened in any one, can not be firm in another. First, A. C. borrowed the
former part of this out of Vincentius Lirinensis, and as that learned Father
uses it, I subscribe to it; but not as A. C. applies it. For Vincentius speaks
there de Catholico Dogmate, of Catholic Maxims etc. which are properly
fundamental: (but here the Bishop is mistaken, for Vincentius speaks also of
not fundamentals, as of the celebrating of Easter according to St. Victor's
decree; the not rebaptizing of those who had bin baptized by heretics etc.)
now in this sense, says the Bishop, give way to every cavilling disputer to
deny or quarrel at the maxims of Christian Religion etc. And why may he not
then take liberty to do the like of any other, till he have shaken all? But
this hinders not the Church her self; nor any appointed by the Church, to
examine her own decrees, and to see that she keep the principles of her faith
unblemished and uncorrupted; for if she do not so, but novitia veteribus, new
doctrins be added to the old, the Church which is Sacrarium veritatis, may be
changed in Lupanar errorum, I am loath to english it. Bp. Laud page 38.
Hitherto the modest Bishop, Page 39.
who quotes Vincent. Lirin. in his Margent, for his lupanar errorum, etc. and
for the whole discourse.

Vincentius Lirinensis is so far from expressing any fear or suspicion of
danger that the Church should be changed into lupanar errorum, a stews of
errors, by addition of novelties, or falling from the primitive doctrine, that
as if he had foreseen this corruption of his meaning, and cutting short his
words practiced by Mr. Laud, he declares in that very place by him quoted, that
only heretics and ungodly men can entertain any such thoughts of Christ's
spouse, sed avertat hoc a suorum mentibus divina pietas, sitque hoc potius
impiorum furor, these are his words, and concealed by the Bishop: who also
striks out of Vincentius Lirin: other words whereby it did appear what a kind of
keeper the Church is of the truths deposited with her, and how little danger
there is of corrupting the old, or admitting of new doctrine. The Bishop (page
38.) sets down the sentence thus, Ecclesia depositorum apud se dogmatum Custos
etc. Denique quid vnquam Conciliorum Decretis enisa est; nisi vt quod antea
simpliciter credebatur, hoc idem postea diligentius crederetur, etc. But in
Vincentius Lirinensis, Christi vero Ecclesia sedula and cauta depositorum
Custos, nihil in ijs vnqua^ permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit: non amputat
necessaria, non apponit superflua, non amittit sua, non vsurpat allena.
Vincent. Lirin. cap. 22.
It is thus, Christi vero Eoclesia sedula and cauta depositorum apud se
dogmatum Custos; here first he skips over these two words sedula and cauta,
diligent and wary, because they spoiled his plot of persuading us that the
Church might by negligence of its Pastors be insensibly changed, and corrupted.
To the same intent he conceales with an etc. the rest that follows, which
would have cleared all, and left no room for the Bishops fraud: for Vincentius
Lirin: his words are, But the Church of Christ is a diligent Depositary or
Keeper of the truths committed to her, never changes any thing at all in them,
lessens nothing, adds nothing; nether cuts away things necessary, nor adjoyns
things superfluous; neither loses what is hers, nor usurps what belongs to
others. Let any Christian or honest Pagan Judge, whether these words be not
Diametrically contrary to what the Bishop pretends unto in this passage, viz.
suspicion and possibility of the Churches adding novitia veteribus, novelties
to the old doctrine; of making a change of that faith she first received from
Christ and his Apostles, and of becoming Lupanar errorum; which this good man
and holy Martyr says he is loath to english; and yet leaves out, cuts, and
corrupts the Latin text of set purpose, to fix upon Christ's Espouse the
greatest infamy.

How Bp. Laud falsifies Occham to infringe St. Austins authority concerning the
infallibility of the Church in succeeding ages as well as in that of the
Apostles: and is forced by his error to resolve his prelatick faith into the
light of Scripture, and the private Spirit of Fanatics, which he palliates
under the name of grace, and thereby warrants all rebellions against Church and
state.
AN act of divine faith must be prudent, that is, men are not bound to believe
any article thereof, (v. g. that Scripture is the word of God) unless there
evidently appear prudent and sufficient motives to exclude all moral
possibility that any but God is the Author of the doctrine proposed to be
believed. These motives of credibility we call the signs of the Church, and are
the miracles of Christ and his Disciples, sanctity and succession of his
doctrine and Doctors, Conversion of Kings and nations to christianity etc. These
signs or motives of credibility, Se hertofore part. 2. Ego vero Evangelio non
crederem nisi me Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas.
though they do not evidence demonstratively that our faith is true, or that
the Church or Congregation of men wherein they be found, is the Catholic, yet
they demonstrat an obligation in us of believing it, as we have proved
elsewhere: in so much that if no such signs or motives of credibility had bin,
none would be bound to believe any point of Christian Religion with certainty
of faith; and therefore St. Austin said he would not believe the Scripture, Aug.
lib. 1. contra Epist. Fund. c. 5.
had he not bin moved thereunto by the authority of the Church; because
Scripture of it self has no sufficient arguments and signs to ground a prudent
and undoubted belief of its being the word of God; but the signs and motives of
credibility invest the Church with sufficient authority to declare both that,
and all other mysteries of faith, and to make our Ecclesiastical Ministry and
Mission more authentikly divin, then any Regal Commissions or human Badges can
set forth the truth and dignity of Ministers of state, and officers of war.
Therefore, as not to believe, or to contemn men so qualified, when they command
in the Kings name, is by the light of reason and consent of all nations, judged
obstinacy and rebellion, (not to be excused by pretending ignorance, or want of
greater evidence then those usual signs of their employments afford,) so must
it be obstinat heresy not to believe that what is proposed by the Church
(qualified with the aforesaid signs) is revealed by God.

This supposed, the main Controversy between Protestants and Catholics is,
about the resolution of Christian faith, for though both parties pretend that
they believe because God revealed to the Prophets, and Apostles the Mysteries
of faith, yet we say that Protestants can not show how it may be prudently
believed that Christ preached or revealed any such doctrine as is pretended,
unless it be acknowledged that the Church of every succeeding age was, and this
present is, as truly and realy (though perhaps not so highly quoad modum)
infallible in delivering the Apostles doctrine, as the Apostles were in
delivering that of Christ. We do not say that Tradition or the Testimony of the
Church, confirmed by the foresaid signs, is the prime motive, and last
resolution of faith, but that the Tradition and Testimony of the present Church
is infallible, to the end it may infallibly apply the prime motive, (which is
Gods veracity) to us; and we prudently assent thereunto.

But the Bishop denying this, is driven with Presbyterians and Fanatics to an
inbred^light of Scripture, and to the private Fanatic spirit; with this only
difference, that where they say they are infallibly resolved that Scripture is
the word of God, by the Testimony of the Spirit within them, his Lordship (page
83.84.) averrs he has the same assurance by grace. And because we object, and
admire that no Catholic could ever perceive this inward and inbred light of
Scripture, whereby all Protestants pretend they are assured it is the word of
God, he concurrs (page 86,) with Fanatitks in telling us, that blind eyes can
not, and pervers eyes will not see it. Its strange his Lordship did not foresee
the sad effects which this Protestant principle and presumption wrought against
himself, and his Prelatick Church, within a very short time after he writ this
doctrine, and applied the same against the Roman Catholics. He might be sure it
would be retorted against the Church of England; for why may not every
Protestant Sectary pretend, that the Prelatick Church of England is as blind
and pervers in not seeing the light of Scripture, as Luther and Laud pretend the
Roman Catholic is? It is but every particular man's fancy, and word; no other
proof is required by Protestants; nor indeed can any better be produced to make
good, that so many honest and learned searchers of Scripture as have bin and
are in the Roman Catholic Church, can not, or will not see the pretended light
of Scripture, so largely diffused among Protestants, and distributed to every
Fanatic, Presbyterian, and Prelatick, whose faith can not be maintained
without this rash judgment, and most dangerous consequences, as prejudicial
both to Church and state, as our late distempers have manifested.

But now to Mr. Lauds falsifications. To prove that the Tradition of the Church
is not infallible, and that the words of St. Augustine, Ego vero Evangelio non
crederem nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas, should be
understood of the Church in the time of the Apostles only, the Bishop says,
Some of our own Authors will not endure it should be otherwise meant by St.
Austin, save of the Church in the time of the Apostles, only, Bishop Laud page
81. edit. 1639.
and in proof of this he cites Occham in the Margent thus. Occham Dial. part.
1. l. 1. c. 4. and sets down these as his words, Intelligitur solum de Ecclesia
quae fuit tempore Apostolorum. Vbi Ecclesia Catholica Episcopos and populos a
tempore Apostolorum vsque in hodi^rnum diem sibimet succedentium importat, and
sic accipit nome^ Ecclesiae Augustinus cum asserit, quod non crederet
Evangelio, ni^^ eum authoritas Ecclesiae etc. Ocham Dial. part. 1. lib. 1. cap.
4.
It is understood only of the Church which was in the Apostles time. Whereas
Occham in the very place quoted, holds the quite contrary, and says expressly,
that the Church whereof St^ Austin speaks in that sentence, contains not only
the Apostles, but also the Church successively from the times of the Apostles
to that very time wherein St. Austin wrote those words, as every one may see by
his sentence truly related in our margent: And indeed St. Austin speaks of that
Church which said to him noli credere Manichaeo, and had succession of Bishops
of Rome, which the Church had not in the Apostles time.

Diverse Frauds and Falsifications of Bishop Laud to defend that Protestants are
not Schismatics.
MR. Fisher having pressed Bishop Laud with that ordinary and unanswerable
argument, proving Protestants to be Schismatiks, because they separated
themselves from the Roman Catholic Church, obstinatly holding diverse opinions
contrary to the ancient and generaly received faith, many whereof had bin
condemned as heresies in former ages by General Counsels, and all orthodox
Christians; his Lordship answers, 1. That the Roman Church is not the Catholic
Church. We reply that when Luther and Calvin began their pretended
reformations, such only as were in communion with the Church and Bishop of
Rome, were held to be Catholics; all others having bin declared Schismatics,
or heretics; and for that reason the first Reformers did not claim to be
members of the Greeks, or of any other Christian^Church then extant; but
acknowledge they found no men of their reformed belief, and therefore separated
themselves from the whole world; as Luther and Calvin expressly say, and we have
proved, showing they did not agree in all points with the Waldenses,
Wickl^ffians, Greeks, or any other visible Congregation of Christians. Therefore
they separated themselves (by inventing and following contrary opinions) from
all visible Churches, and by consequence from the true one, if they will grant
there is a true one upon earth, as the Bishop would seem to acknowledge.

Was it not lawful says he (page 149.) for Juda to reform her self when
Israel would not join? sure it was, or else the Prophet deceives me, Hos. 4.15.
that says expressly though Israel transgress, let not Juda sin. Here his
Lordship supposes two absurdities. 1. That Juda reformed its doctrine (which is
the only question) 2. That the Catholics are to represent the ten tribes,
(because forsooth they are more numerous) and Protestants Juda: whereas no
parallel can be more pat then the Protestants compared with the ten tribes, who
left Jerusalem, and the High Priest, and rebelled with Jeroboam; which King out
of ungodly policy, the better to secure his usurped Crown (just as Queen
Elizabeth) caused the people to desert the old and true Religion, set up new
Priests, Sacrifices etc.

But his Lordship reflecting upon these and other things, thought necessary
(because he saw that himself and his party would be driven to the ten tribes at
length) to defend they were a Church, even after their schism or separation;
for that there were some true prophets among them, as Elias Elizeus etc. and
thousands that had not bowed knees to Baal: not observing that such Prophets
and others who continued faithful, were of the true Church of Juda, though
they could not go to Jerusalem; and were no more of the ten Tribes Religion,
then the Greek Roman Catholics are of Mahomets, or English Papists of the
Protestant. And whereas the Bishop's adversary tells him that particular
Churches may not pretend to reform themselves and condemn others of error in
faith, (especialy their acknowledged spiritual Superiors) when the need of
reformation is only questionable; A.C. page 58.
and this was so evident ^ confutation of protestancy, and so convincing a
proof of all their Churches schisms, that his Lordship thought fit to conceal
those words. ( When the need is questionable) in his relation of his
adversaries argument; and after omitting and concealing the force thereof,
endeavors to answer as well as he can. That the first Protestant reformers were
subject to the Roman Catholic Church and prelates in spiritual affairs, is
confessed by themselves; and that without any sufficient cause, or probable
pretext, they rebelled against that superiority and Jurisdiction, is also
evident; unless we should grant (as the Bishop with all sectaries, says page
86.) that all Christendom (Protestants only excepted) are so blind or pervers,
that they can not, or will not see the light of the Scripture, and by
consequence, their own Idolatry and superstition. And this his, and other such
men's senseless assertion, must pass for good evidence, and be a sufficient
warrant for Jnferiors to renounce their obedience, and reform the doctrine of
their Superiors, and of the whole visible Church, without incurring the Censure
or guilt of Schism, and heresy.

Mr. Laud denies that in ancient times the Bishop of Rome was Superior to
other Bishops out of his own Patriarchat, which extended no further (says he)
then to Jtaly, and the adjacent Islands. And to make good this equality of
Patriarchs with the Pope, he quotes (number. 170.) the law, A patriarcha non datur
appellatio. Then he says (page 171.) that in those ancient times of the Church
government, Britanie was never subject to the Sea of Rome, Guilielm. Malmesbur.
in prolog. lib. 1. de g^st^s Pontif. Angl. p. 195.
and that Pope Urban the 2. accounted his worthy predecessor in the Sea of
Canterbury ( St. Anselm) as his own Com-peere, and said he was as the
Apostolic and Patriarch of the other world.

The greatest fraud committed in treating matters of Religion is, to assert a
notorious falsehood so confidently that the truth can not be questioned, or
examined without doubting whether the relator have either soul or shame. Who
can Imagine that a man pretending not only to be an Archbishop, but a
Patriarch, would endeavor to maintain Religion by such impostures? Britain
says Mr. Laud, St Bed. lib. 5. Eccl. Hist. cap. 20.
was never subject to the Sea of Rome No! How then came Venerable Bede to tell
us that an. 673. St. Wilford Archbishop of York, being unjustly deprived of
his Bishopric, appealed to the Sea Apostolic, was heard by Pope Agatho, and
by virtue of his sentence restored to his Bishopric? How comes St. Gregory the
great to write thus to St. Austin our English Apostle. Bid lib. 1. Eccl.
Histor. cap. 29.
Seeing by the goodness of God, and our industry, the new English Church is
brought unto the faith of Christ, we grant to you the use of the Pall (the
proper badge or sign of Archiepiscopal dignity) to wear it when you say Mass;
and we condescend that you ordain twelve Bishops under your Jurisdiction; yet
so that the Bishop of London be consecrated hereafter by a Synod of his own
Bishops, and receive his Pall from this holy Apostolical Sea, wherein I, by the
authority of God, do now serve. See this Treatise par. 1. sec^ 1. Council.
Afrik. Can. 101. Ut Romam liceat Episcopis provocare; and ut Clericorum causae
apud suarum provinciarum Episcopos finiantur, etiam litteris nostris ad eundem
venerabilis memoriae Zozimum Episcopum datis, insinuari cur^* vimus etc.
Our will likewise is, that you send a Bishop to York, to whom we intend also
to give the Pall, (that is, to make him Archbishop) but to you shall be
subject not only the Bishops you make, and he of York, but all the Bishops of
Britain. If Urban the 2. said St. Anselm of Canterbury was a Patriarch, none
can deny but that he received that dignity and his Jurisdiction from Saint
Gregory, as the others of the East, did from the Sea of Rome.

That the Patriarchs of the East were subject and did appeal to the Bishop of
Rome, is evident in the Ecclesiastical History; and as for the law of not
appealing from a Patriarch, Mr. Laud could not be ignorant it was intended for
the inferior Clergy, who (of ordinary course) were not to appeal further then to
the primat of their province; for so the Council of Afrik determins.

His Lordship, without doubt did see also how in that very Council it is
acknowledged that Bishops in their own causes might appeal to Rome.

Council. African. ep. ad Bonifac pap. to which St. Austin subscribed.
Mr. Fisher asked the Bishop, Quo Judice does it appear that the Church of Rome
has erred in matters of faith? as not thinking it equity that protestants in
their own cause should be Accusers, witnesses, and Judges of the Roman Church.
He answers, there is as little reason or equity that any man who is to be
accused, should be the accused, and yet wittness and Judge in his own cause.
Fisher replies that, the Church of Rome is the principal and Mother Church; and
that therefore though it be against common equity that subjects and Children
should be Accusers, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners against their Prince,
and mother, in any case; yet is it not absurd that in some cases the Prince or
mother may accuse, witness, Judge, and if need be, execute Justice against
unjust and rebellious, or evil Children, especialy if the prince, or mother be
infallible. But the Controversy being at length reduced unto this, whether the
Church might not err in doctrine, as Princes and parents do in governing their
subjects and Children, Mr. Fisher says, it can not, and proves it by that of
St. Matthew 16.18. That Hell gates shall never be able to prevail against the
Church. The Bishop says this is to be understood that errors (which are meant
by Hell gates) shall never be able to prevail against the Church in Fundamental
Articles; and confirms this his saying by one of St. Austin, quoting his words
thus, pugnare potest, expugnari non potest; whereas if his Lordship had bin
pleased to set down St. Austins words sincerly as he ought, the case had bin
clearly decided. St. Austins words are, Ipsa est Ecclesia sancta, Ecclesia vna,
Ecclesia vera, Ecclesia Catholica, contra omnes haereses pugnans. And then come
in pugnare potest, expugnari tamen non potest. The Church fights against all
heresies, contrary to every article, and by consequence whether Fundamental or
not; and yet expugnari non potest; she can not be overcome. All heresies, says
the Saint depart from her as unprofitable branches cut of from the vine: but
she remains still in her root, in her vines, in her charity; the gates of Hell
shall not overcome her. All this (as not being for his Lordships purpose, who
challenged all our party to show one Father for 1200. years after Christ, that
concluded the infallibility of the Church out of Matthew 16.18.) is concealed by
the Bishop from his Reader.

The like fraud is practiced by this Lordship in answering to that Text of St.
Irenaeus, St. Irenaeus l. 3. cap. 3.
ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem
convenire Ecclesiam; hoc est, eos qui sunt vndique fideles: in qua semper ab
his qui sunt vndique, conservata est ea quae est ab Apostolis Traditio. These
words he sets down in the Margent, and does English them thus, To this Church
(he speaks of Rome) fot the more powerful principality of it, it is necessary
that every Church, that is, the faithful ( vndique) round about, should have
recours. ( Laud page 182.) First he translates vndique (which signifies
(ordinarily) from all places, parts, and every where) round about; to the end
St. Irenaeus might be thought to make the Sea of Romes principality a bare
primacy of order, and precedence; and then confine its Jurisdiction to Italy,
Sardinia, and Corsica; but hereby he would make the Saint speak nonsense, for
he used this argument against the Gnostics in France, and other heretics, and
gives us this rule of Christianity, that the doctrine or Tradition of the Roman
Church is the touchstone of all Apostolical doctrine. If therefore vndique in
this place does signify no more then round about Rome, and thereby the more
powerful principality Irenaeus speaks of, be restrained to precedence; and the
Roman Jurisdiction to sole Italy and its Islands; he must have argued thus, It Is
necessary that Italy, Sardinia, and Corsica, should have recours to Rome for
its Bishops precedence of place, or in regard of his Patriarchal power within
Italy and the adjacent Islands; Therefore the Gnostics in France, and all other
heretics, of the world, are convinced of heresy for not having recours to the
Sea of Rome. This would be a far fetched consequence, and as unworthy St.
Irenaeus found Judgment, as its necessary to defend Mr. Lauds false comment,
and Religion.

Yet to make this appear not so improbable an interpretation, Mr. Laud (page
181. tells us that Irenaeus was a Bishop of the Gallican Church, and a very
unlikely man to captivat the liberty of that Church under the more powerful
principality of Rome; as if forsooth, the so much talked of liberties of the
Gallican Church (which were not claimed or thought on until 1300. years after
St. Irenaeus his time) could move him to limit the Popes spiritual Jurisdiction
to Italy; or that the Gallican liberties did exclude it now from France. These
are too gross mistakes, and can hardly be excused by ignorance in so knowing a
person as Mr. Laud is thought to have bin. Gregor. Nazian. in Car* de vita sua.


After the same manner does he abuse St. Gregory Nazianzen, who speaking of the
Roman Church says, Vetus Roma ab antiquis temporibus habet rectam fidem. and
semper eam retinet, sicut decet vrbem quae toti orbi praesidet, semper de Deo
integram fidem habere. These words the good Bishop translates thus into English
( page 12.) Ancient Rome from of old has the right faith, and always holds
it, as becomes the City which is governess over the whole world to have an
entire faith in, and concerning God. But (says his Lordship) there is no
promise nor prophecy in St. Gregory, that Rome shall ever so do, And to make
this the more clear to his illiterat English Reader, he leaves out the word
ever in the later part of his Translation, and in his gloss upon the sentence
omitts the same word again, saying only, it became that City very well to keep
the faith sound and entire. But How long? Semper (says St. Gregory) for ever.
Therefore Bishop Laud thought fit to conceal that semper. At length he
acknowledges a double semper in S. Gregory, but misplaceth the later. His
words are plain (says he) semper decet etc. whereas St. Gregory says not,
semper decet etc. (it always becomes) but decet, it becomes that City which
Governs the whole world, See D Lauds labyrinth. p. 135. and 136
semper de Deo integram fidem habere* always to have the entire faith of God.
Now who sees not a manifest difference betwixt these two propositions, It
always becomes that City to hold the entire faith. And It becomes that City
to hold the entire faith always The first only signifies, the keeping of the
faith entire (whenever it is don) is a thing well becoming the City of Rome.
The second signifies, to keep the faith so that it must never fail, or cease
to keep it entire, is a thing well becoming the City which Governs the whole
world. Besides, the Government whereof St. Gregory speaks, must be understood of
souls, or spiritual; because Roma vetus did not govern in his time, temporaly,
seeing the Emperor resided in New Rome, that is Constantinople. Therefore St.
Gregorys words are to be understood of the Popes spiritual Jurisdiction, who
governed the souls of the whole world as supreme Pastor under Christ.

But Patriarch Laud can not endure this, and will needs have all Bishops; (or
at least all Patriarchs) equal with the Bishop of Rome, by Christ's institution;
and proves it ( p. 200) by the authority of St. Hierom, whom Mr. Laud mistakes;
for the St. speaks only of the caracter of Episcopacy, and says that all
Bishops are ejusdem Sacerdotii, ejusdem meriti, Hierom. ep. ad Evagrium.
and by Gersons Book de Auferibilitate Papae: when Gerson, says he, writ this
Tract de Auferibilitate Papae, sure he thought the Church might continue in a
very good being without a Monarchical head. Therefore, in his Judgment, the
Church is not by any command or institution of Christ, Monarchical. Gerson par.
1.154.

Answ. Gerson that famous Chancellor of Paris writ that Book in time of
Schisms and Troubles, wherein for the peace of the Church, doubtful Popes may
be deposed, as also Heretics. Auferibilis non est usque ad consummatione^
saeculi Vicarius sponsus Ecclesiae ^ quin aliquis certus ei praeficiatur etc.
Gerson Consid. 20.
But Gerson never meant that a Pope may be so deposed as none other should
succeed, he defends the contrary earnestly and expressly consid. 8. His words
are: Any civil monarchy or regal Government may be taken away, or changed into
an Aristocracy, the law still continuing in force: but it is not so in the
Church; which was founded by Christ in one supreme Monarch throughout the
world: Because Christ Instituted no other Government unchangeably Monarchical,
and as it were regal, besides the Church. Can any words be more express against
Mr. Lauds assertion; and yet his assertion is so positive, that I have known a
Catholic Divine deceived by his authority in this particular; but after
examination wondered at the Bishops confidence.

I conclude this matter of Protestant falsifications with this fair offer; let
the learned men of that side show but any one saying of any ancient Orthodox
Father, A fair offer to Protestants
or Council, quoted by the reformed writers of any Nation or quality
whatsoever, to confirm protestancy; and if it be not found either impertinent,
or corrupted by addition, omission, translation, or concealing the words going
before, or coming after, whereupon depends the true meaning of the Text, let
them J say but show one of these that speaks clearly in favor of Protestancy,
and I will confess in print that J have bin mistaken in the opinion I have of
their Religion, and of its want of truth. But if not as much as one Orthodox
Doctor, can be produced to support their Tenets, and the credit of Protestant
writers, I hope they will not take it in ill part, that we advise our
Contreymen, and all Christians to renounce their Conduct and Communion.

SECT. XII. Whether it be piety or policy to permit the Protestant Clergy of
these three Kingdoms to enjoy the Church Revenues, for maintaining (by such
Frauds, and Falsifications as hitherto have bin alleged) the doctrine of the
Church of England; which also they acknowledge to be fallible, and by
consequence (for all they know) falls; and how the said revenues may be
conscientiously applied to the use and ease of the people, without any danger
of sacrilege, or any disturbance to the Government, if a public Trial of both
Clergies sincerity be allowed, and liberty of Conscience granted.
THat it cannot be piety in a Prince or people, to cast away so vast a Treasure
upon so uncertain a Religion and Clergy, as we have proved the Protestant to
be, needs no proof. Neither is there any doubt but that it was policy, though
not piety, in Q. Elizabeth (whose title could not stand with popery) to bestow
the said revenues upon any men that would call themselves a Clergy, and engage
to fool the vulgar sort with falls Scripture for framing a Religion or
reformation agreeable to her title and interest, against the Royal line of the
Stewards, lawful heirs of this Monarchy. As little question can be made, that
the present possessors, and pretenders of Bishoprics, and Benefices, will
endeavor to justify and continue Q. Elizabeth's course, though the case be
altered; and that such of the layty as have unlawful designs in their hearts,
will side with the Bishops, and strive to gain, or make a party, and win the
hearts of ignorant and seditious people, by pretending great zeal for that
prelatick Religion whereby Q. Elizabeth usurped the Crown, and her Creatures the
revenues of the Church; not despairing but that as she by the advice of her
Council and Clergy forced, or foold this Nation out of their loyalty, and duty
to the Stewards (by pretending that popery is Idolatry) so themselves may upon
any occasion, (and perhaps upon the motion of liberty of conscience) have the
like success against K. Charles the second, as Q. Elizabeth had against the
Queen of Scots. This is the only objection can be made against liberty of
Conscience, from which (say they) will spring Popery and will be the plea of
policy against piety, in case the falsehood of prelatick protestancy, and the
frauds of the faction interested therein, should be as zealously cried down, as
we presume it to be clearly discovered in this Treatise.

Our answer to this plea is. 1. That liberty of conscience, and legal changes
of Religion in England, have bin always made by Acts of Parliament, as we may
see in the statuts of K. Henry 8. K. Edward 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth; and
against resolutions taken* in so legal and general a way, no rebellious designs
have ever prevailed in this Monarchy; nor can; because in a Parliament is
involved the free consent and concurrence of the Prince and people; and in case
it should be judged conscionable and convenient that liberty of Conscience be
granted to all Christians, (though thereby it could be feared the Roman
Catholic Religion would be restored to these Kingdoms) it must be at the
instance of the people, and by vote of Parliament; for that the Royal family,
and the privy Council are at present nothing inclined to Popery: But we hope
and pray that in time God may open his Majesty's and his Counsels eyes to see
the Divin truth, and the Temporal conveniences annexed to the ancient faith
whereof this Monarchy has bin so long deprived. 2. The case between the Queen
of Scots, and her Royal issue now reigning, is very different; for albeit her
right was as clear (according not only to Catholic principles, but to Acts of
our Protestant Parliaments) as it is, that a man can not have two Wives at
once, or that Q. Elizabeth's mother could not be wife to K. Henry 8. during Q.
Catherins life, nor her self legitimat; yet the Protestant principles, and her
Fathers Testament, seemed to favor her succession; and the Queen of Scots
marriage to the Dolphin of France made the English* (even Catholics) more slow
then they would have bin otherwise, in declaring for her right in the due time
(which was a little before, and immediately after Q. Mary dyed) because they were
not inclined to be subject to a French King, or governed by his Viceroy. None
of these circumstances and considerations now concurring, it is not likely that
designing or discontented persons can take any advantage against the royal
family that now reigns, in case liberty of conscience, or even the restoring of
the Roman Religion should be judged conscientious, and convenient by the
Parliament.

3. The Protestant Clergys sincerity is now much more suspected, and the common
people less incensed against popery, then in Queen Elizabeth's days; when the
Protestant Bishops and Ministers Sermons, and Bibles made men believe, that
Images were Idols, the Pope Antichrist; Priests, Traitors, Agents for the King
of Spain etc. which things now are discovered to be calumnies and impostures;
for the Bible making Images Idols, is corrected by public authority; the Pope
known to be a civil person, like other men, not the beast of the Apocalypse: Nor
Rome the whore of Babylon: Priests have served the King faithfully at home and
abroad; and if any of them has in our late troubles negotiated with the King
of Spain, or his Ministers, it was then intended, and since has proved, and
bin owned by our gracious Sovereign to have had bin for his Majesty's, and his
Royal Highness benefit; and (when they were in exile) in order to their
subsistence and restoration; not any way against their interest. Wherefore
seeing the people of these nations are naturaly inclined to piety, though whilst
they were abused by the Protestant Clergy, and countenanced by the interest of
an illegitimat Prince, they did persecute Priests and popery as the greatest
obstacles of peace and salvation; yet now, seeing they are better informed, and
that in this particular of our desire to apply the Church revenues to the Crown
for the defense of this Empire against all foreign and domestic Disturbers,
we can have no design but duty to our King, and love to our Country, there can
be no ground to fear, that the bare word or clamors of interested Adversaries,
will disturb the Government, or incense a well meaning multitude against
Papists, Priests, or any other persons that desire nothing but a peacable and
public Conference in order to liberty of Conscience, and to ease these Nations
of those heavy burdens under which they groan. And indeed it concerns so much
the soul and state, the public good, and all private persons to examine, whether
English men (after so many changes) may not, and have not bin mistaken in
matters of Religion, and misled by education, that we have reason to hope some
worthy and zealous Protestants will be pleased, (for their own, and the worlds
satisfaction) to move in Parliament, that our objections against the novelty of
their doctrine, and the sincerity of their Clergy, may be taken into
Consideration, and a public Trial allowed for the discovery either of their
Cheat, or of our Calumny. If I be found a Calumniator (no other joined with me
in this work) I do engage in the word of a Christian, to present my self to due
punishment, in case J escape the pestilence, whereunto J have resolved to expose
my self for the benefit and salvation of my brethren; but if the Protestant
learned Clergy be found Cheats, I humbly and only beg, that the revenues which
they possess may be better bestowed; not upon the Catholic Clergy, but upon
the Crown, for the defense and ease of the Country. If the Protestant Religion
be true, by a fair Trial it can receive no damage, nor the state incurr any
danger: if false, besides the conversion of souls to the Catholic truth, the
Commonwealth may declare (to whom it appertains) the necessity there is of
seizing upon the Church livings for the preservation of the people; and by
their approbation conscientiously enjoy the same.

And albeit never any Protestant contributed to the foundation of Bishoprics,
or Benefices; but that all such pious works in these Kingdoms have bin founded
by our Roman Catholic predecessors, with an express obligation of prayer for
the souls in Purgatory, and of preaching the Roman Religion; yet I question not
but that they who (by virtue of the last wills and Testaments of the Founders,
and long prescription of lawful Predecessors,) ought to be in possession of
the Temporalities of the Church, are so good Patriots and dutiful subjects, as
to declare they will resign their right unto his Majesty, whenever these
three Kingdoms will think fit to grant liberty of Conscience, or to return the
ancient true Religion; and thereby the world may be satisfied, that our quarrel
with the Protestant Clergy is not for lands, but for souls; and of this we have
given heretofore sufficient evidence in the change of Religion made by Q. Mary;
having then resigned our Abbeys, See the petition and instrument of the
Catholic Clergyes resignation in Doctor Heylins Ecclesia restaurata page 43.
and the Stat. 1. Mar. and in this Treatise part. 1.
and impropriations to the Crown; whereas the Protestant Clergy in these great
wars never presented the King with any Donative out of their vast fines and
revenues. This backwardnes of the Bishops in so pressing a Conjuncture,
together with the present poverty of the people, and the dangers whereunto these
nations are cast for want of a public revenue, (which ought to be independent
of taxes that can not be seasonably and securely raised, when they are most
necessary) do not only justify, but exact a scrutiny into the right whereby the
sacred patrimony of the Church is possessed by men that neither expose their
persons, nor open their purses for the defense of their King and Country,
notwithstanding* that his Majesty, the Nobility, and people are so deeply
engaged for the safety, honor, and trade of this Empire in a defensive war
against the united powers of most powerful Enemies; and that the Parliament
was forcit (for want of other means) to feed the King, and be his faithful
soldiers, with smoke of Chymnys, whilst a mean Ministry raised by Q.
Elizabeth* in opposition to the Royal family of the Stewards, does swallow up
the substance of these Kingdoms. No sacrilege to apply the Church revenues to
the Crown in some cases.


How ridiculous it is to hear these Protestant Ministers cry out Sacrilege, at
this our proposal, as if they had any spiritual caracter, or any right to what
they possess; or though they had, as if the Church ought not to contribute in
cases of extreme necessity, to the defense of the Commonwealth. The undoubted
Catholic Clergy will rid the layty of any scruple of Sacrilege, for applying
the goods of the Church, to the necessary defense of the Country* We know the
ancient Pastors and Bishops of Gods Church did not scruple (in such cases) to
sell the very Chalices and vestments of the Altars; much less to spend their
revenues for the safety of their Flock. But indeed they had no wives, nor
Children, and therefore needed not be solicitous to buy estates for their sons;
or to setle jointures on their wives, or to raise portions for their daughters
out of the patrimony of the Church, which of right belongs to the poor* and who
is more poor then our soldiers, and seamen? or then Husbandmen and Tradesmen
that hitherto contributed; nay then our King, that sacrifices his revenue to
the maintenance of the land forces, and navy?

See the Sentence of Pope Julius 3. sent to Queen Mary an. 1554. And the
reasons thereof set down by Dr. Burges in his book No Sacrilege nor sin etc. 52.
and 53. whereof the last reason is, seeing the goods and possessions of the
Church, even by the authority of the Canon laws, may be aliened for the
redemption of Captives, and that the same may be don by that Church only to
whom such possessions do belong* it is fit and reasonable that such
dispensations should be granted for continuing of possession already gotten,
for so great a good of public concord and unity of the Church, and
preservation of the State, as well in body as in soul page 54. edit. 1660.


But if the Protestant Clergy be confident of the Justice of their cause, why
do they not come to a trial? why do they oppose liberty of Conscience? why do
they with so many artifices decline reasoning and delude the people? (...)
their Religion be true, we Roman Catholics will not ^^pine at their riches, A
public Trial and Conference desired by Catholics.
nor at the rigor of the laws made by Queen Elizabeth against our Religion, and
against the interest of the Stewards; or at least we will not be such fools as
not to be hastily and heartily converted to protestancy, seeing thereby we may
not only be saved, but share with the Protestant Clergy, enjoy very many
conveniences, and free our selves from the penalties and incapacities whereunto
we are subject for being Papists; Herein they may believe us, there being no
likelihood we shall be obstinat against a truth (if protestancy appear in our
desired Conference to be a truth) every way so advantageous to our selves. But
an ill cause dreads nothing so much as a free and public hearing; See Doctor
Allen in his Apol. for the Seminaries. And Persons in his Defense of the
Censure. Arch. Lauds reason confuted.
since protestancy was intruded into England by Q. Elizabeth, the Catholics
have continually petitioned and pressed for a public trial, but never could
obtain that favor.

Archbishop Laud (page 445.) against Fisher, gives this reason, that the King
and the Church of England had no reason to admit of a public dispute with the
English Romish Clergy, till they shall be able to show it under the seal or
powers of Rome, That that Church will submit to a third, who may be an
indifferent Judge between them and us, or a General Council; which Council
though general, he says (page 194.) is not infallible. And as for any other
indifferent, and infallible Judge, the Bishop thinks there is none as yet in
the world; and yet its certain that a Judge or Council that is not believed
infallible, is not for the purpose, because neither party can be obliged to
submit their judgments to its sentence in matters of faith. So that though the
controversy could be decided by a fallible Judge, or Council, we should remain
still divided; and that, the Bishop well knew; but some thing he must have said
to divert the well meaning Protestant layty from questioning the sufficiency or
sincerity of their own Clergy, observing their backwardnes in giving
satisfaction to our so just demand. And yet we granted to them in Q. Mary's
reign as free a disputation as they desired; we gave them their choice of books
and notaries, and time, not only to put in their arguments and answers in
writing, but to review and correct what they dislik't upon more mature
deliberation.

To Archbishop Lauds reason for not allowing a Conference, is answered, that
we desire so much the salvation of souls and service of the state, that we will
give under our own hands and seals (the powers of Rome we cannot Command) that
if Protestants will admit of such a Trial as was granted to them in England,
and to their party in France (which we have related in this Treatise) we are
content to submit to my Lord keeper of England and other noble persons
judgments therein: And let our Adversaries choos either to argue or answer; let
them object falsifications of Scripture and Fathers against us; or answer to
such as we shall charge them withal. And if they cannot maintain their
Reformation without such fraudulent dealing as we object against them, let them
loose the Church revenues; if we can not defend our Religion without the lik
fraud, let us not only be debarred from liberty of Conscience but loose our
lives. Notwithstanding my Lord keepers known inclination to favor Protestancy,
we will not except against his, and the Committees sentence; so confident are
we of the justice of our cause. If they refuse so fair an offer, though they
keep their revenues, without doubt they will forfeit their credit, and be as
much lost in the opinion of their own Prelaticks, as of Fanatics. And as the
Protestant Clergys diffidence must breed doubts, and diminish the esteem of the
Pastors in the mynds of their flocks, so may it give the Protestant layty full
assurance there can be no danger in embracing our Religion, which so learned
persons as are in the Protestant Clergy, dare not encounter.

Besides, the late change of their prelatick forms of Ordination has so
discredited their caracter of priesthood, See the Nullity of the Protestant
Church, and Clergy.
and Episcopacy, that no sober layman will fight for a priestly function
confessed by the Priests themselves to be invalid: and what confession of
invalidity can be more plain, then to add unto their old forms the words Priest
and Bishop, forced thereunto by the arguments of their Adversaries, See also my
Erasus junior* and an other book of mine called Erastus seni.
demonstrating that neither of those functions had bin hitherto sufficiently
expressed in their Rituals; and by consequence that the caracter could not be
given by forms so vnsignificant, and so imperfect? I have often considered what
could move the Clergy of the Church of England to condemn (in this particular
of their form of Ordination) their first Protestant Ancestors; and to
condescend to their Catholic adversaries, in a matter so important as that of
the validity of their priestly and Episcopal caracter, and to acknowledge by
this change, (judged hitherto by themselves to be at least, superfluous,) that
they who began and perfected the reformation, were grossly mistaken, and
themselves misled in one of the most essential points of Christianity, and in
one, without which there can be no Church. Had the dispute between them and us,
bin about convenience of discipline, or decency of Ceremonies, a change in such
things, (alterable according to the circumstances of time, place and persons)
might be pious and prudent, because it might take away occasion of cavills; but
to alter the essential forms of Priesthood and Episcopacy, and to add thereunto
(now after a Century of years) words which (hitherto wanting) concludes the
Nullity of their Church, and Clergy, must rather augment the doubt, then avoid
the cavil. If they were satisfied of the validity of that form whereby
themselves since Ed. 6. until this present, See the late or last Editio^ of
the Common prayer book since his Maj. happy restoration and there you shall
find the words Priest and Bishop put into this their new form; which are not in
their old.
had bin ordained, what needed any addition of Priesthood and Episcopacy, which
we argued, and they denied to be wanting? did they imagine that such an addition
would end the dispute? I believe it has; for it is an acknowledgment that our
exceptions were well grounded; but why should they give us this advantage? J
fancy they have hopes that some other Spalato will Apostatize, and then by this
new undoubted form make them real Bishops. Yet that will not serve their turn;
their want of spiritual Jurisdiction makes their caracter useless; and want of
jurisdiction together with their errors in Doctrine does vn-Church a
Congregation, as well as want of Orders.

As this want of ordination renders them incapable of the Benefices and
Bishoprics which they enjoy; so their corruptions of Scripture, and
Falsifications of Counsels and Fathers, make them unworthy: And he can not be
a true Christian that will stick to their interest after that he is informed of
the nullity of their calling, and of the falsehood of their doctrine. Wherefore it
will not be in the power of any prelatick politician to make himself popular
upon the score of patronizing such a cause, or Clergy against Liberty of
conscience or Conferences: and the Prelatick caracter and discipline is to all
other Protestant parties as odious, as our late distempers have evidenced.

The only objection now remaining is, that Presbyterians and other Sectaries
will take the advantage of an Act for Liberty of Conscience, or even for a
change in Religion (in case the Parliament should resolve upon it) for crying
down of Monarchy. But (as we said) it is well known these Sectaries either
desire Liberty of Conscience, or their animosity is as great against Prelatick
Protestancy as against Popery; and if now they be kept in obedience and aw of
the government, the King and Parliament will be better able hereafter (in case
of any such liberty, or change to keep them to their duty (by the addition of
the Church revenues) then they are at present. Besides, it is very certain that
among those Sectaries many are moral and conscientious persons, and would
conform to the truth of the Roman Catholic Religion, had they bin rightly
informed, and the Tenets thereof had not bin rendered odious and ridiculous by
the impostures of Protestant preachers, and the vulgar errors of a homly
education; all which obstacles will be easily removed, if Catholics have
liberty to speak and reason for themselves. So that considering the influence
which Truth always has upon honest dispositions (such as our English are) and
the prejudice which all men retain against falsehood, when it is discovered (and
it is not their interest to promote it) I see no danger of drawing the people
into a Rebellion upon the account of Liberty of Conscience, or of opposing a
change from Protestancy into the old Religion; especialy seeing the generality
may hope thereby to see the Church Revenues lawfully and legaly applied to
their own ease, and against all disturbers of the peace, and Trade of these
Nations. Let us therefore have a fair Trial and conference in order to Liberty
of Conscience, and then judge of the truth and sincerity of both Clergys, and
of both Religions.

Notwithstanding the evident convenience of this humble proposal, I fear we do
in vain flatter our selves with the hopes of a public Conference. We are
inclined to believe what we wish for, notwithstanding that former experience,
and our learned Adversaries knowledge of so clear evidences on our side, casts
us again into despair. Did the business depend of the vote, of the whole
multitude of the Protestant Clergy, we might assure our selves of a conference,
because many of the ordinary Persons are honest, and most so ignorant, that
they believe themselves to be in the right way of salvation; for, they take all
that Bishop Jewel, and John Fox say, for truth, never examining it further.
But the Bishops and great Doctors are of another stamp; I fear their guilt of
conscience, will busy them in opposing all Treaties and Trials of Truth; and
yet methinks not any one thing should render them more suspected of fraud, and
falsehood, then so unreasonable an opposition. 1. Because it argues diffidence
of their cause. 2. Because their Church being confessedly fallible, and by
consequence uncertain of the truth, they ought not to refuse any means whereby
men may be further informed thereof. Though we Papists believe the Roman
Catholic Church infallible in matters of doctrine, yet whenever our
Adversaries desire to conferr about Religion, their Request is granted: nay the
Council of Trent (how ever inconsiderable Protestants make it) invited all the
learned Protestants of the world to propose therein all their doubts and
difficulties, offering all safety and civility to their persons. And though the
infallibility of our Church be not consistent with a submission of our faith to
the judgment of a Third in point of doctrine, yet that prerogative does not
debarr us from submitting ourselves in matter of fact, and falsifications, to a
fair trial of indifferent persons. As for the Pope and general Counsels not
submitting to a Third in controversies with Protestants, it is no pride; but a
prerogative of all supreme Magistrates, whether spiritual or temporal, as our
Adversaries confess, and contest to be reasonable when their own Bishops deal
with Non-conformists; and all Lay Sovereigns must maintain the same, when they
treat with their revolted Subjects; which Subjects are judged very unreasonable
if they refuse to treat with their King (of grievances) unless he submits the
controversy to the decision of a Third: and much more intolerable, if no
competent Third were to be found, as it is in our case; unless we think that
Turks, Jews, or Pagans, are fit men to judge of Christian Religion. Wherefore,
if the Church of England thinks it unreasonable, that her Sectaries should not
conferr with prelatick Divines, unless they have it under the seal and powers
of Canterbury, that the Archbishops, or the Convocation will submit to the
judgment of a Third; I understand not how Arch-Bishhop Laud could exact the
like condition from the Pope or a general Council, before Protestants would
confer with Roman Catholics.

The other reasons alleged for refusing to Roman Catholics a public Trial of
Falsifications, and an amicable Conference of Religion, makes the refusal yet
more unreasonable. Popery (says every Protestant) is a growing Religion; if
disputes thereof be admitted, we shall turn all Papists: If they be not
persecuted, their profession will prevail: If liberty of conscience be granted,
very few will frequent Protestant Churches. The prelatick Clergys last reason
is, Venient Romani and tollent locum nostrum. If we come once to reason the
matter with Roman Catholics, infallibly we shall loose our Revenues. But, I
may assiure them that the Roman Clergy covet not their revenues; if it be found
that we have any right to the Church livings, we will lay our pretensions at
his Majesty's feet, and Petition the Pope (as we did in Queen Marys days) to
leave all to the King and Parliaments disposal, for the ease and defense of our
fellow Subjects, and the terror of our Enemies. And as for our Religion being a
growing Religion, we cannot deny it, and rejoice that our Adversaries confess
so much; how could it otherwise be the Catholic, or become universal?
Protestancy is confined to this Northern Climate, notwithstanding its liberty,
of open and sensual allurements; the Mohammedan persuasion is propagated by
force of Arms, and multiplicity of Wives; the Greek Schism is but a spite and
spleen against the Primacy of Rome, and therefore is justly Become a Slavery to
the Turk. No Religion but the Roman Catholic does grow and flourish, maugre
the Storms of outwa^d Persecutions, and the strength of our inward perverse
inclinations aganst it: we follow reason against the appearance of sense, we
prefer virtue before vice, the judgment of the Church before our own, and
Heaven before Earth; and therefore we are made Strangers in our own Country,
Straglers abroad, Tennants at will of our own Estates, and our lives stand at
the mercy of every base Informer, that will press the law against our
Conscience; and yet in this sad condition and circumstances, our Religion does
increase, and is acknowledged to be a growing Religion: Ergo it is the true
Catholic, and not only the most safe for the Soul, but the most convenient for
the State, especially of Great Britain, as now shall more particularly appear.

SECT. XIII. The same further demonstrated, and how by Liberty of Conscience,
or by Tolerating the Roman Catholic Religion by Act of Parliament, the British
Monarchy will become the most considerable of all Christendom, Peaceable at
Home, and recover its Right Abroad. How evidently it is the mutual Interest of
Spain and England to be in a perpetual League against France, and how
advantageous it is for Spain to put Flanders into English Hands.
THree things must concur to make a Monarchy Powerful and Peaceable. 1.
Uniformity in Religion, or at least Liberty of Conscience. 2. Great Revenues of
the Monarch, without empoverishing (by unusual and unimerciful Taxes) the
Subjects, unless they be slaves. 3 Men fit for Sea and Land Service. These
Islands afford the last; the other two we want, but may have them (if we will)
by an Act of Parliament for Liberty of Conscience, or for tolerating the old
Faith of our Ancestors, wherewith this Kingdom flourished in Peace and
Prosperity for the space of 1000 years: Such an Act, I mean as may make legal
one Profession, but wherein there ought to be a Proviso, that none of another
suffer for his Conscience or Religion, especially, for the Roman Catholic.

That without Uniformity in Religion, or without Liberty of Conscience, it is
impossible for a Monarchy to be long peaceable, or powerful, is manifest by
Reason and Experience. Reason does dictate, that when Men's minds are
Discontented and Oppressed by Persecution for their Conscience, they will
hazard their all to be satisfied and saved; their Rebellion against the
Sovereign will be thought the ground of their Salvation, or at least the only
way to preserve their Posterity from being damned, and brought up in the state
false Religion. Experience does show that diversity of Opinions, if but one be
permitted, does not only occasion Domestic differences, as the parting of Man
and Wife, of Parents and Children, Brothers and Sisters, etc. But is the cause
of public Inconveniences, as jealousies between Princes and Subjects, from
whence proceed civil Wars, which are the greatest obstacle of Prosperity in an
Empire, or Commonwealth. Whilst the Hugonots were persecuted in France, France
was not so considerable; Here in England we are more afraid of persecuted
Presbyterians, Fanatics, and other Sectaries, than of the French, Danes and
Dutch; seeing therefore Liberty, or Uniformity in Religion is so necessary for
the Peace and Power of a Monarchy, all Statesmen must grant the Religion
fittest for the State is that, which is most likely to be generally embraced,
if Men may have their free choice. Now whether that be Protestancy, or Popery,
is the question. It is not Protestancy, because it is now a hundred years and
more, since it has been endeavored by all ways imaginable to bring the
Subjects of the Crown of England unto an Uniformity in Protestancy, even by
Sanguinary and Penal Statutes; and yet the design does not take, and indeed
cannot: Because it involves a contradiction; for, to be a Protestant, is to
have the liberty of op^ning, and the gift of interpreting Scripture; which
Liberty and Prerogative is not consistent with a subjection of Judgment to the
Authority and Interpretation of any Church, or Council; and by consequence not
with Unity of Faith. Besides, the Protestant Church (whether Prelatick,
Presbyterian, or Fanatic) is not as much as pretended to be Infallible in
Doctrine, or in its Interpretation of Scripture; and it is a great vanity for a
Church that professes Fallibility in explaining the Scriptures, and admits
a liberty or Latitude of applying the Letter of the same, to every private man's
Spirit and Interpretation, to oblige men to any unity, or certainty of Faith,
and therefore our Acts of Parliament are so inefficacious. Again* Faith is not
Christian, unless the Believers hold it certain; and no Believer can hold his
own Faith certain, if he submits and comforms his Judgment to the Doctrine and
Decrees of a Fallible Church: For that no man can think himself certain of what
he knows may fail* evident therefore it is, that the Protestant Faith is
neither Christian nor certain; because the Professors thereof (if they be
guided by their confessed fallible Church) must know that their Faith may be
False.

The Roman Catholic Church (seeing it is believed Infallible by all
Catholics) may teach a Faith which must be thought by us to be Certain,
Conscientious, Christian, and by consequence convenient, fit for both Soul, and
State. How conscientious and Necessary it is for the Salvation of the Soul, we
have proved in this whole Treatise, as also how convenient for the State; now I
will show the same in a word; and by the confession of our Adversaries. It is a
growing Religion say they, therefore (I infer) convenient, and fit for that
Uniformity of faith, and union of Hearts, which cements the People with their
Sovereign, and among themselves: It is indeed, so growing a Religion, that it
has spread it self over the whole world, not by force of Arms, but of truth,
See the Sect. of the second Part of this Treatise and the first Part, Sect. 1.
not by allowing lewd liberty or licentiousness; but by working miracles by
professing, and observing abstinence, chastity, poverty and obedience to
spiritual and temporal Superiors; by mortifying our Passions, and the perverse
inclinations of a spiritual pride and proper judgment; this pride and property
of judgment (the source of Heresy) we renounce by submitting our opinions to
the Church, acknowledging in the same, God's Infallible assistance, and
authority; and this our submission proceeds not from simplicity, credulity,
or rashness, but we are induced thereunto by evident marks of Gods favor and
providence clarly appearing in our Roman Catholic Church, and in no other; as
Miracles, Conversion of Nations, Succession and Sa^ctity of Pastors, etc.
whereby the most Learned Men of the World, in every Age since the Apostles,
have been evidently convinced of an obligation to conform their Faith to a
Church so supernaturally qualified; and therefore did prudently believe that
none but God is Author of the Roman Catholic Doctrine; and we judge our selves
bound, under pain of damnation, to follow their example. For, these Signs of
Divine Providence are so far above the force and course of Nature, and so
visible to all the World, that not only the Learned, but all sorts of people
who are not wilfully obstinate, must confess a sufficient evidence of Gods
Commission, and Authority in our Church; and by consequence they deny Gods
veracity, who contradict the Doctrine of a Congregation that has so notorious,
and significant badges of his Divine trust for proposing Articles of Faith, and
composing all differences in Religion. So that having for our guide a Church of
so Authentic Authority, and a Testimony to rely upon, so visibly confirmed by
supernatural Miracles, and marks of Gods Commission, the same Church must needs
have his Infallible assistance in discharging her trust, of instructing
Mankind; wherefore we Catholics may and do uniformly agree and acquiess in her
Difinitions, with as little fear of being seduced, as of God being the Seducer.

He must be very unreasonable, who (after being informed of these motives of
credibility, or marks of Gods Church) will refuse to submit his judgment to so
convincing arguments of the Divine Authority; and this is the reason why not
only the Natives of one Country, or the Subjects of one Monarch, but whole
Kingdoms and Kings of most different tempers, and interests, do so easily,
constantly, and unanimously submit and adhear to the Roman Catholic Religon,
both now and in former Ages; whereas they who at any time opposed the same,
could never agree among themselves, or with themselves; but were, and are
divided into as many opinions, as there are fancies, or occasions offered of
changing their inclinations, or of raising their fortunes.

And now our Statesmen may easily conclude which of both Religions is not only
most conscientious for the soul, but most convenient for the power and peace of
the State, if they will reflect upon the different ways of planting and
preserving both Religions, the Catholic, and Protestant. To omit other
examples, let them consider how St. Austin our Apostle of England, arrived at
Kent with forty Monks and Preachers, entered into Canterbury (as our Adversary
Fox confesses p. 150.) in procession with a Crucifix carried before him, and
singing Litanies; and how they converted that Kingdom and all England from
Paganism to the very same Roman Catholic Religion we now profess, in every
particular; not by force of Arms, or by Frauds of falsifying the Letter and
Sense of Scripture; See 1* p. Sect. 1.
but by working confessed Miracles in confirmation of our Roman Text and Sense
of Scripture, which they Preached; and by the example of a Godly life. How this
same Religion continued for almost a thousand years in this Island, and in all
that time never was there any Rebellion upon the score of our Doctrine, or of
Interpreting of Scripture; much less did the Subjects pretend Scripture or the
Word of God, to warrant a Superiority over their Sovereign, or to try Him by a
formal Court of Justice. On the other side our Statesmen will find in all
Histories, and this Treatise, that in this one Age since Protestancy began,
that Reformation has not entered without Rebellion or Tyrany into any one
Kingdom, Country or City; that he who first Preached this Reformation ( Luther)
did see it divided into more Sects than himself had years, though he lived to be
an old Man. That never any of these Sects continued long without embroyling the
State. That never Miracle was wrought to confirm any kind of Protestancy; nor
the Author of any of these Sects or Reformations lived with the esteem I do not
say of holy, but of honest conversation. No marvel therefore if People so
naturally honest as the English, cannot be brought to uniformity in a
Reformation so unlikely to be Divine, and that was begun by a dissolute and
drunken Friar, who had no Rule of Faith but his own fancy; the marvel indeed
is, that any sober man can be persuaded it is possible to bring pious and
prudent men to reject the old Religion (confirmed with so many supernatural
signs and renouned for so long and successful subjection to Lawful Kings) for a
new fangled device introduced into England by an Illegitimate Queen, in
opposition to the Title and known right of our lawful Sovereigns.

Seeing therefore our Adversaries do confess that the Roman Catholic is a
growing Religion, even in this groaning and sad condition wherein we are kept
in these Kingdoms; who doubts but that if made the Religion of the State, and
countenanced by Law, or even tolerated, it will soon grow to such a hight, that
all other persuasions will be rendered contemptible, and incapable of thwarting
the Designs and Decrees that will be resolved upon by the King and Parliament?
when Law, Religion, and Reason walk hand in hand, there is no room or pretext
left for Rebellion upon the score of conscience. And what can be more legal
than an Act of Parliament? what more agreeable to Religion and Reason, than
that every man ought to submit his judgment to Authority so Authentikly Divine,
and so prudently judged to be Infallible, as that of the Roman Catholic
Ghurch? For, what more convincing arguments can there be of Divine and
Infallible authority, than the undeniable Miracles, Sanctity, Succession, both
of Doctrine and Doctors, Conversion of Kings and Nations, etc. of the Roman
Catholic Church? He who denies any of these, must consequently resolve to
believe nothing, and even to doubt of himself, of his Parents, Country, and
Relations, because no Man has, or can have, a more credible Testimony, or a
more constant Tradition for any one of these particulars concerning his
Parents, Country, etc. than he has for the Miracles wrought in Confirmation of
the Authority, Infallibilty, and Doctrine of our Church; the Sanctity and
Succession whereof is as evident also as our converting of Kings and Nations
from Paganism to Christianity, and cannot be contradicted without questioning
at least all humane Faith and History. A Church and Religion so supernaturally
qualified, cannot be prudently suspected to be a Cheat, or humane Invention;
And if once, I do not say, established, but permitted, in these Kingdoms, its
Doctrine needs not be fenced with Sanguinary Statues, nor favored by any
Penal Laws and Acts of Parliament for Uniformity; all which rigorous
proceedings will be superfluous, as also the continual care and vast charges of
suppressing unlawful Assemblies. The absurd gestures and foolish fancies of
every humorsom fellow, or Hypocrite, will not then take with the common people,
and pass for motions and revelations of the Holy Ghost; neither will silly
Tradesmen be heard with patience in Pulpits prate nonsense, and comment upon
Texts of Scripture. All these impieties and disorders I say, will be quasht
when liberty is granted to declare unto the ignorant and misinformed people,
the Roman Catholic truths, and the motives that induce to believe them: and no
Nations in the World are more inclined to embrace the truth, and wholesome
documents than these Islands; witness the multitude of our ancient Saints, the
magnificence of our Churches, and even the zeal of the present Seekers, and
Sectaries, in their mistaken way of Salvation.

By all which it appears there would soon be an Uniformity in Religion in
these Kingdoms, if the Roman Catholic were Tolerated. That the King would have
a considerable and conscientious Revenue (to support the Honor of this
Monarchy, and suppress all sinister designs) by the addition of the Church
Livings, when resigned by the Roman Clergy, needs no proof; I believe there
will be found more difficulty in His Majesty to accept, than in the Catholic
Clergy to offer such a Donative; seeing His Piety is now so great toward
unlawful Ministers, doubtless it would be refined in case He did see the
mistake. Let us suppose therefore that God has heard our continual Prayers,
and will open the eyes of him and of these Nations, and that they will
acknowledge the Errors of their Education; in such a case I say, the Roman
Clergy ought to press (and without doubt will) their Revenues upon His Majesty
and the Commonwealth? 1. To let the World see they seek not so much Worldly
Interest as the salvation of Souls. 2. Because the Kings Catholic Ancestors
and theit Subjects of the same Profession, founded all the Bishoprics and
Benefices of these Kingdoms; and it is a principle and practice of Roman
Catholics, that in case of necessity, the Heirs of the Founders ought to be
maintained and relieved by the Foundations.

But the principal reason to move His Majesty not to reject, and the Roman
Catholic Clergy to make so dutiful an offer, is the absolute necessity there
is of a greater public revenue, then at present the Crown does possess. For
though the English Valor should force advantageous Articles of Peace from our
Enemies, that Peace will not be lasting, unless they see we are in a condition
to force the performance as well as the Peace; if at any time a breach of
Articles should happen, or new injuries be offered. Nothing is more uncertain
than the solemn agreement of Princes: Their Leagues last no longer than until
they be at leisure, and recover strength to renew the War; and if one of them
wants a constant and considerable Revenue, he and his Subjects will be
contemned and his Dominions made a prey to his more powerful Neighbor, though
lately reconciled Friend. The best pledge therefore of a Peace with Foreigners,
is our own power: if we rely wholly upon the word of the French, or upon the
worth of the Dutch, we shall be mistaken, and repent our credulity.

But shall our power so depend of Parliaments, that before the Lords and
Commons can meet, or Ta^es be raised, our Enemies may be landed, and our selves
so distracted that none knows what to do? Without doubt our power must depend
of Acts of Parliament, espicially of one annexing the Church Revenues to the
Crown, seeing no other found does appear. Never Parliament did give greater
proofs of love and liberality to a King, than this present; but the more people
have given, the less able they are to give; their will is still the same, their
ability is not: what then? must Churchmen (whose profession ought to be
poverty, especially when the State is empoverish'd) think of enjoying Millions
of Revenue, and see that the Laity is not able to bear the burden of the War?
or must the Fnglish Monarchy be reduced to such a condition, that if the French
or Dutch will but send a Messenger to have a Place of importance delivered to
them, it must be done, because the King has not Money to maintain a War, and
defend His Subjects? I do not say this has been, but I fear it may be the case
of England, if the King's Revenues be not made much more considerable than they
are. And how they may be considerably, conscientiously and conveniently raised
otherwise than I have proposed (by the Lands of the Church) I do not
understand, and wish that others find out a better expedient. As for relying
upon extraordinary Taxes and Subsidies, raised from the impoverished, and
discontented Laity by new Acts of Parliaments, according to occasions offered,
it is not safe; for that such Taxes are looked upon by all wise men, to be more
dangerous than durable, as depending upon a popular Vote and Vogue, whereupon
neither the secret and solid designs of State, nor the Peace of the Monarchy,
nor the power of the Monarch (all which require a constant and sure Revenue)
can be well built.

Seeing therefore that extraordinary Taxes cannot be made, that ordinary and
constant Revenue, which is absolutely necessary for the maintenance of Peace as
well as of War, and that the Laity cannot contribute much more than they have
done, and that the Revenues of the Clergy may be so conscientiously applied to
the Crown, I see not any scruple of Sacrilege that may deter the King or
Parliament from such a resolution. There is not one Catholic Divine thinks it
Sacrilege to apply sacred things to pious uses; and what use can be more
pious, than the public safety, the defense of King and Country, the ease of
poor Subjects, the maintenance of Soldiers and Seamen that venture their lives
for our repose? or then Pensions to their Widows and Children, when themselves
perish in the Service? Seeing I say, this is lawful and laudable in all other
Countries, I see not why our Bretish Clergy should be excepted from so general
a rule, and excepted from so particular a Duty? The Portugal Nation has been
ever most Orthodox and pious; and since their late separation from Spain, they
have applied the Revenues of the Bishoprics to the maintenance of their War
against the Castilians; and this, without the Popes positive approbation: How
much more lawful would it be for our Catholic Clergy to resign (with the Poprs
consent) their Right and Revenues to the King upon so pious and public a
consideration, as Liberty of Consci^nce, and a Toleration of our true Faith?
and how rationally may it be presumed the Pope and all therein concerned, will
consent thereunto?

But in such a case, how shall the Roman Catholic Clergy be maintained? by
Gods Providence, and Christian Charity, as they have been, when our Ancestors
were first Converted. How are they now maintained in England, Holland, Japan,
and China? Let us not be Solicitous for things of this World; let us seek the
Kingdom of Heaven, and we shall not want. There was never more Piety in the
Church, than when the Ministers thereof had no Lands. Let the Finances, or
found of the Exchequer be settled in such a manner, that the King need not
trouble His Subjects, unless it be upon some very extraordinary occasion, and
we may be confident that what can be spared, will not be denied. All must be
left to the Piety and Prudence of His Majesty, and His Ministers. Let us who
are but Passengers and private persons in this great Ship of the Commonwealth,
pray for fair weather, that the Sun of Justice may shine, and discover the
dangers both of Soul and State, whereunto these our floating Islands have been
driven by the tempestous and cross winds of Protestancy, and leave the rest to
God, and to such as he has placed at the Helm: The mist of Protestant Frauds,
and falsifications once disperced, and falsehood vanished into its own nothing,
through the force and evidence of truth, our Masters will not be necessitated
(as now they are) to steer the State according to the deceits of a mercenary
Clergy, or to the Decrees of a fallible Church; And as they will enjoy the
benefit of our Catholic Doctrine, so we ought not to doubt but that we shall
find the effects of their Christan Charity.

The King's right to France.
Peace and Plenty thus established at home, then we may think of our Right and
Interest abroad. Its undeniable that the two best Provinces of France (Normandy
and Aquitain) are our Kings ancient Patrimony, and undoubted Inheritance;
neither can his right to that whole Kingdom be much questioned, seeing that the
Salick Law (if ever any such thing was) extended no further than Franconia, a
Province of Germany; and had it been intended for France, the Line Male of the
Kings thereof, had not been so frequently changed: but it seems the French
would have one Law for us, and another, or none at all, for themselves. Our
ancient Kings regarded not this Salick Pretext, they claimed by Law, and
conquered by Arms that great Empire; But the difference between the white and
red Rose, occasioned the loss of our French Lillies; when those differences
were composed, and the Titles of York and Lancaster united in King Henry 8.
instead of recovering France, he made a breach with Rome; and by the Protestant
Reformation, which he began, and his Successors continued, they have been so
diverted and distracted at home, that they wanted both means and opportunity to
prosecute their claim to the best Kingdom of Europe.

And indeed so long as Protestancy does so much prevail in these Islands, we
may despair of having any Dominion in the Catholic Continent. We have had late
experience how the two emulous great Crowns of France and Spain conspired to
recover (contrary to the ordinary maxims and practices of state) Dunkirk out of
our hands; neither was it bestowed upon us with any other intention then of
taking it from us when a peace should be concluded, though Cardinal Mazarin
endeavored to make Cromwell believe the contrary. But that which must make our
hopes (even of Normandy and Aquitain) quite vanish, is the prejudice which the
generality and nobility of France, and of those two mentioned Provinces, retain
against the Reformation which our former Kings not only professed but pressed
upon others. The Normans and Gascoins do love our King as their undoubted and
natural Prince; but they are so averse from being of his Religion, that they
had rather endure the hardships of a Jealous (but Catholic) Government, then
try and trust the Faith and Caresses of a Protestant. And truly our proceedings
in Ireland, and the Principles whereupon we have grounded the Settlement of
that Nation, seem to have so little regard to the performance of Promises,
Solemnity of Treaties, and engagements of public Faith made to Roman
Catholics, that few of that Profession will be induced to take a Protestants
word, or trust his Religion in another occasion; seeing that, notwithstanding
the Kings inclination, and Declaration to make good his Articles of Peace, such
is the privilege of Protestancy, and the Power or Prerogative it gives to the
Protestant Multitude, that a King cannot be just to Papists, without running
the hazard of being injurious to himself, and of loosing his Crown by a
Protestant Rebellion. Is it likely that Catholic strangers will become
Subjects to this Monarchy, when the Catholic Natives are by our Laws made
Strangers, and incapable of Trust or Employment, only because they are
Catholics? Is it credible we shall maintain the Privileges and Rights of
Foreign Catholic Corporations, when we make a Law that no Catholic shall
enjoy his own Lands, or freedom in our Corporations, notwithstanding the
express Articles of a proclaimed Peace to the contrary, in favor of the
Catholic Natives. Therefore unless we resolve to be more moderate in our
Religion at home, it is a vanity to claim our Right, or to think of diverting
our Enemies abroad. As for designs built upon the Strength of the French
Hugonots, they can have no other ground but our desires; that Party is brought
so low in France, that the King made his aversion to their Religion, and
Themselves, no state secret; and scrupled not to tell their Agents representing
Grievances, that though his Grandfather loved them, and his Father feared them,
yet he did neither love nor fear them: And truly all that England can expect
from them, is but the Presbyterian Prayers of Charenton, and of their other
Calvinian Congregations, for the good success of Puritans against Prelaticks
and Royalists. But if the Catholic Religion were Restored, or at least
Tolerated in these Kingdoms, by Act of Parliament, we should be more formidable
to the French Kings, then ever our Ancestors have been, and no less successful.
Normandy, and Aquitain, could have then no pretext to except against their
Lawful Princes; the Scots (who always hindered) would now help to Conquer the
rest of that Kingdom. The Princes of the French Blood could not be kept in such
awe, as they are at present, if we had any footing in France, and the odious
Name and Faith of Protestants, were (by granting liberty of Conscience) a
little sweetened; otherwise if the Princes (who perhaps desire to favor any
Foreigner, whether Protestant or Catholic to make their Cousin less Absolute)
did join with Protestants, their Power would be rendered useless, and themselves
odious, because they joined with Persecutors of the Catholic Faith.

Besides; the Spaniard (whose Interest it is to have France divided, and
embroiled) would countenance our Designs, and contribute to our Conquest, if we
Tolerated Catholics; which now he dares not do either for scruple of
Conscience, or at least for fear of loosing the Reputation and Name of the
Catholic King, that gets him so many grants of Church Revenues, Comiendas, and
Cruzadas, and so great Contibutions from the Clergy. If he joined with us (as
now we are) in recovering our Right, he would only gain the Name and Opinion of
a Fautor of Heretics, and loose the Donatives and Devotion of his Church
Friends, and perhaps the duty of his Lay Subjects. But if England did grant
liberty of Conscience, it were much more for his Interest to dispose of his
Daughters, and (with them) of Flanders to our Royal Family, than to the German
House of Austria.

Hitherto the Politicians of Europe have been employed in keeping the scales
equal between France and Spain, to the end neither of those two great Crowns
might gain too far upon their Neighbors, and so by degrees devour all petty
States and Princes, and afterward endanger other Monarchs; hence every Crown
concerned it self not only in protecting Allies, but in fomenting Rebellions,
as Q. Elizabeth did that of Holland, and of the other United Provinces. But of
late the case is altered; Holland now Copes with England; the Spaniard has had
so many losses of Armies, Navies, and Kingdoms, that now he is more pitied
then feared, or envied; and France is arrived to such a height of Power, by
uniting to it self the Provinces of Lorain, Alsatia, and Rossillon; the Cities
of Perpignan, and Pignorole, (the Keys of Spain and Italy) the greatest part of
Artois; And the most important Towns of Flanders, and other Provinces, and
moreover the French King has settled so vast a Revenue upon his Crown,
independent of his Parliament, or of the vote of the People, that he and France
is become a terror to all Christian Princes; My Lord of Clarendons policy
censured by all Wise men.
which therefore censure our English Statesmen for not having closed in time
with Spain, and for having supported Portugal immediately after our Kings
restoration; we should rather (say they) have permitted Spain (by recovering
of Portugal) to counterpoise France, and put it self into a condition of
revenging the manifold injuries done by the French to the Catholic and British
Monarchies, and thereby secure our selves, and frustrate the designs, and
attempts which were foreseen would be made by so Powerful, Prudent, and warlike
a Monarch as Louis 14. against England, it being the likliest Kingdom to check
his greatness, and prevent his being universal Monarch.

Besides, they say we could not but expect a visit from so unquiet, emulous,
and neighboring a Nation as France, in case they were peaceable at home, and
Spain busied with Portugal; we having visited them so often heretofore in their
own Country and Court, and indeed they never since have been at leisure, nor in
a Posture to return us a visit until now. These reasons might have moved us to
have had been more kind to Spain, especially seeing our Alliance with Portugal,
(for which we forsook Spain) added not the Islands Azores, or Terceras to our
Empire, as the World imagined it would, the Portugueses not being in a
condition to refuse any demands, when they sought our Friendship, and were
abandoned by the rest of the World. This is the Discourse, and Censure of
strangers; which, being a mere matter of State, we wave as improper for our
Profession. Yet common sense does tell us, that the Azores, or Terceras could
not be easily obtained, (at least not long enjoyed) by Protestants, seeing the
Natives of those Islands are all Catholics, and rather then live in
Persecution under a Protestant Government, would (in all likelihood) have
submitted to the Spaniard; and we been Catholics, or tolerated Catholics,
without doubt those Islands might have been ours. What little advantages our
Sovereigns are like to have in the other World by being Protestants, has been
hitherto sufficienly declared; in this Section we only show how much they loose
in this World by their Protestant Zeal of not Tolerating the Roman Catholic
Religion.

King James (as the World knows) was a very Wise Prince, and thought it was the
Interest of England to be in a perpetual League with Spain against France. How
far the Spaniards will engage with us at present, or trust Promises and
Articles confirmed by the Protestant public Faith, I do not know; but if by
Act of Parliament we did tolerate Roman Catholics, it would be evident to the
Spaniards themselves that it were greater convenience and security for the
Spanish Monarchy, to Ma^ch continually with the Princes of England, One of the
King of Spain his Ministers told me, that the late King Philip 4. had disburs'd
for the Defense of the Low Countries, four hundred Millions of Ducats, which
amounts one hundred Millions sterling. All this Treasure was sent out of Spain.
then with the German Austrians; and that it would be more for their purpose to
give the Netherlands (which are a vast charge to Spain, and of no concern but
to busy France) as a portion with their Infantas to our Kings, then to the
Archdukes, or to the Emperors. The reason is clear, Our Kings cannot be
diverted from Invading France, and Relieving Flanders, (or Spain it self) by
Turks, Swedes, German Princes, or Electors; as the Emperor and Austrians may;
our King may secure their Spanish West India Fleets, and frustrate all Attempts
against them, which the Emperors cannot. Our Kings have an Hereditary Right,
not only to Normandy, Aquitain, and Anio^, but to all France; and this Right,
together with our former Successes in that Kingdom, makes us look upon it still
more as our own, then some Titular Kings of Jerusalem do upon the Holy Land; we
retain still hopes of Calais, the loss whereof occasioned Q. Mary's Death This
Hereditary Right and Hopes of recovering France, makes us as irreconciliable to
the French, as the Spaniards are. The German House of Austria has no such
grudge, or ground of a perpetual and immediate quarrel, against the French; and
therefore is not so fit to join in a league offensive, and defensive with Spain
against the French Kings, as England is: And the Peace of Munster shows that
the German Austrians will forsake the Spanish Austrians sometimes, and that
their Interests may be separated, as relating to France; but the English and
Spanish Interest (in opposition to France) are not separable. Wherefore, if any
shall live to see England Tolerate Catholic Religion, I doubt not but that he
will see a more strict League and Alliance between England and Spain, then ever
has been seen between Spain and Austria; not only by Marriages of the Royal
Families, but much more by a mutual Wedding of each others Interest; and then
we may rationally expect at least Cautionary Towns in Flanders, as convenient
Places for our Retreat, and for a free Passage into France, or rather as
absolute a Donation of the whole Country, as the Archduke Albertus had;
whereas, whilst we continue Protestants, or at least Persecutors, neither will
the Spaniards hear of such a Proposition, nor the Catholic Natives accept of
us, if their Masters would grant it.

The Spaniards understand how interwoven the Interest of their Monarchy is with
ours, in case we gave liberty to Catholics; but think it not policy to trust
us much upon any other Terms, and desire our Conversion, or a Toleration not
only out of Charity, to others, but out of Convenience to themselves; and
therefore they were so earnest with our late King in Spain to renounce his
Protestancy; and some attribute to his aversion against the Catholic
Profession, the breach of the Spanish Match. We see how they sent three
Ambassadors one upon another to demand the late Royal Princess of Orange for
the Prince of Spain, not doubting but that in her tender years, she would have
been brought to be of her intended Spouse his Religion.

We have indeed been most Happy in the Person and Royal Issue of our Virtuous
Queen and Gracious Queen Mother; and yet the French confess they did not that
Favor unto us for any Happiness they wished us, Monsieur de Silbon in his 3.
Book of Policy* Discourse 4 of the Alliance of of Princes, etc. Page 295.
but to compass their own ends, and obtain some advantages of our late King,
when the Passion of love to his beautiful Spouse, made him forget the reasons
he had to be averse from matching in her Family. Our Alliances with Spain are
Conjunctions of both Monarchys against an irreconciliable and common Enemy,
France: They are not only private Contracts between the Married Princes, but
public concerns of their Loyal People: The Puritans always opposed them, for
that they knew Matches with Spain engaged that Monarchy in crossing their
Presbyterian Plots, and designs against our Monarchs. They would not have
presumed to Rebel against Charles the I. had it not been the Interest of the
French King to foment Rebellion against the Lawful Kings of England, and the
English Kings of France? Whereas on the contrary, it is the interest of Spain to
maintain the Right of our Kings, increase their Power, and offer them
Conveniences and help to recover their own in France. We may therefore say
with Truth, that the French King and Ministers seek our Alliance, thereby to
lessen our Power: But the Spaniards, to increase it: We must judge of the
Intentions of Princes, by their Interests, it is the Interest of Spain that
England be Powerful; it is the Interest of the French King to destroy both it,
and that Line which claims a Right to France. We see how much addicted, he and
his Ministers were to the late Usurpers, and Rebels. By their Kindness to
Cromwell and to his Sons, it does appear, they had rather any Line should reign
then the Right. And because our Kings Ancient Right to France (if they did
favor Catholics) would, in all liklihood, give them footing in Normandy, and
Aquitain, some Politians are of opinion that the French Statesmen like well
enough of Protestancy in England. How far their Christianity does incline them
to wish our Kings, and these Kingdoms were Catholic, we cannot tell; but their
Policy and Proceedings seem not show any great Zeal for our Conversion, fearing
perhaps that Popery may make us Popular in France, and put us into a condition
of recovering our own.

To conclude this matter of State, wherein I am engaged against my Will, by the
Impertinency and Importunity of our Adversaries, (pretending that our Cotholick
Religion is disadvantagious to these Kingdoms)* and by reason of the too great
influence such humane considerations as these have upon state Ministers in
their choice and settlement of Divine Worship in Commonwealths; I desire the
Judicious Reader will reflect upon the Situation and Fertility of these
Islands; the honest disposition, and Warlike Genius of the Inhabitants; the
irreconciliable quarrel of the French Kings to ours, the interest of Spain, in
promoting these our Rights; and then, after mature consideration, let him be
Judge, whether any Monarchy in Christendom has such means, and may make such
Friends, to raise it self, without injustice, into a great Empire? And what
great pity it is, that all these means and Friends are rendered unprofitable by
our persecuting the old Faith, and by professing a new Religion, that divides
us at home, makes our Government odious to such as ought to be our Subjects
abroad, and deprives us of the true Friendship and Succors of Spain, whose
interest it is that we were, (or at least did Tolerate) Catholics, and were so
considerable as to gain our own, or (by endeavoring to regain France) were
able to divert the French from invading Spain, Italy, and Flanders.

This is as much as I thought fit (and perhaps more then some will think I
ought) to say, in a matter of this nature. But something must have been
answered to stop the mouths of our politic Controversors, who continually harp
upon this string of reason of state, in their Books against the Roman Catholic
Faith; pretending to demonstrate, that it is inconsistent with the Interest and
Greatness of our Kings, with the Peace and Prosperity of their Subjects.
Therefore leaving this Argument, I will return to that which is more proper for
my profession, and show how manifestly God has confirmed our Catholic Faith,
(and confuted the Protestant persuasion) by Miracles, which are the greatest
Evidence that is consistent with the nature and merit of Christian belief. For
every point wherein Protestants and we differ, I will relate Miracles wrought
in favor of our Doctrine, and our sense of Scripture, against theirs, not
recorded by uncertain or obscure Authors, but by the prime Saints and Doctors
of the Catholic Church, in the Ages wherein they lived.

THE FOVRTH PART. The Roman Catholic Religion in every particular wherein it
differs from the Protestant, confirmed by undeniable Miracles.
SECT. I. That such Miracles as are approved by the Roman Catholic Church in
the Canonization of Saints, are true miracles, and the doctrine which they
confirm, can not be rejected without denying or doubting of Gods Veracity; and
how every Protestant does see true Miracles though he does not reflect upon
them, in confirmation of the Roman Catholic Faith.
BY Miracles approved by the Roman Catholic Church, I understand such Miracles
as induced the said Church to canonize and worship for Saints, the persons by
whose prayers, or relics they were wrought. As for other miracles, though I
know many not mentioned in the Acts, and Processes of Saints Canonizations, are
true, so doubt I not but some vulgarly reported, may be falls; but that is a
thing wholly impertinent to my design, and the dispute against Protestants? It Is
sufficient for my purpose, and their confusion, that some true miracles have
bin and are wrought in confirmation of that Roman Catholic Doctrine, which they
deny, or doubt of, and we believe.

And first we are to know, that no Confessors (Martyrs have a privilege,
Martyrdom it self being a notorious miracle) are canonized, or worshipped by the
Roman Catholic Church, before the Pastors thereof see authentic proofs, of
supernatural miracles wrought by those Confessors, or their Relics. A holy
life and conversation, if not confirmed by supernatural signs, is not
sufficient to canonize a Roman Catholic Saint, because hypocrisy may deceive
all human observation, and outward appearances of morality are no infallible
evidence of the internal acts whereby men are justified, and whereof God alone is
witness and Judge; and therefore before his declaration and approbation of the
persons true sanctity by working undoubted miracles, none can be honored by the
Church as his faithful and beloved servant. In the inquiry, and examination of
witnesses concerning the truth of miracles, the care and caution of the
Bishops, and other officers, is no less then the importance of a matter, wherein
the credit not only of themselves, but of the whole Catholic Church is
concerned; and therefore the quality and capacity of the Jnformers and
Jnquisitors is considered, as well as the nature and circumstances of the
miracle, and the judgment of able Physicians (when it is a cure) demanded,
least some natural accident or art, might pass for a supernatural miracle. And
this not only of late, has bin the practice of the Church, but continualy
since the primitive times, as you may read in St. Austin (Breviar. Collat. di.
2. cap. 14.) who also (de oper. Monach. c. 28.) reprehendeth some vain and
wicked Monks that for filthy lucre carried about falls, or doubtful relics of
Martyrs. But the Church always provided Antidots against such Jmpostures;
witness the 14. Canon of the 5. Council of Carthage against revelations and
Relics not approved of, and St. Gregory the Great in his letters to St.
Augustine our Apostle of England (ep. 9.) And Innocent. 3. in the Council of
Lateran. c. 2.

And if the same be not exactly observed in these British Kingdoms, it must be
attributed to the want of the States permission to the Roman Clergy for
exercising that power which Catholic Canons give them, over such as pretend to
be Miraculists, Prophets, or to have revelations etc. Where the Roman discipline
and doctrine is obeyed, there are officers, or Jnquisitors appointed, whose duty
it is to inquire after, and examine the life, doctrine, and conversation of such
as pretend to have supernatural gifts, and extraordinary illuminations, or to
work miracles, which none dares to allow for true, much less print or publish,
until the fact, and circumstances be maturely examined by the Bishops and their
Divines, or by the Jnquisition. Whefore all these diligences being applied in
so many different and distant places, by indifferent and eminent persons, it is
as impossible the miracles returned by them as authentic, should be
counterfeited, as it is that such men, no way related either among themselves,
or to the person of whose life and conversation they inquire, and inform,
should conspire to discredit and damn themselves for an imposture that can not
be concealed, and whereby they are to expect no benefit, but the loss of their
benefices, dignities, perpetual imprisonment, and infamy. No marvel therefore if
it was never heard that any one miracle related in the process or Bull of any
Saints Canonization, was found to be falls, or as much as contradicted by any
credible Testimony; so wary and circumspect the Church has always bin, as also
the Congregation of Cardinals, and Prelates, to which that charge is committed.

Besides, Perpetual miracles.
some miracles are not only credible by relation and Tradition, but so visible
and permanent even to this day, that they need no proof but eyes and will to
see them. Such are diverse Bodies of Saints preserved from corruption, not by
Egyptian Mummies, or human art, but by divin power. Such is (to omit many
others) that most stupendous miracle of St. Ianuarius Martyr and Bishop of
Beneventum, The miracle of St. Ianuarius at Naples.
whose blood kept in a Vial of glass at Naples, is congealed, and looks dull
and dry like earth; This miracle failed once when it was showed privately to a
young english Lord, and this failing was printed in the Italian Gazets as very
strange news.
but when in the festival of the Saint (or at other times) it is carried in
procession, or laid on the Altar at Mass together with the head, it is
liquified and dissolved in such sort, that it seems to boil, and assume a
lively and fresh color. This happens every year, and never fails but when
some great and general calamity does immediately ensue, and fall upon the City
and Kingdom of Naples. By this permanent miracle, which every Protestant
Traveller may see, is confirmed our Roman Catholic Religion in general, and in
particular the Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, prayer to Saints, and
the worship of their Relics.

Other miracles there are so credible (in regard of the Testimony and Tradition
whereby they are delivered to us, and of other remarkable circumstances) that no
man in his wits can deny the fact, though Protestants dispute the power,
whether it was a divin, The famous and undeniable miracle of St* Francis
Xaverius wrought in the person of Marcello Mastrilli.
or diabolical. But when the miracle exceeds the Devils power, then they are
puzzeld, and troubled. As for example, Father Marcello Mastrilli a noble man by
birth, and a Jesuit by profession, was struck in the temples of the head by a
weighty hammer that fell from a great height, and in that condition was carried
from the work, whereof he was Overseer, to his bed; where he lay without sens or
motion for some days, until the hour of his approaching death, to the great
grief of all the nobility of Naples his friends, and relations, who came to the
Jesuits College of that City to see this sad spectacle, and the next day to
the Church to assist at his funeral, the Altars having bin the night before
covered with black, for that his brethren were to say the mass of the dead for
his soul, after that the Physicians, and Chyrurgions had given him over, and
judged he would expire before the next morning. Some noble men who came early
to the College (rather to pray for his soul, then to inquire of his health)
were surprised to see him saying Mass at the Altar, and could not credit their
eyes, until they were informed of the admirable means whereby he was rather
revived then recovered. The manner was this.

Jn the dead of the night the Fathers that watched with ^ying Mastrilli,
observed, that he not only moved, and turned toward the wall, but heard him
speak; whereat they were astonished; a little after he sat up in his bed, called
for his clothes, pen and ink; Then he writ with his own hand, how, at that
instant St. Francis Xaverius Apostle of India, China, I^pan etc. and one of the
first Companions of St. Ignatius, Founder of the Jesuits, had appeared to him
in a pilgrims habit, but very glorious, and calling him by his name, asked
whether he desired to live, and go preach the Roman Catholic Religion to
Japan, as he had formerly promised, but could not persuade the Superiors to
send him, he being of a weak constitution, unfit for that labor, and voyage.
Marcello answered, that he resigned himself wholly into Gods hands, to do what
was most for his divin glory. Xaverius then told him, it was Gods will he
should go to Iapan, and shed his blood for his divin faith in that Country, a
greater favor (said the Saint) then J deserved, after all my travels and pains.
Then he bid Marcello apply the Relics he had about his neck (which were of
the Holy Cross, and of St. Xaverius himself) to his fore; he obeyed; but the
Saint told him he mistook the place, and with his own hand applied them to the
contrary side of his head, and suddenly was cured, having first repeated after
the Saint a vow of going to Iapan; they who watch't, heard Marcellus his words,
but not any others. They ran to acquaint Father Vincentius Caraffa the late
General of the Jesuits, who was then but Superior or spiritual Prefect of their
house in Naples, and found that holy man upon his knees at his prayers, but
seemed not to be surprised with the news they brought him: whence many
concluded that God had revealed the matter to him before their coming; and
granted health to Marcello at Caraffas request: He was indeed a person of
extraordinary sanctity, as his life and death witness, I was at Lis^on when
this holy Martyr embarcke there for the East Indy, in order to his further
navigation to Japan, some 30. year since* and I heard Marcello relate his own
miraculous cure; and do remember what str^ving there was between Passengers,
and Merchants to ship their goods and persons in the same vessel wherein
Marcello was to embark not doubting of its safe arrival at Go^; so satisfied
were all sorts of people of the truth of the miracle, and of the accomplishment
of his Martyrdom in Iapa^, revealed to him by St. Xaverius.
and had always a great care of Marcellos progress in virtue. Immediately after
this miraculous cure, he began his long Journey, and being respected as a
living Martyr by all the Princes of Italy, by the King of Spain, Viceroys of
Portugal and of the Jndies etc. he arrived at length at Iapan, and there
suffered a most cruel death, and glorious Martyrdom, as St. Xaverius had told
him, whereof and of his miracles and Prophesies there are diverse Books written,
and many witnesses living.

What can Protestants object against this miracle? will they deny the fact? Thy
dare not question the Testimony of a whole Kingdom and City, or of so many
persons of quality and integrity, eye witnesses thereof. Will they attribute the
cure to the power of the Devil? his power does not reach so far as to deaths
doors; at least he must have more time then was in this case, to recall men
from thence, and restore them to perfect health. Will they attribute the
prophecy of Mastrillos Martyrdom in Japan to the Jesuits craft, and
presumption, grounded upon hopes and conjectures? They have more wit then to
pretend and publish a prophetical assurance of a thing subject to so many
uncertainties as the infallible performance of so great a Task, and so tedious
and dangerous a navigation, by a person of so weak a constitution as Marcello,
whose design (if it were human) might have bin frustrated by as many casualites
and changes of diet, Climat, etc. as every where occurr in that space of time
which is spent before men arrive from Europe to the Antipodes. What if Father
Mastrilli had perished by the way? Jn what a condition would himself and the
Jesuits have been, who gave out so confidently that he would be put to death in
Japan, according to St. Francis Xaverius his revelation? Js it credible they
would venture the credit of their order, and that reputation of integrity which
they have gained in the Catholic world, upon a mere conjecture, and
contingency, and without any necessity of thus playing the Prophet? This
evidence does vex peevish Presbyterians, but they must have patience, and
confess that the Jesuits are not limbs of Antichrist, nor those horns of the
Beast wherewith Ministers fool their flocks, and feed themselves: God would
never raise from deaths doors such Jmpostors (as Protestants pretend the Jesuits
are) and command them to go preach their doctrine (if falls) to so many remote
Nations, Whitak de Ecclesia page 349. Bp. Laud against Fisher page 108. Calvin
Harm. in Marc. cap. 13. p. 302. miracula sigilla sunt verae doctrinae. Nam quis
vel cogit and absque blasphemia, Deu^ commodaturum suam propriam vim
virtutemque mendacio? Chamier tom. 2. Controv. lib. 16. cap. 14 p. 677. Gods
veracity questioned by Protestants, when they answer to the argument deduced
from Roman Catholic miracles. A demonstration to prove that God can not permit
true true miracles to confirm falls doctrine.
nor countenance their Missioners, and Missions with this and many other
miracles wrought to confute protestancy, and to confirm our Catholic doctrine.

Though the Magdeburgian Century writers (having reliued in every one of the
first eleven ages cap. 13. many Popish miracles (as they call them) and not
being able to deny the fact) say (as the Pharisees did of our Saviors
miracles) that they were either fables, or wrought by the power of Beelzebub,
and lying signs whereby the superstition and Idolatry of Popery was confirmed:
yet our English Protestants (for the most part) condemn these Germans for this
sottish answer, but themselves give another as little satisfactory. Both their
ancient and modern writers (being ashamed to deny the reality of our miracles,
or the supernaturality of the power whereby they are wrought) say, that true
miracles are not of force to prove true doctrine, because they are neither
infallible, nor inseparable marks of truth. Jn which rash assertion they
contradict not only their learned Brethren Calvin, Chamier, and others, but
call in question Gods veracity, and maintain the lawfulnes of heresy, and
infidelity. For, the perfection of veracity (even in men, much more in God) is
not a sole inclination of speaking always truth, but includes such an aversion
to lying, (and by consequence to all unnecessary equivocation) that he who is
perfectly verax, or a man of truth, can not without violating that virtue, as
much as seem to countenance or color error, and falsehood with the least sign
of his approbation; much less can God make errors and falsehood credible by
miracles, or by such an appearance of truth as may not only excuse the mistake
of prudent and learned persons, but oblige them in conscience to mistake.

That there is no necessity for God to work miracles in confirmation of errors
and falls doctrine, is granted by our Adversaries; and by consequence they must
also grant that he can not use that kind of Equivocation. To say that he may
work true miracles in confirmation of a falsehood, thereby to exercise and show
an absolut power over us his creatures, is as much as to say, he may exercise
his power against his own inclination to truth, and thereby destroy himself by
violating his veracity. Besides; though we should suppose this absurdity and
contradiction, that God can work a miracle to confirm error, or falsehood, and
yet himself by such a supernatural action (which involves his inclination) not
be inclined to that error, or falsehood, though I say this absurdity and
contradiction were supposed, yet can it not be denied but that by such a
miracle, at least we rational Creatures would be inclined to error and
falsehood; But he who loves truth, (especialy if he loves it infinitely, as God
does) can no more incline others to error, and falsehood, then he can incline
himself thereunto, because he loves truth for it self, and because it is truth,
and by consequence (truth being always the same) he must love it in others as
well as in himself; and therefore can as little incline others (by working
miracles) to error and falsehood, as himself can be inclined to error and
falsehood.

That men are not only inclined, but obliged in conscience to believe
whatsoever they see confirmed by a true miracle, is evident by these Texts of
Scripture, Joan. 15.24. Matthew. 11.^^.
Had not I don among them the works which no other man did, they had not
sinned. Woe be to thee Corozain, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for had the miracles
don among you, bin wrought in Tyrus, and Sidon, they had long since don
penance in sackcloth and ashes. Joan. 10.^^.38.
The works which I have don in my Fathers name, bear witness of me. And,
though you believe not me, Joan. ^.^^.
believe my works. And again, We know that thou art a Teacher come from God,
for no man could do these miracles thou do, except God were with him. And the
reason why miracles oblige us in conscience to believe the doctrine by them
confirmed, is, because they are a sufficient and moral evidence of Gods
authority, and (as it were) the great Seal wherewith he warrants his Ministers
and the Church, to preach, and propose his doctrine, and Commands. Now if he
could put this seal to any falls doctrine, or thereby authorize an erroneous
Church, men might prudently doubt whether he does not do so now de facto, and
in every particular; but with such a prudent doubt none is bound to obey any
Church authority and by consequence there could be no obstinacy, heresy, or
infidelity against Gods revelations, and veracity, how ever so authentickly and
sufficiently proposed by miracles, which are the signs and badges of divin
authority, and the most authentic marks of the true Church.

To that ordinary objection of Antichrists miracles which (though falls and
feigned) yet will seem so true to many, that most of the world will be seduced,
we answer. 1. That there will be an apparent difference between Antichristian
and our Catholic miracles, though for want of due reflection, prudence and
piety, men will not consider the difference, nor compare his miracles with
ours. 2. Christ's words and warning of Antichrists feigned miracles, is a
sufficient evidence of their falsehood, because we must not credit our selves, or
any outward appearances, against the express words of Christ. This is the
reason why in the Sacrament of the Altar we are not deceived by the Species or
appearance of bread and wine.

Though there were no other argument that Antichrists miracles are falls, but
this, Anti Christ's Miracles are not credible if compared with ours.
that the miracles of the Church both in the old and new Testament, are first,
and that we have a Caveat to beware of such miracles and miraculists as shall
come afterward to confirm contrary doctrine, whosoever is moved by Antichrist
or his forerunners, to forsake the ancient faith and signs of the Church, for
novelties how ever so plausibly or prodigiously confirmed, deserve damnation.
For, there are two qualities that oblige men in reason and conscience, to
prefer one thing before another, how ever equal they both may seem to be in
other respects; 1. priority of time. 2. present possession. We see what
privileges and prerogatives are given by the law of nature and Nations, to
such as are antienter by birth, or nobility, then others* and how possession is
said to be eleven points of the law. These qualities are most properly found in
our Roman Catholic doctrine; it is most ancient, and always has had the
precedence of all pretended Reformations, both in time, and in the possession
of the hearts of the faithful. The same we say of our Catholic miracles.
Therefore we ought to prefer them before any others that shall appear
afterward in opposition to them.

Of visible miracles seen thought not observed, by every Protestant, in
confirmation of our Roman faith.

The difference between true and falls miracles.


Besides, those miracle so credibly reported that no man can deny them without
being guilty of obstinacy, and rashness; and besides those others continualy
visible, as that of St. Januarius; there is an other kind of true miracles seen
(but not observed) by every Protestant, upon which if they did reflect, as many
of them as mean well, would become Roman Catholics.

The difference between true and falls miracles, is, that true miracles are
works besides or against the order of nature, and of secundary causes, and
therefore may be don only by the divin power; as to receive the dead, to cure
diseases of the body, and distempers of the mind, without the application of
any natural means, or remedys. And because the Devil has less power over souls
then over bodies, the cure of a distemper of the mind, whereof no natural cause
appears, is a greater and more authentic miracle, then any cure of the body
how ever so prodidious. Falls miracles are only such as may be don by the
application of natural causes, and remedies; as that of Vespasianus, of whom
Suetonius recounts that he restored sight to a blind man, and the use of his
feet to a lame man: But Cornelius Tacitus does acknowledge (lib. 4. Hist.) that
the Physicians being consulted, did answer, those diseases were not incurable;
and Tertullian (in Apologetico cap. 22.) says that both the disease and the
cure was a work of the Devil. Antichrists miracles also will be such as as*
may be don by the course and concurrence of natural causes.

That miracles don upon men's minds are greater then any ^^res, or changes
wrought upon the body, St. Bernard in vita St. Malac. c. 57.
is granted by our Adversaries; and St. Bernard recounts as one of the greatest
miracles of St. Malac^ius, that he converted, an obstinat soul to recant his
opinion against the real presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament. And for the
most remarkable miracle of St. Bernard himself, it is recorded, how with the
blessed Sacrament in his hand, he did so terrify William the proud Duke of
Aquitain, that he fell prostrate at his feet; and he whom the most powerf^ll
Monarchs of Christendom could not rule, submitted himself to the disposal of a
poor Monk, because he threatened him with that which in appearance seemed to be,
and Protestants hold to ^e no more in reality, or in substance, then a wafer
cake. These things supposed as undeniable in Philosophy and Divinity, it may be
easily proved, that every Protestant does, or at least may see, true miracles
in confirmation of our Roman Catholic ^aith. For, without question it is
either a miracle of God, or of the Devil, that all the Roman Catholics (not
only now, but) for so many ages past, should (contrary (...) the evidence of
sense, and to our natural inclination of judging according to that evidence)
adore for our Savior JESUS Christ, that which in appearance is but a wafer
cake, or a Cup of wine* We are either abused, and seduced by Satan, or
inspired and enabled by the Holy Ghost, to contradict our senses; which
contradiction being in a matter so long and so much controverted in public
schools, and general Counsels, and a thing whereupon depends our Salvation, we
can not ^e presumed (if we err) that we err for want of examining, and
comparing the reasons of both sides, Catholic, and Protestant: especialy if we
consider the number, learning, and integrity of the Roman Catholic Examiners,
and the great difficulty which they (as well as all other men) find, in
believing or judging against the evidence of sense, and in denying that to be
bread, or wine, which does smell, look, taste, feel, and feed like bread and
wine. Now if we prove that this mavelous and unanimous contradiction of our
senses can not be a miracle of the Devil, protestants must grant it is a
miracle of God; and from thence may conclude what censure themselves deserve
for being obstinat against our doctrine, and for running with the appearance of
sense against the express words of Scripture, confirmed by so supernatural and
visible a miracle as our not condescending, or assenting to that evidence which
we (as men) are naturaly inclined to follow.

It is an undoubted Maxim wherein both Catholics and protestants agree, that
God only can work upon the soul (while it is in the body) immediately, without
the help of our senses, or without making impressions upon the Organs thereof.
The Devil can not suggest or convey heretical opinions into our minds
otherwise then by so tempering the objects, and tampering with our senses, that
the soul does wilfully, though unwarily, embrace deceitful appearances for
real truths. His whole power and art consists in humoring the soul in its
mistake of these sensual appearances, and allurements, making them to seem
unquestionable evidences; for it would quite destroy his drift, and spoil his
market, if the soul did suspect a fallacy, or at least reflect upon the vanity
of sensual objects, and appearances. Wherefore he always inculcats that the best
rule in matters of faith, is, not to contradict or contemn (upon any score
whatsoever) the experiments and appearances of sense.

Even in Paradise before man's soul was wounded and weakened, he attemped, and
compassed the fall of our first Parents by a fallacy, grounded upon the
evidence or appearance of their senses against Gods word, and warning; God told
them they should dye if they did eat of the forbidden fruit; but by the sight
and taste of the forbidden fruit, the Devil wrought so upon their souls, that
they believed him and their senses, and preferred that fallacious evidence
before Gods express word. And if Satan prevailed with them in the state of
innocence to judge of divin revelations rather by their own senses, then by the
literal sense of Gods word, how unlikely is it that after such success he will
tempt their posterity in a contrary manner? or that he will suggest to men,
that they ought not to believe their eyes and senses in the Controversy of
Transubstantiation; but rather rely upon the litteral sense* of Christ's words,
This is my Body? Seeing therefore it is a strange and singular miracle, that so
many pious and learned men of different tempers, interests, times, and Nations,
after so frequent and serious debates, in a matter whereupon depends their
eternal happiness, should (without any present, or prudent advantage or
allurement) resolve to contradict their own senses, and curb their nature, and
inclinations of judging according to their sight, taste, etc. and that this
great miracle can not be attributed to the Devil, whose suggestions and
impressions reach not the soul, unless they be conveyed through our senses, and
our selves consent to the sensual solicitations, and appearances wherewith
Satan does assault, and allure us; it follows, that our Roman Catholic
resistance, and resolution of not condescending to those solicitations, and of
not crediting such appearances, must be a miracle of God, and the effect of his
supernatural grace, not of the Devil, or of any natural power of our own. So
that our adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, and our belief of
Transubstantiation (which are the things Protestants most except against in the
Catholic Religion) if they reflect upon them, will be found to be supernatural
miracles, and convincing motives for their Conversion to our Roman Catholic
Faith.

Let Protestants number also the particular doctrins wherein they differ from
Roman Catholics, and observe how our belief and practice in such particulars
go against sensual appearances and pervers inclinations, and they will find we
have as many visible miracles as there are doctrinal and practical differences
in our Church from Protestancy.

To these may be added the general signs or marks of the Church, as our unity
in faith, the continuance, and universality of our doctrine, our Apostolical
succession, our conversion of Nations to Christianity etc. No Protestant can
rationaly deny that every one of these is a visible and supernatural miracle,
which can be as little attributed to human industry, as to chance, or fate; For
if they might, how comes it to pass that not one of these signs, can or could
ever be found in any other Congregation of Christians but ours? This much I
thought fit to say, not to satisfy the curiosity, but the conscience, of them
who desire to see any one undeniable miracle that favors Popery. And albeit any
one true miracle does confirm the whole doctrine of our Roman Church, yet J will
set down more then one for confirmation of most particulars wherein we differ
from Protestants; and begin with what we have in hand, concerning
Transubstantiation, and the adoration of Christ in the Sacrament; which our
Adversaries pretend to be a kind of Idolatry; for that our selves confess the
Species or accidents of bread and wine do remain, See Belarmin de Ecclesia lib.
4. cap. 29.
and they are creatures by us adored together with Christ. Our common and
constant answer (whereunto no reply can be given) is, that we adore the Species
no more (when we adore Christ in the Sacrament) then the Apostles, and others
who conversed with him upon earth, adored his cloak, or clothes, when they
adored himself!

SECT. II. Of true miracles related in the Ecclesiastical Histories by men of
greatest authority in every age, to confirm the particular mysteries of our
Catholic faith, and that sense of Scripture, wherein Roman Catholics differ
from Protestants.
THere is not any thing so evident which is not questioned by obstinate and
interested persons. The Protestant layty (in regard of their education) are
fixed in the maintenance of Protestancy, the clergy are interested, because it
is their livelihood. Let Catholic miracles be never so visible, or credibly
reported, Protestants look upon them as mistakes; and that can be for no other
reason, but because themselves are settled in a prejudice against the doctrine of
the Church of Rome. The Authors that relate Popish miracles are credited in all
other matters, and esteemed ^udicious persons; but when they come to that
point, they must needs loos their wits, or be judged Jmpostors. To avoid this
Cavil, or confute the Calumny, J have fixed upon Authors whose wisdom and
integrity has never hitherto bin called in question, even in points of
doctrine, and the sole denial of whose Testimony, is held to be a sufficient
evidence of heresy, or foolery in the person that contradicts it, and of
weakness in the cause that can not be maintained without so unreasonable a
contradiction. And seeing they are credited in matters of faith, J hope they
deserve credit in matters of fact.

Of miracles related by St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Austin, St
Nylus, St. Cyprian the Martyr, St. Gregory the great, St. Optatus, and others,
in confirmation of Transubstantiation, Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament,
the Sacrifice of the Mass, Communion under one Kind, Prayer for the Dead, and
Purgatory.
A Certain venerable old man (says St. Chrysostom) to whom many Mysteries were
revealed by God, told, St. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio lib. 6. cap 4. Adoration
of the Blessed Sacrament.
that in time of Sacrifice he once beheld a multitude of Angels with shining
garments, compassing the Altar with bowed heads, as soldiers do in presence of
their King. Which attendance of Angels (says he in the next words before) was
performed by Angels at that wonderful table, and compassed it about with
reverence, in honor of him that lies thereon.

St. Nilus in ep. ad Anastasium. St. Gregory Naz. Orat. 11. de obit^ Gorgonia.
St. Nilus relates how St. Chrysostom almost every day had visions of Angels
assisting and adoring the Blessed Sacrament until the Sacrifice was finished.

St. Gregory Nazianzen recounts how his sister Gorgonia was cured of a diseas
after she was past all hopes of recovery, by prostrating her self before the
Altar, and calling upon him who was honored and worshipped thereupon. O
admirable thing! (says he) she presently felt herself delivered from her
sickness, and so she returned eased both in body and mind etc.

St. Cyprian. in sermon. de lapsis. Post medium. Communion under one Kind.
Evagrius Orthodoxus. lib. 4. c. 35. an. Dom. 552 A miracle for the Communion
under one Kind.
St. Cyprian reports of a certain woman, who (says he) when she would with
unworthy hands have opened her coffer wherein was (retained according to the
ancient custom the Blessed Sacrament under the Species of bread) the holy thing
of our Lord, fire did spring up, whereby she was so terrified, that she durst
not touch it.

In the Ecclesiastical History is recorded this example which Evagrius writ as
a thing notorious, and don in his own time. In the time of the Patriarch Menas
(says he^) there happned a miracle worthy to be remembered. It was an ancient
custom in Constantinople when many parcels of the pure and unspotted body of
Christ our God were remaining after Communion, little Children were called out
of the Schools, and were permitted to eat them. It happened, that a little boy
(whose father was a Jew by profession, and a maker of glass by his trade) being
among the rest, did eat also his share of the aforesaid reversion of the
Blessed Sacrament, but coming somewhat late home, and his parents demanding the
cause, the child told innocently what he had don; which the Jew his Father
understanding, he was so enraged, that unawares to his wife, he cast his little
son into the burning oven wherein he used to melt and frame his glass. The
mother missing the Child, sought for him for three days together, but hearing
no news of him abroad, she returned home with an heavy heart, and sitting down
at the workhouse door, she began to bewail the los of her son, calling him by
his name; the boy hearing and knowing his mothers call, did answer within the
oven; whereat the woman starting, burst the workhouse door, and rushing in,
espied her Child standing amidst the Coals without receiving any harm. After
coming out, being demanded how he escaped burning so long, a woman, said he,
came oftentimes unto me, and brought me water to quench the force of the fire,
wherewith I was environed, and withal gave me meat as often as I was hungry.
This accident being told unto the Emperor Justinian, he caused the mother and
boy to be baptized, which because the obstinat father refused to yield unto, by
the Emperors commandment he was hanged upon a Gibet. This and the former
example of St. Cyprian, show that God is not displeased with receiving the
Communion under one Kind; and that it was a thing indifferent in the primitive
Church.

To Confirm the Catholic belief of Transubstantiation, Transubstantiation.
Petrus Diac. and Joan Diac. in vita^. Gregorij: Gui^mu^dus Anersanns Episc. lib
3. de Sacram. Euch. St Antonin. in Chron. p. 2. cap. 3. tit. 12.. 8.
and the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Blessed Sacrament,
there are very many miracles recounted in the Ecclesiastical History, as that
of St. Gregory the great, who perceiving that a Roman Matron laughed at the time
she was to receive the Communion, and demanding the cause of her laughter, at
so unseasonable a time; she answered she could not but laugh to hear him call
the bread which her self had made, the Body of Christ. (She used to present the
Saint every week with Mass breads) St. Gregory upon this turned himself to the
Altar, and laying the Blessed Sacrament thereupon wished all the people to pray
with him, that God would be pleased for the confirmation of the Catholic
faith, to show unto the corporal eyes of all that were there present, that what
the woman took for bread, was no bread, but flesh. And accordingly the
consecrated Host appeared visibly to be pure flesh. Then beseeching God to
restore the Sacrament to the former show of bread, it forthwith appeared as it
was at first, and the woman acknowledging her error, received it with humble
and servent devotion.

Primat Usher is the only writer I ever read, Primat Vshers falsification^ to
discredit this story, and the following.
who questioned the truth of this story, but quotes not any one Author, besides
himself, that ever doubted thereof; and to make it seem the more improbable,
falsifies the Text of Ioannes Diaconus, pretending he says that the Roman
Matron found the Sacramental bread turned into the fashion of a fingar, all
bloody; whereas Joannes Diaconus only says it was turned into flesh. Answer
page 69.
The same insincere dealing he uses in discrediting the relation of Paschasius
Radbertus, and diverse others, concerning a miracle to confirm the same mystery,
assuring the ignorant Readers, that Paschasius takes it out of Gesta Anglorum,
Usher Answer page 69 Particulam carnis quam super Altar posuera^, ca^nem
factam reperit. Joan. Diac. in vita S. Gregor. lib. 2. cap. 41. Usher in his
Catalogue of Authors Usher Answer paeg. 77. Doctor Humphrey in Iesuitismi part.
2. ^at. 5. page 5.
whereas it is well known, and Mr. Usher confesses else where, that Malmsbury
who writ Gesta Anglorum, lived almost 300. years after Paschasius.

To discredit the doctrine of Transubstantiation as well as the authority of
that holy and most learned man Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury, who lived
in Berengarius his time, and confuted his heresy with convincing arguments from
Scripture, Fathers, and undeniable Miracles; Primat Usher says Lanfranc was the
first that leavened the Church of England with this corrupt doctrine of the
carnal presence. But his own Protestant Brethren tell him he is mistaken, and
that Transubstantiation is as ancient in the English Church as Cristianity; it
being taught by St. Austin the Monk and Apostle of England. Let us hear
Lanfranc speak for himself against Usher, as well as against Berengarius; None,
says he, though but meanly versed in Ecclesiastical History, or the holy
Fathers, is ignorant, how God has confirmed the Catholic doctrine against
Berengarius with many miracles. Which writings of Ecclesiastical History and
Fathers (says Lanfranc) though they arrive not to that most excellent height
of authority that we give to Scripture, yet are they sufficient to prove that
this faith which we (...) profess, has bin the same with that which all
faithful who went before us held from ancient times.

When this heresy of Berengarius was again revived by Wicleff, and the
Lollards, in England, our learned Country man Thomas Waldensis, who lived in
those times, tells us, how God confirmed the doctrine of the real presence, and
Transubstantiation in that Kingdom with manifest miracles, and of some he was
an eye witness. Let us relate, says he, Thomas Waldensis Tom. 2. de Sacram.
Eui char. c. 62.
to the glory of God, what happened in our own time and knowledge. In Norfolk
there dyed lately a devout and godly maid, called of the vulgar sort Joan
Meateless, because she was known never to have tasted any meat or drink, for
the space of fiveteen years together, except only the B. Sacrament of the
Altar, which she received with great devotion, and with extraordinary Joy and
Iubily of mind every Sunday. And which was most admirable, she was able to find
out one only consecrated Host amongst a thousand that were not consecrated.
Thus he: and without doubt this last was no less a miracle then the former;
because the consecrating of one Host among many depends upon the intention, and
inward determination of the Consecrator, which none but God can know. But from
Norfolk let us pass to London.

I will now relate a story (says Waldensis) whereof I my self was an eye
witness in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London, where the venerable
Archbishop Thomas Arundell of happy memory (the son and Brother to an Earl)
sat in Judgment in his Bishops chair, assisted by Alexander the Prelat of the
Church of Norwich, and others. At which time he propounded certain
Interrogatories concerning the faith of the Eucharist unto a Tailor of the
parts of Worcestershire, taken in the crime of heresy; but when as the obstinat
fellow could not be persuaded by any reason to embrace the right faith, nor
would believe, nor call the consecrated Host any other thing but only holy
bread, he was at last commanded to worship the said Host, but the Blasphemous
heretic answering said, verily a Spider is more worthy to be worshipped then
it is, when behold a Monstrous horrible Spider came sudenly sliding down by her
thread from the top of the Church directly unto the blaspemers mouth, and
endeavored very busily to get entrance even as he was speaking the words;
neither without much adoo could the many hands of the standers by keep her from
entering into the wretch whether he would or no. Thomas Duke of Oxford and
Chancellor of the Realm was there present, and saw this wonder. Then the
Archbishop stood up, and declared to all that were present, that the revenging
hand of God had denounced the man to be a blasphemer.

Harpsfeild in Hist. Wicleff. cap. 18. ex Waldens. and Regist. Arundell.
Harpsfeild relates the same miracle out of the Register of Archbishop
Arundell; but we may doubt whether that old Register was not reformed as well
as the old Religion, by the Protestant Prelates. Such clear evidences are seldom
preserved entire by the enemies of truth. We see how frequently the very law
books and ancient English statuts are corrupted by our English Protestants, to
favor the Kings spiritual supremacy, as is largely proved by Persons against
Sir Edward Cook, and Bishop Morton, in a particular book against Cook, and in
his Sober and quiet Reckoning with Thomas Morton: wherein he discovers the
unworthy practices of Justice Cook, See Parsons sober Reckoning a page 508.

How Protestants falsify and corrupt the very statuts, and law Books.


and others falsifying the Charters of our ancient Kings etc. As for example
that of King K^nulphus, pleaded by Humphry Stafford Duke of Buckingham. 1.
Henry 7. for the sanctuary of the Monastery of Abindon; which as it is printed
by Pinson in Catholic times, says, that Leo then Pope did grant the said
immunities and privileges etc. and is yet so read in the Lord Brooks Abridgment
tit. Corone; pl. 129. But since King Henry 8. spiritual Headship, Pope Leo has
bin left out in most printed Statuts, and Judge Cook quotes them so corrupted,
as good evidence against the Bishop of Romes jurisdiction, pretending that the
Kings, and not the Popes, gave spiritual jurisdictions and immunities.

Optatus Melevitanus l. 2 contra Donatistas.
St. Optatus Bishop who lived before St. Austin the Doctor, relates how the
Donatists (to vex the Catholics who did worship the Blessed Sacrament) cast
the consecrated Hosts to their dogs. But they escaped not Gods heavy Judgment;
for, the raging dogs with revenging teeth (says Optatus) tore their own
Masters in pieces, as if they had bin strangers and enemies; yea as if they had
known them to be thieves, and men guilty of our Lords Body.

Miracles of the Mass. Perrexit vnus, obtulit ibi Sacrificiu^ Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi, ^rans quantum potuit, vt cessare^ illa ^exatio, Deoque
protinus mis^rant^ cessavit. Aug. de Civitate Dei l. 22 c. 28. Theodorus lector
lib. 2. Coll^ctaneo^rum.

ST. Austin reports of his own time and Country, how that one Hesperius
having his house infested with wicked Spirits, to the affliction of his beasts
and servants, desired (says St. Austin) in my absence certain of our Priests,
that some would go thither etc. one went and offered (says he) there the
Sacrifice of the Body and blood of Christ, praying what he might that the
vexation might cease, and God being thereupon merciful, it ceased.

The like miracle does Theodorus (who lived in the fifth Century) write
happened to Coades King of Persia, who being desirous to enter into a Castle
placed in the confines of his Kingdom toward India, was hindered by many wicked
spirits which haunted the said Fortress; and notwithstanding that as well the
Persian Sorcerers, as also those of the Jews, had employed all their magic
art, yet could not entrance be obtained. At last a christian Bishop was called
upon, who with once saying Mass, and making the sign of the Cross, put
forthwith to flight the infernal powers, and delivered up the Castle to the
King free from all molestation.

Miracles for Purgatory.
ST. Gregory the Great tells of a Monk called Justus, Purgatory and Prayer
for the Dead. St. Gregory l. 4. Moral* c. 55.
who (says he) was obsequious to me, and watched with me in my daily sickness:
this man being dead, I appointed the healthful Host to be offered for his
absolution thirty days together, which don, the said Justus appeared to his
Brother by vision, and said, J have bin hitherto evil, but now am well etc. And
the Brethren in the Monastery counting the days, found that to be the day on
which the thirtith oblation was offered for him.

The same St. Gregory writes how Paschasius Deacon of the Roman Church was
tormented with the pains of Purgatory after St. Gregory 4. Dial. 40.
death for having adhered until near his death, Miracles wrought by St. Bernard
to confirm every point of the Roman Catholic doctrine. Gofrid. in vi^. S. Bern.
lib. 3. c* 5. and 6. Willelmus Abbas St Nicodorici Remensis l. 1. c. 10.
Bernardus Abbas Banevallis.
unto Laurence the Schismatic, but at length was delivered from those pains by
the prayers of St. German Bp. of Capua.

We will not her detain the Reader with more particulars; but confirm the whole
bulk of our Roman Catholic Doctrine with the undeniable miracles of St.
Bernard, (a known Papist) against the Petrobrusians, Henricians, and
Apostolici, whom Protestants claim as members of their own Church, for denying
the real presence, sacrifice of the Mass, extreme unction, Purgatory, prayer
for the dead, prayer to Saints, the Popes authority, worship of Images,
Indulgences etc. Against these heretics St. Bernard was commanded by the Pope
to preach and accompany his legate Cardinal Albericus to the Country of Tolosa,
where he wrought innumerable miracles to confute, and confound the aforesaid
Heretics, as may be seen in the writers of those times in so much that the
Saint in his return declined all Common roads, to avoid the multitudes of
people that flockt to reverence him as an Apostle: See the Centurists Centur.
12. col. 1634.1635. and 1649. alleging St. Bernard giving Testimony of his own
miracles.
Though afterward in his 241. Epistle to the Tolosians he says (to keep them
constant to the truth, as St. Paul did to the Thessalonians) we thank God for
that our coming to you was not in vain, our stay indeed was short with you, but
not unfruitful, the truth being by us made manifest (non solum in sermon, sed
etiam in virtute) not only by preaching but also by power (of working
miracles*) the wolves are deprehended etc.

Of all St. Bernards miracles J will mention but one which Godefridus relates
as an eye witness, and could not without known discovery and discredit have
then reported a matter so public, and of such importance, with so great
variety of particular circumstances, had the thing bin untrue. There is (says
this Author) a place in the Country of Tolosa called Sarlatum, where, as the
Sermon was don, they offered to the servant of God (as every where the use was)
many loaves to bless, which by lifting up his hand, and making the sign of the
Cross, in Gods name blessing, he said thus: Jn this you shall know that these
things are true, which we, and that those other are falls, Osiander in Epit.
Cent. 12. l 4. c. 6. page 310. says of St. Bernard, miracula ei prope infinita
a Pontificiis scriptoribus affinguntur, quae ego partim ab otiosis Monachis
excogitata puto, partim permissione Dei praestigijs Satani^is effecta existimo*
non quod Sanctu^ Bernardum magum fuisse putem, sed quod vero simile sit Satanam
talia miracula effecisse etc. Tales fuisse puto St. Bernardi visiones and post
morte^ suam apparitiones, praestigias videlicet diabolicas, quibus Satan and
ipsi Sancto Bernardo (dum viveret) and aliis illusit. Whitaker de Ecclesia page
369. ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse sanctu^ existimo. Adomnem progressum
atque promotum, ad omnem aditum and exitum, ad vestitum and calceatum, ad
lavacra, ad mensa^, ad lumina and cubilia, quaecumque nos conversatio exercet,
frontem Crucis signaculo ^erimus, cujus disciplinae si legem expostules
scripturam nulla^ invenies: traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix, consuetudo
confirmatrix, fides observatrix. Tertull. de Corona Militis c. 3. and 4. Cyril.
Hiero. Catech. 13. S. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. and 25.
which the Heretics labor to persuade you etc. And whosoever they be (of your
diseased persons) that taste the loaves, they shall be healed, that you may know
us to be true Ministers of God. Ganfredus Carotensis, a Bishop, who stood by,
added, if they take it with a good faith, they will be healed; St. Bernard
sudenly replied, I do not say so, but whosoever will taste of them will be
healed, to the end they may know we are true and sincere ministers of God. And
so huge a multitude of diseased persons recovered by tasting the same bread,
that over all the Country this was divulged etc.

Here we see first: How St. Bernard took those people to be heretics, and
calls them wolves according to the phrase of the Gospel, because they denied
the very same doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church that Protestants do deny;
as the real presence, and Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Popes supremacy,
prayer to Saints, worship of Images, Indulgences etc. We see how God declared
by true miracles that the Saint was not mistaken in censuring them as
heretics, and by consequence all who obstinatly maintain the same opinions
which they did, to be of the same stamp. Osiander a learned Protestant says,
that though he takes not St. Bernard for a Conjurer, but rather for a holy man,
and honors him as a Saint, yet he thinks his miracles were don by the Devil.
And though this evasion be most absurd, and unworthy either a Scholar, or a
Christian, yet is it the common and best plea of Protestants against such
evidences. J say the answer is most absurd. 1. for that St. Bernards miracles
exceeded the Devil and natures power. 2. If he was a Saint, God would not have
permitted the Devil to abuse him so grossly in a matter of faith, without the
purity and profession whereof there can be no true sanctity. 3. Much less would
he have permitted the Devil to make St. Bernard an instrument for the
establishing of Jdolatry, and other damnable errors of Popery, in case the
contrary belief of Protestants, and Petrobusians be the Catholic: for albeit
God has permitted the Devil to make use of wicked men to broach and promote
heresys, we never read that he condescended so far to his Luciferian pride, as
to let him employ Saints in such a ministry, or to confirm falsehood by such
miracles as St. Bernards; neither indeed is such a permission consistent with
Gods veracity, or with our obligation to believe his doctrine, as has bin
proved.

SECT. III. Miracles to confirm the worship, and virtue of the sign of the
Cross, recorded by St. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, St. Cyrillus of Jerusalem, St.
At^anasius, St. Hierom, St. Gregory Turonensis, Nicephorus and Theodoret in the
Ecclesiastical History.
THat the primitive Christians by Tradition from the Apostles used to sign
themselves frequently with the sign of the Cross, at the beginning and
finishing of every work, rising and going to bed, before and after meat, is
testified by Tertullian: and St. Cyrill of Jerusalem, says, let us not be
ashamed to confess Christ crucified, but let the cross be printed confidently
in our foreheads with our fingers, as also in all other things: in our bread,
in our drink, in going abroad, in returning home, before sleep, when we rise,
in traveling, in resting: it is a great guard, given to the poor gratis, to the
infirm without trouble, it is a grace given by God, the mark of the faithful,
and terror of the Devils. By this sign they have bin triumphed over; show it
boldly; when they see the Cross they remember him that was crucified; they fear
him that bruised in pieces the Dragons head. And even as the Apostles and they
who stuck to their doctrine and discipline, honored and used the sign of the
Cross, so Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Basilides and all the progeny of heretics,
did, and do abhor that instrument of our redemption, in so much that St. Paul,
declares it to be a mark of heresy, to be an enemy of Christ's Cross. And St.
Hipolitus, that most ancient and learned Martyr, Epist. ad Philip. 3.
in his book of the Consummation of the world, says, that Antichrist will
prohibit men to make the sign of the Cross. Epiphan. haer. 21 and 28 Theoder.
2. haer. fab^ 4. and alij.
And as Simon Magus maintained that the Cross ought not to be honored, because
Christ did not realy suffer upon it, but only his Jmage, and Cerinthus came
near the same error, pretending that JESUS and Christ were different, and that
only JESUS suffered, not Christ: Besides that neither JESUS, nor Christ, but
Simon Cyreneus, who carried the Cross, suffered upon the same, and that Christ
did shrink away: as these heretics, J say, thought the Cross ought not to be
worshipped, because they maintained Christ did not suffer death upon it, so all
Christians who believed his real passion and death, did honor the Cross in the
primitive Church; and God to confirm this their faith and piety, has wrought
innumerable miracles whereof I shall relate but very few.

The first shall be taken out of Paulinus Bishop of Nolae his writings, a man
of such sanctity and credit, that St. Austin, St. Hierom, St. Gregory the
great, St. Gregory of Tours, Prosper Aquitanicus, and others say of him he was
faithful as Abraham, obedient as Isaac, benign as Jacob, liberal as
Melchisedech, discreet and prudent as Joseph, meek as Moses, innocent as
Samuel, merciful as David, wise as Solomon, of great courage as Peter, fervent
as Paul etc. And so charitable that he made himself a slave in Africa to redeem
from barbarous servitude some of his Flock. This holy Bishop Paulinus receiving
from the hands of his Kinswoman Melania a little piece of the Cross which John
Bishop of Jerusalem sent unto him, it happened that a stable full of hay took
fire, and the flames reached to St. Paulinus his house; he presently took the
relic of the Cross, and opposed it to that furious element, S. Paulinus
natal. 10. S. Felic. S. Paulinus Nol. ep. 11. ad Severum. Open rante virtute
divina jugi miraculo in materia in sensata vim vi^am tenens, ita innum^ris
paene quotidie hominum votis lignum suum commodauit, vt detrimenta non
sentiret, and quasi intacta permanserit, quotidie divid^e sumentibus, and
semper tota venerantibus. Nicephorus lib. 8. cap. 29. S. Hierom in vita S.
Hilarionis in fin.
whereupon the devouring flames instantly retired, and the fire was wholly
extinguished. Of this miracle St. Paulinus himself composed an elegant poem yet
to be seen in his works. A greater miracle the same Saint observes in the holy
Cross, which he mentions in a letter to his friend Severus* for notwithstanding
that (says he) it was the custom of the Bishops of Jerusalem to present the
Pilgrims with little pieces of the holy Cross, yet by a continual miracle of the
Divin power the holy Cross retaining living virtue in a dead matter, did so
distribute its wood almost every day to the desires of innumerable people, that
it remained as it were untouched, divided to the receivers, and always entire
to those that worship it. The same miracle is observed by St. Cyril of
Jerusalem Catech. 4.10. and 13.

In the same letter to Severus, St. Paulinus does recount that Christ's Cross
was known from the others of the thieves crucified with him, by reviving a dead
woman, to whose body it was applied. And Nicephorus says that besides this
miracle it cured instantly one that was dying.

What a number of miracles St. Anthony the Monk wrought by making the sign of
the Cross, every one may see in his life written by the great Champion of the
Church St. Athanasius: and the like also of an other Monk St. Hilarin in his
life written by St. Hierom* one J will relate in his own words.

At that time (says St. Hierom) the seas transgressed their bounds, upon the
earthquake of the whole world, which happened after the death of Julian. And as
if God would threaten men with some new deluge, or else that all things were to
return into their first Chaos, so hung the ships, being hoysed up to the steepy
tops of those mountains, which as soon as they of Epidaurus saw, namely those
roaring and raging waves, and that Mass of waters, and that whole mountains
were brought in upon the shoars, by whose rapid floods (being in fear of that
which already in effect they found to be come to pass, that the town would
utterly be overwhelmed, they went unto the old man ( Hilarion) and as if they
had bin going to a battle, they placed him for their Captain upon the shore;
But as soon as he had made three signs of the Cross upon the sand, and held up
his hand against the sea, it is incredible to be told into what a huge height
it swelled, and stood up before him, and raging so a long time, and being as it
were in a Kind of Indignation at the impediment which it ^ound, it did yet by
little and little slide back again into it self. And this does Epidaurus, and all
that region proclaim even to this day, and mothers teach it to their Children;
that so the memory thereof may be delivered over to posterity. That which was
said to the Apostles, if you have faith, and shall say to this mountain,
transport thy self into the sea, it shall be don, may truly and even literaly
be fulfilled now etc. For wherein does it differ whether a mountain descend into
the sea, or else, whether huge mountains of water grow suddenly hard, being as
if they were of stone, just before the feet of the old man; and that yet on the
other side they should run fluid and soft? The whole City was in a wonder, and
the greatness of the miracle was publikly known as far as Salon.

St. Gregory Turonensis tells us how after that a man who conspired with Cyrola
the Arian Bishop to feign himself blind, S. Gregory Turon. 2. hist. 3.
Protestant miracles are but Cheats.
and to say he received sight by his prayers, by Gods just judgment became
realy blind; (as Bruleus of Geneva was found dead by Calvin's prayers to revive
him) and after this cheat was so punished, Eugenius the Catholic Bishop
restored to him sight, by making the sign of the Cross.

Sozomen l. 7. c. 25. of his Ecclesiastical History recounts how St. Donatus
Bishop of Evorea in Epirus with making the sign of the Cross killed a monstrous
serpent that devoured both man and beast. an. 394.

How efficacious the sign of the Cross is against the temptations and charms of
the Devil, S. Gregory Nazian. orat. in Julian. Theodoret. lib. 3. c. 3.
may be gathered from many examples of the ecclesiastical History. I will only
mention that notorious fact of Julian the Apostata related by St. Gregory
Nazianzen, and Theodoret. Julian notwithstanding his Monastical profession,
entertained ambitious thoughts of succeeding his Brother Gallus in the Empire,
he dealt with a Magitian to know whether fortune would favor him. The Magitian
led him to the place where he used to conjure, and the Devils appearing upon
his invoking of them, but like themselves, Julian was so frighted, Some
Protestants agree with pagans and Magitians in contemning the sign of the
Cross, and maintaining the Devils power against it. Osiander Cent. 4. page 326.
speaking of the Devils flying away at Julians making the sign of the Cross,
says, Diaboli simulata sua fuga voluerunt vulgi superstitionem confirmare,
quasi Cruci^ signo Daemones abigantur. The same say the Centurists Cent. 4.
col. 1446.
that (according to his own former custom, and that of the primitive
Christians) he made the sign of the Cross in his forehead, and the Devils
vanished. Whereupon Julian reflecting and considering the virtue of that sign,
and conferring thereof with the Conjurer, this wicked fellow told him, that the
Devils fright proceeded not from any fear of the Cross, but from a discontent,
and detestation of Julians practicing so ridiculous an action; and the poor
wretch (says St. Gregory) out of hopes and covetousness of the Empire that the
Magitian prognosticated, gave credit to his words.

How many millions of souls are abused by Protestant Ministers, as Julian was
by pagan Magitians? Some Ministers will not admit of the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, because they hold it to be superstitious; others, though they admit of
it in Baptism, yet in all other actions think it ridiculous, and both parties
agree in believing that it has not any virtue against the Devil. Not only our
English Protestants, but Osiander, and the Magdeburgian Centurists do justify
the speech of the Magitian, and would have us follow the example of Julian the
Apostata, as also the doctrine of the Gentiles, whom Arnobius l. 10. contra
gentes does reprove for saying, that though the name of Christ JESUS but heard
drives away wicked spirits etc. yet that was upon horror and hatred of the
name, not upon grant of greater power.

SECT. IV. Miracles in confirmation of the Catholic worship of Images, related
by the most eminent Authors of the ecclesiastical History, and by the second
General Council of Nice an Dom. 787. wherein assisted 350. Bishops.
OF all Protestant errors, and exceptions against the Roman Catholic Religion,
not any is more unreasonable, and inexcusable then their opinion of the
vnlawfullness of worshipping the Images of Christ our Savior, and his Saints.
Act. 5.15. Evagr. 4. hist. 29* St. Damasc. 4. de fide Orthod. 17. Niceph. ^.
hist. 7. Metaphr. 15. non and in vit^ S. Alexii. Tom. 3. Council. Hadrianus Papa
ad Carol. Magnum Methodius Episcopus apud Marian. scot. in Chron. an. Dm. 3. S.
Bedae de loc. sa^ct. c. 8. and 5.
Because. 1. They see that the Scripture makes distinction between Images, and
Idols, God prohibiting the one, and not only permitting, but commanding his
people to place the other in his Temple, even closs to the Arck of his
Testament, and that the Brazen serpent wrought miracles, while the Jews looked
upon it as an Image. 2. They might observe that upon the very first preaching
of the Apostles, St. Peter's shadow (which was the Image of his body) wrought
many miracles, unto which God would never have concurred, had his shadow bin an
Jdol, or had there bin in the worship of Images any danger of Jdolatry. And
much less would Christ himself have sent his Image to Abagarus King of Edessa,
or given his picture to Veronica as all antiquity did believe, and record. 3.
They may be ashamed of the first broachers of their Protestant doctrine against
the worship of Images, Jews, Saracens, and condemned heretics, who (as
Tarasius proved in the second Council of Nice) corrupted the holy Scriptures
to assert their heresies. But leaving these things we will mention a few
miracles.

Eusebius 7. hist. 14 Niceph. lib. 10. c. 30. Theophilactus in cap. 9. Math.
Eusebius and others in the Ecclesiastical History relate, how the woman that
was cured by touching Christ's garment, (Math. 9.21.) returning home, set up for
memory of this benefit the statue of Christ, as also her own, adoring him; and
that he himself had seen them; and that an unknown herb did grow at the bottom
of Christ's statue, which so soon as it came to touch the garment of the statue,
did cure all diseases.

In the year 362. Julian the Apostata (vexed to see this statue worshiped, and
the worship thereof confirmed with so many miracles) commanded the same to be
thrown down, and broken in pieces; and set up his own in steed thereof* but his
was immediately destroyed by fire from heaven, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 20. ad
Metaphrast. 20. October. Centur. 4. c. 13. col. 1447.
and the Christians gathering together the pieces of Christ's statue, placed it
in the Church; where it was, as Sozomenus writes, unto his time.

The honest Centutists against all truth of History, not having the Authority
of as much as one Writer thought (by lying impudently) to conceal the evidence
of this miracle from the illiterat Protestants; and some English have imitated
their example in so shamfull an imposture, saying that Christ's statue (not
Iulians) was destroyed by fire from heaven.

An other miracle you may read in the second General Council of Nice produced
by 350. Bishops as an undeniable evidence against the heresy of the
Image-breakers; for the confutation whereof they were assembled, and the miracle
happened but some 20. years before. The wicked Jews in the City of Beritus in
Syria, crucified the Image of Christ, and peirced with a lance the side thereof,
whence suddenly issued such abundance of blood and water, that the Churches
both of the East and West received relics thereof, and with it all diseases
were cured. By so great, and so many miracles those obstinat people were
converted; and the Church of God appointed a day to celebrat the memory of so
notorious a favor; And Athanasius, a learned Bishop of that age, writ a Book
entitled De Passione Imaginis Domini.

The conversion of Jews to Christianity has seldom bin effected without great
miracles: None can be mo^e stupendous, then that which St. Vincent Ferrer (an.
1412.) wrought upon their whole Synagogue in Salamanca, wherinto he entered with
a Crucifix in his hand, on their Saboth, and preaching with great fervor of
that mystery. On a sudden both men and women found white Crosses upon their
Clothes, which made such an impression in their hearts, that they all were
baptized, and turned their Synagogue into a Christian Church, which they called
of the holy Cross. This Saint Vincent was a Dominican Friar, whose preaching
against heretics and Jews God confirmed by miracles, 38. dead were revived by
his intercession, he cured all diseases with the sign of the Cross, holy water
etc. and was of so great esteem among Catholics, that when Martin King of
Aragon dyed without issue, the naming of a Successor was left to St. Vincent,
and all the Competitors acquiesced in his choice. See all this in St. Antoninus
tit. 23. cap. 8.

The chief Champion of Gods Church against the heresy of Image-breakers was St.
John Damascen, and therefore was so much hated by the Emperor Leo Jauricus (by
whose tyranny and Decree that heresy was professed, and the Catholics
persecuted at the instance of a Jew his Favorite) that John Damascen being in
high esteem with the Prince of the Saracens at Damasco, the Emperor, by the
means of Skilful scribes, counterfeited his hand and sent a letter to the
Saracen, pretended to have bin writ by John Damascen to his Majesty inviting
him to besiege Damasco, and giving him assurance of assistance and good
success. Whereat the Saracen Prince was so enraged, that he commanded John's
right hand to be cut off. The Saint retiring to his Oratory, and prostrated
before an Jmage of our Blessed Lady, beggd her intercession for the restitution
of that hand which had bin employed until then in defending her sons honor,
and her own, against the Iconoclasts, and should continue for the future, if
restored, in the same service. Whereupon he seemed to sleep, and had a vision of
the Mother of God, and when he waked, found his hand joined as it had bin
formerly to his arm. The Saracen Prince seeing the miracle, earnestly entreated
him to remain in his Court, But St. John Damascen retired to the desert, and
there writ the praises of our Lady, and three excellent Treatises yet extant in
defense of the worship of Images. All which you may see more at large in his
life writ by John Patriarck of Jerusalem, and other Authors of those times.

Jn the Ecclesiastical History it is recounted by Zonaras, how in the time that
Leo Armenus persecuted Catholics for worshipping Jmages, his son Sabatius
Constantinus, who had bin dumb, came to the statue of St. Gregory Nazianzen,
praying inwardly in his heart to the Saint, that he might obtain of God the use
of his tongue, which immediately God was pleased to grant.

There is scarce a Country or County where the exercise of Catholic Religion
is public, which abounds not with Miraculous Jmages. Iustus Lipsius Diva
Sichimiensis edit. Antuerp. an. 1605. cap. 45.
I will only at this time mention that famous miracle don at Sichem, an. 16^4.
Related by Iustus Lipsius, and found to be true by sundry Protestant
Gentlemen, attending on the Earl of Hartford Ambassador in Flanders, who did
see and conferr, with the party cured, and were satisfied by the public and
credible testimony given to them of the whole matter, as follows.

John Clement whose Mother being at her delivery of him, cut, thereupon died,
leaving behind her this her son lame from his Nativity, and of a monstrous
composition of body, his thighs and feet were contracted and turned toward
the forepart of his breast, so as his knees did grow and stick thereto, his
body was round or spherical, unfit to stand, ly or walk. Having from his birth
continued in this estate for 20. years, and so known to the Jnhabitants of
Bruxells, and other places adjoining, he was moved in his mind to go to our
Ladies Chapel in or near the town in Brabant called Sicham, where he had heard
of many miraculous cures credibly published to have bin don. Being come thither
in a Wagon, and having confessed his sins, and received the B. Sacrament, he
did in the end feel his contracted and bound feet to be loosed and stretched
forth, so as presently he stood on his feet, himself and the beholders being
^mazed thereat. Many such or greatet miracles have bin don at ^oreto, Zaragoca,
Guadalupe etc. Neither can they be denied (...) any who is not either very
obstinat or ignorant.

Let the most precise and peevish Protestant in England con^^der whether it be
Probable or possible that God would work (...) undeniable miracles against his
own word* and the true sense ^f Scripture; and whether it be not more likely
that the Ro^an Catholic sense thereof (so confirmed) is that which the ^oly
Ghost inspired, and meant, rather then the sense of Lu^^er, Calvin, Cranmer, or
of the Parliament an. 3. and 4. Ed. 6. ^hen all Jmages of Christ and his Saints
were commanded by (...) express statute to be pulled down; Provided always that
the ^ct or any thing therein contained, should not extend to any ^mage or
picture set or graven upon any Tomb in any Church, ^happel, or Churchyard, only
for a monument of any King ^rince, Nobleman, or other dead person, which has
not bin ^ommonly reputed and taken for a Saint. So that by the Reli^ion and
Laws of England, there must not be any sign or mo^ument of sanctity left or
permitted in Churches, as if God ^id intend profane persons should have greater
respect showed to them in his own house, then his own Servants; The Protestant
distinction of civil and Religious worship misapplied by Ministers to delude
their flocks.

St. Austin lib. 3. de Trin. c 10. Speaking of such holy signs as Images,
says, Honorem tamquam religiosa possunt habere.


and that their having bin eminent in his Divin service, and his testifying the
same by evident miracles, were a sufficient cause to break their monuments, and
blot their memories out of the hearts of Christians.

The Protestant Clergy delude their flochs with telling them that civil worship
may be given to statues and Jmages of Kings, Princes, and Noblemen; Religious
worship may not be given to any Creature however so holy, it being peculiar to
God. But Christ teaches contrary doctrine and says that whosoever receives a
Prophet as a Prophet, shall have the reward of a Prophet; if by Religious
worship they mean Latria, or that supreme which is due to God alone, we allow
their doctrine; but if they take it ^or that reverence which is due to any thing
that is holy by sanctification, spiritual grace, caracter, or application to
the service of God, we deny it. What do they think not only of Prophets and
Apostles, whom the faithful Religiously worshipped, and adored in the old and
new Testament, but of inanimat things, as the Temple, the Tabernacle, the Arck,
the Propitiatory, the Cherubins, the Altar, the bread of proposition etc. Nay,
what do they think of themselves? Does not every Protestant Bishop teach and
inculcat to the people that he is their spiritual Father, and upon that score
expects they should kneel down to him and ask his blessing? S. Ambros. sec. 10.
Qui imaginem coronat Jmperatoris, utique illum honorat, cujus imaginem
coronauit; and qui statuam contempserit Imperatoris, Imperatori utique fecisse
videtur injuriam.
Do they not commend as Religious and devout souls such as give them this
respect? Is not this a Religious worship? There is not any of their Bishops can
pretend that so much ceremony is a civility due to their birth, but they
attribute it to their spiritual dignity, and to their supposed caracter of
Episcopacy. We desire no other Kind of worship be given to our Catholic
canonized Bishops, or to Images, then that which the Protestant Bishops claim
as due to themselves, and to their pictures. And yet these men will needs have
Popery to be Idolatry, because we worship real sanctity with the same ceremony
and respect, that they exact for mistaken Episcopacy.

SECT. V. Miracles related by St Austin, St. Ambrose, St Gregory Nazianzen St.
Epiphanius, St. Chrysostom, St. Hierom, St. Optatus, St* Bid, St* Bernard, St.
Anselm, and others in confirmation of praying to Saints, and worshipping of
their Relics; and of the virtue of Holy water, of the Sacraments of
Confirmation, Confession, and Extreme unction.
ST. Hierom says the heretic Eunomius was the first that impugned the
worshipping of Saints Relics, S. Hierom. contra Vigilant.
whose error Vigilantius followed, and added an other against praying to
Saints. Eusebius. hist. lib 4. c. 15. Centuriatores cent. 2. c. 3. col 31. St.
Ambrose sermon. 39 de sanctis Naza^* and Celso in fin.
How ancient the worship of Saints Relics is, we see by the Epistle of the
Church of Smirna concerning the Martyrdom of St. Polycarpus, St. John
Evangelists Disciple; whose reliks the Christians gathered (even after his body
was burnt) with most fervent devotion. St. Ambrose gives many reasons why
relics ought to be honored.

If you ask me, (says he) what do you honor in flesh consumed, and turned into
dust? I honor in the Martyrs flesh the scarres that he received for Christ; I
honor the memory of one that lives by the perpetuity of his virtue; I honor
ashes sanctified by the confession of our Lord; Our doctrine of Indulgences is
confirmed by the same miracles that confirm worship of Saints, Pilgrimages etc.
because Indulgences are commonly annexed to these devotions.
I honor in ashes the seeds of eternity: J honor the body that taught me to
love God, and to contemn death for his sake. And why should not Christians
honor that body which the Devils fear? etc. Finaly I honor a body that honored
Christ in the sword, and is to reign with him in heaven. Thus St. Ambrose; Now
to our Miracles.

St. Austin (de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.) tells how that in the presence of
him and others, a devout woman called Palladia, who being sore diseased, and
repairing for her health to the monument of St. Stephen, as soon as she prayed
to the Saint, sana surrexit, she received health. And in the same Chapter a
little before he relates the like miraculous example of one Florentius of
Hippo, and of Eucharius a Priest of Spain, as also of Ten infirm persons in his
presence miraculously cured; and sundry dead restored to life. In the ninth
book of his Confessions cap. 7. he tells how the dead bodies of St. Gervasius
and Protasius were after many years found uncorrupted; and that at their dead
bodies a blind man received his sight. A miracle (says St. Austin) don at
Millan (where the said bodies lay) when I was there, a great number of people
being witnesses thereof. St. Hierom recounteth in the life of St. Hilarion, how
his dead body was after ten months found uncorrupted, yiedling forth a fragrant
smell. And Saint Bede testifies the same of St. Cuthbert l. 4. hist. cap. 30.

St. Ambrose having had a revelation where the bodies of the Martyrs St.
Gervasius and Protasius lay, S. Ambros. ep. 85 ad Mar. soror. and ser. 93. de
Inventione corporum S. Gervasij and Protasij: Ariani dicunt, non sunt Daemonum
vera tormenta, sed ficta and composita ludi bria.

S. Hierom. contra Vigilant cap. 4. In morem Gentilium, impiorumque Porphyrij*
and Eunomij, has praestigias Daemonum esse confin^ga^, and non vere clamare
Daemon^s, sed simulare tormenta etc.

S* Chrysostom. in lib. contra Gentiles, speaking of Babylas, sententiae nostrae
abunde faciunt fide^, quae quotidiana a Martyribus eduntur miracula. Cent. 4.
cap. 13. col 14^6 Nazianzen. Orat. in Cyprian. says. Omnia potest pulvis
Cypriani cum fide, ut sciunt hi qui ipsi experti sunt, and miracula usque ad
nos transmiserunt.

A miracle to confirm the worship and devotion of the Mother of God.


placed them with great solemnity in the Church, and they wrought many
miracles, which he recounts; among others the Devils were tormented by the holy
Relics, and were forced to confess that their torments proceeded from the
intercession of the Saints; but the Arrians, vexed to see the Catholic faith
confirmed by such miracles, endeavored to discredit them by saying the Devils
were not realy tormented, and that these were no true miracles, as Protestants
say now of our Exorcisms; for which folly and obstinacy they were reprehended
by St. Ambrose, as Vigilantius for the same reason is censured by St. Hierom.
In like manner ought the Centurists and other Protestants be condemned for
discrediting the miracles which St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Rufinus relate
of St. Babylas, which was, that after bringing of the body of the holy Martyr
into the Temple of an Idol, the Jdol ceased to speak, and therefore Julian the
Apostata commanded the body should be removed from thence; The Centurists
answer that the Devil was neither silenced nor frighted by the Saint, and
presence of his Relics; but feigned to be overcome, to the end that
superstition might encreas.

St. Gregory Nazianzen says that St. Cyprians Relics are omnipotent to work
miracles, if applied with faith, as experience does show: and (orat. 1. in
Iulianum) he relates how Gallus and Iulianus two Brethren, and Nephews to the
Emperor Constantius, joining to build a famous Church over the Relics of St.
Mamans Martyr, the part which Gallus (a good Catholic) undertook, went on most
prosperously; but the part of Julian (who was then perverted in his Judgment,
and became afterward the Apostata) could never as much as have the foundation
laid, for that the earth by continual and unusual earthquakes, did always cast
from it self, and in a manner vomit forth all that was laid in it by Iulianus.

And the reason was says St. Gregory Nazianzen, because the Martyrs are so
linkt in charity, that St. Mamans would not be honored by him, who in time was
to decry the worship of his Brethren, and disgrace them. But the Centurists
above cited say, that God hindered Julianus his fabric to show that he was not
pleased with the superstitious worship of Martyrs; and yet they do not consider
that he was pleased to let Gallus his fabric prosper. Such fopperies as these
we must expect even from learned men that undertake to maintain new opinions
against the ancient doctrine of Gods Church, confirmed by evident miracles.

St. Anselm whom Protestants commend, as one of the worthiest Prelates of the
Church both for piety and learning, recounteth in his book of the Miracles of
our B. Lady this story.

The Devil (who out of his inveterat hatred, and envy to man, seeks all means
possible to ruin him) took human shape, and put himself into the service of a
Nobleman, with whose humor he did so comply, as in a short time he was steward
of his family, and Master of his will: taking the advantage of this favor he
persuaded him to commit many mischiefs, and murders; walking one day in the
fields with some of his servants not much better then himself, he abused a
devout Priest, and carried him prisoner to his Castle. At night the Priest
signified to him that he had a business to impart to his Lordship, in which he
was much concerned, but it must be opend to him in presence of all his
servants. He longing to know the business commanded all his servants should be
called; and all appeared, the steward only excepted, who retired to his
chamber, pretending he was not well; and being pressed to come, answered, he
could not stir: the Priest replied to the Lord, that the stewards presence was
absolutely necessary; whereupon other servants were ordered* to bring him in
their arms, he still counterfeiting the sick man. When the holy Priest did see
him, he commanded, and conjured him in the name of Almighty God, to declare who
he was, and to what end he had thrust himself into that Noblemans service. The
steward answered, and confessed he was the Devil, and that his end of serving
that man was, to procure his destruction and damnation, which he had long
before effected, had not the B. Virgin interposed herself, and interceeded to
God, for his Conversion. (...) of the cure; they could not be mistaken, neither
could they have any design in deceiving others by a falls information; neither
durst they or the Monk who writ the story, venture to abuse the whole Kingdom
with such an imposture that could not be long concealed, or unpunished. So that
this being the miracle whereupon Fox did fix, to disgrace all the rest, as also
St. Thomas his sanctity; I shall believe them all to be as authentic as any
miracles need to be; and as that which both in the French and English, profane
and Ecclesiastical Histories, is recorded, of the King of France his
pilgrimage to St. Thomas his Shrine in Canterbury, for the recovery of his son
Philips health; in what despair the Father and all France were of his life by
human remedies, is evident by his undertaking so unusual and dangerous a
Journey, as it was for a King, to put himself into the hands of his reconciled
enemy, and of so powerful a Monarch as K. Henry 2. But God that would have all
the world take notice of St. Thomas his glory, and of the justice of his cause,
disposed so things, that the most Christian King and Kingdom should be
beholding to him for the life of the Heir apparent of the crown, who immediately
recovered, and the King (to show his gratitude for so great a benefit) did give
many Lands and privileges in France to the Monks of Canterbury; all this was
don in the year 1179. and but nine years after his Canonization.

Miracles of Holy water.
S. Basil. de Spirit. S. c. 27 Alexan. 1. ep. 1.
ST. Pasil testifies that the use and blessing of holy water is an Apostolical
traditon; neither can it be denied if we consider these words of St. Alexander
Pope, who but 50. years after St. Peter governed the Church. We bless water
sprinkled with salt for the people, that all being sprinkled with it, may be
sanctified and purified: which thing also we ordain as to be don of all
Priests. For if the ashes of an Heifer being sprinkled with blood, Hebr. 9.13.
did sanctify and cleans the people, much more water sprinkled with salt, and
consecrated with divin prayers does sanctify and cleans the people. S. Clem.
lib. 8. Constable. cap 35. Dion de Eccles hier cap de Baptismo. Cyril. Caie^ chapter 3.
Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 12. Ambr. lib. 4. de Sacr. c. 5. and l. de iis qui
initiant. cap. 3. Epiph. haer. 30. August. hom 27. epist. 50 and Sermon. 9. de
Sanct and lib. 6. in Jul. c. 8. Conc. Nannit cap. 4.
And if by salt sprinkled by (...) the profet, the barrenes of the water was
healed, how much ^ore the same salt being consecrated with divin prayers,
takes (...) the barrenes of human things, and sanctifies those which (...)
defiled, and cleanses and purges, and multiplieth other (...) things, and
turns away the deceits of the devil, and ^^sendeth men from the craftines of
the evil Ghost. For if by ^^^ching of the hemm of the garment of our savior we
do not (...) but that the diseased were cured; how much more by the ^^ubt of
his holy words or his elements consecrated, by which (...) frailty does receive
health both of body and soul. Thus (...) Alexander Pope and martyr in the first
age of Christianity. that is said of holy water, the same is applied by the
ancient ^^hers to holy Oil, holy bread, holy Candells, holy Ashes, (...) Palms,
etc. Theodoret ( hist: l. 5. c. 21.) tells that (...) dissolved enchantments
by sprinkling of holy water, which (...) (says Theodoret) the Devil not
enduring the virtue of the ^^inkled water fled away. See also the like report
made of ^^^charius by Palladius (...) historia Lausiaca cap. 19. of miraculous
(...) wrough by holy water: see St. Gregory lib. 1. Dial. cap. 10. (...) Saint Bede lib. 4. hist. cap. 4. and Palladius cap. 9. and 20. and ^^^doret in his
Theoph. cap. 13. of a memorable miracle don con^^^ding Church lights. Read
Eusebius hist. lib. 6. cap. 8. S. (...) 2. lib. 1. contra haereses. haeres. 30.
page 61. edit. Basil. (...) how Josephus (seeing fire made unactive by
enchantments, and (...) from burning by witchcraft) called for water, (a world
of (...) being present) made the sign of the Cross upon it, put his (...) into
the vessel of the blessed water, saying, In the name of ^^sus of Nazareth, whom
my Fathers crucified, let there be virtue (...) this water for the dissolving
the charms don by these men. Then (...) Epiphanius, he took some of the water
in his hand, sprin^^^^ the several enchanted Furnaces with it, and dissoluta
sunt in^^^amenta, the witchcraft ceased, the fire burned, the people who (...)
the wonder, cried aloud, One God there is, who helps the Chri^^^^ns and so
departed.

Epiphanius cited in the precedent page relates an other miracle don by Joseph,
upon a possessed man. Joseph, says he, having shut the doors took water in
his hands, blessed it with the sign of the Cross, besprinkled the raging man
with it, commanded the Devil in the name of JESUS to be go^, and the possessed
party was cured. This miracle (says Epiphanius) the Jews knew, and great talk
there was of it: some said Josephus had opened the Gazophylacium, and finding
there the name of God writ, did the wonder by force of this name; It was true
he did the miracle, but not as the Jews imagined. Thus St. Epiphanius.

Of our Catholic Churches severe inquiry, discovery, and punishment of
Counterfeits in this kind and al other sorts of miracles, our Adversaries give
testimony: see Osianders epitom. Centur. 16. page 32. And the book entitled,
Two Treatises, the first of the lives of Popes, etc. The second of Mass etc.
also of falls miracles wherewith Mary de la Visitation Prioresse de la Anunciada
of Lisbon, deceived very many, and was discovered and condemned, Englished and
printed 1600. And see in the Addition in the end of that book, an other like
discovery and punishment in Sevill of one Father. Lion. See also such an other
Discovery of falls miracles in St. Thomas Moors dialogue of veneration of
Images, Relics, etc. l. 1. c. 14. so that our Catholic Bishops and
Inquisitors are so far from contriving and concealing such practices, that they
publish and punish them with extreme rigor. And this our sincerity in
publishing falls miracles, is the only evidence Protestants have to say, that
the true miracles are falls: for thus they argue against us: such a Nun, or
Friars miracles and revelations were falls, as appears by our own discovery
and punishment of the cheat; therefore we have reason to suspect that none are
true; whereas if obstinacy did not prevail with them more then reason, they
should have inferred, and believed the quite contrary conclusion. Madre Luisa
de Charion notwithstanding her prediction to our late King Charles, that if he
did not become a Roman Catholic, he should be the most vnfortunait Prince in
the world, after some years of prosperity; Notwithstanding I say, this, and
many other predictions, her continual fasting, and seeming miracles, she was by
the Jnquisition, kept in prison all her life, and never declared innocent, or
free from illusions, until after her death, when God seemed to approve of her
sanctity by undeniable signs and testimonys.

Miracles of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
COnfirmation is a Sacrament of the new law, as sacred and holy (says St.
Austin lib. 2. contra lit. Peril. c. 104.) as Baptism it self: it is ministered
unto the baptized with the imposition of the hands of a Bishop, and the
amoynting with holy Chrism. And therefore St. Urban Pope and Martyr (an. 227.)
in his letter to all Christians says, All the faithful ought to receive the
holy Ghost after Baptism by the imposition of hands from a Bishop, that they
may be found perfect Christians: because when the holy Ghost is infused, the
faithful heart is dilated to prudence and constancy. And an other Pope and
Martyr ( Eusebius. cp. ad Episcop. Tust. and Campan.) The Sacrament of imposition
of hands is to be had in great reverence, which cannot be don by any other but
by the high Priests: neither is it read or known to have bin don by any other
in the Apostles time, but by the Apostles themselves. Act. 8.14. and 19.6.
And Tertullian (de carni^ resurrect. cap. 8. and in lib. de Bapt.) alluding to
the nature of oil, wherewith we are anointed in the Sacrament, says, the flesh
is anointed that the soul may be consecrated; the flesh is signed that the soul
may me be fensed; the flesh by imposition of hands is overshadowed, that the
soul by the spirit may be illuminated.

Hitherto Prelatick Protestants according to the 25. article of their 39. of
Religion, contemned the holy Sacrament of Confirmation as superstitious, and
corrupt following of the Apostles; but since Episcopacy was cried down in
England by the Puritans they writ whole Treatises of the necessity and praises
of Confirmation, not so much (I fear) out of any devotion themselves have to
that Sacrament, as to be end the people may be devoted to their Episcopal
caracter, it being granted that only Bishops can confirm Christians. Doctor
Tailors Discourse of Confirmation is an excellent Interlude all circumstances
considered; He proves the necessity and holiness of Confirmation, contrary to
the 25. article of his faith; then he proves that only true Bishops can
confirm; whence some, say it follows that his Protestant Episcopacy is not for
that purpose. 3. he pretends that the Jesuits (though he know the contrary)
are enemies to this holy Sacrament. The question between Doctor Smith Bishop of
Calcedon, and them was, not whether Confirmation were not necessary when it
might be had conveniently; but whether it were so absolutely necessary for
salvation, that the Catholics of England ought to bring upon themselves new
persecutions for maintaining and harboring a Bishop in that Kingdom to confirm
them. And Tailor approves (page 66.) the same by saying that Confirmation is
not absolutely necessary for salvation.

4. It is ridiculous to see how Doctor Tailor quotes Authors and books for
Confirmation, that in all other points of doctrine, he rejects as unworthy of
credit: amongst others a book of miracles whereof he believes not one; the old
Ordo Roman^^^ (page 24.) St. John Damasc^n. (page 76.) Melchiades Pope (page
44.) the Apostolical Constitutions (page 16.) which in other matters he rejects
as apocryphal; Rupertus, (page 4. who in any thing not favoring Episcopacy
Tailor contemn^ as a Novice* and too modern; St. Bernard the Monk, and St.
Malachias* the Bishop, two acknowledged Papists 5. He is much troubled to see
that these Authors call Confirmation a Sacrament; and knows not how to English
Sacramentum; at last he resolves to translate it Rite; and therefore these latin
words of the Ordo Romanus which he sets down page (24.) Omnino praecavendum
esse ut hoc Sacramentum Confirmationis non negligatur, the Bishop does English
thus; we must by all means take heed that the Rite of Confirmation be not
neglected. And (page 5.) he says St. Bernard in the life of St. Malachias, my
Prodecessor in the Sea of Down and Connot, reports that it was the care of that
Good Prelat to renew the rite of Confirmation in his Diocese.

Seeing Protestants with Doctor Tailor, value so much the testimony and faith of
St. Bernard, let them see how he condemned all their opinions against the Roman
Catholic faith as heresys in the Petrobusians, Henricians, and Apostolici,
Heretofore part. 4.
and then I hope they will acknowledge their error, in not tolerating Popery.
St. Bernard, does relate in the life of St. Malachias (whose Successor Doctor
Tailor is not, either in caracter or Doctrine) that he cured a lunatic child in
confirming him with the sacred unction. A miracle (says Holinshead) seen and
confessed by many hundreds of people, and thereupon blown through the world. St.
Optatus (l. 2. contra Donatistas) reports how the heretic threw out of the
window ( ampullam Chrismatis) a vial of Chrisme, holy oil, to the intent to
break it, the which being stayed by an Angels hand, God preserved, and did light
safe among the stones.

A Miracle of the Sacrament of Extreme unction.
OF the Sacrament of Exteeme unction St. Austin gives this testimony. So often
as any infirmity chances, Sermon. 215. de temp.
let him that is sick receive the body and blood of Christ; and after that let
him anoint his body, that, that which is written (Iac. 5.14.) may be
accomplished in him. Is any sick? let him bring in the Priests, and let them
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of our Lord. And the prayer
of faith shall save the sick* And our Lord shall lift him up: and if he be in
sins, they shall be remitted him.

I doubt Doctor Tailor and his prelatick Convocation will not allow in this
controversy of Extreme Unction, the testimony of St. Malacly to be as pious as
they did in the former of Confirmation. And if you ask the cause, they can give
no other, but that their Episcopacy is not so much concerned in maintaining
extreme Unction, as Confirmation; We shall notwithstanding, relate St. Bernards
words, and St. Malachias work, and desire Doctor Tailor to let us know why he
thinks the testimony of one, and the example of the other to be more credibles,
and imitable in the point of Episcopacy, then in other articles of Christian
doctrine. A noble man (says St. Bernard in vita Malachiae) dwelled near the
Monastery of Benchor, whose wife being sick, Malachias was requested to anoyl
her, which was deferred till morning; afterward a sudden outcry being made
that she was dead, Malachias came, and when he certainly found that she was
dead, he was greatly troubled in mind, imputing the falt to himself, that she
dyed defrauded of the grace of the Sacrament, and lifting up his hands to
heaven said, I beseech thee o Lord (etc.) what more! she that was dead opend
her eyes (etc.) and Malachias giving thanks praised God, and anointed her,
Knowing sins to be remitted in this Sacrament.

Miracles of the Sacrament of Confession.
Hom. 49. ep. 50. cap. 3. and ho^ 41. and 50. cap. 4. and 5.
IT is written ( Act. 19.18.) that many of those (primitive Christian) that
belived, came confessing and declaring their deeds. Therefore St. Austin says
to some who thaught it not necessary to confess their sins to Priests, Do ye
penance such as is don in the Church, that the Church may pray for you. Let no
man say within himself I do it in secret, J do it before God alone: God who
pardons me, knows that I do in my heart. Mat. 18.18.
Was it therefore said in vain, whatsoever you shall loos in earth, shall be
loosed in Heaven? Were the keys given to the Church of God in vain? Joan. 20.23.
Do we frustrat the Ghospel of God? Do we frustrat the words of Christ? Do we
promise you that which he denies? Do we deceive you? And in an other place,
there are (says he) that do think it sufficient for their salvation, if they
confess their sins to God alone, unto whom nothing is hidden, and every man's
conscience lies open: For they will not, or they are ashamed, or they disdain
to show themselves unto Priests: Whom yet our Lord has by Moses ordained to
discern between leper and leper. But J will not have thee deceived with this
opinion, and be ashamed thereby to confess them unto the Vicegerent of our
Lord, either languishing with ^hamfastnes, or stiffnecked with indignation.
For, of reason in like manner must we admit him for our Judge, which our Lord
does not disdain to be his Vicar.

St. Cyprian says, I beseech you my brethren, De laps. vide ep. 10 and 55.
Quaest ^88. in reg. (...). vide quaest. 229. and in ep. 3. can. ad Amphil. can.
78. St. Bedes holiness and great learing acknowledged by John Fox: as also his
excellency in the knowledge of Scripture, and yet he never had the least
scruple that worship of Jmages was Idolatry, or that any point of Popery was
contrary to Scripture, himself having bin a professed Popish Monk, and
confessed by Protestants to be a great Saint.
every one to confess his sin whilst yet he that sins remains in this
world, whilst his confession may be admitted, whilst every man's satisfaction
and remission given by the Priests, is acceptable unto our Lord.

St. Basil the great says, It is judged necessary that sins be confessed unto
those to whom is committed the dispensation of the mysteries of God: for so the
very penitents of ancient times are found to have confessed their sins unto
holy men. Sundry miracles wrought by God to confirm our Catholic doctrine of
the Sacrament of Confession every one may read in Joannes Climacus grad. 4. in
S. Petrus Damian. in ep. ad Desiderium. In Petrus Cluniac. lib. 1. de Mirac.
cap. 3.4.5. and 6. J will relate one or two out of S. Bid, of whom Fox (page
165.) says; As touching the holiness and integrity of his life it is not to be
doubted: And says of his learning (ibid.) so notable and famous was the
learning of Bid, that the Church of Rome both stood in need of his help, and
also required the same, about the discussing of certain controversies
apperaining to learning. Moreover the whole Latin Church at that time, gave him
the mastery in Judgment and knoweldge of the holy Scriptures. And yet this holy
Man who was such a Master in all learning, and Scripture, in his history of the
Church of England, recounts Miracles either seen by himself, or so credibly
reported that he (being of so sound a Judgment as Fox confesses) believed and
writ them for authentik, to confirm every point of our doctrine wherein we differ
from Protestants. Let us hear one of Confession.

In the time of Conrede (says Saint Bede. l. 5. c. 14. hist.) who reigned after
King Edilrede, there was a certain Captain in great favor with the King, for
his valor, but careless of his soul. Wherefore the King often admonished him to
make humble confession of his sins, and amend his life, least by deaths sudain
prevention he might loos time of repentance; but he, notwithstanding this
gentle admonition of his Souveraign, deferred his confession. In the mean time
being visited with sickness, the King came to his Chamber (for he loved him
tenderly) and exhorted him that at the least now he would confess before he
died, No, quoth he, J will not be confessed now, but when J am well recovered I
will, least if I should now do it, my fellows would say that I did that for
fear of death, which I did not in health. When the King came the next day to
visit him, and give him good council, he cried out incontinent, with a pitiful
and lamentable voice, saying: Alas, what mean you Sir, why come you hither? you
are not able to do me any good. The King answered, say not so, see ye play the
wise man's part. Nay, says he J do not rave, but J have here before mine eyes a
wicked conscience all wounded and mangled. And what is the matter, said the
King; A little before you came, quoth he, two beautiful young men came in and
sat down by me, one at my head, the other at my feet; and one of them took a
fine book out of his bosom, but little in quantity, and gave it me to read: Jn
the which when I looked a little while, I found all the good deeds that ever I
had don fair written; and God knows they were few in number, and little in
effect* when I had don, they took the book of me again, and said nothing. Then
sudenly came there about me a whole legion of wicked spirits, and besieged the
house round about, and sitting down, replenished every corner within. Then he
that for his foul face and highest seat appeared to be greatest among them,
taking, out a book terrible to all men's sight, unmeasurable for greatness and
for weight importable, commanded one of his black guard to bring it to me to
read. When I read a little I found all the enormous detestable sins that ever I
had committed, not only in word and deed, but also in thought, written there in
great black letters: and he said to the two fair young men that sat by me, why
sit you here, knowing most certainly that this fellow is ours? They answered,
True it is, take him and lead him away to the bottomless pit of damnation; and
with that they vanished away. Immediately two wicked spirits having fier-pronges
in their hands, rose up, and struck me one in the head and the other in the
sole of my feet, the which now with great torment and anguish creep up into the
bowels, and other internal parts of my body, and when they meet together J shall
die, and be drawn hence by the Devils into Hell without redemption. Thus spoke
that miserable man lying in extreme desperation, and so dyed out of hand. It is
evident (says Saint Bede) he had not these visions for his own sake, whom they
availed nothing at all, but for other men, who knowing his lamentable end might
be afraid to differr, and prolong the time of Repentance, while they have
opportunity and leisure.

In the next Chapter (cap. 15. l. 5.) Saint Bede tells of an other damned for
differring his confession, thus. I my self (says Bid) Knew a Religious man
(whom would to God I had never known) placed in a good and famous Monastery;
notwithstanding he himself, was infamous for his lewd behavior, and loos life.
I could tell his name also, if it were worth the telling. This man was
earnestly rebuked of his brethren and Superiors of the Monastery, for his
enormities, and exhorted to a better trade of life, but all in vain, etc. But
as men are wont to say, He that will not come of his own accord within the
Church-door, shall run against his will to hell gates, this man being now
struck with a very faint diseas, and brought to extremity, called all the
Convent about him, and with much lamentation and deep sighs, like a man already
damned, began to declare unto them, that he saw hell gates open, and the devil
drouned in a deep dungeon thereof and Caiphas and the whole rablement that put
Christ to death, cast in flaming fire, hard by him: and next to them (O
miserable and wretched man that I am, said he) I see a place of eternal
perdition prepared for me, The brethren hearing these woeful words, exhorted
him earnestly to repent and be sorry for his sins while he was yet alive.

Then he (brought to extreme despair) answered, no, no: There is no, time for
me to amend my former life, especially seeing I perceive my judgment is past,
and fully completed already. With these words he dyed without receiving the
Sacrament. His body was interred in the farmost part of all the Abbey; not one
of all the whole Convent durst Say Mass for his soul, nor sing Psalms, nor once
say, one Pater noster for him. This chanced of late in the Country of the
Bernician^* (Northumberland) and was blazed all the Country over: So, that it
stired up many to make quick Confession of their sinful acts, and not to take
days with God. Which God grant it may work also in such as shall read this
present story. Hitherto Saint Bede, who lived above nine hundred years ago.

Thus much of ancient miracles in confirmation of Popery, some whereof were
seen, others so undoubtedly believed by the greatest Saints and Doctors of Gods
Church, that they judged them worthy of being recorded in their writings, to
the end posterity might, by giving them credit, take for divin the doctrine
which they confirmed. We do not recurr to the primitiye Fathers and times for
miracles, out of any want of the like in our days, every where now some are so
visible, that only foolish Atheism, or obstinacy can deny their
supernaturality; we mention the ancient miracles and Fathers for two reasons.
1. To prove that our doctrine is the same, with theirs, and confirmed by the
like miracles. The obstinacy of Protestants in rejecting and corrupting the
ancient Fathers. A notable corruption and impudency of Calvin Calvin l. 2.
Jnst. c. 3.
2. To convict our Adversaries of obstinacy by their denial, or contempt of the
testimony of the holy Doctors and Catholic Church in such things as their
spirit does not fancy; and yet they do admit the same testimony as sufficient
and Obligatory in such points of Christianity, as themselves think necessary or
convenient for their own reformations, and interpretations of Scripture. It is
ridiculous to see how Calvin (ex. gr.) presses and wresteth the authority of
St. Austin for some parts of his doctrine, and how he sleighteth the same when
that holy Doctor speaks against it. To draw St. Austin to countenance the error
against freewill: I will relate St. Austin (says Calvin) in his own words, and
then quoteth his words thus: Primam fuisse libertatem posse non peccare,
nostram multo majorem non posse peccare. Whereas the St. Speaks in that pl^ce
of our happiness in heaven where we shall not be able to sin, and preferres it
before the liberty Adam had in Paradise of being able not to sin: his words
are, Prima libertus voluntatis erat posse peccare, novissima erit multo major,
S. Aug. l. de corr. and gratia ad valent. cap. 12. and l. 22. de Civit. Dei c.
30. S Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis c. 2. and 4.
non posse peccare. Prima immortalitas etc. Here Calvin corrupts the words;
instead of St. Austins Novissima, he puts in, nostra; then leaves out erit,
with many other words which made clear St. Austins speech and meaning of the
liberty we shall have in heaven; but Calvin makes him speak of our liberty here
upon earth; and is so inconsiderat as to reprehend grievously the Master of the
Sentences for following St. Austins sense according to the text. But when St.
Austins authority is urged against him in favor of the Mass, prayer for the
dead, and Purgatory, and particularly how careful he was to have Mass said for
the soul of his Mother St. Monica, that desired him at her death, to remember
her in his Sacrifice of the Altar, Calvin says, it was but an old wives
request which her son never examined according to the Scriptures, and after his
own private affection would have the same approved by others.

As Calvin Luther and all, the first Protestant Reformers contemn the Catholic
Churches authority in matters of doctrine, when it is contrary to their new
interpretations, and extravagant fancies of Scripture, so do they and their
Successors in that of miracles; Jf any Miracles be recounted that confirm the
mysteries which Protestants reject, though delivered by the same Author, and in
the same book, they must needs be old wives tales, not duly examined etc. And
yet the foolish and falls stories of such a frantic and crackt-braind fellow as
John Fox was known to be, and his Acts and Monuments show him to have bin, are
credited by persons that have no other ground to believe his fables and follies
but their education in Protestancy, and aversion to Popery: His lies and simple
stories must pass for a true Ecclesiastical History, notwithstanding that they
are contradicted by all the Histories of the world, and that many of his
Martyrs were found, following their trades, after that he had described their
torments, and deaths very particularly, and patheticaly: his miracles in
confirmation of protestancy (and indeed his whole book) are so ridiculous, that
I admire some Protestant zealots, if they would have the reformation be thought
a Religion, do not suppress or reform the work. Fox his miracles how ridiculous.
He tells for a stupendous miracle, that a stone fell from a ruinous building
upon Luthers stool, after he had bin eased, or weary of sitting upon it. An
other, that a multitude of German Clowns, debauched Clergy men, and libertins,
embraced Luthers reformation, it being so indulgent to liberty, sensuality and
vice; and that the Bishop of Rome, and other Catholic Prelates Censures did
not stop the violent course and Torrent of their pervers inclinations. See Fox
his Act. and Monum page 1843. 1844.
He makes dreams revelations, Merchants Expounders of the Apocalypse; and not to
seem partial, how himself was made a fool by revelation.

But in steed of suppressing or correcting Fox his foolish Acts and Monuments,
the Protestant Clergy have reprinted that book diverse times, He that believes
in me the works that I do, he shall do, and greater: Joan. 14.12. In the
marginal notes of the English Bible printed 1576. it is thereupon said, This is
referred to the whole body of the Church, in whom this virtue does shine for
ever.
since his death, with new comments, chronologies, and great commendations of
the work; every Parish Church is to have one, and few private families will
endure the want of so great a spiritual treasure. And though the Bishops know
it is not only a very absurd piece, but also the chief thing that makes,
Puritanism, and Presbytery spread, and so popular in England, yet because it
persuades the simple and vulgar sort, that Popery is idolatry, they countenance
a book so prejudicial to themselves.

Our Catholic miracles are of a different nature, and not related by such
lying foolish fellows as Fox, but by the greatest Saints, and wisest men of
Gods Church; men so much esteemed for their virtue, learning, and judgment that
Protestants themselves are ashamed to undervalue their testimony in matters of
faith, and ( a fortiori) ought to believe them in matters of fact, if they
intend to believe any thing at all that is not mentioned particularly in
Scripture: I say particularly, because Christ our Savior assured us in
general, (as our Adversaries confess) that miracles should continue in the
Church forever, as signs of the true belief (Marc. 16. 20. Joan. 14.12. 2. Cor.
12.12.

The Conclusion.
I have said as much as I think necessary for the information and instruction
of such Protestants as desire to know the truth, and do not find my conscience
guilty of any one falsification in this whole Treatise: And truly it were a
great absurdity in me to commit wittingly that crime which J so much cry down
in others. Such mistakes as have crept into the printed book, will J hope, he
attributed to the Printer, or Transcriber: I am sure I have bin so diligent in
examining the quotations and assertions pro and con the Catholic cause, that
want of care cannot be objected; and if there be no want of sufficiency in the
work, that commendation is not due to me, but to the goodness and evidence of
the cause I maintain. For, what acutenes of wit is requisite to defend a
Religion that never was impugned but by persons so lewd, and unreasonable, that
at the very first appearance of their opposition, they were condemned as
heretics by the whole visible Church that then was? What profundity of
judgment can be thought necessary to demonstrat that the ancient primitive
letter and sense of Scripture ought to be preferred before the Devils
interpretation thereof embraced by Luther; or before any new Canon and fancies
of the like debauched friars and Priests? What little learning is not more then
sufficient to discover so palpable frauds and falsifications as the Protestant
Writers practice, to make their Reformations seem agreeable, to Gods word? What
Erudition is so mean that does not surpass the history of one age, or of
Protestancy; a Religion so lately sprung up, and raised from the pride,
ambition, liberty, and lewdnes of the first reformers, and confined to the
Northern parts of this least part of the world? How can such a Religion be
Catholic either in length of time, extent of Territories, or Conversion of
Nations?

Jts true that for the space of 100. years England has bin so blind as not to
see such gross errors; but this misfortune was occasioned by their fondnes of
Q. Elizabeth; to make good her title to the Crown they separated themselves
from the communion of the Church; and when her interest vanished with her
death, and for want of posterity, few were living after her long reign, that
observed the motives of her reformation; most Englishmen believed the changes
she made, had no relation to her illegitimacy, but proceeded from pure zeal of
the Gospel. Her new Clergy both then, and eversince, have endeavored to
confirm the people in that persuasion, by falsifying Scripture, Counsels, and
Fathers; but the discovery of the frauds, and the principles of Protestancy
practiced against the late innocent King, have opend the eyes of many to
discern the flaws of the Reformation, and the fallacies of their own education;
And now that it is as much the concern of the whole Nation to tolerat the Roman
Catholic faith, as it was Q. Elizabeth's interest to change it into
protestancy, I doubt not but that every particular persons ease in the addition
of a revenue to the public, will excite both conscience and curiosity to
examine, whether the prelatick Religion and Clergy of England, have not more of
human invention, then of divin institution? And if after perusing this
Treatise, and proposing the arguments and instances thereof to their learned
Ministry, no satisfactory answer can be given to the particulars wherewith
their doctrine and function is charged, to what purpose should men continue in
mistakes so damnable to the soul, and dangerous to the state?

But if the Protestant Clergy can divert the Layty from entertaining any
thoughts of curiosity, or scruples of conscience in order to the examination of
this matter of so great importance, and can make them believe that K. Henry 8.
passion to Ann Bullen was a just cause to introduce the Reformation, and to
assume the Supremacy; or that the Earl of Hartfords ambition of being
absolutely Protector of England, (quite contrary to K. Henry 8. Testament, and
to his own Oath of not assuming any power above his Colleagues and Tutors of K.
Edward 6.) was a divin inspiration to bring in Zuinglius his Sacramentarian
Religion into the Realm; or that the Duke of Northumberlands poisoning the young
King, and excluding the next and lawful heirs from the Crown, to conferr it
upon his own own son and the Lady Jane Gray (pretending thereby to promote his
new Zuinglian Gospel) was the work of the holy Ghost: Or that Q. Elizabeth's
murder of the Q. of Scots, and her Parliaments Decrees and endeavors to
prefer any natural issue of her body to this Empire, See Mr. Vdal in his book
of the life and death of the Queen of Scots, dedicated so K. James.
before the legitimat and immediate Heirs, the Stevards (and thereby to continue
her prelatick Protestancy) were things lawful according to the principles of
Christianity, and Catholic faith; If the Protestant Clergy I say can persuade
the layty, that all this was lawful, and agreeable to the doctrine which Christ
and his Apostles did preach, either they have an abundance of wit, or they that
believe them very little judgment.

A great wit maintained that they may as well make Mahomets Alcoran a plausible
Religion in England, and gain thereby as great revenues as they do by their
Reformation, and Protestant Scripture, whereof neither the Canon, letter, or
sense is that which God delivered to his Church, as heretofore has bin proved.
I do not speak in rallery (said the gentlemen) but seriously, Part. 2. A
discourse with Mr Dan. Oneal^ in Flanders.
when I say that men who believe the Protestant Religion to be true, may be
induced by the same persons and the like reasons, to believe that Mahometisme
is the true Religion. This has also bin solidly proved by Doctor Reynolds in
his Calvino-Turcismus: and by others also when they demonstrat that Calvinism
and Turcism agree in the principal points; and every one knows that the
doctrine of the 39. articles, of the Church of England, is the quintessence of
Calvin's doctrine, and was by him applauded, though he said that (as to Point of
discipline) there were many tolerable fooleries in in that Church and Lyturgy.
But let us pursue the Gentleman's parallel of Mahomet and his doctrine, A parallel
between Mahometism and Protestancy.
with our English Reformers and their doctrine, and we shall plainly see, that
there is as much reason to believe Mahometism, as prelatick Protestancy; and
that both these Religious were planted, and propagated by the same means; nay
that it is more to be admired how our Countrymen became Protestants, then the
Arabians, or Armenians became Turcks. When Mahomet began to preach his doctrine
in the East, See heretofore part. 2. sec. 10. and 11.
Christianity (there) was so discredited, (by being divided into sects, and
into so many heresies of Arians, Manichees, Nestorians etc.) that men were
disposed (by that diversity of opinions) to follow any new Religion; especialy
that of Mahomet, because he borrowed something from every Sect; and as the 39.
Articles of the Church of England agree in some fundamental points with
Catholics, and also with heretics, so Mahomet agrees in the worship of one
God with Jews and Chri^tians; and in the doctrine and worship of Christ, he
comes at ^eer to Christianity as most Arians, and Nestorians, or the
Antitrinitarian Protestants of Hungary, Poland etc. nay as Bp. Morton, and some
other Prelaticks. But when Luther in Germany, and Cranmer in England began
Protestancy, S. John Damascen de haeres. says that Mahomet granted Christ as
the word of God and his son, but withal a Creature, and confessed that he was
conceived of the Virgin Mary by virtue of the holy Ghost.
all the west and Latin Church agreed in the Roman Catholic faith; no other
Religion was regarded; and the ^emnants of Wickleff and Hus, were hissed out of
the world, at least were nothing so considerable any where, as the above
mentioned heresies had bin in the East, when Mahomet began there to preach his
Alcoran. So that if heresy, or apostasy can have any excuse, Mahometism in its
beginning was more excusable then Protestancy, by reason of the more
considerable divisions that then were among Christians in matters of doctrine,
then when Luther began his Reformation.

Now let us come to particular reflections upon both. Mahomet retained some
parts of Scripture as well as Protestants; and had as good grounds to reject
what he did not fancy of the letter and sense thereof, as Protestants have to be
choosers of their own Canon, and interpretation. Mahomet gives as many rules of
Morality as Protestants; and though he allows of many wives, Protestants do the
same; with this only difference; that Mahomet says it is lawful to keep many at
once; Protestants say you must keep but one at a time, and that you cannot have
the variety of wives men so much desire, See heretofore part. ^. sec. 2.
without the formality of a divorce; how little is requisite for the validity and
legality of Protestant divorces, we have proved heretofore by the authority and
principles of the first Reformers, and the daily practices of their Successors.
In all other things Mahomets sect is more austere, in fasting, praying,
abstaining from wine etc. then Protestancy. And because both agree in the
incoherency, and absurdity of their principles, both also agree in planting,
propagating, and defending their doctrine not by miracles, or rational
arguments, but by force, and sanguinary statuts. And this is the reason why
Catholics are as little permitted to dispute, or reason for the Roman Religion
in these Kingdoms, as Christians in Turkey; and Priests are as much perseeuted
for writing books of Controversies, as Printers and Stationers and severely
punished. Thus much as to the parallel of both doctrins.

But If we compare their persons, or virtues, we shall find that Mahomet was an
honester man, and deserved more credit then Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, or any of
the first Protestant Reformers. He never was baptized, at least never professed
any Religion, until he composed his own, with the help of an Arian Monk; but
all the first Reformers had first professed the Catholic faith, which
afterward they renounced, pretending that God had forsaken his Church for many
ages; and presumed to say that he had authorized and inspired them to reform
(without showing any warrant) that doctrine unto which their betters in
learning, virtue, and judgment actualy submitted, as unto the true Catholic,
and themselves also had embraced as such, until their pride and lust prevailed
against their conscience. Mahomet married a Widow, and had made no vows not to
marry; the first Reformers married Nuns, and themselves also were votaries,
Calvin only excepted; but his incontinency was no less scandalous, and
notorious, then theirs; having lived in adultery with a Gentlewoman of Mongis,
that left her husband at Lansan^^ to enjoy Calvin's Company at Geneva: who
attempted also to commit the like sin with the Lady ^ollande of Bredrode, wise
to a sickly Nobleman called James Borgongue Lord of Fallaise; in so much as she
persuaded her husband to leave Geneva, and go to Lansan^^, where she revealed
the whole matter. Mahomet it is true was a Cheat, but a mere cunning cheat then
Luther, Calvin, or Cranmer, etc. for by his Dove, or fitts of the falling
sickness he made people believe that the holy Ghost appeared and inspired to
him the Alcoran; but the Protestant Reformers had not so much to show for their
new doctrine, Canon, Translations, and their new sense of Scripture. Mahomet was
constant to his principles; the Protestant Parliament and Reformers were as
changable as the times, and humors of the giddy people; and therefore may with
more reason then the Turks give the Moon crescent for the Crest of their
Religions, as Catholics do the Cross. Here in England they changed with Henry
8. the Roman faith for Articles of Religion devised by the Kings Majesty. As
soon as he dyed they changed that faith into Zuinglianism, to comply with the
Protector Somerset; within two or three years after they changed Zuinglianism
into Calvinianism, at the suit of Calvin, and reformed the Liturgy accordingly.
After K. Edward 6. death they returned with Q. Mary to the old faith. With Q.
Elizabeth they restored the new, but with some alterations. When K. James
succeeded they changed their Translations of Scripture and other things. In K.
Charles 1. time, prelatick Protestancy was pulled down by Presbytery, this by
Independency etc. Prelatick Protestancy being restored again by K. Charles 2.
the forms of Ordination (whereupon depend the validity of the prelatick
Ministry, Church, and Sacraments) were not thought sufficient, and therefore
are now changed into more Catholic forms; and thereby all is left doubtful,
and changeable; for if the Church of England acknowledges to have erred in a
thing of so great importance, what assurance can it have of not erring in all
the rest? In a word, Protestants in this one Kingdom, and in this one age, have
made mo^^ changes of Religions, then Mahometans in the ten ages they have
continued, and in the greatest part of the world which they have conquered.

These things maturely considered, makes Mahometism, as probable a Religion as
the best kind of Protestancy, and therefore it would be no great wonder, if they
who believe the Protestant and Prelatick Clergy, and take their word and
fancies for true Scripture and Christianity, should alter their belief upon the
change of that Clergys testimony; acknowledging that hitherto they had bin
mistaken, (which they may confess at any time because their Church is
acknowledged fallible) and that now they find the Turks have the true faith,
for that they reject all such books of Scripture, as any Christians ever
doubted of (and that as lawfully as the pretended apocrypha, are rejected by
Protestants upon the same ground) and likewise believe all Protestant
fundamental points necessary for salvation, See Heretofore part. 2. sec. 11.
seeing they believe of Christ as much as Arians, Socinians, and Chillingworth
with his Sect of wits; nay as much as the moderat and modern Prelatick writers,
who say, that it is sufficient to believe Christ is the word and son of God,
which Mahomet never denied. If any Mahumetan Prince could pretend a title to
this British Monarchy, (with probability of prevailing) why may not we think he
would find the Protestant Clergy as ready to comply with his Religion, (thereby
to secure their own, and promote his interest) as they were ready to change the
Catholic and legal Religion, which was professed in Q. Mary's time, for
complying with Q. Elizabeth, and fortifying her weak title against the
legitimat and undoubted Heirs? All things weighed, there is less difference
between Mahumetism and prelatick Protestancy, then between prelatick
Protestancy and Popery; for that Popery and Protestancy agree only in the name
of Christianity, in the motive and manner of faith, they differ, and in the
ground thereof, as also in the Canon, letter, and Sense of Scripture; but
Mahumetism and Protestancy though they agree not in the letter of Scripture,
(Protestants admitting into their Canon more books thereof then the Turks) yet
they both agree in the rule of Religion, (though not in the application,) as
also in the rule whereby their Canon and sense of Scripture is discerned, which
is, every man's private judgment in controverted matters; in that point which is
not controverted, (to wit, one Deity) the consent and concurrence of the
generality of the world, or evident reason, is the foundation as well of
Mahumetism as of protestancy; as also in the point of the immortality of the
soul. Therefore I see no impossibility or improbability (said this great wit)
why Mahumetism may not in time be made the Religion of these Nations, without
violating the principles, or altering the grounds of Protestancy, and the
prelatick Clergy be as much applauded, See heretofore part 2. sec. 10. how the
most learned Protestants of the world became Turcks and Jews sticking to the
principles of Protestancy.
and rewarded for the one change as for the other: The greatest obstacle is,
that no Mahumetan Prince can pretend a title (even such as Q. Elizabeth's was)
to the Crown.

God almighty deliver us from so great evils, and open the eyes of them that do
not see the precipices whereunto their souls are led by such principles; and
grant the learned prelatick Clergy grace to prefer truth before falsehood,
conscience before convenience, and eternity before the few days which they are
to enjoy Benefices, and Bishoprics. But in case they do not (for fear of
loosing their credit and conveniences) recant their errors. J hope the
Protestant Layty will have so much curiosity as to examine whether it be
possible that so many Catholic Authors as have written books of Controversies,
should damn and discredit themselves, by forging and feigning Protestant frauds
and falsifications, quoting the very places and pages where they are to be
found; affirming that without such practices, protestancy cannot be maintained;
to examine I say whether we Catholics can be so wicked and witless, as to
accuse men of such grievous crimes without hopes of any honor, or profit to our
selves, but rather with a certainty of an immediate discovery of our impostures.

If this one thing be maturely considered, the Protestant Layty and their
unlearned Clergy that rely so much upon the sufficiency and sincerity of
Cranmer, Jewel, Fox, Morton, Andrews, Whitaker, Fulk, Perkins, Usher, Laud,
Abbots, Chillingworth, Bramhall, Cosins, Hamond, Tailor, etc. will believe us,
or at least examine, and certainly find most palpable inexcusable corruptions
and contradictions in every one of their own Authors books composed against the
Roman doctrine, and conclude with us, that Piety and Policy is mistaken in
promoting Protestancy, and persecuting Popery, and that a good revenue, may be
conscientiously settled (if legaly demanded) upon the Crown; and upon the poor
soldiers, and seamen that defend these nations against foreign invasions, and
rebellious insurrections: Seeing the Pope and his Roman Catholic Clergy, in all
likelihood, will be content to resign their right and interest in the Church
revenues to his Majesty, as they did in the like occasion to Q. Mary, who
notwithstanding the tenderness of her conscience, was satisfied there could be
no scruple of Sacrilege in applying (with consent of the true owners)
ecclesiastical livings to pious and public uses.

And now I hope I may conclude this Treatise with humbly desiring a Conference
or examination of Protestant and Catholic books, at least of one for each
side; let the quotations of Doctor Tailors Dissuasive be viewed, and that book
or any other writ against the Roman Religion, stand for the Protestants
sincerity, it is like he writ nothing carelessly, or rashly, his declared drift
being to make a whole Nation Protestants, and professing himself to be only
Amanuensis to a prelatick Convocation of reformed Bishops, which in his Preface
he compares with that Assembly of the Apostles wherein choice was made of Judas
his Successor, and says the lot of St. Mathias fell upon himself, and that
some other like himself was Barnabas the just. Jf this holy Convocation of
Protestant Apostles should set forth a Book that has more lies then leaves, I
hope men may advise their friends to consider whether a Religion that cannot be
maintained but by such men and means, and a Clergy that practices such frauds
and falsifications, ought to be preferred before a Religion and Clergy that not
only professes (as all others do) to write truth, but presses to come to a
public trial thereof in a ^egall way; and rather then fail herein, are content,
that the controversy be decided by them, that are known to be most zealously
devoted to Protestancy. I do not instance Bp. Tailors Dissuasive from Popery
for the Trial, as if his falsifications to maintain Protestancy were more
numerous, or more enormous then those of other writers that have defended the
same cause. No. He is more wa^y then many, and more moderat then most of his
predecessors, or equals. But I instance his book to give my adversaries all
the advantages that the learning of the Author and the Authority of a
Convocation can afford. Jf they have a better opinion of the sufficiency of
Bishop Jevell, then of Bp. Tailor, they may fix rather upon his Apology for the
Church of England, then upon Doctor Tailors Dissuasive from Popery, authorized
by the Church of Ireland. To Jevells Apology we oppose Harding, Stapleton, and
Rastalls Answers; To Tailors Dissuasive, Worsley, Lengar, and Sergeants
Annotations. But if they refuse this offer, as pointing but at two particular
Doctors of their Church, let them be pleased to have the truth of their
Reformation, and the sincerity of their whole Clergy examined by answering to
the frauds and falsifications wherewith I charge their whole Church, and
calling, in this book.

FINIS.
The Sum of this Treatise Containing the Substance of every Section.
THE FIRST PART. Containing the Matter of Fact of the Beginning, Progress,
Principles, and effects of Protestancy.
SECTION I.
HOw necessary a rational religion is for a peaceable government, and wherein
does the reasonableness of Religion consist. How dangerous for a temporal
Sovereign to pretend a spiritual supremacy over his subjects. Heathen Princes
durst not assume it without a persuasion in their subjects that it was due by
descent from some Deity, or that the Gods signified their approbation thereof by
prodigies and miracles. The great Turk, notwithstanding his tyranny, thinks it
not policy to pretend a spiritual jurisdiction over his subjects, though
slaves. The ground of policy piety and peace consists in establishing by law a
Religion confirmed by miracles: that such a Religion will make the Prince
powerful and popular, the Prelates respected, the people willing to obey and
pay taxes. It takes away all pretexts of rebellion upon the score of a
tenderness of conscience. How necessary it is for the Government to have a
devout Clergy, and that Clergy at the Sovereigns devotion, and Some of them
employed in State affairs. Thereby all disputes between the spiritual and
temporal jurisdictions are prevented. With how much reason Statesmen dread
such disputes. For the space of 1500. years the Catholic world believed that
the Bishop of Rome had the supreme spiritual jurisdiction over souls, as being
Christ's Vicar upon earth: and that only such as were of his Communion, and
under his obedience, were members of the Catholic Church: and therefore the
Greeks for exempting the Bishop of Constantinople and themselves from that
obedience, were declared Schismatics: others were condemned as Heretics for
teaching and professing doctrine contrary to the Roman. Both the doctrine and
authority of the Roman Bishops and Clergy, has been confirmed by undeniable
true miracles, even here in England. It was held to be the only Catholic
doctrine in St. Gregory the great his time. That faith which we Roman
Catholics now profess is the same (in every particular) with that of St.
Gregory, and of all Orthodox Christians of his time, and for confirmation
whereof true miracles have been wrought.

SECT: II.
OF the Author and beginning of Protestancy. The first Preacher thereof was
Martin Luther an Augustine Friar; who from his youth had bin lianted by the
Devil, and presumed to have bin possessed. He resolved to preach and write
against the Mass, praying to Saints, and other Catholic Tenets, after that the
Devil had appeared to him, and convinced him by Protestant arguments. How
weakly the Protestant writers endeavor to excuse Luthers disputation,
instruction and familiarity with the Devil. Others acknowledge it and maintain
that the Devils doctrine ought to be believed when it agrees with the Protestant
interpretation of Scripture, that is, with every private interpretation contrary
to the sense of the whole visible Church. How much it is against piety and
policy to make the Protestant, or any other private interpretation of Scripture,
the Religion of the State, or to prefer it before that of the Church, and of
the holy ancient Fathers, quoted subsect. 1. and passim.

SECT: III.
OF the principles ad propagation of Protestancy. How Luther begun his
reformation by gaining Poets, Players, Painters, and Printers, to discredit by
their Poems, Pamphlets, pictures and ballads, the Roman Catholic Religion, and
its Clergy. How he drew also many dissolute Friars and Priests to his side, and
married nine of them to so many Nuns in one day, taking also one to himself.
How he made his reformation plausible to Libertins by teaching that only Faith
was necessary for Salvation, without troubling themselves with good works: and
popular, by preaching that no Christian ought to be subject to an other, and
how thereupon the Clowns, and Tenants of Germany rebelled against their Princes
and Landlords. The three fundamental principles of Protestancy are. 1. That for
many ages the whole visible Church had bin in damnable errors, and so continued
until Luthers reformation. 2. That there is no rule of faith but Scripture as
Protestants are pleased to interpret it. 3. That men are justified by only
faith. How from these principles have issued innumerable Protestant Religions
contrary one to the other. Luther did see his own reformation divided into 130.
disagreing sects of Protestants. None could ever prove there was one true
miracle wrought to confirm the Protestants doctrine, or their pretended
authority for reforming the Tenets of the Roman Catholic Church; Protestants
are forced to say that miracles are ceased, and that ours are Diabolical or
counterfeit. Because no true Bishops were Protestants, and by consequence they
could have no Priests ordained, and so their Priesthood must have perished
after the death of the first Apostatas Luther and others, the Protestant
reformers and Churches taught, that all Christians are Priests both men and
women: and this doctrine is supposed to be true by the Church of England in
their 39. articles, and in the Act of Parliament 8. Eliz. 1.

SECT: IV.
OF the Protestant Prelatick Church of England. The occasion of K. Henry the 8.
divorce from Q. Catharin, and of his revolt from the Church of Rome, was his
passion to An Bullen: the words of S. John Baptist to Herod, concerning his
brothers wife, absurdly applied to K. Henrys marriage, with his Brothers
widow. How zealously he had formerly maintained the Popes supremacy: how
cruelly he afterward persecuted the professors thereof; and how impiously he
judged S. Thomas of Canterbury, robbed his shrine, and burnt his Relics. The
Catholic Princes rejected his embasies and solicitations for imitating his
example in assuming the supremacy. And how much the protestant Princes were
troubled and ashamed that he made his lust the motive of his reformation. How
incredible a thing is the English supremacy. K. Henry 8. at length resolved to
renounce it, and return to the duty of a Christian King, but stood upon such
terms, and differrd it so long that he died in Schism, excommunicated, and
despairing of Gods mercy. His last will and testament was broken before his
body was buried. The Earl of Hartford made himself Protector, and brought into
England the Sacramenrian or the Zuinglian heresy, against K. Henrys last will,
and the laws of the land then in force without a Parliament and contrary to
the votes of the Earls of Arundell and Southampton, and others of the 16.
Trustees named Governors by K. Henry 8. during the minority of Edw. 6.

SVBSECT: I.
HOw Seamor was directed and destroyed by Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. The
said Dudley (notwithstanding he was a Catholic in his judgment as himself
confessed at his death) concurred to establish protestancy in England,
designing thereby to unsettle the state, and make way for excluding the right
heirs of the Crown; and crown his own family, which he effected by excluding Q.
Mary (for being a Catholic) and by marrying his Son to the Lady Jane Gray, who
had no other right to the Kingdom but what her Zeal to the Protestant Religion
and Clergy gave her. What wicked men and great cheats were Cranmer and his
Camerades that composed the 39. articles of the Protestant Religion of the
Church of England, and the common prayer book, that of Sacraments, Rites and
Ceremonies, and how the common people were made believe the change was not of
Religion but of language

SECT: V.
OF the 39. Articles of the Church of England; they contain only some general
notions of Christianity, and are applicable to all dissenting Sects of
Protestancy, as Presbytery, Zuinglianism etc. The design of the composers
having bin rather to give men a liberty of not believing the particulars of
Christian Religion, then of tying them to any certain points thereof, or to any
faith, therefore they declare that the visible Church is fallible, and determine
no certain canonical Scripture of the new Testament. They make the doctrine that
Luther learnt of the Devil against the Mass, Tradition, and praying to Saints
etc. part of their Creed: as also the Tenet against spiritual Caracters of
Episcopacy and Priesthood ( art. 25.) rejecting imposition of hands as not
instituted by Christ. In the 2. last Articles they endeavor (in vain) to
suppress the errors of Anabaptists; especialy that of appropriating to
themselves other men's goods: in vain I say, because in their former articles
they declare its lawful for Protestants to dispossess the Roman Catholic
Clergy of their goods and dignitys, by virtue of a private interpretation of
Scripture; and the Anabaptists pretend no more but that its lawful for
themselves to deal after the same manner with Prelaticks: and it is certain there
can be no disparity given. So that the two last articles of the 39. as also
that of the authority of the Protestant Clergy, are against an evident parity
of reason in their own Protestant Principles.

SECT: VI.
A Particular account of the revolutions which these 39. articles caused in
England: and how they may work always the same effects, if there be such
politic and popular heads amongst us, as Dudley, Crumwell and many of the last
long Parliament. Q. Mary's Reign how much endangered by Protestant designs and
rebellions. Duke Dudleys speech at his death. The Roman Catholic Religion
restored by Act of Parliament, and the Protestant decreed to be Heresy and
Schism, as also the force and frauds of K. Henry 8. divorce discovered, and his
marriage with Q. Catharin of Spain, declared valid. The Roman Clergys
resignation of the Church revenues to the Crown and present possessors. Q.
Elizabeth's intrusion against the right of the Stewards effected by the zeal of
the Protestant faction for suppressing of Popery.

SECT: VII.
NOtwithstanding that Q. Elizabeth was declared illegitimat by 3. Acts of
several Parliaments never yet repealed, she possessed herself of the Croun, and
excluded the Queen of Scots the lawful and immediate heir to Q. Mary lately
deceased. By the advice of Cecil and others she revived Protestancy, and the
Supremacy, thereby to excuse her illegitimacy. She instituted a new Kind of
Clergy; the Prelatick Protestant Bishops neither had, nor have any other
caracter of Episcopacy, but what the great seal, and her temporal laws give
them. Any Lay person may consecrat a Bishop of the Church of England, if he
has the Kings commission to do it, all other things being superfluous,
according to the Act. 8. Eliz. 1. and 25. article of the 39. How the Oath of
supremacy divided Protestants, and made the Catholics more constant. The
simplicity of some Protestant writers pretending that the Pope offered to
confirm the English liturgy if Q. Elizabeth would acknowledge his jurisdiction.

SECT: VIII.
REasons why Q. Elizabeth in her long reign could not settle her Protestant
Religion, nor gain credit for the Prelatick Clergy: Neither is it possible for
her Successors to make the generality of her subjects to have any esteem for
either.

SECT: IX.
HOw injurious and prejudicial the Protestant Religion has been to the Royal
family of the Stevards: and how zealous they have bin, and still are, in
promoting the same. It preferred not only Q. Elizabeth, but also any natural
child of hers, before the line of the Stewards. Whereof see the 8. sect. ^in:
How dexterously K. James played his game; and how they who murdered his
mother, were forced to invite him to the Crown of England. Of his design to
reform the principles and liberty of Protestancy, intending thereby to render it
less dangerous to lawful Sovereigns, and Monarchy. How K. Charles 1. pursued
his Fathers design; but his sufferings and death demonstrat the impossibility
of confining the Protestant liberty within the rules of Government, or reason.
By the fundamental principles of Protestancy, every particular person is a
Supreme Judge in spiritual affairs; and may more easily apply and abuse that
prerogative to the prejudice of his Sovereign, then the Pope can his papal
Supremacy. Therefore its a great providence of God when any Protestant King of
England escapes to be judged and deposed by his Subjects.

THE SECOND PART.
OF the unreasonableness of Protestancy and of the inconsistency of the
principles of Protestancy with Christian piety and peaceable government.

SECT: I.
THe unreasonableness and inconsistency of Protestancy with Christian piety, or
policy, proved by the very fundamental principle of all Protestant
reformations; which principle is a supposition of the fallibility and fall of
the visible Catholic Church, from the pure and primitive doctrine of Christ, to
damnable errors, and notorious superstition. Such a change is demonstrated both
incredible and impossible.

SECT: II.
THe Protestants proof of such a change is their pretended cleerness of
Scripture. It is demonstrated that their Sense of Scripture is not clear in any
texts controverted between Catholics and Protestants. That the principles of
Protestancy incline to vice, the Catholic principles to virtue: proved in many
particulars. The invisibility of the Church, a ridiculous comment.

SECT: III.
THe Protestant letter and Sense of Scripture is not the word of God. Doctor
Cossins his Scholastical History of the English Canon of Scripture, confuted;
as also his exceptions against the authority of the Roman Catholic Canon. The
Lutheran Churches of Germany agree not with the English Canon of Scripture.

SVBSECT: I.
DOctor Cossins (now Bp. of Duresme) his exceptions against the Council of
Trent, answered. The legality of a Council as well as of a Parliament may stand
with the absence of many members, if they were summoned and expected. The
absurdity of Protestant writers excepting against the want of Bishops in the
Council of Trent, whereas themselves made new Religions and reformations by a
Single voice of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin etc. and in England by the vote of
the major part of twelve persons named by the Parliament to determine matters of
faith and Sacraments; seven men were thought sufficient to do the work, and
cast the Roman Catholic Religion. Protestant Bishops can no more pretend to
sit and define in a general Council, then proclaimed rebels can pretend to
vote in a lawful Parliament. Its as reasonable the Bishop and Church of Rome
should condemn heretics, and judge all controversies of faith as it is that a
King and Parliament condemn rebels and judge suites in law. A new definition
of Pope or Council is no new article of faith; it is only a declaration of our
obligation to believe that which formerly had bin revealed but not sufficiently
proposed. Doctor Cossins his egregious falsification of Belarmin, his wresting
words of St. Austin and St. Hierom.

SECT: IV.
THe Protestant translations of Scripture are fraudulent and falls: no certainty
of Christian faith can be built upon them: Protestants admit no Copy or
translation to be authentic, to the end they may be at liberty to reject what
they do not fancy of the letter of Scripture as well as of the sense. The
vulgar Latin is authentic Scripture. How corrupt are all English Bibles. How
in K. Edward 6. his reign Cranmer, and the first Apostles of English
Protestancy, changed the very text of Christ's words (This is my body) three
several times. Protestants make the Apostles fallible in doctrine, even after
receiving the holy Ghost, and by consequence must hold their writings or
Scripture to be fallible.

SVBSECT: I.
MAny particular instances of Protestant corruptions in the English Bibles, to
asert the Protestant and prelatick doctrine of the Church of England, Against
images, Against Ordination by imposition of hands, Against the single life of
Priests, Against the Sacrifice of Mass, Against vows of chastity. To favor
the Kings Supremacy, How fondly these corruptions are excused by Whitaker, and
how absurdly Scripture is made speak according to the Protestant translations.
What small hopes there are that a Clergy which corrupts Scripture, or
continues and countenanceth corruptions of Scripture, will repent or recant
their errors, and how little reason the Protestant layty has to rely upon
their Clergys sincerity, or upon their English Scripture.

SECT: V.
THe Protestant interpretation is not the true Sense of Scripture. The
principal part of Gods word, is the sense he delivered to the Church, together
with the letter. Its against reason to believe that the Church would be more
careful of preserving the letter, then of preserving the sense of Scripture;
and therefore Protestants are inexcusable for taking the letter from the Roman
Church, and rejecting the sense. The holy Fathers bid us receive the Sense of
Scripture as well as the letter, from the Church. An infallible mark of heresy
to do the contrary. It is at least 16. to one, that the Roman Catholic Sense
of Scripture is true, and the Protestant falls.

SECT: VI.
NO Protestant Church has a true Ministry, Miracles, Succession of doctrine,
or Sanctity of life. Their extraordinary vocation is ridiculous and incredible,
it being impossible that God should send Ministers to contradict doctrine
confirmed with so many signs of his own authority and approbation, as the Roman
Catholic is. God never sent such vicious men as the Protestant reformers were,
to reform his Church either in the old or new Testament. If the Protestant
doctrine had bin true, God would have wrought miracles to confirm it, for the
conversion of the seduced Papists, as Protestants confess he does for the
conversion of the Jndians, Iaponians, and China. What wicked men were Luther,
Zuinglius Calvin, Beza, Cranmer, and the rest of his Camerades that framed the
Religion and Liturgy of the Church of England; and how little credit in matters
of faith deserves the Parliament that confirmed the same. Calvin's miracle at
Geneva foretold by Tertullian.

SECT: VII.
THe conversion of pagan Kings and Kingdoms to Christianity foretold in
Scripture, is a more clear sign of the true Church then any other miracles; and
not to be found in any other Church but in the Roman Catholic, acknowledged by
learned protestants. Of Barlows threescore invisible Queens converted by
protestants. No greater an absurdity then their invisible Church. The vain
endeavors of Calvin and other protestants to convert Heathen nations. Bezas
despair of Success in that Ministry, and his advice to protestants to leave
that labor to the Jesuits, and rather busy themselves at home. Tertullians
saying (that its a sign of heretics to pervert Christians, not convert
pagans,) may be properly applied to Protestants. Their success in propagating
their new Ghospel no greater miracle then the propagation of Mahomets Religion.

SECT: VIII.
OF the Protestant justifying faith how absurd and inconsistent with Christian
virtues: how dangerous to Princes and all civil government: Cromwell was
directed by it, and it may raise many Cromwells. Its as dangerous an opinion as
Atheism; and therefore cried down by K. James in the Conference at Hampton
Court: yet can it not be disowned by the Church of England without disowning
Protestancy, and the Prelatick Religion. How much the best Protestant Princes
and their Ministers are forced to suffer by this justifying faith of their
subjects: what great errors in policy they much condescend unto: Proved by the
settlement of Ireland. The late Earl of Straffords project and policy to make
Roman Catholics considerable in Irland. Protestant Monarchy is more supported
by Jrish Popery, then by Scotch or English presbitery. How fallacious, and
dangerous a thing it is they call the English Protestant interest, in Irland.
Jn all parts of the world where Protestancy is professed, their own Authors
confess that vice and villainy must reign; and there most, where their
justifying faith is purest. The Roman Indulgences and Jubilees give no such
liberty or indemnity as the justifying Protestant faith. We Roman Catholics
ought to praise, and thank our Sovereign and his Ministers for not feeling wors
effects of this justifying faith, and of Protestancy. To use us with Christian
moderation they strive against the principles of their own Religion.

SECT: IX.
THat the rule of the Protestant faith and judge of controversies (which is
Scripture as interpreted by every Protestant) is not consistent with Christian
Faith, humility, Charity, peace either in Church or State. All heretics
appeal to the letter of Scripture, therefore Luther called it the book of
heretics. Every particular person (according to the fundamental principle of
Protestancy) must be a Supreme Judge of Scripture, Counsels, and Fathers and
of the whole Church. How ridiculous it is to see shallow wits, and silly women,
explain Scripture, condemn Counsels, Fathers, and the whole Catholic Church;
which folly proceeds from want of judgment, humility, charity, and Christian
faith: It occasioned our late troubles, and rebellion, which was grounded upon
the Principles of Protestancy. A Protestant people cannot be otherwise governed
then a people whereof every one by privilege or birthright, may appeal from
the law interpreted by public Courts of Judicature, to the law interpreted by
every private person. The Protestants imaginary general Counsels, and their
appeals thereunto, discovered to be a cheat to divert and delay any
determination of religious controversies. Every Protestant is a Pope, more
absolute and dangerous, then the Bishop of Rome. K. James his saying that every
Protestant in the house of Commons was a King by his Religion. How little the
oath of Supremacy contributes to the Kings Sovereignty, or Security, or to the
subjects loyalty. The Protestant rule of faith is but every ones fancy applied
to the words of Scripture. And therefore they often change according to their
weakness of judgment or strength of passion. Auditius his expression of their
monthly faith; and Melanctons saying (both Protestants) that they knew whom to
avoid, but knew not whom to follow, are ingenuous. The Protestant confessions,
and articles of faith composed, and professed by every national Church, oblige
not the members of those Churches, because the Collectors and composers of such
articles are not infallible, and will be thought not to agree with Scripture,
at least as every particular person will explain it. The 39. Articles of the
Church of England are so ambiguous, that they may be applied to all dissenting
Tenets of Protestants, both at home and abroad; and therefore are printed and
pressed in England to satisfy disagreeing parties: and yet no party is
contented with that indifferent symbol, though each party callenges them in
some occasions, as favoring their own opinions, nor any thing more contrary to
piety and policy then articles so applicable to contrary Tenets, and interests.
An arbitrary Religion is more dangerous and prejudicial to a state, then an
arbitrary government. How unfit the 39. articles and the Oath of Supremacy are
to be made the distinctive sign of trust and loyalty to the King. A man is more
engaged to stick to the King by a red scarf, or a garniture of ribands of the
Kings colors, then by an oath of so incredible a thing as the Supremacy; and
so vnsignificant articles as those of the 39. that contradict the Roman
Catholic doctrine. That Religion that has not a more certain or infallible
rule of faith then the Protestant Prelatick of England has, is not fit to be
made the distinctive sign of trust, or loyalty, or the Religion of the state.

SECT: X.
HOw fundamental principles of the Protestant reformations maturely examined,
and strictly followed, have led the most learned Protestants of the world, to
Judaism, Atheism, Arianism, Mahometism etc. And the protestant Churches of
Poland, Hungary and Transylvania, to deny the mystery of the Trinity; and our
best modern English wits and writers, to admit of no other rule of Religion*
but natural reason. Instanced in Castalio, Bucer, David George, Bernardin
Ochin, Neuserus, Calvin, Alemanus, Socinus, Chillingworth, Stilling fleet,
Faukland etc. How prelatick Protestancy is contemned by the best protestant
wits, and writers as being incoherent to the principles of protestancy, and
contradictory in its own Tenets. How Presbiterians agree with the
Anti-trinitarians in their way of reforming. A Prelatick is a Presbiterian
against Papists, and a Papist against Presbyterians. His own Religion includes
both their Tenets, though contradictory: he has but one Tenet whereunto he is
constant, and that is Episcopacy de Iure divino. Calvinists are said by
Lutherans to be baptized Jews, and that Mahometism, Arianism, and Calvinism,
are 3. pair of hose of one cloth. All protestant reformations are remnants of
the same piece, though with different trimmings according to the diversity of
their reformers fancyes. Why our English protestants deny not the Trinity, as
well as those of Hungary: without violating the principles of protestancy they
may do it. Articles of Christian Religion against conclusions clearly
deducible from the principles of protestancy are not valued by protestants. It
is the case of the Church of England.

SECT: XI.
THe indifferency, or rather inclination of Protestancy to all kind of
infidelity, is further demonstrated by the prelatick and Calvinian doctrine of
fundamental and no^ fundamental articles of faith. The design of this new
distinction manifested and frustrated. The design is to make all Christians
(though declared heretics) that dissent from Roman Catholics, one Church, and
of the Protestant communion. The Greeks and others, reject Protestants as
heretics. By their doctrine of fundamentalls Turks and Jews may be of one
Church and communion with Christians. Protestants proceed in matters of
Religion as weak Statesmen do in state affairs. For their separation from the
Roman Catholic Church they cannot be excused from a damnable sin and schism.
Their writers charity toward Catholics is but forced and feigned. Whatsoever
is required that a Church be truly Catholic, is visible in the Roman. It may
judge and censure all other dissenting congregations, without note of
partiality, or illegality. Protestants have no credible nor legal witnesses to
testify that their doctrine is the same which Christ and his Apostles taught:
Roman Catholics have. If all sects of Christians were admitted to general
Counsels, and therein Judges of themselves, and of their faith, greater
illegality it would be; and greater partiality, then that only Roman Catholics
be Judges of their cause. Since the Apostles time, one part of the Christians
judged the other; and the part that judged the other, was that which obeyed and
stuck to the Bishops of Rome as St. Peter's Successors; proved in every age
until this present.

SECT: XII.
HOw Gods veracity is denied by Protestancy; as also by the prelatick doctrine
of fundamental and not fundamental articles of faith. The belief of Gods
veracity consists not in acknowledging that whatsoever God said, is true:
(never any heretic denied that, and all heretics deny Gods veracity) but
consists in believing that God will not color nor countenance falsehood with
supernatural and evident signs of truth. Protestants give less credit and
obedience to Gods Ministers and Orders declared by the Church though qualified
with undeniable signs of Gods truth* then they do to a Constable, Catchpol, or
any other the meanest officers of a Court or Commonwealth; though their
warrants or badges may be more easily counterfeited, then the miracles or
signs of the Roman Catholic Church. They will not believe God speaks or
commands by the Roman Catholic Church, though it has the supernatural signs
of his trust, and shows his great seal Miracles; but they believe that the
King speaks and commands by any Minister of state, or inferior Magistrate. No
Ministers of judicature or officers of war, have so authentic marks of the
Kings authority to command the subjects, and to end Suits of law, as the Roman
Catholic Church has of Gods authority to instruct mankind, and determine
controversies of faith. As it is rebellion to contemn the Kings authority
represented by the authentic badges thereof in his Ministers; so is it heresy
to contemn Gods authority represented in the Roman Catholic Church by
supernatural signs; as miracles, sanctity, Conversion of nations etc. Gods
veracity might be lawfully questioned, if it were lawful to judge that he
permits the Roman Catholic Church to err in any point of faith whatsoever:
Proved by a similitude of my Lord Chancellor delivering the Kings mind to the
Parliament in his Majesty's own hearing and presence. Veracity is a virtue
inclining to speak truth, not only when the person speaks, but when any other
speaks by his commission; for then, the person that employes an other to speak,
is bound (by virtue of his own veracity) to endeavor (to the uttermost of his
power) that his Minister, or Messenger utter nothing but truth: and this is to
be understood not only in matters of great, but also of small importance.
Protestants make their own convenience (not Gods veracity) the motive of their
faith: and measure thereby, which articles are fundamental, which not. The most
fundamental article, (or the foundation of faith) is, to believe, that God can
not permit his Church to err, even in not fundamentals. A Demonstration ad
hominem against the Protestant doctrine of the Churches fallibility in not
fundamentalls.

SECT: XIII.
THe same further demonstrated; as also that neither the Protestant faith, nor
that of the Sure footing in Christianity, is christian belief. Not the matter
believed, but the motive and manner of believing, makes our belief Christian.
Protestants and the Author of the Sure footing believe not any thing in matters
of faith which they do not imagine to be evident, in it self, or evident to them
that it is revealed. They agree in making clear or self evidence the rule of
faith, but vary in the application of that rule: the Author of the Sure footing
applies it to all or most of the Roman Catholic Tenets; Protestants to few.
The doctrine of the Sure footing can not be excused by the opinion of some
Schoolmen, that say, an act of faith is possible and consistent with evidence
of the revelation. Christian faith must have a mixture of obscurity. Mr. Robert
Boyles expression (that faith and twilight agree in this property, that a
mixture of darkness is requisite to both; for that with too refulgent light the
one vanishes into knowledge, as the other, into day) is not only witty, but
agreeable to the sense of the ancient Fathers, and to Scripture: Hebr. 11.

To believe, is to trust the person believed, and take his word for the truth*
as you do a man's word, or bill for money. Gods worth and veracity being
infinite, we ought not to admit of any doubt in matters of faith: our assurance
of faith must not be grounded upon evidence either of the object, or of the
revelation but upon an impossibility that God should (by evident signs) oblige
mankind to believe, that he revealed the mysteries of Christianity and yet not
reveal them; or permit the Church to deceive us. God were not omnipotent, did
he permit the Church to err in any matter of faith, though not fundamental:
because according to the proportion of ones inclination to any thing, is the
application of his power to effect the same: and Gods inclination to truth,
(even in not fundamentalls) being infinite, he must be infinitely concerned, and
applied to preserve the Church from falsehood in the least articles as well as
in fundamentalls. The different manner of believing God, and men. We could not
believe God if it were evident to us he spoke what we assent unto. Wherein does
consist the guilt of heresy? Declared by that of rebellion. The absurdity of
the private spirit, and of all other Protestant pretexts against the public
testimony and authority of the Roman Catholic Church.

SECT: XIV.
PIety and policy mistaken in making prelatick Protestancy the legal Religion
of the state; and in continuing the Sanguinary and penal statuts against the
Roman Catholic faith. It was want of Christian piety in Q. Elizabeth to
introduce the Protestant Religion, but not want of human policy, because she
had no title to the Crown but by Protestancy. The title of the Stevards is
unquestionable; and therefore they need not the Support of Protestancy. How
dangerous and damnable a thing it is, to make the temporal laws of the land the
rule of faith: the Protestant prelatick Religion has no better. The Principles
and privileges of Protestancy being inconsistent with Sovereignty and
government; every Protestant Commonwealth found it necessary to mold and
moderat those principles and privileges by human laws, according to the
customs and constitutions of every Kingdom; and therefore Episcopacy (without
which our Parliaments could not be legal) was here in England continued with
prelatick Protestancy, though contrary to the Tenets of Protestancy, and to the
examples of other Protestant Churches. Whence follows continual discontents
and designs of the generality of these Protestant nations against their
prelatick Clergy; and the little esteem and affection there is for the same
Clergy among the reformed Churches abroad. How unsafe it is for the Prince and
government to establish by law a Religion and Clergy so generaly hated, and
that acknowledges it self to be fallible in doctrine, and therefore (for all
they know) lead their flocks to eternal damnation. Laws enacted to favor
Religion, ought to suppose, not pretend to make the Religion reasonable. Reason
is the ground of human laws; but human laws can not be the ground of Religion.
How dangerous it is to press too much the Act of uniformity against so great
and zealous a multitude as the Sectaries are. Their errors ought to be confuted
with reason, not rigor. The prelatick Clergy (whose spiritual Censures and
authority ought to quash all dissentions) does cause the mischief, and engages
the state in perpetual troubles for maintaining (by force of law) the
improbability of their caracter and jurisdiction, against the evidence of
reason.

SVBSECT: I.
THe prelatick caracter and Religion is so incredible that few serious men in
their judgments continue any long time Prelaticks. By pretending a mean, and
moderation between Papists and Presbiterians, the Prelaticks fall into manifest
contradictions in defending their own caracter, doctrine, and discipline. How
learned Protestants are forced to confess that the Prince may force his
subjects by laws to his Protestant persuasion; and that every Protestant
subject (notwithstanding the Prince his prerogative) has a private authority to
judge of the Prince his Religion; and is bound to stick to his own contrary
judgment. What great confusion this must occasion. It is the nature of all
Religions that give private men liberty to judge of Religious controversies, to
cause such disorders. How this inconvenience is prevented in the Roman
Catholic. One of the differences between it and the Protestant is, that when
Protestants rebel, they do not violat the principles of Protestancy, which
makes every man Supreme in matters of faith, and by consequence of state. When
Catholics rebel, they go against their principles, that give no such
supremacy or liberty. Jn these last one hundred years there have bin more
rebellions upon the score of Protestancy, then have bin since Christ's time upon
the score of the Roman Catholic Religion. In what sense the Roman Catholic is
a growing Religion. Whether it be policy to persecute a Religion that
increases against the rigor of the laws; and to promote a Religion that does
not increase with all the helps of laws and favors of the Prince. The
sanguinary and penal statuts are thought to be so unjust, (even by Protestants)
that no honest and sober man thinks them fit to be put in execution. Whether it
be policy to continue such statuts? All seditious persons begin their designs
against the government with pressing the execution of the statuts: and sometimes
thereby make the zealous and giddy multitude rebel. Whether it were not piety
and policy to repeal statuts, that, if put in execution, make the nation and
government infamous; if not put in execution, may occasion rebellion, by reason
of an indiscreet zeal in the giddy multitude? Besides, their being enacted to
suppress the principles and destroy the persons of the Catholic party, which
maintained the Stevards right to the Crown, ought to facilitat the repeal.

SVBSECT: II.
THe sanguinary and penal statuts of England against Catholics, can not be
justified by the proceeding of the Inquisition, or by laws and edicts of
Christian Kings and Emperors against heretics. The first English Protestants
acknowledged themselves to be heretics, when they petitioned to the Parliament
(1. Ed. 6.) for a repeal of all ancient statuts against heretics, not daring
to preach and profess their reformed doctrine until the Parliament had
condescended to their petition. Queen Elizabeth's reformation confirmed by
Sanguinary statuts diametricaly opposite to primitive Christianity: and therefore
very strange, that men so knowing as the English nobility and gentry, should
continue them; or that persons so pious, loyal, and well bred, should not
(either out of Christian charity to Catholics or out of a dutiful civility to
the Royal family that now reigns) repeal laws enacted by Q. Elizabeth for ruin
of the Stevards party, and for excluding themselves from the Crown.

THE THIRD PART.
COntaining the conscience and convenience of tolerating the Roman Catholic
religion by Act of parliament; proved by the little conscience of the
Protestant clergy, in maintaining Protestancy with frauds and falsifications:
and by the great inconveniences this Monarchy suffers by pressing the
prelatick and Protestant Religion upon tender consciences.

SECT: I.
DEmonstrated that either the learned Protestant, or the Roman Catholic
Clergy, are Cheats. Proved by the impossibility of concealing the truth of
Christianity, and of the true Church otherwise then by the frauds, and
falsifications of either Clergy: So manifest are the signs of the Catholic
Church and so particularly mentioned in Scripture. And as one of the two
Clergyes are Cheats, so either the Catholic or Protestant layty, are damnably
careless in matters of salvation. Reasons why the Catholic layty can not be
thought carless; the Protestant may. How easily the truth may be known and how
the Protestant layty may be considerably eased from extraordinary taxes, by
informing themselves of the truth of Religion. The impudency and impiety
wherewith Bp. Ievell and the first prelatick clergy imposed Protestancy upon
this nation, to favor Q. Elizab: pretensions, and to raise themselves from
Pedantry to Peerage. Proved by Ievells Challenge and Sermon at Paul's Cross;
and by his and the Prelatick clergyes Apology for their Church of England:
pretending that the Catholic Church for the first 600. years was Protestant.
How this imposture was confuted by the Catholic writers; and the Protestant
writers forced to acknowledge their own error. How the same imposture was again
maintained by succeeding prelaticks, and how vnsuccesfully. How Tailor revived
now again the same shamfull imposture, and with how great infamy to his person,
and discredit to his cause. The Protestant layty can not, without committing a
damnable sin give any credit to their Clergy in matters of Religion, after so
many and so manifest Discoveries of the frauds and falsifications whereby
(alone) they defend Protestancy. How a conference and Trial about this matter
can not be conscientiously denied, nor the denial stand with good policy.

SECT: II.
THe same further demonstrated; and that there can be no reason to suspect the
sincerity of the Roman Catholic Clergy.

SVBECT I. AND II.
WHether it be charity to treat Cheats with ceremony, when they are convicted
of damning souls by frauds and wilful falsifications. And whether the first
reformers of the English Church ( Cranmer and his Camerades,) ought not to be
censured accordingly. The frauds, and wilful falsifications, hypocrisy,
incontinency, impiety and Atheism of the prelalatick Protestant Clergy in K.
Edward 6. reign. What a wicked man Arch. Cranmer* was. of Peter Martyr,
Echinus, Bucer, Latimer, and Ridleys impieties.

SVBSECT. III.
OF Hooper, Rogers, Poynet, Bale, and Coverdale. Hooper and Rogers combined
against Cra^mer and Ridley. How Latimer joined with them. Their Project of
Puritanism. How Hooper inveighed against plurality of benefices when he had
none, and enjoyed two Bishoprics when his faction prevailed; and left his
friend Rogers in the lurch. How Rogers and Coverdale conspired with Tyndall to
falsify Scripture. Bishop Poynets contest and Suit in law, with a Butcher,
about the Butchers wife, notwithstanding that Poynet had one of his own. But
Sentence was given for the Butcher against Poynet* contrary to the Principles
and liberty of Protestancy, and to what the protestant Church had resolved
before in the like case between Sir Ralph Sadler, and one Barrow, whose wife
was decreed to be married to Sir Ralph, during Barrows life. Bishop Bales
conversion to protestancy, related by himself, and attributed to his beloved
Dol. What an impostor he was. Bish: Coverdales drunkenes, and corruptions of
Scripture. How corrupt and ungodly a Scripture is the English translation of
the Bible. It was condemned by act of Parliament as fraudulent and falls.
Notwithstanding which censure it was (and is) imposed upon the Nation as the
word of God; sometimes it was called Mathews Bible; othertimes the Bishops
Bible or the Bible of the large volume, with little or no alteration. Coverdales
vanity in attempting to convert to protestancy the University of Oxford.
Laurence Sanders a Protestant Martyr and Priest; his resolution to die for
legitimating his little bastard.

SVBSECT: IV.
ARch. Cranmers conference with Doctor Martyn and other Catholics. How weakly
he defended the Protestant cause. How vainly Protestants pretend Scripture for
their doctrine, as all heretics do. How Cranmer was proved to be an heretic by
the definition of Origin, Tertullian, etc.

SECT: III.
OF the Protestant Clergy in Q. Mary's reign, the same that afterward founded
Q. Elizabeth's Church. Their frauds, factions, cheats, and changes of the
English Protestant religion during their exile in Germany, Related by Dr.
Heylin. How the German Protestants called the English Protestants, the devils
Martyrs, and would not entertain their banished Clergy and Confessors. How
thereupon the English clergy changed and accommodated their Religion to that of
the places wherein they lived, and printed books at Frankford and Geneva
containing contrary doctrines for humoring dissenting churches. How often they
changed their Liturgy at Frankford. Of Grindall, Horn, Sandys, Chambers,
Pakhurst, Whithead, Whittingham, Williams, Goodman, Wood, Sutton, Fox; their
frauds, factions, divisions and books against Q. Mary etc. How unfit men to be
Bishops and to found a Church: and yet they were the chief pillars and Prelates
of Q. Elizabeth's reformation.

SECT: IV.
ABominable frauds, and wilful falcifications of the protestant Clergy in Q.
Elizabeth's reign to maintain their doctrine set forth under the name of an
Apology and defense of the Church of England. How Q. Elizabeth gained the
Nobility and House of Commons to vote in Parliament for reviving Protestancy.
Of Bish. Jewels ridiculous challenge at Paul's Cross. How all the Protestant
Clergy conspired with him in his impostures. How they were confuted by Doctor
Harding, Stapleton and other Catholics. All the Protestant writers borrow from
Jewels impostures their arguments and authoritys against the Roman Catholic
Religion. Acknowledged by Dr. Heylin in his history of the Church of England.

SVBSECT: I.
THe Protestant Clergys fraud and falsehood against Communion under one kind. It
was a thing indifferent in the ancient Church. Proved by several instances:
Jewels ridiculous evasions.

SVBSECT: II.
Jewel and the Protestant Clergy censure as heretics the same ancient Fathers
they appeal unto in other controversies, for condemning the marriage of Priests.
They corrupt the Ecclesiastical history for the same reason; and bring an
example of an imaginary Bishop to confirm their corruption: and pretend that S.
Gregory Nazianzen says that a Bishop may minister the better in the Church for
having a wife in his house, and that his own Father was instructed in
Ecclesiastical functions by his wife.

SVBSECT. III.
Jewel (and his Prelaticks) charge Cardinal Hosius and all Catholics with
contemning the holy Scriptures contrary to his own knowledge, and even after he
had bin admonished of the imposture.

SUBSECT. IV.
FAlsifications and frauds against the Bishop of Rome his Supremacy, scripture
falsified to impugn the same.

SVBSECT. V.
PRotestants frauds and falsifications to deny and discredit the Sacrifice of
Mass. Their pretense that the ancient Mass was the same thing with the English
communion or Liturgy. Jewels impudency.

SUBSECT: VI.
PRotestant falsifications and corruptions of Scripture to make the Pope
Antichrist, and the succession of Bishops a mark of the beast. Q. Elizabeth's
first Bishops were violently bent against Episcopal Succession, because it was
notorious that themselves wanted such a succession. Want of Succession a mark
of heretics. Proved by Fathers.

SVBSECT: VII.
PRotestant falsifications to prove that Popes may, and have decreed heresys.

SVBSECT: VIII.
ITem to prove that Popes have insulted over Kings.

SVBSECT: IX.
ITem to prove that S. Austin the Apostle of England was no Saint but an
hypocrit, as also to discredit Catholic Writers.

SVBSECT: X.
PRotestants frauds and falsifications of Scripture, as likewise their altering
of the 39. articles of Religion, to make the laity believe that there are true
Bishops and Priests in the Church of England. Jtem their forgery of records.
The Evasions of Primat Bramhal and others, concerning their Episcopal
succession, confuted.

SVBSECT: XI. and XII.
AN advertisment to the Reader concerning Bishop Jewel, of some learned
Protestants converted to the Roman Catholic Faith by discovering the
falsifications and frauds of his books. Mr. Hookers sincerity questioned for
his immoderat praises of so great and notorious an impostor, in his Eccles.
Polit. A feigned Protestant story of the two Doctors Reynolds. How Jewel
excused his falsifications in presence of the Earl of Leicester, by saying that
Papists must be dealt with as Papists.

SECT: V.
FRauds, follies and falsifications of John Fox his Acts of monuments; and of
his Magdeburgian Masters in their Centuries. The little sincerity of the English
Church and Clergy in countenancing such falls dealing. All sober men that read
the works of the Magdeburgian Centurists must conclude they composed them
rather in drinking stoves then in retired studies: so rash and foolish are
their censures of the greatest Doctors and Saints of Gods Church. Vale^tia the
Jesuit aptly compared these centurists to malefactors that confess, all the
knowing and honest men of the country or city witness that they are thieves
and heretics etc. And then these malefactors refute all this, by only saying
that the said knowing and honest men, so highly esteemed by all the world for
their knowledge and integrity, spoke incommodiously, and ignorantly, when they
accused the thieves. John Fox his absurdity in making the true Church visible
to Protestants, and invisible to Catholics. What a ridiculous Church of
Protestants he fancies, and deduceth only from the time of Pope Innocent 3. and
composeth of a rablement of all sectaries, divided among themselves, and
dissenting also from Protestants. Proved in particular instances of Waldensis,
Albigenses, Wickleff, and others. His three simple Miracles of Luthers, and how
Fox describes a revelation of his own, and how he was made a fool by
revelation. The Prelatik clergy recommend Fox his works to all Godly people,
though the learned of them know it to be a collection of frauds, follies, and
fables.

SUBSECT: I.
John Fox his Calendar of Protestant Saints. In all 456. whereof Bishops Martyrs
5. and Cranmer the principal; by him you may judge of the rest. Bishops
Confessors. 1. Virgin Martyrs none. Maid Martyrs 3. Kings and Queens Martyrs
and Confessors 1. ( Edward 6.) Other men and women Martyrs 393* other men and
women Confessors 57. The greatest disputers (against the Catholic Bishops) of
these Martyrs, were a Cook, a Cowheard, a Tailor, a Blaksmith, a millers wife,
a Cutlers wife, and a married maid, So Fox calls her. How madly these poor
souls ran to the fire. Fox his Martyrs were all fanatics.

SUBSECT: II.
Wilful falsifications committed by John Fox in his acts and monuments. He
falsifies Saint Bede, and an ancient english Synod, to make them Quartodecimans,
and to favor the Protestant doctrine of divorces. He falsifies also St.
Antoninus, to discredit Pope Gregory 7. alias Hildebrand: and a Council, to
favor the marriage of Priests. The ancient Greeks and Latin Churches held the
single life of Priests. 120. lies in three leaves of Fox his book; and more in
the whole then in Sleydans History, though eleven thousand are gathered out of
Sleydan by the German writers. His censuring Acts of ancient English
Parliaments for condemning Rebels and heretics. His falsifying Sr. John
Oldcastles profession of faith; to make us believe he was a Protestant in the
point of Purgatory.

SUBSECT: III.
DOctor Charks egregious falsification of St. Austin, and how falsely he
excuses Luthers doctrine of the lawfulness of Adultery and incest.

SUBSECT: IV.
ARch. Cranmer and Peter Martyrs falsifications against transubstantiation and
the Sacrifice of the Mass.

SECT: VI.
HOw some Protestant writers in Q. Elizabeth's time seeing their fellows proved
falsifiers, waved the testimonies of the ancient Fathers and Counsels, and yet
the others continued their former course of falsifying both Fathers and
Counsels. Of Whitaker, Arch. Whitgift, and Fulk* How they contemn the Fathers
and Church, when they relate ancient condemned heresies that Protestants now
profess. Doctor Willet a great Impostor: how impudently he falsifies, taking
God to witness he will speak nothing but truth: it is the general custom of
Protestant writers.

SECT: VII.
FAlsifications and frauds of the prelatick and Protestant Clergy ever since
the beginning of K. James his reign, for continuing and maintaining Protestancy.

SUBSECT: I.
THeir corruptions of Scripture notwithstanding that the King commanded the
English Bibles to be corrected. They corrected some few things that gave
advantage to the Puritans against Episcopacy leaving other corruptions as
formerly. Instead of correcting their falls Scripture, they forged new
Registers. How they falsify Scripture in the first commandment ( Exodus 20.4.)
and yet object against us Catholics that we take away the 2. commandment. How
absurd this their objection is. See also how they corrupt Scripture to humor
K. James in the supremacy: diverse others. Arch. Abbots and the Bp. of Gloucester
altered the true translation of St. Peter's epistle to impugn Purgatory; accused
of this impiety by Sir Henry Savill that translated it rightly. How they
corrupt Scripture against prayer to Saints. That Saints in heaven do hear our
prayers, proved by reason and authority. Whether it be not more then credible
that Arch. Abbots who falsified Scripture, would forge Registers. How
unreasonably the prelatick Clergy in their Dedicatory to King James (set before
the new translation of Scripture) desire his Majesty to protect the same
against the objections of Puritans and Papists.

SUBSECT: II.
OF Dean Walsinghams scruples and Search into matters of Religion; and how by
discovering the frauds and falsifications of his own Protestant Clergy, he
became a Roman Catholic. The occasion of his doubts. His memorial to K. James
(as being head of the church) for satisfaction. His reading of the Defense of
the Censure, and his judgment thereof. How that book proves Scripture is more
clear for Catholic Tenets, then for Protestant: of Dean: Walsinghams
appearance before his Grace at Lambeth: his conference with Doctor Covell. This
Doctors fraud and folly in diverting Walsingham from the truth. Of Dean
Walsinghams third and fourth appearance before my Lord of Canterbury. How he
was abused and threatened by his Grace, for desiring to know the truth. Of the
Knight of the corner ( Perkins) and his persuasions. How the Archbishop (to be
rid of a man that pressed to know the truth) remitted Dean Walsingham to the
Commissary of St. Albans, and to others who gave him no satisfaction. Of Bells
libells delivered, by the Archbishop to satisfy Mr. Walsingham. His last
appearance before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and an assembly of Divines.
How in their presence he produced the corruptions and falsifications of the
Protestant books recommended unto him by his Grace, and yet neither he nor that
assembly durst compare Mr. VValsinghams notes of frauds with the same books as
Mr. Walsingham desired; but dismissed him, wishing he were far enough, for
discovering their cheat, and the weakness of their Religion.

SUBSECT: III.
Reflections upon Mr. VValsinghams Relation. This like case, and cheat does
happen as often as the Protestant Clergy observes any conscientious person
troubled in conscience through the unreasonableness of their Religion. A case
of conscience concerning one millions of revennue proposed, and desired it be
decided by the Parliament, and that some knowing person, (my Lord Chancellor)
be the Moderator of the conference for that purpose.

SUBSECT: IV.
A Relation of a Trial held in France about Religion. How necessary the like is
in England, for the credit of Protestants, and convenience of the state.

SECT: VIII.
PRotestant falsifications to persuade that the Roman Catholic doctrine is
inconsistent with the Sovereignty and safety of Kings, and with civil Society
between Catholics and Protestants. How the Protestant writers having bin
worsted at Scripture, Counsels, Fathers etc, now endeavor to defend
Protestancy by reasons of state, and become unfortunate Politicians. Diverse
falsifications touching this subject published by Morton Bishop of Duresm. How
he answers some objections with new lies: others, whith laying the blame upon
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Dr. Stork etc. To most objections, he gives
no answer. The whole National Synod and Protestant Clergy concur in an
imposture concerning the sign of the Cross in Baptism, against Roman
Catholics. The Protestants falsifications of the Canon Law about deposing of
Kings: About cheating excommunicated persons: About murdering and massacring
Protestants. Diverse falsifications to assert a spiritual Supremacy in Kings.
According to the Law of England, our Kings may minister all ecclesiastical
functions, consecrat Bishops; and their letters patents are sufficient to give
any lay person (man or woman) power to consecrat Bishops and Priests. Ten
wilful falsifications set down together by Bish: Morton for proving that
Catholics hold the Pope cannot be deposed nor become an heretic. Primat
Bramhalls falsification to prove that Popes may and have decreed heretical
doctrine.

SECT: IX.
PRoved by reasons and examples that no Religion is so little dangerous to the
sovereignty and safety of Kings, or so advantageous to the peace and prosperity
of subjects, as the Roman Catholic, notwithstanding the Popes spiritual
supremacy. Bellarmin (the Author most excepted against in the opinion of
deposing of Kings) says that a King cannot be deposed for being an heretic,
unless he forces his subjects to heresy. The Author of this Treatise does not
intend to promote Bellarmi^s doctrine, but only shows there can be no danger
in it though it were allowed as true. Not any thing more contrary to sound
policy, then to lay for the foundation of loyalty an Oath or engagement against
opinions plausible, popular and practiced. The best way to suppress them is to
silence the Authors, not censure their doctrine. How little the Popes power is
feared by protestants, though they make it the pretext of persecuting
Catholics. How little his censures can disturb the government in regard of the
notoriousness of the fact, and the solemnity of his sentences, required for
their validity. How Arch: Laud and other protestants contradict them selves in
this matter. A fancied possibility without probability can bring no danger to
the government. How unreasonable it is to exact a more strict profession of
allegiance from catholic subjects to a protestant Sovereign, then is given by
any other Catholics to their Catholic Sovereign. That the french Kings exacts
such engagements, or Remonstrances from their subjects against the Popes
authority, as is required in England and Ireland from Catholics against the
same, is a gross mistake. All such disputes are prohibited in France, as
tending to sedition, and no way profitable. The Censure of the Parliament of
Paris, and some Doctors of the Sorbon against the Popes authority, disanulled
by the King and privy Council in France. Protestants cannot clear their own
principles in this particular from the aspersions they lay on the Catholic
Tenets. One of the fundamental principles of Protestancy is, a power in the
people to depose Sovereigns, and dispose of their Kingdoms for the use of the
Ghospel. Proved by the examples of all Kingdoms and States that received the
Reformation, even the Prelatick of England.

SECT. X.
THat Protestants could never prove any of the wilful falsifications wherewith
they charged Roman Catholic writers: but on the contrary themselves are
convicted of that crime whenever they attempted to make good their charge
against us. Of the Index Expurgatorius. Bp. Tailors objections in the
Dissuasive; as also Bp. Mortons, Bp. Jewels, etc. retorted upon themselves.
Item Sutcliffs accusations against Bellarmin. The Council of Calcedon
confirmed by Act of Parliament of Q. Elizabeth, and by consequence the Popes
spiritual supremacy, which that Council asserts.

SUBSECT: I.
PRotestants convicted by Belarmin of holding 20. ancient condemned heresies;
and how fourteen are admitted by them, or at least unanswered; and the other
six whereof they endeavor to clear themselves, are excused only by falsifying
Fathers, and Catholic Authors: among which are two Pelagian heresies, two
Novatian, one Manichean, and one of the Arians. Besides these, Protestants
maintain Justification by only faith with the Simonians and Eunomians. That God
is the author of sin, with the Florinians. That women may be and are Priests,
with the Peputians. That Concupiscency is a sin; with Proclus. That the true
Church was invisible for many ages, with the Donatists. That men ought not to
fast the Lent, pray, nor offer Sacrifice for the dead, with the Aerians. That
Saints ought not to be prayed unto, nor their relics or images worshipped, with
Vigilantius.

SVBSECT II.
FAlsifications objected against Baronius by Dr. Sutcliff. How ridiculous. The
difference between the falsifications objected by Catholics, and those that
are objected by Protestants.

SECT XI.
CAlumnies and falsifications of Luther, Clavin, Archbishop Laud, and Primat
Usher, to discredit the Roman Catholic Religion, and uphold Protestancy,
against their own conscience and knowledge. What impudent impostors were Luther
and Calvin. Proved in many particulars. Frauds and falsifications and calumnies
of Primat Usher (called the Irish Saint by Protestants) against the real
presence, and Transsubstantiation. Against sacramental Confession. Against
absolution of sins by a Priest. His cheat concerning Duli^ nd Latria. No new
invention of Jesuits, but the ancient doctrine and distinction of the Fathers.
Against prayer to Saints. His imposture of the Breviary of the
Premonstratensian Order.

SVBSECT. I^
OF Bp. Laud, the English Protestant Martyr. How fraudulently he would fain
excuse the modern Greeks from being heretics, notwithstanding his 39.
Prelatick articles condemn their doctrine of the holy Ghost as heresy. He
abuses S. Austin to make Protestants believe that general Counsels may err
against scripture and evident reason. He abuses Vincentius Lyrinensis, laying
to that ancient Fathers charge, his Graces own blasphemy: and commits therein
many frauds. He falsifies Orcam, and resolves the Prelatick Faith into the
imaginary light of Scripture, and the priva^ spirit and therein agrees with
Presbiterians and Fanatiks And pretends that Prelaticks are not Schismatics
and Sectaries. But to excuse them commits diverse frauds. His pretense of the
lawfulness for private Churches to reform themselves, confuted. His doctrine
does justify all the sectaries proceeding against himself and the Church of
England. His vanity in pretending that the Church of Britain is independent of
the Pope: as also that the Pope can not be judge in his own cause. His
fraudulent and absurd explanation of S. Ireneus against the primacy of Rome;
item of the gallican libertys. His abusing and corrupting S. Greg. Nazian
because that Saint asserteth the infallibility of the Roman Church. His
falsifying of Gerson upon the like account. A fair offer to Protestants for
the trial of falsifications.

SECT. XII.
Whether it be piety, or policy, to give the Protestant Clergy of these 3.
Kingdoms a million sterling. per an. for maintaining (by such frauds and
falsifications as hitherto have bin alleged) the doctrine of the church of
England which also they acknowledge to be fallible, and by consequence (for all
they know) falls. And how the said million per an: may be conscientiously
applied to the use of the people, without any dangerous disturbance to the
Government. It was policy in Q. Elizabeth to make such a clergy and Religion,
but not piety. The case being now altered, neither piety nor policy to preserve
either. No seditious or interessed persons can disturb the Government (by
pretending zeal for preserving a Religion and Clergy so prejudicial to the soul
and state) if liberty be granted to discover the cheat whereby the people are
abused. Many Protestant mistakes wherewith the common sort were fooled, are now
cleared; and their own convenience will invite them to examine further the errors
of doctrine incident to education, from which errors the Protestant Church does
acknowledge it self not exempted. If the Protestant faith be true, such a trial
as we desire will be of great satisfaction to the Professors thereof, and
confirm them in their religion, and convert Papists and Sectaries to the same;
if it be falfs, besides the salvation of souls by a discovery and prosession of
the Roman truth, these kingdoms will be able not only to defend themselves, but
offend foreign Enemies after we are enabled thereunto by a conscientious
addition of a million sterling. per an, to the publik revenue. No danger of
sacrilege in applying the Church revenues to pious and public uses, for the
preservation of the people; practiced by the ancient Catholic Clergy. Not one
good reason why the Church of England ought not to admit of such a public
conference as we propose and desire. Bishop Lauds reason to the contrary
confuted. The denying and differring it a sign that Protestants are guilty.
Catholics grant conference to Protestants whenever they demand it.

The Protestant layty have reason to question their Clergies Ordination and
caracter, as well as their doctrine. The new change of their forms of
ordination, very suspicious. That the Roman Religion is such a growing
Religion, proves it is the true Religion, fit to be made the Religion of the
state.

THE FOURTH PART
THe Roman Catholic Religion in every particular, wherein it differs from the
Protestant, is confirmed by considerable Miracles, recorded not in vain
Legends, or modern Authors, but in the most authentic histories of the world,
and by the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of Gods Church.

SECT: J.
SUch Miracles as are approved by the Roman Catholic Church are true Miracles.
The doctrine confirmed by those Miracles, cannot be rejected without doubting of
Gods Veracity. Every Protestant does see [though not observe] true Miracles, in
confirmation of the Catholic faith. What great scrutiny is made by the Roman
Catholic Church into true Miracles, and the lives of men, that are to be
canonized for Saints. There can be no combination or cheat in such matters.
Some Miracles permanent, that be seen by all men, as that of S. Ianuarius in
Naples. An undeniable Miracle of S. Francis Xavier wrought upon Marcello
Mastrilli, most remarkable for many circumstances. Miracles to confirm Popery,
related by the Magdeburgian Centurists; but by them [absurdly] attributed to
the Devil, or said to be seigned. True Miracles cannot be wrought to confirm
falsehood: it is against Gods veracity to permit the same. Miracles oblige us to
believe the doctrine, in confirmation whereof thy be wrought The difference
between Antichrists, and Catholics Miracles, or true and falls Miracles. That
all the Roman Catholics adore the Sacrament, and believe Transsubstantiation,
as also other points of Popery, is an evident Miracle of God, and can not
proceed from the Devils power or art. The Devil temps men to be heretics by
the means and ministry of their senses, and by humoring the same, not against
the evidence and inclination of sense. The general signs and marks of the
Church, are undeniable Miracles. No other Church besides the Roman Catholic,
can show those signs.

SECT: II.
OF particular miracles that confirm the Roman Catholic Tenants and our sense
of Scripture, related by S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Austin, S.
Nilus, S. Cyprian the Martyr, S. Optatus, S. Gregory the great, and others, in
confirmation of adoring the B. Sacrament, Transsubstantiation, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, Communion under one kind, prayer for the dead, and Purgatory. Primat
Vshers falsifications and fraud to discredit some of these Miracles discovered.
Of Miracles in England, related by Waldensis, and recorded by the Archbishops
of Canterburyes Register. How Protestants falsify the very statuts, and law
books. Miracles wrought by S. Bernard to confirm every controverted point of
the Roman Catholic doctrine against the Protestant. Protestant writers confess
S. Bernard was a Saint; and yet say his Miracles were wrought by the Devil. How
absurd.

SECT: III.
MIracles to confirm the worship and virtue of the sign of the Cross, recorded
by St. Paulinus, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Athanasius, St. Hierom, St.
Gregory Tu^onensis, Nicephorus and Theodoret.

How by Tradition from the Apostles the primitive Christians were accustomed to
sign themselves frequently with the sign of the Cross. The first and worst
Heretics were enemies of that sign. Christ's Cross multiplied by miracle in St.
Paulinus his time. Protestant miracles are but cheats. Not one of them true.
Protestants agree with Pagans, heretics, and Magitians, in contemning miracles,
and the sign of the Cross. How the Devils dread the same.

SECT: IV.
MIracles in confirmation of the Catholic worship of Jmages, related by the
most eminent authors of the Ecclesiastical History, and by the 2. Council of
Nice an. 787. wherein were 350. Bishops. St. Peter's shadow was the Image of his
body; and by scripture ( Act. 5.15.) it appears to have wrought Miracles. The
Protestant Imposture concerning Christ's statue that Julian the Apostata broke,
confuted. S. John D^mascens hand that was cut off by the practices of
Image-breakers, restored by his praying at our Ladies Image.. The Protestant
evasion of civil and religious worship, confuted.

SECT. V.
MIracles related by S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Chrysostom, S. Hierom, S. Optatus S. Bid, S. Bernard, S. Anselm, and others in
confirmation of prayer to Saints, worshipping their Relics, of the virtue of
holy water; the Sacraments of Confirmaon, Confession, and extrem Unction. The
doctrine of Indulgences confirmed by the same Miracles that confirm worship of
Saints, Pilgrimages, etc. The truth of all S. Thomas of Canterburyes Miracles
evidenced by one that Fox recounts, and picks out to discredit the test. What
little reason Protestants have to suspect our Catholic Miracles of forgery. How
severe the Roman Church is in the scrutiny, and punishment of such Impostures.
Reflections upon Bishop Tailors Treatise of Confirmation. Confession, and
extrem Unction, maintained to be Sacraments by ancient Fathers. S. Bedes
holiness and learning acknowledged by Protestants. He relates Miracles, whereby
the errors of Protestancy are confuted. How absurdly Protestants contemn the
authority of the holy Fathers in Miracles, admitting it in matters of faith.
How ridiculous John Fox his Miracles are; how unwisely the Prelatick Clergy
countenance his Acts and Monuments, that have so spread Puritanism in England.
A Parallel between Protestancy and Mahometism.

FINIS.
THE CONCLUSION To the right Honorable the Committee OF PARLIAMENT, FOR
RELIGION.
May it please your Honors
VEnerable Saint Bede in his History of the Church of England, recounteth, how
St. Austin the Monk, S. Bid lib ^ hist. cap 25. who lived an. Dom. 700.
and our Apostle (Sent by St. Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome to convert our
Saxon Ancestors from Paganism to Christian Religion) arriving at the Isle of
Tanet in Kent, gave notice unto King Ethelbert (then a Pagan,) that he and his
fellow-preachers were come from Rome, and brought to him very good tidings; to
wit, that such as would follow and obey their doctrine, should enjoy an
everlasting Kingdom in heaven, with the true and living God. The King moved
with curiosity, came into the Island of Tanet, and notwithstanding his
suspicion that the Monks were Magitians, returned this civil and prudent
answer; you give us very fair words, and promises, but yet for that they are
strange, and unknown unto me, I can not rashly assent unto them, forsaking that
ancient Religion which thus long both I and my people have observed. But for so
much as you are come so far to the intent you might impart unto us such
knowledge as you take to be right, true, and good, w^e will not seek your
trouble, but rather with all Courtesy we will receive you and minister unto you
all such things as are behovefull for your living. Accordingly he allowed them
lodging and other necessaries in the City of Canterbury, and after hearing, and
examining their doctrine, became a Christian.

The very same tidings and Doctrine that St. Austin and his Companions delivered
to King Ethelbert, do I most humbly offer unto your Honors in this book, as
your own Bishops and writers See John Bole Bishop of Ossery in act. Romans
Pontif. edit Basil. 15^8. page 44.45 46. and 47. See also Osiander in Epitom.
Cent 6 page 288.289. and 290.

Carrion in Chronic. lib. 4 page 567.

See the Century writers of Magdeburg Cent. 6 cap 10. col 748 384 37^.376* 381
425. ^ seqq

See Dr. Humphry in Iesuitismi. p. 2. ra^. 5 page 5. and 627. all of them
confessing that S. Austin taught the very same doctrine in all particulars that
we Papists now profess.


confess, and is plain in St. Bedes History, testifying that as they approached
near the City (of Canterbury) having the Cross and Image of our King and
Savior JESUS Christ, carried, as their manner was, before them, they sung
Letanies* they served God in continual prayer, watching and fasting; They
resorted to an ancient Church built in the honor of St. Martyn (made while the
Romans were yet dwelling in England) and there did say Mass etc. This their
doctrine they proved to be true by working of many miracles, and to be the very
same, which Joseph of Arimathea and the Apostles had preached to the ancient
Britons; whose Bishops St. Austin courted to Ioyn with him in converting of the
Saxons; a Curtesy he never would have desired or demanded, had their Doctrine
differed from his; S. Bid lib. 1. cap. 25. and 26.
of certain ceremonies used by them in Baptism, and of their Jewish way of
celebrating Easter, he did not approve, and all Protestants grant he had good
reason; neither could the Britons themselves gainsay it, when by common accord
they prayed that God would vouchsafe by some heavenly sign to declare whether
their particular traditions, or rather St. Austins (with whom, S. Bid lib. 2.
cap. 2.
says Bid, all the other Churches throughout the whole world agreed in
Christ) were most acceptable to his Divin Majesty; S. Bid lib* 1. cap. 32.
Sets down S. Gregory's letter to king Ethelbert, wherein he gives him this
caracter of S. Austin: our right reverend Brother Augustine, Bishop, being
brought up in the rule of Religion, having good knowledge in the holy
Scriptures, and a man through the grace of God, of much virtue, whatsoever he
shall advertise you to do, gladly hear it, devoutly perform it, diligently
Remember it.
and the Briton Priests having prayed in vain for the restitution of fight to a
known blind man, St. Austin compelled by just necessity, fell on his knees,
prayed, and forthwith the blind man saw. Then the Britons confessed indeed that
they understood that to be the true way of righteousness, which Austin had
preached, and showed unto them. This miracle God wrought by his servant to
reduce the ancient Britons to an uniformity in ceremonies. Many And ibid. cap.
13. he sets dow^ S* Gregory's letter to S. Austin, exhorting him no^ to glory
in himself for the Miracles which God wrought by him for the instruction of
others. J know (says holy Gregory) deer Brother that it pleases God to sh^^^
by the^ great miracles among the people, Whom by thee he has called to his
faith. Wherevpo^ it is needful; that of that most heavenly gift, both thou
joy* with fear, and fear with joy. Thou have to joy, for that by means of the
said Miracles the English men's souls are won to the faith: Thou have to fear,
least through the miracles which be don by thee, thy weak mind be lifted up in
presumption falling as far inwardly by vain Glory, as thou art by outward
prays puffed up* etc. And concludes his letter thus! And what^oever grace thou
either have, or shall receive to work miracles, think i^ given thee* not for
thyn own sake, but for theirs, the Minister of whose salvation thou art
ordained.
other greater miracles did he work by the same St. Austin, whereby our Modern
Ministers are convinced of heresy, for being obstinat in their errors against
Transubstantiation, worship of Images, Purgatory, Prayers to Saints,
Jndulgences, the Sacrifice of the Mass etc. for that with these Popish Doctrins
both St. Austin and his Master St. Gregory are charged by your own Protestant
writers, and censured as converting the Saxons from Paganism to this
Superstition.

I hope your Honors will not give unto us, (who desire only liberty of
conscience, whereof the worst consequence can be this that the ancient Religion
of Christ may thereby be restored) a wors answer then King Ethelbert returned to
S. Austin: Though what we affirm of the Catholic belief, will seem strange to
you that have hitherto supposed the same to be idolatry, or superstition, and
perhaps suspect us to be as great Sorcerers as King Ethelbert did S. Austin and
his Companions: But without question so pious and prudent Persons as Your
Honors, will not be less charitable then a Pagan, to men that besides an
everlasting Kingdom in heaven, come to offer you a million sterling. per an. upon
earth; especialy seeing we do not desire you should condemn your own Protestant
Religion, nor credit ours, before you see what your Clergy can answer to our
reasons, and to corruptions and falsifications of Scripture, and Fathers, which
we desire to object against them in a public conference, if it be your Honors
pleasure to grant us that favor; for obtaining whereof they will be as earnest
Suitors as we, if they believe their own doctrine. But in case they decline or
deferr so reasonable, and seasonable a request as we humbly concieve ours to
be, I hope Your Honors will not think that men who dare not defend their
Religion against provoking adversaries, that offer to show the falsehood thereof,
and the frauds whereby it is, and only can be maintained, deserve so great
reverence, and revenues, or can be fit to direct others in the way of salvation.

D. Fulk in his confut of purgat. calls St. Austins preaching, our perversion
Mr. Powell calls him a falls Apostle; Mr. Ascham in Apol. pro Caen. Dom. page
33. calls him the establisher of all Popish Doctrine. Mr. Willet in his
Tetrastylon Papismi, page 122. places St. Gregory and St. Austin among the
first Fathers of Superstition, and Captains and Ringleaders of Popish Divines.
etc.
As for their railing against St. Austin our Apostle, notwithstanding that God
approved of his Doctrine (with many miracles) it is no satisfactory way of
reasoning: neither (as I persuade my self) will they be able to rally so grave
and sober a Comittee as your Lordships, out of a million per an. by quoting
their own Translations and sense of Scripture, or by wresting texts to their
own advantage, and to the great prejudice both spiritual and Temporal of these
Nations, against the Common^sense and consent of the visible Church for 16.
ages. They have had indeed hitherto better Success in this particular, then
they could expect from so wary and wise a people as the English; but the
improbability that a Clergy would be so impudent, and impious, as to falsify
Scripture, forge Registers, and build faith upon fancy, has gained them more
credit then they deserved, and made the Layty more credulous, and carless then
Christians ought to have bin in a matter of so great importance as the
everlasting happiness of their souls, and in a subject so tempting and
suspicious, as the revenues of the Church. Now that it has bin the fate, or
fortune of this Monarchy to be involued in wars, which have discovered the
insufficiency of the Kings revenue to maintain the same, and that we have no
other security of a peace (when concluded) but the words of Dutch and French^,
drawn up into a formality of Articles, which will be no longer observed then it
will be their convenience so to do; and that the honor and safety of these
three Nations can not be secured without greater, and more Constant supplies
and subsidies, then perhaps (after a little time) will be safe to exact of the
impoverished multitude: seeing, I say, this is the present condition of our
State, (and will be also for the future, whenever it pleases our neighbors,
to be our enemies) not only all lawful ways of raising moneys must be sought
after, but many ways ought to be examined, that perhaps hitherto were supposed
unlawful.

Wherefore as the French King has lately commanded a severe scrutiny to be made
into a new pretended Nobility (of a hundred years standing,) reducing them to
their own Rank and quality of Citizens, and has by penalties, and payments of
the Taille raised very considerable sums of money, I presume to suggest unto
your Honors, (who are appointed to rectify the mistakes, and correct the abuses
of Religion) the Equity, and convenience of the like scrutiny into Queen
Elizabeth's pretended Clergy: and dare engage my life, that after your Serious
examination of those Protestant Ministers right to the Church livings, and the
Roman Catholic Clergys resignation of their right to his Majesty, ye will
find a just title in the Crown to a revenue sufficient not only to prevent all
domestik dangers, but also to secure us from all foreign disturbances, whether
Popish, or Protestant.

This human considera^ion is no^ offered to so zealous and pious persons, as
your Honors are known to be, for a motive of Changing Religion; it is only
intended for a matter worthy your Judicious reflection, whether men of so much
conscience and credi^* as our Catholic Authors are reputed to be in the most
considerable parts of Christendom, would so particularly, frequently, and
confidently (in their printed Books) accuse the Protestant Clergy of wilful
and inexcusable falsifications; and offer to own the charge in a publik Trial,
and pretend that without such practices the Protestant Divines can not maintain
their reformations; how is it possible, I say, that knowing and conscientious
persons can be such impudent Impostors? or if ye think our Catholic Clergy
can impose such manifest untruths upon our own layty, as the Protestant
Ministers pretend we do, when we condemn Protestancy; why may not the
Prelatik Clergy of England be Subject to, and suspected of the like impudent
practices. There being therefore as fair a possibility of gaining a million per
an. for the Crown, as it is incredible that men of reputation would publish
impostures so easily discoverable without any hopes of profit thereby to
themselves, but rather with an assurance of discredit to their cause, and of
credit to their Adversaries; and nothing lost (but a little time) in that Your
Honors will be pleased to appoint a time and place for a public trial thereof,
(it being but a matter of fact, and soon determined) I humbly beseech Your
Honors that you will be moved with conscience, curiosity, and convenience, so
to order this affair, that the world may be satisfied which of the two Clergys
(Catholic or Protestant) abuses their Flocks by a cheating Religion.

Not many years since, one Mrs. Stanhop, an English Protestant Gentlewoman that
resided in Paris, had thoughts of changing her Religion, her chief motive being
the novelty of Protestancy: Dr. Cossins (now Bishop of Duresme) after taking
upon himself in that City the Charge of the English Prelatick Congregation,
notwithstanding his conformity with the Presbyterian Hugonots, and his frequent
excursions to Charenton; and being vexed to loose so virtuous and exemplar a
soul as Mrs. Stanhop was reputed to be in his Protestant Church, he seriously
endeavored to persuade her, that the ancient Religion of England was
Protestancy; and that Popery was the novelty. But it seems the Gentlewoman
(though she had not perused S. Bedes Ecclesiastical History) had read our
Cronicles, the Annals of John Stow, and other Protestant lay-writers, much more
sincere then Dr. Cossins; and whereas before his discourse she only doubted,
after she had considered and reflected upon the improbability and extravagancy
of his imposture, her doubt changed into a certainty of the falsehood of
Protestancy, seeing so learned a Doctor could not maintain its antiquity and
truth by a better argument. I Think she is yet living, and a Religious in
Paris; I am sure many persons of credit and quality yet living, can testify the
truth of this passage, which is but a petty Protestant fraud in respect of
other sleights and Falsifications mentioned in this Treatise, wherein Dr.
Cossins also bears a part.

I have not presented Your Honors with this story of Doctor Cossins as if it
had bin a rarity; it is the ordinary practice among Protestant Prelates and
Preachers to feed their Flocks with such stuff* there can be no other against
the universal tradition, and all the Histories of Christendom. My design in
recounting such a passage, is only this, that your Honors may be pleased to
consider, whether Doctor Cossins (or any other Protestant Prela^, to continue
in his Bishoprik or Benefice) will not do as much now for keeping his Royalties
and Revenues of the County Palatin of Duresm, as he did then to be a petty
Pastor of a private Chapel in Paris? Will any learned Protestant Minister
stick to imitate such an example, knowing it is the only way for such persons
as they are, to thrive, and become great in the English Church and State? Your
Honors Charity may be so great as to suspend your Judgments concerning their
sincerity, but your consciences are so tender, that you will not keep these
Actions in suspense of a matter wherein they are so much concerned. The only way
to satisfy them, and your selves, as I said before, is, that ye be mediators
to the King and Parliament for a Publik Trial either of the Protestant Clergys
cheat, or of the Catholic Clergys Calumnies. If what is laid to the protestant
Clergys charge in this Treatise, be proved, the Crown gains a million sterling.
per an. If not, the Protestant Church and Clergy gains credit; so that these
nations can be no loosers by the Trial we humbly desire; for that, if granted,
it will be known which of both is the true Religion, and perhaps that may
appear to your selves to be the true Religion, which offers to treble the
publik revenues, and to make this Monarchy not only the most Christian, but the
most considerable of the Universe; and then will be fulfilled the vulgar
prediction of our King, Erit Carolo Magno Major; and your Honors will be the
chief instruments in making him so great, and his subjects happy; which is the
only design of

Your Honors most obedient and most humble servant. J. W.


