THE Foolish Abuse and wise Use OF RICHES.

A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of BROMSGROVE IN Worcestershire, May
1. 1695.

Upon occasion of a Charity given to that Place, BY Sir Thomas Cooks of
Bentley, Knight. Bar.

By W. Talbot, D. D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1695.

TO Sir Thomas Cooks OF BENTLEY, Knight Baronet.
SIR,
SInce that too favorable Account which those worthy Gentlemen, that heard my
Sermon, gave you of it, has out-weighed those Reasons which I offered against
Printing it, and you have so far taken their Character of it, rather than mine,
as to join with them in soliciting me to make it Public, I do here present you
with it just as I delivered it, without the least Alteration, or any Addition,
except of a few Lines in the Close, which concern some Matters that I was not
then fully instructed in.

If any shall be prevailed upon by any thing I have said, to imitate so fair an
Example as you have set them, I shall repent of nothing relating to the
Publishing of this plain Discourse, but that I have so long delayed complying
with your Desires.

May you, Sir, live to see not only your great Designs accomplished, but
Justice done you in a more full and perfect account of them, by some of those
Children for whose Education you are making such Charitable Provision: But if
they should hold their Peace, the very Stones you have laid will cry out, and
transmit you honorably to Posterity. I am, Sir,

Your most Obliged, and Faithful Humble Servant, W. TALBOT.
Worcester, November. 1st. 1695.
A SERMON Preached, etc.
St. LUKE, Chap. XII. verse xxi. So is he that lays up treasure for himself,
and is not rich toward God.
WHich Words are our Lord's Application of a Parable which He put forth, upon
occasion of a certain Man's coming to him, and begging of him, ver. 13. to
speak to his Brother to divide the Inheritance with him. There was, it seems,
some difference between two Brethren about the division of their Patrimony; one
of them had detained more than his share, at least the other thought so, who
therefore applies himself to Christ, desiring Him that He would order his
Brother to come to a fair Account with him, and allow him that proportion of
his Father's Goods, which of right descended to him: But he declines this
office with a, Man who made me a Judge or Divider over you? ver. 14. As if he
should have said, My Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. My Power no
temporal Power, nor is it my business to Rule and Dispose of Men's Bodies or
Estates, but to instruct their Minds; all that I have therefore to say to you
(and what I say to you, I say to the rest of my Hearers) is by way of Advice to
caution you against Covetousness, ver. 15. which as it has plainly been the
occasion of this present Dispute, and that Injustice which one of you complain
of, so will certainly always make a Man uneasy, but never happy, ver. 15. For
a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
And to make them the more sensible of this, He tells them the following Story
of a rich man whose ground, ver. 16. either by reason of the Fertility of the
Soil, or his good husbanding and manuring of it, together with the concurrence
of God's common Providence, brought forth plentifully, in so much that his
Barns were not able to receive them; and therefore he plotted and contrived
with himself where he should bestow all his Plenty, ver. 17. was then as
careful and as much at a loss where to dispose of it, as before how to get it;
at last he comes to this Resolution, That he would pull down his Barns and
build greater, ver. 18. such as should he of capacity to hold his mighty
increase, and there he could store it up, and then say to his Soul, Soul, thou
have much Food laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry, ver. 18. Thus being made rich, as David speaks in the 49 Psalm. ver. 18.
he blessed his Soul, and no doubt, as it there follows, Men praised him for
doing well unto himself; and as he accounted himself an happy Man, so they
thought him to be a wise and prudent Man. But to show us that the wisdom of
this World is foolishness with God, our Savior tells us, That whatever he was
in his own, or others Opinion, he was but a Fool in God's account, For God said
unto him, Thou Fool, ver. 20.

Fool! For what? For making the best of his Estate, for carefully gathering the
Fruits of it, for safely laying up that Increase wherewith God had blessed him,
for providently taking care for the Years to come? What is there unreasonable
in all this? We do not find that he got his Wealth by any indirect Methods; his
Abundance, as far as appears, was only the lawful product of his own Land and
Industry; nor do we read that he was so insatiable as never to be contented, or
so ridiculous as to resolve to spend all his time in heaping up Wealth, and
allow himself none for the enjoyment of it. On the contrary he gave himself a
quietus, Soul take thine ease, he knew when he had enough, thou have goods laid
up for many years, ver. 19. sufficient Provisions for many Years luxurious
Living, and he resolved to make the remainder of his Life comfortable by the
free use of that Plenty which he had got together in the former part of it,
eat, drink, and be merry.

There is no reason to believe that there is any thing of injustice or
dishonesty that our Savior intends to censure in this Story, nor had He any
occasion to do so from the behavior of that Person, upon whose account he told
it.

For among the Jews, where a Man left more Sons than one, all might claim an
equal dividend of the Estate, excepting that the firstborn was to have a
double Portion of all that the Father dyed possessed of; so that this Brother had
certainly a right to his proportion, and as certainly it was not unlawful for
him by lawful Methods to assert that right; and for the Method he took, 'twas
not only a lawful but commendable one, to have a difference between so near
Relations shortly accomodated by the amicable way of Arbitration, rather than
decided by the tedious methods of Law, which might probably also lengthen and
increase their Enmity and Animosities: And though he was mistaken in the Person
he addressed to, who would by no means intermeddle in Affairs of that nature, yet
his mistake was no very culpable one, but what he might be very easily and
innocently led into, either by the Fame or Knowledge of his great Justice and
Integrity; or by that Relation which he or his Brother, or both might stand in
to Him, as possibly being his Disciples, and then who more fit to determine the
Dispute between them, than their Master? or it may be by the 4th. Verse of the
72 Psalm. (which Psalm, Jews as well as Christians have looked upon as a
Prophecy relating to the Messiah) where he is set forth as a Judge of the
People, and Vindicator of the Rights of the Children, etc. But this
notwithstanding, though he might without fault insist upon his right, and
though the course he took to maintain it by reference, was a very justifiable
and praiseworthy one, yet certainly he timed his business very imprudently;
'twas a mighty oversight in him to employ those Minutes about it, which he had
then opportunity of improving to the more concerning Interests of his Soul; and
to importune Christ to help him to recover a temporary Inheritance, to whom he
might, with success, have applied himself to have directed and assisted him in
the obtaining of an Incorruptible and Eternal one: This seems to me to be the
folly that this Brother was chargeable with, an inordinate desire, and over
eager pursuit, tho by lawful means, of the unnecessary things of this present
Life, to the neglect of the more weighty concerns of that which is to come.

As for the Rich Man, his folly seems to be of the same kind, but more
extravagant; his desires and designs were all turned to this world, here he
sets up his rest, and places his chief happiness in the goods he had laid up,
and hugs and caresses himself with the pleasing prospect of a long voluptuous
enjoyment of them; as for the other World, he had not a thought for it, that
was so little regarded by him, that he did not judge Heaven worth the Purchasing
at the expense only of his superfluities: God had blessed him with a very
plentiful Fortune, he had more than he wanted or knew what to do with: What
opportunity had he of being Rich here and hereafter to? Of laying up sufficient
for the necessities and conveniences of this Life, and 1 Timothy 6.19. of laying
up in store also a good foundation against the time to come, that he might lay
hold upon eternal Life? But alas, this Treasure was put into the hand of a Fool
that had not an Heart to make use of it; tho he had so much that he could not
tell where to bestow it, he never thinks of making any return to that God that
gave all, but chooses to be at the charge of pulling down and enlarging his
Barns, there to lay up his Goods to be a prey to Thieves and Robbers, and food
for Vermin, rather than to treasure them up in Heaven, where no such devourers
can approach: And this is that imprudent management for which God calls him
Fool; and he had presently a very sad conviction of his folly; for while he was
entertaining himself with a vain Dream of many Years Happiness, in an
unrestrained Enjoyment of his Fruits and Goods, he was surprised with the
unwelcome tidings, v. 20. that that Night his Soul would be required of him.

He and his Riches immediately part, they have another Master, and he be
removed into another state, where he cannot take them along with him, and where
having neglected to make any Friends with his Idolized Mammon, to send any
Treasure beforehand, or lay up any Provisions, he cannot expect to be received
into everlasting Habitations, unless those prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, or to enjoy any portion, but one of Fire and Brimstone, without a Drop
of Water to cool his Tongue, all Torment without any alloy or mixture: And so
is he, i.e. This is the Character of every such Rich Man, and this will be his
Case; he is a Fool, and will one day be sensible of it, that thus lays up
Treasure for himself, that considers only himself in the storing up, or
spending of his Plenty and Increase, that amasses wealth merely for his own
satisfaction, either in the beholding it with his Eyes, or consuming it upon
his Lusts, and is not rich toward God; does not employ a proportion of his
abundance to the service and glory of God, in Works of Mercy and Charity: The
words thus explained afford us these two Subjects of Discourse.

1. The folly of those that lay up Treasure for themselves.

2. The true way of making a Wise use and improvement of Riches, by being Rich
toward God.

1. The folly of those that lay up Treasure for themselves. I intend not to
declaim against an honest Care and Endeavor in any one to provide the
necessaries for supporting not only Life, but a comfortable Life, and for
enabling him to maintain the Character, and discharge the Duties belonging to
those Relations which he bears in the World; for such care and endeavor,
provided it does not imply, 1 Timothy 6.17. a trusting in uncertain Riches, or a
resting in them as a Man's chief good, but he can clear himself with Job, and
say, Job. 31.24. I have not made Gold my hope, nor said unto fine Gold, thou
art my Confidence, if it includes not a discontentedness, and repining at his
present lot, nor a distrust of God's Providence for the future, but he
thankfully enjoys what he has already, acknowledging himself less than the
least of God's Mercies; and for the time to come, having used means allowed by
God, can contentedly and faithfully rely upon him for the event, resolving
fully to acquiesce in whatsoever portion his Wisdom shall think meet for him; a
Care and Industry, I say, to gain or keep the good things of this Life, so
moderated and bounded, is not, that I know of, condemned in Scripture; nay, we
are there told, 1 Timothy 4.8. That Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now
is; and certainly a Man may not only enjoy the Promises of God, when he makes
them good, but likewise by Lawful Methods cooperate with, and be Instrumental
to his Providence in the bringing them about: But that which I design to
censure, is the laying up of abundance beyond what true necessity or real
convenience require; the placing a man's chief Happiness in Riches; the making
them his Treasure, v. 34. and consequently, Psalm. 62.10. setting his Heart upon
them, and directing all his Studies and Labors to the obtaining or keeping of
them; the resting in them as his end; and in his own endeavors, as the means
for the Procurement of them. And he that does so is a Fool upon three accounts,
because,

1. He quite mistakes the thing which he proposes as his end.

2. He makes use of Incompetent means for the obtaining of it. And,

3. It is that, which if he should obtain, is not worth his Time and Labor:
These Instances of his Folly I have chosen to insist upon, they being what our
Savior has suggested in the Discourse now before us.

1. He quite mistakes the thing which he proposes as his end. And surely it is a
very great folly for a Man to propose a thing as his chief end, and not know
what it is, but think he pursues one thing, when he really does another; and
yet this is plainly the case of the Man I am speaking of: The end he designs
and thinks he pursues, is to lay up Treasure for himself; and yet he does not
do this, but lays up rather for any Body else: Thou Fool whose shall those
things he that thou have provided? Do thou lay up thy Riches not to spend,
but to keep them by thee, to possess rather than to use; or do thou lay up
that thou may extravagantly squander them away in Luxury and Vainglory?
Which ever thou intendest, thou art as unfaithful a Steward to thy self, as
thou art to God, and do deceive and cheat thy self, as well as rob him: For
let us consider the Man that lays up, not to use, but to keep and possess his
Wealth, he may be a very wise and good manager for his Bags and Chests, for his
Heirs and Executors; but by all his Providence, does not at all advantage
himself, who would be in as truly comfortable a condition, if his Repositories
were stored with stones and dirt, as with Gold and Jewels, while they lie
useless by him; and God knows so they are like to lie while he lives, whether
the heap be increased or diminished; for he that is afraid of spending his
Wealth, when he has a great deal, would not probably be less tenacious of it,
if it should decrease; and he is as little likely to be Cured of this
narrowness of Soul, should his fortune be never so far extended, for in such
persons, Riches, like Hydropical Humors, the more they increase, create the
more violent thirst; nor can time it self work off this Humor, for old Age is
much more apt to contract, than open the Purse, as well as hand. So that no
change of his Circumstances, no Ebb, or Flow of his Fortune, are ever like to
make him change his Practice, Psalm. 39.6. Of heaping up Riches, which he cannot
tell who shall gather. Eccl. 2.18, 19. But which he must leave to the man that
comes after him, who whether he be a wise man or a Fool, he knows not, but must
have Rule over all his Labors wherein he has labored. And surely this man
does not lay up Treasure for himself. Let us in the next place take a view of
the other layer up, that gathers, that he may scatter in extravagance and riot,
and have wherewith to feed his vain Glory and Luxury; he certainly seems to lay
up for himself. No, no, for if he only resolves to spend what he has got, and
lives not to Execure his purpose, Eccles. 11.18, 19. If after he is waxed Rich
with his wariness and pinching, as the Son of Syrack speaks, he should say, I
have found rest, and will eat continually of my Goods; if, as he adds, the time
should come upon him that he must leave those things to others and dye, as the
rich Man's case was in this Parable, why, then his condition is eventually the
same with the Miser's I mentioned before; but if he should have time and
opportunity as he intends to lavish away and consume his Wealth, yet 'twill
appear that he, as well as the Miser, has laid up for others; the only
difference is, no Body was the better for the one 'till his death, whereas the
other in his life time disposed of his Goods to those for whom he laid them up
(i. e.) to others: for whose sake does the vainglorious Man adorn his House
with costly Furniture, himself with rich Apparel, and appear with a splendid
Equipage, is it not for others to feed their Eyes, and gratify their
curiosity, and afford subject for their Discourse, that they may see, and
admire, and talk of his Pomp and Magnificence? For whom does the Extravagant
enlarge his Table, is it not for others? For multitudes of Attendants,
Visitants, and Parasites, as Solomon long since observed, Eccles. 5. v. 11.
When goods increase, they are increased that eat them, and what good is there
to the owners thereof, saving the beholding them with their Eye? Alas, did the
Man consider himself only, meaner Furniture, a cheaper Habit, a slenderer
Table, and smaller Retinue would serve the turn as well, be every jot as useful
to him, and answer all the ends of necessity and convenience: For a Man may,
when his Goods and Riches increase, enlarge his Barns and Bags to receive them,
but he cannot enlarge his own Natural Appetites, nor stretch his real Wants and
Capacity; his own Stomach craves no greater a Portion of Food, nor does his
Body take up any more room, or need other Defensatives to guard it from cold,
or other accidents than before; and therefore whatever extraordinary provisions
he now makes, they are for others, and consequently the Riches wherewith he
supports this Extravagance, he did not lay up for himself; so that neither he
that hoards up his Riches to keep them, that starves in present, lest he should
want hereafter (which is such a piece of Wisdom, as if a Man should cut his own
Throat, for fear of being knocked on the Head he knows not when) no, nor he that
lays up that he may spend in Luxury and Vanity, neither does lay up for
themselves; and yet this is the end they both think they propose, which it is
plain they grossly mistake; and that is the first instauce of their Folly. The

2. Is they make use of incompetent means for the obtaining their end: They
depend upon themselves and second causes for it; they use a great deal of care
and thoughtfulness, and abundance of Labor and Toil; but that these are not to
be relied upon, our Savior tells four verses after my Text; v. 25. For which
of you, says he, by taking thought can add to his Stature, or to the term of
Life, as some understand it, one cubit, nay, can do so much as make one hair
white or black? Alas! all our Endeavors without God's Blessing and Concurrence
can turn to no account: If he works not with us, it is but lost labor, that we
haste to rise up early and late, take rest, and eat the bread of carefulness,
Psalm 127.3. After all our planting and watering, he only can give the
increase: And he only can preserve it to us after he has given it; Our Care and
Power are not sufficient to secure our Goods and Fruits from Moths and Vermin,
nor our Bags from Thieves and Rohbers; where he is not the Keeper, the Watchman
waketh but in vain. But how can that man expect God's Blessing and Protection
who daily forfeits them by distrusting him? by acting as if he believed his
Providence extended not to him; as if he thought him ignorant of his concerns,
or unable or unwilling to take care of him? And what an aggravated provocation
is it for a man to question whether God's Care extends to him, when he daily
sees it reaches to the very Birds of the Air and Flowers of the Field? v. 24,
27. When he sees that God gives Food so plentifully to those inferior
Creatures, and Arrays them so Gloriously, to doubt whether he can or will make
provision for man whom he has appointed to be Lord of those Creatures, and for
whose use and service they were made; nay, when he has had experience in
himself of Gods Power and goodness in greater instances, to distrust them in
less; v. 23. when God has bestowed a Body and Life upon him, to doubt his
affording him the means for support of them; these are such unworthy and
provoking returns, that whoever is guilty of them, has little reason to expect
any thing further from him: And however he may pretend in words to believe a
Providence; this is a plain denying of it in Practice, and disclaiming all hope
and Expectation from it; and how well that man consults the safety of what he
already has, or what further success he can reasonably hope for of Labors,
that places them out of the care of God's Providence, every one may easily
Judge. But,

3. Lastly, the Man that lays up Treasures for himself, proposes an end, that
if obtained, is not worth his care and pains: Nor can contribute any thing to
his real Happiness. For suppose him possessed of as great abundance as his
present wishes reach to, is he sure he would be then content? Would not his
wishes probably be enlarged with his Estate, and carry him on as much further
yet? Thou will pull down thy Barns, says St. Basil, (of the Rich Man in this
Parable,) and build greater; and when thou have done that, what resolutions
will thou take afterward? Wilt not thou again pull down, and build again? When
men's desires of Wealth go beyond the bounds of necessity and convenience, they
become infinite, there is no limiting of them: They are, as that great Father
says, like men running down a steep Precipice, there is no fixing of their Foot,
or stopping of their course: And if a man cannot gain his ease with his end,
but after all the success of his Labors, he shall continue to be as restless,
and want as much, and desire as much as before, surely his pains are bestowed
to very little purpose: But supposing his eager thirst after more should be
allayed, that he should know when he had enough, and be satisfied with that
proportion which he has laid up, and bid his Soul take its ease, as this Man
resolved to do, though he did not live to try whether he could keep his
resolution, yet what would he then do with it? would he store up his abundance
and not use it? What good would it then do him? Or, how would he be happier for
having so much useless Lumber lodged in his own House, than he would be if so
much were laid up in his Neighbor's House; he would have no pleasure by it but
in opinion, but would have the real pain of perplexing thoughts how to secure
it, and tormenting fears lest he should lose it? But if he should resolve to
spend it, yet of all that he shall extravagantly squander, 'twill, as I
observed before, be but a small proportion that he will bestow upon himself;
and of all the mighty Provisions that shall be purchased thereby, but a little
will come to his own share: And is it a happiness to be continually caring and
providing for others? Men that look at a distance, see only the outside, and
judge according to appearance, may think great and rich Men very happy, and
possibly some of them that know no better may think themselves so, but if we
will take the opinion of one who was every way qualified to make a true
judgment of this Matter, who had Wealth enough to procure, and curiosity to
make trial of all manner of earthly delights, and wisdom to pass a just censure
of them, we shall find it far otherwise. For Solomon, who was great, as he
himself says, Eccles. 2. v. 9, 10. and increased above all that went before him
in Jerusalem, who kept not, as he adds, from his eyes, whatsoever they desired,
nor withheld his heart from any joy, and who was also, as the Scripture
witnesses, wiser than all men, he, upon a strict review of all the Greatness
and mighty Treasure he was possessed of, and that circle of diversified Delights
which they enabled him to entertain himself with, a large catalogue whereof he
sets down in the 2d. of Eccles. gives this account of them all in the 11. ver.
That all was vanity and vexation of Spirit: that he had found nothing of true
satisfaction, or solid pleasure in them, they did but deceive his expectation,
and occasion a great deal of uneasiness by the disappointment: And a greater
than Solomon has assured us, That a man's life does not consist in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, Luke 12.15. They are no more
necessary or useful to his well-being, than able to prolong his being; a Man
may be here very miserable with them, and very happy here without them: and
when he comes to dye, they cannot keep him in this World, nor go with him into
the next. Then indeed, in that night when his Soul is required of him, will the
vanity of all earthly Treasures, and the folly of him that has laid them up,
most eminently appear; what will they all then signify to him, when he cannot
use them, and must leave them? All his Riches cannot compound with Death, nor
all his Power and Greatness secure him from the Grave; he must quit his
spacious Habitations for a narrow Coffin, and all his Gayety for a poor Shroud;
his large Demeans, which he has extended far and wide, by adding Field to
Field, must dwindle into six Foot of dark Earth, and all his Attendants and
Parasites be changed for the Society of Worms, which will prey upon his Body,
as they had done upon his Estate. And for his poor Soul, with what horror and
amazement will it be surprised, when it must be unclothed, stripped of its
earthly House, the Body, and has not any Mansions prepared for it above? When
it must go naked and destitute of all the imaginary Advantages it enjoyed in
the Body, into a place of Torment, to be kept in Chains of Darkness to the
Judgment of the Great Day, 'till they shall both meet again to be made
completely miserable.

Go to now ye rich Men, weep and howl, for the miseries that are coming upon
you, James 5.1. Ye that heaped up Treasures, have only heaped up fire for the
last day to consume you, ver. 3. Ye that have wasted it in Luxury and Riot,
have lived in pleasure upon the Earth, and been wanton, have only nourisht your
hearts as against the day of slaughter, ver. 5. Behold your Judge stands before
the door, v. 9. expecting an account of those Talents wherewith he entrusted
you; Mountains of Wealth heaped one upon another, will not cover you from his
presence, nor blind his Eyes, nor suborn the Evidences that will come in; the
Rust of that Gold and Silver which you Misers have unprofitably hoarded up, and
the very Ministers to your Pride, and Luxury, and Vices, on whom ye Prodigals
have wasted it, as well as the Poor whom ye have both defrauded, will witness
against you, and what Mercy can ye expect from your Judge, who have showed none
to his Members?

But are Riches always kept to the hurt of the owners thereof? Must a plentiful
Estate lawfully descending from the Father disinherit the Son of the Kingdom of
Heaven? or the blessings of God's left Hand upon his own honest Labors
necessarily entitle him to be placed upon the left Hand hereafter? God forbid
any should say thus. No, Riches in themselves considered are neither good nor
bad, but indifferent, as Poverty is; both States are capable of being improved
to very good purposes, or abused to very ill ones; both have their Temptations,
and both have their Advantages. If Riches may tempt a Man to Pride and Luxury,
to love of the World, and forgetfulness of God, Poverty may be too apt to
incline him to murmur and repine at God, to Steal, and take his Name in vain:
And if Poverty put a Man upon the exercise of Patience, Contentedness, and
Faith, Riches may give him opportunities of exercising a Grace which the
Apostle prefers before all these, that of Charity, and by the due practice
whereof, we do most nearly resemble the most perfect of all Beings, our Father
which is in Heaven. The Virtues which Riches may enable a Man to perform have
that advantage over those which are owing merely to Poverty, which St. Paul
gives Prophecy over Speaking in an unknown Tongue, he that speaks in an
unknown Tongue edifieth himself, but he that prophesies edifieth the Church, 1
Cor. 14. The Virtues of the poor Man, as he is such, center in himself only,
but the rich Man may cast his benign Influence on all about him, may be Eyes to
the Blind, Feet to the Lame, a Father to the Poor and Fatherless, and cause the
Widows heart to dance for Joy, as Job speaks; may do good not only to the
present age, but to the Generations that are to come; he may in a Sense be
always with the Poor, may make Provision for the Feeding and Clothing of their
Bodies, for the instructing and forming of their Minds, and for the putting
them into Capacities of being serviceable to God, and useful to Men in their
Generations; and by so doing may become a sort of a Savior to them, contribute
mightily, not only to the saving of their Bodies from shame and misery here,
but both Souls and Bodies from eternal confusion and torment hereafter. And
this is,

2. The true way of making a wise improvement of Riches, which is the Second
General Head I proposed to discourse upon, and is included in the Phrase rich
toward God, and to be so, is, as our Savior expounds it at 33 ver. to give
Alms, or in St. Paul's Expression, to be rich in good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to Communicate, 1 Timothy 6.18. To make the needy share with
me in my Plenty, and minister out of my Abundance to the necessities of those
who have no Portions provided for them: And he that does so may be said to be
rich toward God, either as he performs a service highly acceptable to God; not
that he is benefited by our largest Charity, our Goodness extends not to him,
but to the Saints that are upon the Earth, Psalm. But yet it is very grateful to
him, as the Apostle assures us, To do good, and to distribute, forget not, for
with such Sacrifices God is pleased, Heb. 13.16. And this likewise may occasion
another pleasing Sacrifice to him, that of Praise and Thanksgiving, for so St.
Paul says, The administration of this Service not only supplies the wants of
the Saints, but is abundant also by many Thanksgivings to God, 2 Cor. 9.12.
Nay, the Scripture represents the Money which the charitable Man gives to the
Poor, as a Loan lent to God; and our Savior tells us, That He resents the
merciful Offices done to them, as performed to Himself. He that has pity on
the Poor, lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. And in as much as ye did it to
one of these my Brethren, ye did it to me, Matthew, 25. So that in this sense he
that abounds in works of Charity, may be said to be (...), rich toward God: or
there may be another sense of the Phrase, which the Learned Grotius contends
for (Grot. in Loc.) who will have (...), which we render rich, to be all one
with (...), which signifies laying up Treasure; and (...), which we render
toward God, to be as much as (...), with God; and then to be rich toward God,
as we Translate it, is to lay up Treasure for our selves with God; and this
Christ implies the charitable Man does at the forementioned 33d. Verse of this
Chapter, when he advises us, if we cannot otherwise do it, to sell some part of
what we have, and give Alms, and so provide Bags that wax not old, and treasure
in Heaven that fails not. We need not be curious which of these Senses to take,
for the truly Charitable Man is rich in both of them; he is Rich toward God,
and he lays up Treasure for himself with God; and he that does so, certainly
makes the wisest use and best improvement of his Riches.

For being rich toward God, what more prudent course can a Man take, than by
making a grateful return of some of his Plenty to that bountiful hand from whom
he received all, to engage his Blessing upon the rest? And by distributing out
of what he hasalready given, to those whom he has appointed as his Substitutes
to receive those expressions of our Love and Gratitude, which he is not capable
of, to secure his further Favors for the future? Now that the merciful and
charitable Man does this, the Scripture tells us in many places; I will name
three or four, in Psalm. 41. David describing the Blessedness of the Man that
provides for the poor and needy, says, That the Lord will deliver him in the
time of trouble, will preserve and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
the Earth; and in the 37th. speaking of the righteous Man, and what he means by
a righteous Man in that Psalm, is very plain from 21. and 26. verses of it: In
the former the righteous shows mercy, and gives; and in the other, he is
ever, or your Margin has it, all the day merciful, and lends; of this
Righteous, i. e. this merciful, liberal man, he says, v. 19. He shall not be
ashamed in evil times, and in time of famine he shall have enough. Ver. 29. The
righteous shall inherit the Land, and dwell in it for ever. And to the same
purpose, ver. 34. and in the 25th. I have been young, and now am old, yet never
saw I the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging their Bread. And ver. 26.
his Seed shall be blessed. And in Psalm. 112. speaking of the same righteous
Man, whom he explains to be one that is gracious and full of compassion, v. 4.
A God-like Character: and v. 5. That shows favor, and lends: and in 9.
has dispersed and given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, he
shall be afraid of no evil tidings, v. 8. Wealth and Riches shall be in his
House, v. 3. His Horn shall be exalted with honor, v. 9. his Seed shall be
mighty upon the earth; the generation of the upright shall be blessed. And his
Son Solomon assures us, in Prove. 25.9. That he that has a bountiful eye shall
be blessed, for he gives of his Bread to the poor. And Chap. 28.27. He that
gives to the Poor shall not lack. Not far from that, for in 11.25. The liberal
Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered again. I will add
but one Passage more, and that is in the 3d. Mal. 10. Bring me, says God, all
the Tithes into the Storehouse. All the Tithes, that is, the third Years
Tithes, as well as the every Years, those that were for the Poor, as well as
those for the Priest, as God appointed, Deuteronomy. 14.28. At the end of the third
Year, thou shall bring forth all the Tithes of thine increase the same Year,
and the Levite, and the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the Widow, shall come
and eat, and be satisfied. Bring me all these Tithes, and prove me herewith
says the Lord of Host, if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour
you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And let
not any one think that this related to the Jews only under the Old Testament
Economy, and concerns not us Christians; for though there be something
positive in the Proportion which God required to be laid aside for the Poor,
viz. the Tithe of the increase of the third Year; yet certainly the duty it
self of feeding the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow, is moral, and of
Eternal Obligation: and if the Duty extends to us, why should any one doubt but
the Promise does too, unless he can believe that no Temporal Blessings are
promised under the Evangelical Dispensation, and he that does so must
contradict St. Paul, who says not only, That Godliness in general has the
promise of this Life, as well as that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. 2 Cor. 9.9.
but particularly applies to the Righteous, i. e. the Charitable Man the
Promises I mentioned before in the 112 Psalm, and encourages the Corinthians to
a liberal Contribution to the poor Christians in Judea, from this
consideration, That God is able to make all Grace, i. e. all plenty abound to
them, v. 8. From these Scriptures then it appears, That both Deliverances from
want and danger, and positive Blessings too, both security and increase of what
he has, earthly Blessings upon himself, and upon his Posterity also, are
promised by God to that Man that is Rich toward him: And although these, as
all temporal Promises are to be understood, as Divines express it, cum
exceptione crucis, i. e. not absolutely, but with this reserve, unless God sees
it best for his Servants to order it otherwise, yet this is no impeachment of
that Man's Wisdom, that ventures his Goods upon this bottom, for either he will
have that very return in kind, which God has promised, or that which God Judges
to be better for him, and that certainly is so, and then he will have no reason
to charge either God with injustice, or himself with folly.

But whatever befalls him here, it is enough to justify the prudence of his
Conduct, that he will be sure to enjoy hereafter the treasures he has laid up
with God; and if he does with the expense of his temporary, uncertain,
perishing treasures, that are daily liable to inward corruption, and to outward
violence, purchase those that are certain, incorruptible, and eternal, no one
can say, but he makes a very wise use and improvement of them.

We must not indeed pretend by the largest and most disinterested Distributions
of our Charity, or by any thing we can do, to satisfy for our sins, or deserve
Heaven; Christ alone has made satisfaction for those, and merited this for us:
we are unprofitable Servants when we have done all, and all our righteousness
as filthy rags; our good Works can plead no merit with God, when it is he alone
that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure; and particularly
our Charity to others is purely the effect of his Bounty to us, who bestows
upon us both the means and the heart to be charitable; but yet the Scripture
makes this Grace of Charity to be of so great price in the sight of God, that
as it more than once informs us, it can cover a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20. 1
Pet. 4.8. cast a vail over several slips and imperfections in the Person
eminent for it, which God would not overlook in the Man destitute of it.

Nay the true Riches, Treasure in Heaven, eternal Life, are there assured to
the due performance of it, not as an efficient meritorious cause, but a
condition required on our part to qualify us for the application of our
Saviors Blood, which only can take away sin, and give us a title to Heaven:
And so necessary a condition it is, that Christ, in his description of the last
Judgment, Mat. 25. gives such an account of his procedure in that day, as if
the only matter he should come to inquire into, would be the performance or
neglect of this great Duty. Not but that all our works done in the flesh, our
very words and thoughts, will then be judged, but this will be a Matter of very
special and particular inquiry; this being a Duty which our Lord has
recommended to us, both by Precept and Example, it being what he was, a most
eminent instance of himself, the New Commandment which he has given to his
Disciples, and the distinguishing Badg and Character by which he would have
them to be known from the rest of the World. And indeed, wheresoever this Grace
is found in its due measure, and with its requisite qualifications, as well as
to the inward affection and habit, as to the outward effects and exercises of
it, other Virtues and Graces cannot be wanting. There may be a great show of
Charity; a Man may give Alms plentifully, and do many things outwardly, from
whence the World may judge him to be very charitable, when through some inward
defect he is in reality far otherwise: There must be, as the Schoolmen
observe, to make an Action good, a concurrence of all requisite conditions,
whereas one single defect in any one condition, will make an Action evil; (so
much easier is it to do evil than good.) Thus to make an Action truly
charitable, there is something more requisite than the bare bestowing my Money,
and disposing of my Fruits to the Poor, though it be in never so large a
proportion; for a Man may, as St. Paul intimates, 1 Cor. 13. give all his Goods
to feed the Poor, and yet not have Charity. I cannot insist upon all the
requisites, but will mention two, which wherever they are wanting, there can be
no true Charity, and wherever they are found it cannot be false: And they are
such that any Man may easily try whether they be in him or not, and
consequently judge of his Charity; and they are, a right Principle, and a right
End. If my Charity proceed from a corrupt Principle, as love of my self, or be
directed to an ill end, as to raise my own reputation in the World, that I may
have Praise and Glory of Men, or any secular advantage, it is no Charity, it
profits me nothing as to any future account, nor must I expect any reward from
my Father which is in Heaven: but if a sincere Love to God, and my Neighbor
for his sake, be the Principle, and the promotion and advancement of his Glory
the end of my Charity, it cannot easily be defective upon any other account;
for where Love is the moving Principle, the Man will give cheerfully and
liberally, he that acts out of Love, acts with a great deal of alacrity, and
never thinks he can do too much for the party loved; and where God's Glory is
his end, he will be very cautious, lest any sinister or by end intermix with
it; he will take all due and prudent care to testify one, and promote the
other; and then whatever unwilling mistakes he may be guilty of in any of the
less concerning circumstances of it, they will certainly be some of that
multitude of sins which such a Charity will cover; nay, in whom there is such a
noble Principle, and such a noble End, all other Virtues and Graces must
accompany this of Charity, and no instance of Obedience will be wanting; for he
that does any thing out of Love to God, and for the advancement of his Glory,
will be ready out of the same Principle to do every thing that may promote that
end.

Whether for these, or whatever other reasons our Savior and Judge was pleased
in his description of the Process in the great and terrible Day, to give
particular instances only in works of Charity and Mercy, as Clothing, Feeding,
Visiting, etc. the Naked, Hungry, Sick, and Imprisoned, etc. and to tell us
that the irreversible Sentence of Glory or Misery shall be past upon us, as we
have done, or not done them. This is certainly enough to show how necessary a
Duty this of Charity is, and to encourage us to abound in this Grace, and be
rich in good works, and to be merciful according to our power. God is not that
hard Master that looks to gather where he has not strawed; he does not expect
that those that have but little should give much, no, if they do but their
diligence to give of that little, they gather to themselves a good Reward
against the day of Adversity, Mark 12.42. The poor Widows two mites, which she
cast in amongst the Free-will-offerings were well accepted, and her Charity
highly commended by Christ, who has assured us, That even a Cup of cold Water
given to a Disciple in the Name of a Disciple, shall not lose its reward. But
from those to whom he has given greater Abilities, God expects larger returns
of Charity. And surely it is their Wisdom to make them in the most ample manner
they can, since he has promised that he will not forget their labors of love:
who would Sow sparingly, that can do it plentifully, when he that Ministers
Seed to the Sower, and increases the fruits of their righteousness, 2 Cor.
9.10. has told them that their crop shall be proportionable in quantity to the
Seed they sow; he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparirnly; but he that
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, v. 6.

The Sum is Liberality and Charity to the Poor have promises of the Blessings,
both of this World and the next, and though the former Promises are
conditional, yet the performance of the duties have the advantage over all
other Methods we can use to gain the good things of Life, in two respects,
first in that they are more likely to obtain them for us, and secondly, they
cannot fail but when it is our Interest to be without them.

But the latter are absolute and peremptory, and will one Day infallibly be
made good, to all such as are truly rich toward God: Where then can we dispose
of our Riches, better than to him, in what hands can we lodge them saser, and
from whom can we expect a more advantageous account of them? He will manage
them to our greatest Interest, both here and hereafter, repay us with usury
here, either in kind, or in that which shall be better, and re-pay us hereafter
with bags that wax not old, and durable treasures in Heaven, which nothing can
corrupt or take from us.

What then remains, but that I address my self to you in the words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.58. Wherefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in this work of the Lord, for as much as ye know
that your Labors shall not be in vain in the Lord. If ye Sow, ye are assured
ye shall reap in due time, if ye faint not: And what if ye should miss of a
Crop here? Is it a great matter for you to sow temporal things, if ye shall
reap spiritual and eternal things? What if ye must tarry for one 'till
hereafter? Does not the Husband wait with long patience for the precious Fruit
of the Earth? Be ye also patient therefore until the coming of the Lord, which
draws nigh; behold he comes quickly, and his reward is with him: And then
when he shall be seated upon the Throne of his Glory, attended with all his
holy Angels, and all Nations shall be gathered before him, then will appear who
has been the wise Man, and who the Fool, the unprofitable and unfaithful
Steward, of the unrighteous Mammon, that has either hid his Lord's Talent, and
let it lie useless by him; or imbezled and misspent it in Luxury and Riot; or
he that has made himself Friends with it, by employing it to pious and
charitable uses: when they shall be amazed, as the wise Man speaks, Wisd. 5. at
the strangeness of his Salvation beyond all that they had looked for, and
repenting and grieving for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves, This
is he whom we had sometime in derision, and a proverb of reproach, whom we
accounted a mad Man for thinking to increase by scattering, and for laying out
certain and present Treasures in prospect of uncertain future Advantage, how do
we prove the Fools, and he the wise man; And what has our pride profited us, or
what good have our Riches, with our vaunting, brought us; all those things are
passed away as a shadow, and as a Post that hastes by, but as for him, how is
he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot among the Saints? When they
shall thus censure themselves, and with trembling and confusion hear the
dreadful Sentence of their Judge. Then shall he stand with great boldness
before the Face of those who made no account of his Labors of Love, and before
the Face of his Judge too: Being prepared to answer those Interrogatories that
shall then be put to him, with a Here Lord are thy poor naked Members which I
have clothed; here are the hungry Bellies that I have fed; here are the
Strangers, the Sick and Imprisoned to whom I have Minister'd. Then shall he
receive a beautiful Crown from the Lord's hand, who shall tell him, In as much
as thou have done it to these, thou have done it to me, Come therefore thou
blessed Child, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee from the foundation of the
World.

Thus have I dispatched the Two Things I proposed; and showed, 1. The Folly of
those that lay up Treasure for themselves, and 2. The true way of making a wise
improvement of Riches, by being rich toward God.

And blessed be God, though our Age and Country abound too much with Examples
of the former, yet we do not want some Instances to exemplify the latter part
of my Discourse; our Savior's Prophecy, Mat. 24. v. 12. That the love of many
shall wax cold; and St. Paul's account of the last days, 2 Timothy 3. v. 12.
wherein Men shall be lovers of themselves and covetous, without natural
affection, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; are but too visibly
verified in us, upon whom the ends of the World are come: But yet as far as we
are removed from the first dawnings of the Gospel Age, and from the more
immediate influences of those bright Examples the first Embracers of it, who
sold their possessions and laid them at the Apostles feet, whereof distribution
was made to every Man as he had need. As late as we live, and as cold as our
Climate is, we have had, and have some burning and shining Lights, who by their
charitable works have both warmed and refreshed many of their poor Brethren,
and by the Light of their good Examples invited and encouraged others to do
likewise, and occasioned many Thanksgivings to God on their behalf: We can
produce instances of useful Charities that have been given since the
Reformation, sufficient to convince the Romanists, That Protestants do as much
acknowledge the Obligation, as they disclaim the merit of good works; Instances
so many, and great, in proportion to the little time that the People of thy
Holiness, O Lord, have possessed thy Sanctuary, as may justly make them blush to
charge us with denying the necessity of good Works: If any have taught that a
naked dead Faith, destitute of Works, is the whole entire condition of
Justification, let them bear their own burden, but let not the Church be
charged, which always subscribes to that of St. James, Jam. 2.26. As the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. Though with
our Savior she teaches us to say, when we have done all, we are unprofitable
Servants: We can, I say, show our faith by our works. I need not go out of this
County to find several Instances; a Commission now in foot for the enquiring
into, and redressing any Abuses in the management of them, has given me an
opportunity of knowing this. But having trespassed too far already, I must
suppress a great deal that I might say upon this Subject, and shall only
mention some few Instances of Charity, given and designed to very good uses
within our own Memories, and in the Lifetime of the Donors, some already
perfected, and some not yet completed: Among the first sort I reckon the
Hospital at Old Swinford; and this I do the rather instance in; because this
Parish partakes in the Charity of that Noble Foundation, which, through the
munificence of the Founder, the care of the Managers, and prudence and industry
of the present Master, is, it may be, one of the most useful Charities that
late Years have produced, at least in these Parts.

Of this sort likewise is that which is the occasion of our present Meeting,
and is more entirely given for the benefit of this Place and Neighborhood, and
is designed not only for the Clothing of the Bodies of some of your poorer
Children, but for the Adorning of their Minds, and putting them into Capacities
of providing for themselves, and being useful to the World: Here you have a
beautiful and convenient Structure built, and a competent Provision made for a
Schoolmaster, to instruct such as shall be admitted into it, not only in the
Rudiments of Grammar, but also in the Principles of the Christian Religion, as
they are briefly comprised in that excellent Summary, our Church Catechism: And
whoever considers what a mighty Influence the Education of Children has upon
them, when they come to be Men, how tenacious they are of those Principles
which they imbibe in their Childhood, especially how closely those they then
suck in relating to Religion stick to them afterward, (as we have sad
experience in too many unhappy Persons, upon whom prejudice of Education has
wrought more than force of Argument) must certainly own it to be a most pious
and prudent Design of your Charitable Benefactor, to provide for the early
Institution of such, whose mean Circumstances may either render them destitute
of any Education, o^, which is not better, expose them to a bad one; and for
the leading them into the Truth, and possessing them with right Notions, while
the pliableness and tenderness of their Age, make them very Ductile, and
capable of any impressions. But I must not dwell upon this, nor may enlarge
upon other Subjects, which are offered me by the further generous Designs of
that worthy Person who has occasioned our coming together at this time, who is
settling the same Charity on a Neighboring Parish that he has bestowed upon
this, and making the same pious Provision for the poor Children of Fecknam,
that he has done for those of Bromsgrove. Nor does his Charitable Intentions
stop here, or leave the Children at the Schools he is building for them, but
carry them on to the University, where he has laid large and noble designs
indeed, which we may hope ere long to see executed.

But I must forbear, and shall conclude with a hearty Address to the Father of
Lights, from whom every good and perfect Gift comes, that for this Loan, which
is already lent unto the Lord, he would return it double into the Bosom of the
Lender, in the Blessings of this Life and the next. That he, who works in us
to will and to do of his good pleasure, would perfect what he has begun in him;
That he would make him to abound more and more in this Grace, and to that end,
That he would make all Grace abound toward him, that he always having
All Sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work, being enriched in
every thing, to all bountifulness, which causes through us Thanksgivings to
God. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Bennet.
THE Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces. Written in French by the Baron Maurier,
in 1682. whose Father was Twenty Years Ambassador at the Hague. And Published
at Paris, by Order of the French King. To which is added the Life of His
Present Majesty, King William the Third. By Mr. Thomas Brown. Together with
each Prince's Head before his Life. Done from Original Draughts, by Mr. Robert
White.

Mr. Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing Curious Reflections, very
useful and necessary for the Right Understanding and Judging of the excellency
of Homer and Virgil: done into English, with some Reflections on Prince Arthur,
by W. S. To which are added an Essay on Satyr, by Monsieur Dacier; and a
Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry, by Monsieur Fontanelle.

Monsieur Rapin's Reflections upon Aristotle's Poetry, Englished by Mr. Rymer,
together with some Reflections on our Modern Poets.

In the Press.

Sermons upon several Occasions, by R. Meggot, D.D. llate Dean of Winchester.


