Advertisement.
WHereas several Sermons of His Grace JOHN late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Imperfectly taken from Him in Shorthand, may be surreptitiously Printed: This
is to give Notice, That there is nothing of His Grace's designed for the Press
at present; and that when there is, it will be Advertised in the Gazette.

THE Last Sermon Of His GRACE JOHN late Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY. Preached
before the KING and QUEEN AT White Hall, February 25th, 1693/4.

Together with his Grace's SERMON ON Phil. 3. 20. For our Conversation is in
Heaven.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill; and W. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCV. Price 6 d.

THE LAST SERMON Of His GRACE JOHN late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
TIT. III. 2. To speak evil of no man.
GEneral Persuasives to Repentance and a good Life, and Invectives against Sin
and Wickedness at large, are certainly of good use to recommend Religion and
Virtue, and to expose the deformity and danger of a Vicious course. But it must
be acknowleged on the other hand, that these general Discourses do not so
immediately tend to reform the Lives of men: Because they fall among the Crowd,
but do not touch the Consciences of particular Persons in so sensible and
awakening a manner as when we treat of particular Duties and Sins, and
endeavor to put men upon the practice of the one, and to reclaim them from the
other, by proper Arguments taken from the Word of God, and from the nature of
particular Virtues and Vices.

The general way is, as if a Physician, instead of applying particular Remedies
to the Distemper of his Patient, should entertain him with a long discourse of
Diseases in general, and of the pleasure and advantages of Health; and
earnestly persuade him to be well; without taking his particular Disease into
consideration, and prescribing Remedies for it.

But if we would effectually reform men, we must take to task the great and
common disorders of their Lives, and represent their faults to them in such a
manner as may convince them of the evil and danger of them, and put them upon
the endeavor of a cure.

And to this end I have pitched upon one of the common and reigning Vices of
the Age, Calumny and Evil-speaking; by which men contract so much guilt to
themselves, and create so much trouble to others: And from which, it is to be
feared, few or none are wholly free. For who is he, says the Son of Sirach,
that has not offended with his tongue? Ecclus. 19. 16. In many things, says
St. James, James 3. 2. we offend all: And if any man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect man.

But how few have attained to this perfection? And yet unless we do endeavor
after it, and in some good measure attain it, all our pretense to Religion is
vain: So the same Apostle tells us, James 1. 26. If any man among you seems
to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that
man's Religion is vain.

For the more distinct handling of this Argument, I shall reduce my Discourse
to these Five Heads.

First, I shall consider the Nature of this Vice, and wherein it consists.

Secondly, I shall consider the due extent of this Prohibition, To speak evil
of no man.

Thirdly, I shall show the Evil of this practice, both in the Causes and
Effects of it.

Fourthly, I shall add some further Considerations to dissuade men from it.

Fifthly, I shall give some Rules and Directions for the prevention and cure of
it.

I. I shall consider what this Sin or Vice of evil speaking, here forbidden by
the Apostle, is: (...), not to defame and slander any man, not to hurt his
reputation, as the Etymology of the word does import. So that this Vice
consists in saying things of others which tend to their disparagement and
reproach, to the taking away or lessening of their Reputation and good Name.
And this, whether the things said be true or not. If they be false, and we know
it, then it is downright Calumny; and if we do not know it, but take it upon
the report of others, it is however a Slander; and so much the more injurious,
because really groundless and undeserved.

If the thing be true, and we know it to be so, yet it is a defamation, and
tends to the prejudice of our neighbor's reputation: And it is a fault to say
the evil of others which is true, unless there be some good reason for it
besides: Because it is contrary to that charity and goodness which Christianity
requires, to divulge the faults of others, though they be really guilty of
them, without necessity or some other very good reason for it.

Again, It is Evil-speaking and the Vice condemned in the Text, whether we be
the first Authors of an ill Report, or relate it from others; because the man
that is evil spoken of is equally defamed either way.

Again, Whether we speak evil of a man to his face, or behind his back: The
former way indeed seems to be the more generous, but yet is a great Fault, and
that which we call reviling: The latter is more mean and base, and that which
we properly call Slander or Backbiting.

And Lastly, Whether it be done directly and in express terms, or more
obscurely and by way of oblique insinuation; whether by way of downright
reproach, or with some crafty preface of commendation: For so it have the
effect to defame, the manner of address does not much alter the case: The one
may be more dextrous, but is not one jot less faulty: For many times the
deepest Wounds are given by these smoother and more artificial ways of Slander;
as by asking questions, Have you not heard so and so of such a man? I say no
more, I only ask the question: Or by general intimations, that they are loath to
say what they have heard of such a one, are very sorry for it, and do not at
all believe it, if you will believe them; And this many times without telling
the thing, but leaving you in the dark to suspect the worst.

These and such like Arts, though they may seem to be tenderer and gentler ways
of using men's reputation, yet in truth they are the most malicious and
effectual methods of Slander; because they insinuate something that is much
worse than is said, and yet are very apt to create in unwary men a strong
belief of something that is very bad, though they know not what it is. So that
it matters not in what fashion a Slander is dressed up, if it tend to defame a
man and to diminish his Reputation, it is the Sin forbidden in the Text.

II. We will consider the extent of this Prohibition to speak evil of no man;
and the due bounds and limitations of it. For it is not to be understood
absolutely, to forbid us to say any thing concerning others that is bad. This
in some cases may be necessary and our duty, and in several cases very fit and
reasonable. The Question is, In what Cases by the general Rules of Scripture
and right Reason we are warranted to say the evil of others that is true?

In general, we are not to do this without great reason and necessity; as, for
the prevention of some great evil, or the procuring of some considerable good
to our selves, or others. And this I take to be the meaning of that advice of
the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 19. 8. Whether it be to a friend or a foe, talk not of
other men's lives; and if thou can without offense reveal them not; that is,
if without hurt to any body thou can conceal them, divulge them not.

But because this may not be direction sufficient, I shall instance in some of
the principal Cases wherein men are warranted to speak evil of others, and yet
in so doing do not offend against this Prohibition in the Text.

First, It is not only lawful, but very commendable, and many times our duty to
do this in order to the probable amendment of the person of whom evil is
spoken. In such a case we may tell a man of his faults privately; or where it
may not be so fit for us to use that boldness and freedom, we may reveal his
faults to one who is more fit and proper to reprove him, and will probably make
no other use of this discovery but in order to his amendment. And this is so
far from being a breach of Charity, that it is one of the best testimonies of
it. For perhaps the party may not be guilty of what has been reported of him,
and then it is a kindness to give him the opportunity of vindicating himself:
Or if he be guilty, perhaps being privately and prudently told of it he may
reform. In this Case the Son of Sirach advises to reveal men's faults; Ecclus.
19. 13, 14, 15. Admonish a friend, says he, it may be he has not done it; and
if he have done it, that he do it no more: Admonish a friend, it may be he has
not said it; and if he have, that he speak it not again: Admonish a friend, for
many times it is a slander; and believe not every tale.

But then we must take care that this be done out of kindness, and that nothing
of our own passion be mingled with it; and that under pretense of reproving and
reforming men, we do not reproach and revile them, and tell them of their
faults in such a manner as if we did it to show our authority rather than our
charity. It requires a great deal of address and gentle application so to
manage the business of Reproof, as not to irritate and exasperate the person
whom we reprove, instead of curing him.

Secondly, This likewise is not only lawful, but our duty, when we are legally
called to bear witness concerning the fault and crime of another. A good man
would not be an accuser, unless the public good, or the prevention of some
great evil should require it. And then the plain reason of the thing will
sufficiently justify a voluntary accusation: otherwise it has always among
well-manner'd People been esteemed very odious for a man to be officious in
this kind, and a forward Informer concerning the misdemeanors of others.
Magistrates may sometimes think it fit to give encouragement to such persons,
and to set one bad man to catch another, because such men are fittest for such
dirty work: But they can never inwardly approve them, nor will they ever make
them their friends and confidents.

But when a man is called to give testimony in this kind in obedience to the
Laws, and out of reverence to the Oath taken in such Cases, he is so far from
deserving blame for so doing, that it would be an unpardonable fault in him to
conceal the truth, or any part of it.

Thirdly, It is lawful to publish the faults of others in our own necessary
defense and vindication. When a man cannot conceal another's faults without
betraying his own innocence, no charity requires a man to suffer himself to be
defamed to save the reputation of another man. Charity begins at home; and
though a man had never so much goodness, he would first secure his own good
name, and then be concerned for other men's. We are to love our neighbor as
our selves; so that the love of our selves is the Rule and Measure of our love
to our neighbor: And therefore first, otherwise it could not be the Rule. And
it would be very well for the World, if our Charity would rise thus high; and
no man would hurt another man's reputation, but where his own is in real danger.

Fourthly, This also is lawful for caution and warning to a third person, that
is in danger to be infected by the company, or ill example of another; or may
be greatly prejudiced by reposing too much confidence in him, having no
knowledge or suspicion of his bad qualities: But even in this case we ought to
take great care that the ill character we give of any man be spread no further
than is necessary to the good end we designed in it.

Besides these more obvious and remarkable Cases, this Prohibition does not I
think hinder but that in ordinary conversation men may mention that ill of
others which is already made as public as it well can be: Or that one friend
may not in freedom speak to another of the miscarriage of a third person, where
he is secure no ill use will be made of it, and that it will go no further to
his prejudice: Provided always, that we take no delight in hearing or speaking
ill of others: And the less we do it, though without any malice or design of
harm, still the better; because this shows that we do not feed upon ill reports
and take pleasure in them.

These are the usual Cases in which it may be necessary for us to speak evil of
other men. And these are so evidently reasonable that the Prohibition in the
Text cannot with reason be extended to them. And if no man would allow himself
to say any thing to the prejudice of another man's good name, but in these and
the like Cases, the tongues of men would be very innocent, and the World would
be very quiet. I proceed in the

IIId. place to consider the evil of this practice, both in the Causes and the
Consequences of it.

First, We will consider the Causes of it. And it commonly springs from one or
more of these evil Roots.

First, One of the deepest and most common Causes of evil-speaking is
ill nature and cruelty of disposition: And by a general mistake Ill Nature
passes for Wit, as Cunning does for Wisdom; tho in truth they are nothing
akin to one another, but as far distant as Vice and Virtue.

And there is no greater evidence of the bad temper of Mankind, than the
general proneness of men to this Vice. For (as our Savior says) out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And therefore men do commonly
incline to the censorious and uncharitable side: which shows humane Nature to
be strangely distorted from its original rectitude and innocence. The Wit of
Man does more naturally vent it self in Satyr and Censure, than in Praise and
Panegyric. When men set themselves to commend, it comes hardly from them, and
not without great force and straining; and if any thing be fitly said in that
kind, it does hardly relish with most men: But in the way of Invective, the
Invention of men is a plentiful and never-failing Spring: And this kind of Wit
is not more easy than it is acceptable: It is greedily entertained and greatly
applauded, and every man is glad to hear others abused, not considering how
soon it may come to his own turn to lie down and make sport for others.

To speak evil of others, is almost become the general entertainment of all
Companies: And the great and serious business of most Meetings and Visits,
after the necessary Ceremonies and Complements are over, is to sit down and
back-bite all the World. It Is the Sauce of Conversation, and all Discourse is
counted but flat and dull which has not something of piquancy and sharpness in
it against some body. For men generally love rather to hear evil of others than
good, and are secretly pleased with ill reports, and drink them in with
greediness and delight: Though at the same time they have so much Justice, as
to hate those that propagate them; and so much Wit, as to conclude that these
very persons will do the same for them in another Place and Company.

But especially, if it concerns one of another Party, and that differs from us
in matters of Religion; in this Case, all Parties seem to be agreed that they
do God great service in blasting the Reputation of their Adversaries: And tho
they all pretend to be Christiams, and the Disciples of Him who taught nothing
but kindness and meekness and charity; yet it is strange to see with what a
salvage and murderous disposition they will fly at one another's Reputation
and tear it in pieces: And whatever other Scruples they may have, they make
none to bespatter one another in the most bitter and slanderous manner.

But if they hear any good of their Adversaries, with what nicety and caution
do they receive it? how many objections do they raise against it? and with what
coldness do they at last admit it? It is very well, say they, if it be true: I
shall be glad to hear it confirmed. I never heard so much good of him before.
You are a good man your self, but have a care you be not deceived.

Nay it is well, if to balance the matter, and set things even, they do not
clap some infirmity and fault into the other Scale, that so the Enemy may not
go off with flying Colors.

But on the other side, every man is a good and substantial Author of an ill
Report. I do not apply this to any one sort of men, though all are to blame in
this way; Iliacos intra muros peccatur, and extra. To speak impartially, the
Zealots of all Parties have got a scurvy Trick of lying for the Truth.

But of all sorts of People, I have observed the Priests and Bigots of the
Church of Rome to be the ablest in this way, and to have the strongest Faith
for a lusty Falsehood and Calumny. Others will bandy a false Report, and toss it
from one hand to another; but I never knew any that would so hug a Lie and be
so very fond of it. They seem to be described by St. John in that expression in
the Revelation, Whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Another shrewd sign that ill nature lies at the root of this Vice is, that we
easily forget the good that is said of others, and seldom make mention of it;
but the contrary sticks with us, and lies uppermost in our memories, and is
ready to come out upon all occasions: And which is yet more ill-natured and
unjust, many times when we do not believe it our selves we tell it to others,
with this charitable Caution, That we hope it is not true. But in the mean time
we give it our Pass, and venture it to take its fortune to be believed or not,
according to the charity of those into whose hands it comes.

Secondly, Another Cause of the commonness of this Vice is, that many are so
bad themselves, in one kind or other. For to think and speak ill of others is
not only a bad thing, but a sign of a bad man. Our Blessed Savior, speaking of
the evil of the last days, gives this as the reason of the great decay of
Charity among men; Because iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax
cold, Matthew. 24. 12. When men are bad themselves, they are glad of any
opportunity to censure others, and are always apt to suspect that evil of other
men which they know by themselves. They cannot have a good opinion of
themselves, and therefore are very unwilling to have so of any body else; and
for this reason they endeavor to bring men to a level, hoping it will be some
justification of them if they can but render others as bad as themselves.

Thirdly, Another source of this Vice is Malice and Revenge. When men are in
Heat and Passion they do not consider what is true, but what is spiteful and
mischievous; and speak evil of others in revenge of some injury which they have
received from them: And when they are blinded by their Passions, they lay about
them madly and at a venture, not much caring whether the evil they speak be
true or not. Nay many are so Devilish, as to invent and raise false Reports on
purpose to blast men's Reputation. This is a Diabolical temper, and therefore
St. James tells us that the slanderous Tongue is set on fire of Hell: And the
Devil has his very Name from Calumny and false Accusation; and it is his
Nature too, for he is always ready to stir up and foment this evil spirit among
men: Nay, the Scripture tells us that he has the malice and impudence to
accuse good men before God; as he did Job, charging him with Hypocrisy to God
himself; Who, he knows, does know the hearts of all the children of men.

Fourthly, Another Cause of evil-speaking is Envy. Men look with an evil eye
upon the good that is in others, and think that their Reputation obscures them,
and that their commendable qualities do stand in their light; and therefore
they do what they can to cast a cloud over them, that the bright shining of
their Virtues may not scorch them. This makes them greedily to entertain, and
industriously to publish any thing that may serve to that purpose, thereby to
raise themselves upon the Ruins of other men's Reputation: And therefore as
soon as they have got an ill Report of any good man by the end, to work they
presently go to send it abroad by the first Post: For the string is always
ready upon their Bow to let fly this Arrow with an incredible swiftness,
through City and Country; for fear the innocent man's justification should
over-take it.

Fifthly, Another Cause of evil-speaking is Impertinence and Curiosity; an itch
of talking and meddling in the affairs of other Men, which do nowise concern
them. Some persons love to mingle themselves in all business, and are loath to
seem ignorannt of so important a piece of News as the faults and ^^^ies of men,
or any bad thing that is talked of (...) good Company. And therefore they do
with great care pick up ill Stories, as good matter of discourse in the next
Company that is worthy of them: And this perhaps not out of any great malice,
but for want of something better to talk of, and because their Parts lie
chiefly that way.

Lastly, Men do this many times out of wantonness and for diversion. So little
do light and vain men consider, that a man's Reputation is too great and tender
a Concernment to be jested withal; and that a slanderous Tongue bites like a
Serpent, and wounds like a Sword. For what can be more barbarous, next to
sporting with a man's Life, than to play with his Honor and Reputation, which
to some men is dearer to them than their Lives?

It is a cruel pleasure which some men take in worrying the Reputation of
others much better than themselves; and this only to divert themselves and the
Company. Solomon compares this sort of men to distracted persons; As a mad man,
says he, who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death, so is the man that
deceives his neighbor; the LXX. render it, So is the man that defameth his
neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport? Such, and so bad are the Causes of
this Vice. I proceed to consider, in the

Second place, the ordinary, but very pernicious Consequences and Effects of
it; both to Others, and to our Selves.

First, To Others; the Parties I mean that are slandered. To them it is
certainly a great injury; and commonly a high Provocation, but always matter of
no small grief and trouble to them.

It is certainly a great injury, and if the evil which we say of them be not
true, it is an injury beyond imagination, and beyond all possible reparation.
And though we should do our utmost endeavor afterward toward their
Vindication, yet that makes but very little amends; because the Vindication
seldom reaches so far as the Reproach, and because commonly men are neither so
forward to spread the Vindication, nor is it so easily received after ill
impressions are once made. The solicitous Vindication of a man's self is, at
the best, but an after-game; and for the most part a man had better sit still,
than to run the hazard of making the matter worse by playing it.

I will add one thing more, That it is an Injury that descends to a man's
Children and Posterity; because the good or ill Name of the Father is derived
down to them; and many times the best thing he has to leave them is the
Reputation of his unblemished Virtue and Worth: And do we make no Conscience to
rob his innocent Children of the best part of this small Patrimony, and of all
the kindness that would have been done them for their Father's sake, if his
Reputation had not been so undeservedly stained? Is it no Crime by the breath
of our mouth at once to blast a man's Reputation, and to ruin his Children,
perhaps to all Posterity? Can we make a jest of so serious a matter? Of an
Injury so very hard to be repented of as it ought, because in such a Case no
Repentance will be acceptable without Restitution, if it be in our power. And
perhaps it will undo us in this World to make it; and if we do it not, will be
our Ruin in the other.

I will put the Case at the best, that the matter of the Slander is true; yet
no man's Reputation is considerably stained, tho never so deservedly, without
great harm and damage to him. And it is great odds but the matter by passing
through several hands is aggravated beyond truth, every one out of his bounty
being apt to add something to it.

But, besides the Injury, it is commonly a very high Provocation. And the
consequence of that may be as bad as we can imagine, and may end in dangerous
and desperate Quarrels. This reason the wise Son of Sirach gives why we should
defame no man: Whether it be, says he, to a friend or to a foe, talk not of
other men's lives. For he has heard and observed thee, Ecclus. 19. 8, 9. that
is, one way or other it will probably come to his knowledge, and when the time
comes he will show his hatred; that is, he will take the first opportunity to
revenge it.

At the best, it is always matter of Grief to the person that is defamed: And
Christianity, which is the best-natur'd Institution in the World, forbids us
the doing of those things whereby we may grieve one another. A man's good name
is a tender thing, and a wound there sinks deep into the spirit even of a wise
and good man: And the more innocent any man is in this kind, the more sensible
is he of this hard usage; because he never treats others so, nor is he
conscious to himself that he has deserved it.

Secondly, The Consequences of this Vice are as bad or worse to our selves.
Whoever is wont to speak evil of others, gives a bad character of himself, even
to those whom he desires to please; who, if they be wise enough, will conclude
that he speaks of them to others, as he does of others to them: And were it not
for that fond partiality which men have for themselves, no man could be so
blind as not to see this.

And it is very well worthy of our consideration, which our Savior says in
this very Case, That with what measure we meet to others, it shall be measured
to us again; Matthew. 7. and that many times heaped up; and running over* For
there is hardly any thing wherein Mankind do use more strict justice and
equality, than in rendering evil for evil, and railing for railing.

Nay, Revenge often goes further than Words. A reproachful and slanderous
Speech has cost many a man a Duel, and in that the loss of his own Life, or
the Murder of another, perhaps with the loss of his own Soul: And I have often
wondered that among Christians this matter is no more laid to heart.

And tho neither of these great mischiefs should happen to us, yet this may be
inconvenient enough many other ways. For no man knows in the chance of things,
and the mutability of humane affairs, whose kindness and good will he may come
to stand in need of before he dies. So that did a man only consult his own
safety and quiet, he ought to refrain from evil-speaking. What man is he, says
the Psalmist, that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good:
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking falsehood, Psalm. 34. 12,
13.

But there is an infinitely greater Danger hanging over us from God. If we
allow our selves in this evil practice, all our Religion is good for nothing.
So St. James expressly tells us, If any man among you seems to be religious,
and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion
is vain, Jam. 1. 26. And St. Paul puts Slanderers and Revilers amongst those
that shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And our Blessed Savior has told
us, That by our words we shall be justified, and by our words we shall be
condemned, 1 Cor. 6. 10. To which I will add the counsel given us by the
Wiseman, Refrain your tongue from backbiting, for there is no word so secret
that shall go for naught, and the mouth that slandereth slays the Soul,
Wisdom of Solomon, c. 1. v. 11. I proceed in the

IVth place, to add some further Arguments and Considerations to take men off
from this Vice: As,

First, That the use of Speech is a peculiar Prerogative of Man above other
Creatures, and bestowed upon him for some excellent end and purpose: That by
this Faculty we might communicate our thoughts more easily to one another, and
consult together for our mutual comfort and benefit: Not to enable us to be
hurtful and injurious, but helpful and beneficial to one another. The Psalmist,
as by Interpreters is generally thought, calls our Tongue our Glory; therewith
we praise God and bless Men. Now to bless is to speak well of any, and to wish
them well. So that we pervert the use of Speech and turn our glory into shame,
when we abuse this Faculty to the injury and reproach of any.

Secondly, Consider how cheap a kindness it is to speak well, at least not to
speak ill of any. A good word is an easy obligation, but not to speak ill
requires only our Silence, which costs us nothing. Some instances of Charity
are chargeable, as to relieve the wants and necessities of others: The expense
deterrs many from this kind of Charity. But were a man never so covetous, he
might afford another man his good word; at least he might refrain from speaking
ill of him: especially if it be considered how dear many have paid for a
slanderous and reproachful word.

Thirdly, Consider that no quality does ordinarily recommend one more to the
favor and good will of men, than to be free from this Vice. Every one desires
such a man's friendship, and is apt to repose a great trust and confidence in
him: And when he is dead, men will praise him; and next to Piety toward God,
and Righteousness to Men, nothing is thought a more significant commendation,
than that he was never, or very rarely heard to speak ill of any. It was a
singular Character of a Roman Gentleman, Nescivit quid esset maledicere, he
knew not what it was to give any man an ill word.

Fourthly, Let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and consider how himself
is apt to be affected with this usage. Speak thy Conscience Man, and say
whether, as bad as thou art, thou would not be glad to have every man's,
especially every good man's good word? And to have thy faults concenal'd, and
not to be hardly spoken of, though it may be not altogether without truth, by
those whom thou did never offend by word or deed? But with what face or
reason do thou expect this from others, to whom thy carriage has been so
contrary? Nothing surely is more equal and reasonable than that known Rule,
What thou would have no man do to thee, that do thou to no man.

Fifthly, When you are going to speak reproachfully of others, consider whether
you do not lie open to just reproach in the same, or some other kind. Therefore
give no Occasion, no Example of this barbarous usage of one another.

There are very few so innocent and free either from infirmities or greater
faults, as not to be obnoxious to reproach upon one account or other; even the
wisest, and most virtuous, and most perfect among men have some little vanity,
or affectation, which lays them open to the railery of a mimical and malicious
Wit: Therefore we should often turn our thoughts upon our selves, and look into
that part of the Wallet which men commonly fling over their shoulders and keep
behind them, that they may not see their own Faults: And when we have searched
that well, let us remember our Savior's Rule, He that is without sin, let him
cast the first stone.

Lastly consider, That it is in many Cases as great a Charity to conceal the
evil you hear and know of others, as if you relieved them in a great necessity.
And we think him a hard-hearted man that will not bestow a small Alms upon one
in great want. It is an excellent Advice which the Son of Sirach gives to this
purpose; Talk not of other men's lives: If thou have heard a word, let it die
with thee; and be bold it will not burst thee, Ecclus. 19. 10. I shall in the
Vth. and last place, give some Rules and Directions for the prevention and cure
of this great evil among men.

First, Never say any evil of any man, but what you certainly know. When ever
you positively accuse and endite any man of any Crime, though it be in private
and among Friends, speak as if you were upon your Oath, because God sees and
hears you. This not only Charity, but Justice and regard to truth do demand of
us. He that easily credits an ill Report is almost as faulty as the first
inventer of it. For tho you do not make, yet you commonly propagate a Lie.
Therefore never speak evil of any upon common Fame, which for the most part is
false, but almost always uncertain whether it be true or not.

Not but that it is a fault, in most Cases, to report the evil of men which is
true, and which we certainly know to be so: But if I cannot prevail to make men
wholly to abstain from this fault, I would be glad to compound with some
Persons, and to gain this point of them however; because it would retrench nine
parts in ten of the evil-speaking that is in the World.

Secondly, Before you speak evil of any man, consider whether he has not
obliged you by some real kindness, and then it is a bad return to speak ill of
him who has done us good. Consider also, whether you may not come hereafter to
be acquainted with him, related to him, or obliged by him whom you have thus
injured? And how will you then be ashamed when you reflect upon it, and perhaps
have reason also to believe that he to whom you have done this injury is not
ignorant of it?

Consider likewise, whether in the change of Humane affairs, you may not some
time or other come to stand in need of his favor; and how incapable this
carriage of yours toward him will render you of it? And whether it may not be
in his power to revenge a spiteful and needless word by a shrewd turn? So that
if a man made no conscience of hurting others, yet he should in prudence have
some consideration of himself.

Thirdly, Let us accustom our selves to pity the Faults of men and to be truly
sorry for them, and then we shall take no pleasure in publishing them. And this
common Humanity requires of us, considering the great infirmities of humane
Nature, and that we our selves also are liable to be tempted: Considering
likewise, how severe a Punishment every Fault and miscarriage is to it self;
and how terribly it exposes a man to the wrath of God, both in this World and
the other. He is not a good Christian, that is not heartily sorry for the
faults even of his greatest Enemies; and if he be so, he will discover them no
further than is necessary to some good end.

Fourthly, Whenever we hear any man evil-spoken of, if we know any good of him
let us say that. It is always the more humane and the more honorable part to
stand up in the defense and vindication of others, than to accuse and bespatter
them. Possibly the good you heard of them may not be true, but it is much more
probable that the evil which you have heard of them is not true neither:
However, it is better to preserve the credit of a bad man, than to stain the
Reputation of the innocent. And if there were any need that a man should be
evil-spoken of, it is but fair and equal that his good and bad Qualities should
be mentioned together; otherwise he may be strangely misrepresented, and an
indifferent Man may be made a Monster.

They that will observe nothing in a Wise man, but his over-sights and follies;
nothing in a Good man, but his failings and infirmities; may make a shift to
render a very wise and good man very despicable. If one should heap together
all the passionate Speeches all the froward and imprudent Actions of the best
Man; all that he had said or done amiss in his whole Life, and present it all
at one view, concealing his Wisdom and Virtues; the Man in this Disguise would
look like a Madman or a Fury: And yet if his Life were fairly represented, and
just in the same manner it was led; and his many and great Virtues set
over against his failings and infirmities, he would appear to all the World to
be an admirable and excellent Person. But how many and great soever any man's
ill Qualities are, it is but just that with all this heavy load of Faults he
should have the due praise of the few real Virtues that are in him.

Fifthly, That you may not speak ill of any, do not delight to hear ill of
them. Give no countenance to Busy-bodies, and those that love to talk of other
men's Faults: Or if you cannot decently reprove them because of their Quality,
then divert the discourse some other way; or if you cannot do that, by seeming
not to mind it, you may sufficiently signify that you do not like it.

Sixthly, Let every man mind himself, and his own Duty and Concernment. Do but
endeavor in good earnest to mend thy self, and it will be work enough for one
Man, and leave thee but little time to talk of others. When Plato withdrew from
the Court of Dionysius, who would fain have had a famous Philosopher for his
Flatterer, they parted in some unkindness, and Dionysius bad him not to speak
ill of him when he was returned into Greece; Plato told him, he had no leisure
for it; meaning that he had better things to mind, than to take up his thoughts
and talk with the faults of so bad a man, so notoriously known to all the World.

Lastly, Let us set a watch before the door of our lips, and not speak but upon
consideration: I do not mean to speak finely, but fitly. Especially when thou
speak of others, consider of whom, and what thou art going to speak: Use
great Caution and Circumspection in this matter: Look well about thee; on every
side of the thing, and on every Person in the Company, before thy words slip
from thee; which when they are once out of thy lips, are for ever out of thy
power.

Not that men should be sullen in company, and say nothing; or so stiff in
conversation, as to drop nothing but Aphorisms and Oracles: Especially, among
Equals and Friends* we should not be so reserved as if we would have it taken
for a mighty favor that we vouchsafe to say any thing. If a Man had the
understanding of an Angel, he must be contented to abate something of this
excess of Wisdom, for fear of being thought Cunning. The true Art of
Conversation, if any body can hit upon it, seems to be this; an appearing
freedom and openness, with a resolute reservedness as little appearing as is
possible.

All that I mean by this Caution is, that we should consider well what we say,
especially of others. And to this end we should endeavor to get our minds
furnished with matter of Discourse concerning things useful in themselves, and
not hurtful to others: And, if we have but a Mind wise enough, and good enough,
we may easily find a Field large enough for innocent Conversation; such as will
harm no body, and yet be acceptable enough to the better and wiser part of
Mankind: And why should any one be at the cost of playing the fool to gratify
any body whatsoever?

I have done with the Five things I propounded to speak to upon this Argument.
But because hardly any thing can be so clear, but something may be said against
it; nor any thing so bad, but something may be pleaded in excuse for it: I
shall therefore take notice of two or three Pleas that may be made for it.

First, Some pretend mighty injury and provocation. If in the same kind, it
seems thou art sensible of it; and therefore thou of all men ought to
abstain from it: But in what kind soever it be, the Christian Religion forbids
Revenge. Therefore do not plead one Sin in excuse of another, and make Revenge
an Apology for Reviling.

Secondly, It is alleged by others, with a little better grace, that if this
Doctrine were practiced, Conversation would be spoiled, and there would not be
matter enough for pleasant discourse and entertainment.

I answer, The design of this Discourse is to redress a great evil in
Conversation, and that I hope which mends it will not spoil it. And however, if
men's Tongues lay a little more still, and most of us spoke a good deal less
than we do, both of our selves and others, I see no great harm in it: I hope we
might for all that live comfortably and in good health, and see many good days.
David, I am sure, prescribes (...) as an excellent Receipt, in his Opinion, for
a quiet, and cheerful, and long Life, to refrain from evil-speaking; Psalm. 34.
12, 13. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking falsehood.

But granting that there is some pleasure in Invective, I hope there is a great
deal more in Innocence: And the more any man considers this, the truer he will
find it; and whenever we are serious, we our selves cannot but acknowledge it.
When a man examines himself impartially before the Sacrament, or is put in mind
upon a Deathbed to make reparation for Injuries done in this kind, he will
then certainly be of this mind and wish he had not done them. For this
certainly is one necessary qualification for the Blessed Sacrament, that we be
in love and charity with our neighbors; with which temper of mind this quality
is utterly inconsistent.

Thirdly, There is yet a more specious Plea than either of the former, that men
will be encouraged to do ill if they can escape the tongues of men; as they
would do, if this Doctrine did effectually take place: Because by this means
one great restraint from doing evil would be taken away, which these good men
who are so bent upon reforming the World, think would be great pity. For many
who will venture upon the displeasure of God, will yet abstain from doing bad
things for fear of reproach from Men: Besides, that this seems the most proper
punishment of many Faults which the Laws of Men can take no notice of.

Admitting all this to be true, yet it does not seem so good and laudable a way
to punish one Fault by another. But let no man encourage himself in an evil way
with this hope, that he shall escape the censure of men: When I have said all I
can, there will, I fear, be evil-speaking enough in the World to chastise them
that do ill: And tho we should hold our peace, there will be bad tongues enough
to reproach men with their evil-doings. I wish we could but be persuaded to
make the Experiment for a little while, whether men would not be sufficiently
lashed for their Faults, tho we sat by and said nothing.

So that there is no need at all that good Men should be concerned in this
odious Work. There will always be Offenders and Malefactors enough to be the
Executioners to inflict this punishment upon one another. Therefore let no man
presume upon Impunity on the one hand; and on the other, let no man despair but
that this business will be sufficiently done one way or other. I am very much
mistaken, if we may not safely trust an ill-natured World that there will be no
failure of Justice in this kind.

And here, if I durst, I would fain have said a word or two concerning that
more public sort of Obloquy by Lampoons and Libels, so much in fashion in this
witty Age. But I have no mind to provoke a very terrible sort of men. Yet thus
much I hope may be said without offense, that how much soever men are pleased
to see others abused in this kind, yet it is always grievous when it comes to
their own turn: However I cannot but hope that every man that impartially
considers must own it to be a fault of a very high nature to revile those whom
God has placed in Authority over us, and to slander the footsteps of the
Lord's Anointed: Especially since it is so expressly written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the Rulers of thy People.

Having represented the great evil of this Vice, it might not now be improper
to say something to those who suffer by it. Are we guilty of the evil said of
us? Let us reform, and cut off all occasions for the future; and so turn the
malice of our Enemies to our own advantage, and defeat their ill intentions by
making so good an use of it: And then it will be well for us to have been evil
spoken of.

Are we innocent? We may so much the better bear it patiently; imitating herein
the Pattern of our Blessed Savior, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

We may consider likewise, that tho it be a misfortune to be evil-spoken of, it
is their fault that do it, and not ours; and therefore should not put us into
Passion, because another man's being injurious to me is no good reason why I
should be uneasy to my self. We should not revenge the injuries done to us, no
not upon them that do them, much less upon our selves. Let no man's Provocation
make thee to lose thy Patience. Be not such a fool, as to part with any one
Virtue because some men are so malicious as to endeavor to rob thee of the
Reputation of all the rest. When men speak ill of thee, do as Plato said he
would do in that case; Live so, as that no body may believe them.

All that now remains is to reflect upon what has been said, and to urge you
and my self to do accordingly. For all is nothing, if we do not practice what
we so plainly see to be our Duty. Many are so taken up with the deep Points and
Mysteries of Religion, that they never think of the common Duties and Offices
of human Life. But Faith and a good Life are so far from clashing with one
another, that the Christian Religion has made them inseparable. True Faith is
necessary in order to a good Life, and a good Life is the genuine product of a
right Belief; and therefore the one never ought to be pressed to the prejudice
of the other.

I foresee what will be said, because I have heard it so often said in the like
case; that there is not one word of Jesus Christ in all this. No more is there
in the Text. And yet I hope that Jesus Christ is truly preached, whenever his
Will and Laws, and the Duties enjoined by the Christian Religion are inculcated
upon us.

But some men are pleased to say, that this is mere Morality: I answer, that
this is Scripture-Morality and Christian-Morality, and who has any thing to
say against that? Nay, I will go yet further, that no man ought to pretend to
believe the Christian Religion, who lives in the neglect of so plain a Duty;
and in the practice of a Sin so clearly condemned by it, as this of
evil-speaking is.

But because the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than a
two-edged Sword, yea sharper than Calumny it self; and pierces the very Hearts
and Consciences of men, laying us open to our selves, and convincing us of our
more secret as well as our more visible Faults; I shall therefore at one view
represent to you what is dispersedly said concerning this Sin in the Holy Word
of God.

And I have purposely reserved this to the last, because it is more persuasive
and penetrating than any Humane Discourse. And to this end be pleased to
consider in what company the Holy Ghost does usually mention this Sin. There is
scarce any black Catalogue of Sins in the Bible but we find this among them; in
the company of the very worst Actions and most irregular Passions of men. Out
of the heart, says our Savior, Matt. 15. 19. proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, false witness, evil speakings. And the Apostle, Romans
1. 29. ranks backbiters with fornicators, and murderers, and haters of God; and
with those of whom it is expressly said, 1 Cor. 6. 10. that they shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

And when he enumerates the Sins of the last times, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. Men, says
he, shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, ^evil-speakers, without
natural affection, perfidious, false accusers, etc. And which is the strangest
of all, they who are said to be guilty of these great Vices and Enormities are
noted by the Apostle to be great pretenders to Religion; for so it follows in
the next words, Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. So
that it is no new thing for men to make a more than ordinary profession of
Christianity, and yet at the same time to live in a most palpable contradiction
to the Precepts of that Holy Religion: As if any pretense to Mystery and I know
not what extraordinary seize in the knowledge of Christ, could exempt men
from obedience to his Laws, and set them above the Virtues of a good Life.

And now after all this, do we hardly think that to be a Sin, which is in
Scripture so frequently ranked with Murder and Adultery and the blackest
Crimes; such as are inconsistent with the life and power of Religion, and will
certainly shut men out of the Kingdom of God? Do we believe the Bible to be the
Word of God? and can we allow our selves in the common practice of a Sin, than
which there is hardly any Fault of men's Lives more frequently mentioned, more
severely reproved, and more odiously branded in that Holy Book.

Consider seriously these Texts, Psalm. 15. 1. Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that backbiteth not with his
tongue, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor. Have ye never heard
what our Savior says, that of every idle word we must give an account in the
day of Judgment; that by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned? What can be more severe than that of St. James? If any
man among you seems to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain.

To conclude: The Sin which I have now warned men against, is plainly condemned
by the Word of God; and the Duty which I have now been persuading you to, is
easy for every man to understand, not hard for any man, that can but resolve to
keep a good guard upon himself for some time, by the grace of God to practice;
and most reasonable for all Men, but especially for all Christians, to observe.
It is as easy as a resolute silence upon just occasion, as reasonable as
prudence and justice and charity, and the preservation of peace and good will
among men, can make it; and of as necessary and indispensible an obligation, as
the Authority of God can render any thing.

Upon all which Considerations let us every one of us be persuaded to take up
David's deliberate Resolution, Psalm. 31. 1. I said, I will take heed to my
ways, that I offend not with my tongue. And I do verily believe, that would we
but heartily endeavor to amend this one Fault, we should soon be better Men in
our whole lives: I mean, that the correcting of this Vice, together with those
that are nearly allied to it, and may at the same time, and almost with the
same resolution and care be corrected, would make us Owners of a great many
considerable Virtues, and carry us on a good way toward perfection; it being
hardly to be imagined that a man that makes conscience of his Words should not
take an equal or a greater care of his Actions. And this I take to be both the
true meaning, and the true reason of that saying of St. James, and with which I
shall conclude: If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect man.

Now the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good word and work, to do his will; working in you
always that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom
be glory for ever, Amen.

OF A HEAVENLY CONVERSATION.
PHIL. iii. 20. For our Conversation is in Heaven.
FOR the understanding of which words we need to look back no further than the
18th verse of this Chapter, where the Apostle with great vehemence and passion
speaks of some among the Philippians, who indeed professed Christianity but yet
would do any thing to decline suffering for that profession; there are many
that walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that
they are enemies to the Cross of Christ; they cannot endure to suffer with him
and for him, they are so sensual and wedded to this world that they will do any
thing to avoid persecution; so he describes them in the next verse, whose end
is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things. Now in opposition to these sensual and earthly-minded men
the Apostle gives us the character of the true Christians, they are such as
mind Heaven and another world, and prefer the hopes of that to all the
interests of this life, our conversation is in Heaven.

For the right understanding of which phrase be pleased to observe, that it is
an allusion to a City or Corporation, and to the privileges and manners of
those who are free of it. And Heaven is several times in Scripture represented
to us under this notion of a City, It is said of Abraham that he looked for a
City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. It is
called likewise the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.
22. And the same Apostle speaking of the uncertain condition of Christians in
this world says of them, that here they have no continuing City, but look for
one that is to come, Heb. 14. 14.

Now to this City the Apostle alludes here in the Text, when he says our
conversation is in Heaven. For the word (...), which is rendered conversation,
may either signify the privilege of Citizens, or their conversation and
manners, or may take in both these.

In the first sense of the privilege of Citizens, we find (...) a word of near
affinity with this sometimes used; with a great sum (says the Captain to Paul)
obtained I (...), this freedom, Acts 22. 28. According to this sense, (...) may
very well be rendered, as Tertullian often does this Text, municipatus noster,
our Citizenship is in Heaven; an allusion perhaps (as the learned Dr. Hammond
observes) to those who though they were not born at Rome, and it may be lived
at a great distance from it, had yet jus civitatis Romanae, the privilege of
Roman Citizens. In like manner the Apostle here describes the condition of
Christians. It Is true we are born here in this world and live in it, but we
belong to another Corporation; we are denizens of another Country and free of
that City which is above.

In the other sense of the conversation of Citizens we find the verb (...) used
toward the beginning of this Epistle, Let your conversation be as it becomes
the Gospel of Christ. And why may not the word (...) in the Text, Phil. 1. 27.
without any inconvenience include both these? as if the Apostle had said, there
are some that mind earthly things, and are so addicted to them that rather than
part with them they will forsake their Religion; but as for us, we consider
that we are Citizens of Heaven, and accordingly we converse and demean our
selves in this world as those that are free of another City and do belong to it.

So that to have our conversation in heaven does imply these two things.

First, The serious thoughts and considerations of Heaven.

Secondly, The effect which those thoughts ought to have upon our lives.

These two things take up the meaning of my Text, and shall be the subject of
the following discourse.

I. The serious thoughts and considerations of Heaven, that is, of the happy
and glorious state of good men in another life. And concerning this, there are
two things principally which offer themselves to our consideration First, The
happiness of this state. Secondly, The way and means whereby we may come to
partake of this happiness.

First, We will consider the happiness of this state. But what, and how great
this happiness is, I am not able to represent to you. These things are yet in a
great measure within the veil, and it does not now fully appear what we shall
be. The Scriptures have revealed so much in general concerning the reality and
unspeakable felicities of this state as may satisfy us for the present, and
serve to inflame our desires after it, and to quicken our endeavors for the
obtaining of it; as namely, that it is incomparably beyond any happiness of
this world; that it is very great; and that it is eternal; in a word, that it
is far above any thing that we can now conceive or imagine.

1. It is incomparably beyond any happiness in this world. It is free from all
those sharp and bitter ingredients which do abate and allay the felicities of
this life. All the enjoyments of this world are mixed, and uncertain, and
unsatisfying; nay so far are they from giving us satisfaction, that the very
sweetest of them are satiating and cloying.

None of the comforts of this life are pure and unmixt. There is something of
vanity mingled with all our earthly enjoyments and that causes vexation of
spirit. There is no sensual pleasure but is either purchased by some pain, or
attended with it, or ends in it. A great estate is neither to be got without
care, nor kept without fear, nor lost without trouble. Dignity and greatness is
troublesome almost to all mankind, it is commonly uneasy to them that have it
and it is usually hated and envied by those that have it not* Knowledge, that
is one of the best and sweetest pleasures of humane life; and yet if we may
believe the experience of one, who had as great a share of it as any of the
Sons of men ever had, he will tell us, that this also is vexation of spirit;
for in much wisdom there is much grief, and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow, Eccl. 1. 17, 18.

Thus it is with all the things of this world; the best of them have a mixture
of good and evil, of joy and sorrow in them: but the happiness of the next life
is free from allay and mixture. In the description of the new Jerusalem it is
said, that there shall be no more curse, and there shall be no night there,
Rev. 22, 3, 5. nothing to imbitter our blessings, or obscure our glory. Heaven
is the proper region of happiness, there only are pure joys and an unmingled
felicity.

But the enjoyments of this world as they are mixed, so they are uncertain. So
wavering and inconstant are they that we can have no security of them, when we
think our selves to have the fastest hold of them they slip out of our hands we
know not how. For this reason Solomon very elegantly calls them things that are
not, Why will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly
make to themselves wings and fly like an Eagle toward heaven. So fugitive are
they, that after all our endeavors to secure them they may break loose from us
and in an instant vanish out of our sight, riches make to themselves wings, and
fly like an Eagle, intimating to us that riches are often accessory to their
own ruin. Many times the greatness of a man's estate, and nothing else, has
been the cause of the loss of it, and of taking away the life of the owner
thereof. The fairness of some men's fortune has been a temptation to those who
have been more powerful to ravish it from them, thus riches make to themselves
wings. So that he that enjoys the greatest happiness of this world does still
want one happiness more, to secure to him for the future what he possesses for
the present. But the happiness of Heaven is a steady and constant light, fixed
and unchangeable as the fountain from whence it springs, the father of lights,
with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning.

And if the enjoyments of this life were certain, yet they are unsatisfying.
This is the vanity of vanities, that every thing in this world can trouble us
but nothing can give us satisfaction. I know not how it is, but either we, or
the things of this world, or both, are so fantastical, that we can neither be
well with these things, nor well without them. If we be hungry, we are in pain;
and if we eat to the full, we are uneasy. If we be poor we think our selves
miserable, and when we come to be rich we commonly really are so. If we are in
a low condition we fret and murmur, and if we chance to get up and to be raised
to greatness we are many times farther from contentment than we were before So
that we pursue the happiness of this world just as little children chase birds,
when we think we are come very near it and have it almost in our hands it flies
farther from us than it was at first.

Nay, so far are the enjoyments of this world from affording us satisfaction,
that the sweetest of them are most apt to satiate and cloy us. All the
pleasures of this world are so contrived as to yield us very little happiness.
If they go off quickly they signify nothing, and if they stay long we are sick
of them: After a full draught of any sensual pleasure we presently loath it,
and hate it as much after the enjoyment as we courted it and longed for it in
the expectation. But the delights of the other world, as they will give us full
satisfaction so we shall never be weary of them. Every repetition of them will
be accompanied with a new pleasure and contentment. In the felicities of Heaven
these two things shall be reconciled, which never met together in any sensual
delight, long and full enjoyment and yet a fresh and perpetual pleasure. As in
Gods presence there is fullness of joy, so at his right hand there shall be
pleasures for evermore.

2. The happiness of the other life is not only incomparably beyond any
happiness of this world (that, it may be, is no great commendation of it) but
it is very great in it self. The happiness of Heaven is usually in Scripture
described to us by such pleasures as are manly and excellent, chaste and
intellectual, infinitely more pure and refined than those of sense; and if the
Scripture at any time descend to the metaphors of a feast, and a banquet, and a
marriage, it is plainly by way of accommodation to our weakness and
condescension to our capacities.

But the chief ingredients of this happiness, so far as the Scripture has
thought fit to reveal it to us, are the perfection of our knowledge, and the
height of our love, and the perpetual society and friendship of all the blessed
inhabitants of those glorious mansions; and the joyful concurrence of all these
in cheerful expressions of gratitude, in the incessant praises and admiration
of the fountain and author of all this happiness. And what can be more
delightful than to have our understandings entertained with a clear sight of
the best and most perfect Being, with the knowledge of all his works and of the
wise designs of his providence here in the world? than to live in the reviving
presence of God, and to be continually attending upon him whose favor is life,
and whose glory is much more above that of any of the Princes of this world
than the greatest of them is above the poorest worm? The Queen of Sheba thought
Solomon's Servants happy in having the opportunity by standing continually
before him to hear his wisdom; but in the other world it shall be a happiness
to Solomon himself, and to the wisest and greatest persons that ever were in
this world, to stand before this great King to admire his wisdom and to behold
his glory. Not that I imagine the happiness of Heaven to consist in a perpetual
gazing upon God, and in an idle contemplation of the glories of that place. For
as by that blessed sight we shall be infinitely transported, so the Scripture
tells us we shall be also transformed into the image of the divine perfections;
we shall see God and we shall be like him, and what greater happiness can there
be than to be like the happiest and most perfect Being in the world? Besides,
who can tell what employment God may have for us in the next life? We need not
doubt but that he who is happiness it self, and has promised to make us happy,
can easily find out such employments and delights for us in the other world as
will be proper and suitable to that state.

But then besides the improvement of our knowledge there shall be the most
delightful exercise of love. When we come to heaven we shall enter into the
society of the blessed Angels and of the spirits of just men made perfect, that
is, freed from all those passions and infirmities which do now render the
conversation, even of the best men, sometimes troublesome to one another. We
shall then meet with all those excellent Persons, those brave Minds, those
innocent and charitable Souls whom we have seen, and heard, and read of in this
world. There we shall meet with many of our dear relations and intimate
friends, and perhaps with many of our enemies, to whom we shall then be
perfectly reconciled notwithstanding all the warm contests and peevish
differences which we had with them in this world, even about matters of
Religion. For Heaven is a state of perfect love and friendship, there will be
nothing but kindness and good nature there, and all the prudent Arts of
endearment and wise ways of rendering conversation mutually pleasant to one
another. And what greater happiness can be imagined than to converse freely
with so many excellent persons, without any thing of folly or disguise, of
jealousy or design upon one another? For then there will be none of those
vices and passions, of covetousness and ambition, of envy and hatred, of wrath
and peevishness, which do now so much spoil the pleasure and disturb the quiet
of mankind. All quarrels and contentions, schisms and divisions will then be
effectually hindered not by force but by love, not by compulsion but by that
charity which never fails; and all those controversies in Religion which are
now so hotly agitated will then be finally determined, not as we endeavor to
end them now by Canons and Decrees, but by a perfect knowledge and convincing
light.

And when this blessed society is met together and thus united by love, they
shall all join in gratitude to their great Patrons and Benefactors, to him that
sits upon the Throne and to the lamb that was slain, to God even our Father,
and to our Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood. And they shall sing everlasting songs of praise to God for all
his works of wonder, for the effects of that infinite goodness, and admirable
wisdom, and almighty power, which are clearly seen in the creation and
government of the world and of all the Creatures in it; particularly for his
favors to mankind, for the benefit of their beings, for the comfort of their
lives, and for all his merciful providence toward them in this world: But
above all for the redemption of their souls by the death of his Son for the
free forgiveness of their sins, for the gracious assistance of his holy Spirit,
and for conducting them safely through all the snares and dangers, the troubles
and temptations of this world to the secure possession of that glory and
happiness which then they shall be partakers of, and are bound to praise God
for to all eternity. This, this shall be the employment of the blessed spirits
above, and these are the chief ingredients of our happiness which the Spripture
mentions. And if there were no other as there may be ten thousand more for any
thing I can tell, yet generous and virtuous minds will easily understand how
great a pleasure there is in the improvement of our knowledge, and the exercise
of love, and in a grateful and perpetual acknowledgement of the greatest
benefits that creatures are capable of receiving.

3. This happiness shall be eternal. And though this be but a circumstance and
do not enter into the nature of our happiness, yet it is so material a one that
all the felicities which heaven affords would be imperfect without it. It would
strangely damp and allay all our joys to think that they should sometime have
an end. And the greater our happiness were, the greater trouble it would be to
us to consider that it must have a period. It would make a man sorrowful
indeed to think of leaving such vast possessions. Indeed if the happiness of
heaven were such as the joys of this world are, it were fit they should be as
short; for after a little enjoyment it would cloy us, and we should soon grow
weary of it: But being so excellent, it would scarce be a happiness if it were
not eternal. It would imbitter the pleasures of heaven, as great as they are,
to see to an end of them, though it were at never so great a distance; to
consider that all this vast treasure of happiness would one day be exhausted,
and that after so many years were past we should be as poor and miserable again
as we were once in this world. God has so ordered things, that the vain and
empty delights of this world should be temporary and transient, but that the
great and substantial pleasures of the other world should be as lasting as they
are excellent. For Heaven as it is an exceeding, so it is an eternal weight of
glory. And this is that which crowns the joys of heaven and banishes all fear
and trouble from the minds of the blessed. And thus to be secured in the
possession of our happiness is an unspeakable addition to it. For that which is
eternal as it shall never determine, so it can never be diminished; for to be
diminished and to decay is to draw nearer to an end, but that which shall never
have an end can never come nearer to it.

O vast eternity! how do thou swallow up our thoughts and entertain us at
once with delight and amazement? This is the very top and highest pitch of our
happiness, upon which we may stand secure and look down with scorn upon all
things here below; and how small and inconsiderable do they appear to us,
compared with the vast and endless enjoyments of our future state? But oh vain
and foolish souls! that are so little concerned for eternity; that for the
trifles of time, and the pleasures of sin which are but for a season, can find
in our hearts to forfeit an everlasting felicity. Blessed God! why have thou
prepared such a happiness for those who neither consider it, nor seek after it?
Why is such a price put into the hands of fools, who have no heart to make use
of it; who fondly choose to gratify their lusts rather than to save their
souls, and sortishly prefer the temporary enjoyments of sin before a blessed
immortality?

4. And lastly, This happiness is far above any thing that we can now conceive
or imagine. It is so great that is cannot now enter into the heart of man. We
cannot from the experience of any of those pleasures and delights which we have
been acquainted withal in this world frame an equal Idea and conception of it.
So that when we come to Heaven we shall be ready to say of it as the Queen of
Sheba did of Solomon's wisdom and prosperity, that half of it has not been
told us; that the felicities and glories of that state do far exceed all the
fame which we heard of them in this world* For who can say how great a good God
is? and how happy he who is the fountain of happiness can make those souls that
love him, and those whom he loves?

In this imperfect state we are not capable of a full representation of those
glories. We cannot now see God and live. A full description of Heaven and of
the pleasures of that state would let in joys upon us too big for our narrow
capacities, and too strong for weak mortality to bear. We are now but Children,
and we speak as Children, and understand and think as Children concerning these
things; but in the other state we shall grow up to be men, and then we shall
put away these childish thoughts; now we know but in part, but when that which
is perfect is come, that which is imperfect shall be done away; now we see
through a glass darkly ((...), in a riddle) but then we shall see face to face;
now we know in part, but then we shall know even as also we are known, as the
Apostle discourses excellently concerning this very matter, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10,
11.

No sooner shall we enter upon the joys of the other world, but our minds shall
be raised to a strength and activity as much above that of the most knowing
persons in the world as the thoughts of the greatest Philosopher and wisest man
upon earth are above the thoughts of a child or a fool. No man's mind is now so
well framed to understand any thing in this world, as our understandings shall
then be fitted for the knowledge of God and of the things that belong to that
state. In the mean time let us bless God that he has revealed so much of this
happiness to us as is necessary to excite and encourage us to seek after it.

The Second thing to be considered concerning our future happiness, is the way
and means whereby we may come to be made partakers of it. And that in short is
by the constant and sincere endeavors of a holy life, in and through the
mercies of God in our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ indeed is the author of our
salvation, but obedience is the condition of it; so the Apostle tells us, that
Christ is the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5. 1. It
is the grace of God in the Gospel which brings or offers this salvation to us,
but then it is by the denying of ungodliness and worldly lusts, and by living
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world that we are to wait
for the blessed hope, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Our Savior promises this happiness to
the pure in heart, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and
elsewhere the Scripture does exclude all others from any share or portion in
this blessedness* so the Apostle assures us that without holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 18. 14.

And holiness is not only a condition but a necessary qualification for the
happiness of the next life. This is the force of St. John's reasoning, we shall
be like him, for we shall see him. To see God is to be happy, but unless we be
like him we cannot see him. The sight and presence of God himself would be no
happiness to that man who is not like to God in the temper and disposition of
his mind. And from hence the Apostle infers in the next verse, every man that
has this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure. So that if we live
wicked lives, if we allow our selves in the practice of any known sin, we
interrupt our hopes of Heaven and render our selves unfit for eternal life. By
this means we defeat all the designs of God's grace and mercy toward us, and
salvation it self cannot save us if we make our selves incapable of that
happiness which God offers. Heaven is in Scripture called an inheritance among
them that are sanctified, and the inheritance of the Saints in light; so that
it is not enough that this inheritance is promised to us, but we must be
qualified and prepared for it, and be made meet to be made partakers of it.

And this life is the time of our preparation for our future state. Ours souls
will continue for ever what we make them in this world. Such a temper and
disposition of mind as a man carries with him out of this life he shall retain
in the next. It Is true indeed, heaven perfects those holy and virtuous
dispositions which are begun here; but the other world alters no man as to his
main state, he that is filthy will be filthy still, and he that is unrighteous
will be unrighteous still. If we do not in a good degree mortify our lusts and
passions here death will not kill them for us, but we shall carry them with us
into the other world. And if God should admit us so qualified into the place of
happiness, yet we shall bring that along with us which would infallibly hinder
us from being happy. Our sensual inclinations and desires would meet with
nothing there that would be suitable to them, and we should be perpetually
tormented with those appetites which we brought with us out of this world,
because we should find nothing there to gratify them withal. For as the
Apostle says in another sense, The kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The happiness of heaven
consists in such things as a wicked man has no gust and relish for. So that if
a covetous, or ambitious, or voluptuous man were in Heaven, he would be just
like the rich man in Hell, tormented with a continual thirst, and burnt up in
the flames of his own ardent desires, and would not be able, amidst all the
plenty and treasures of that place, to find so much as one drop of suitable
pleasure and delight to quench and allay that heat. So likewise our fierce and
unruly passions; if we should carry them with us into the other world, how
inconsistent would they be with happiness? They would not only make us
miserable our selves, but be a trouble to all those with whom we should
converse. If a man of an envious and malicious, of a peevish and passionate
temper, were admitted into the mansions of the blessed, he would not only be
unhappy himself, but would disturb the quiet of others, and raise storms even
in those calm regions. Vain man! that dreamest of being happy without any
disposition or preparation for it. To be happy, is to enjoy what we desire and
to live with those whom we love. But there is nothing in heaven suitable to the
desires and appetites of a wicked man. All the joys of that place, and the
delights of that state are purely spiritual, and are only to be relished by
those who have purified themselves as God is pure. But if thou be carnal and
sensual, what are these things to thee? What happiness would it be to thee to
see God, and to have him always in thy view who was never in all thy thoughts;
to be tied to live for ever in his company who is of a quite contrary temper
and disposition to thy self, whose presence thou dreadest, and whom whilst thou
wast in this world thou could never endure to think upon? So that the
pleasures of Heaven it self could signify no good or happiness to that man who
is not so disposed as to take pleasure in them. Heaven is too pure an air for
corrupt souls to live and breath in, and the whole employment and conversation
of that place, as it would be unsuitable, so would it also be unacceptable to a
sensual and vicious person.

From all this it appears how necessary it is for us to prepare our selves for
this blessed state, by the constant and sincere endeavors of a holy life, and
by mortifying every lust and inordinate passion in our souls. For till this be
done we are not meet to be made partakers of the felicities of the other world.
And thus I have done with the first thing implied in this phrase of having our
conversation in heaven, viz. the serious thoughts and considerations of heaven;
or the happiness of that state, and of the way and means whereby that happiness
is to be attained.

II. The having our conversation in heaven does imply likewise the effect which
those considerations ought to have upon our hearts and lives: As,

1. To convince us of the vanity of this world. God has on purpose made this
world troublesome and uneasy to us, that there might be no sufficient
temptation to reasonable and considerate men to take them off from the care and
thought of their future happiness; that God and heaven might have no rival here
below; that there might be nothing in this world that might pretend to our
affection or court us with any advantage in comparison of everlasting life and
glory.

When we come to die and eternity shall present it self to our serious and
waking thoughts, then things will put on another face, and those things which
we valued so much in this life will then appear to be nothing worth; but those
things which we neglected, to be of infinite concernment to us, and worthy to
have been the care and endeavor of our whole lives. And if we would consider
these things in time, while the opportunities of life and health are before us,
we might be convinced at a cheaper rate, and come to be satisfied of the vanity
of this world before we despaired of the happiness of the other.

2. To make us very active and industrious to be as good, and to do as much
good as we can in this life, that so we may be qualified and disposed for the
happiness of the next. Men are usually very industrious for the things of this
life, to be rich and great in the world; did we but value heaven half as much
as it deserves we should take infinitely more pains for that. So often as we
consider the glories that are above, how does it accuse our sloth and condemn
our folly that we are less concerned for our souls than most men are for their
bodies, that we will not labor half so much for an eternal inheritance as men
ordinarily do for these corruptible things?

Let us remember that we are hasting apace to another world, and that our
eternal happiness now lies at the stake. And how should it quicken our
endeavors to have such a reward set before us, to have Crowns and Scepters in
our eyes? would we but often represent to our minds the glorious things of
another world, what fervours should we feel in our hearts? we should be all
life, and spirit, and wing; and should do Gods will, almost with the same
readiness and delight, as the Angels do who continually behold the face of
their Father. The consideration of heaven and the firm persuasion of our future
happiness should actuate all the powers of our souls, and be continually
inspiring us with new vigor in the ways of holiness and virtue. How should
this thought swell our resolutions and confirm our purposes of obedience, that
if we have our fruit unto holiness our end will be everlasting life.

3. To mitigate and lighten the evils and afflictions of this life. It is no
great matter how rough the way be provided we be sure that it leads to
happiness. The incomparably greater good of the next life will to a wise and
considerate man weigh down all the evils of this. And the Scripture tells us
that there is no comparison between them. The sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us,
Romans 8. 18. The evils of this life afflict men more or less according as the
soul is fortified with considerations proper to support us under them. When we
consider that we have but a little while to be here, that we are upon our
journey traveling toward our heavenly Country where we shall meet with all
the delights we can desire, it ought not to trouble us much to endure storms
and foul ways, and to want many of those accommodations we might expect at
home. This is the common fate of Travelers, and we must take things as we find
them and not look to have every thing just to our mind. These difficulties and
inconveniences will shortly be over, and after a few days will be quite
forgotten, and be to us as if they had never been. And when we are safely
landed in our own Country, with what pleasure shall we look back upon those
rough and boisterous Seas which we have escaped? The more troubles we have past
through the kinder usage we shall find when we come to our Fathers house. So
the Apostle tells us, that our light affliction which is but for a moment
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. When we come
to heaven our happiness shall then be as real as our miseries were here upon
earth, and far greater and more lasting. And what great matter is it though we
suffer a while in this world, provided we escape the endless unsufferable
torments of the next; though we have not our good things in this life, if
infinitely greater be reserved for us and we shall receive them with interest
in the other?

Several of the evils and calamities of this life would be unsufferable indeed,
if there were nothing better to be hoped for hereafter. If this were true,
Christians would not only be of all men but of all creatures the most
miserable. But our Religion has abundantly assured us to the contrary. And the
assurance of this was that which made the primitive Christians to embrace
sufferings with so much cheerfulness, to glory in tribulation, and to take
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that in heaven they had a better
and more enduring substance. The seven brethren in the History of the Maccabees
upon this persuasion would not accept deliverance that they might obtain a
better resurrection. That storm of stones which was poured upon St. Stephen was
no more to him than a common shower when he saw the heavens opened, and Jesus
(in whose cause he suffered) standing on the right hand of God.

4. To make us sincere in all our professions, words and actions, did men
firmly believe the rewards of another world their Religion would not be only
in show and pretense, but in life and reality, no man would put on a form of
godliness that were destitute of the power of it; we should do nothing for the
opinion of others, but all with regard to God and our own Consciences; and be
as curious of our thoughts, and most retired actions, as if we were in an open
theater and in the presence of the greatest assembly. For in the next life men
shall not be rewarded for what they seemed to be, but for what they really were
in this world. Therefore whatever we think, or speak, or do, we should always
remember that the day of revelation is coming, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed, when all disguises shall be laid aside, and every ones mask
shall be taken off, and all our actions and designs shall be brought upon the
public stage and exposed to the view of men and Angels. There is nothing now
hidden which shall not then be revealed, nor secret which shall not be made
known.

5. To arm us against the fears of death. Death is terrible to nature, and the
terror of it is infinitely increased by the fearful apprehensions of what may
follow it. But the comfortable hopes of a blessed immortality do strangely
relieve the fainting spirits of dying men, and are able to reconcile us to
death, and in a great measure to take away the terror of it. I know that the
thoughts of death are dismal even to good men, and we have never more need of
comfort and encouragement than when we are conflicting with this last Enemy,
and there is no such comfortable consideration to a dying man as the hopes of a
happy eternity. He that looks upon death only as a passage to glory, may
welcome the messengers of it as bringing him the best and most joyful news that
ever came to him in his whole life, and no man can stay behind in this world
with half the comfort that this man leaves it.

And now I have done with the two things employed in this phrase, of having our
conversation in heaven, viz. the serious thoughts and considerations of heaven,
and the effect of these thoughts and considerations upon our hearts and lives.

I crave your patience but a little longer, till I make some reflection upon
what has been delivered concerning the happiness of good men after this life.
I have told you that it is incomparably beyond any happiness of this world,
that it is great in it self, and eternal in its duration, and far above any
thing that we can now conceive or imagine. And now after all this, I am very
sensible how much all that I have said comes short of the greatness and dignity
of the thing* So that I could almost begin again and make a new attempt upon
this subject. And indeed who would not be loath to be taken off from so
delightful an argument? Methinks it is good for us to be here, and to let our
minds dwell upon these considerations. We are unworthy of heaven and unfit to
partake of so great a glory, if we cannot take pleasure in the contemplation of
those things now the possession whereof shall be our happiness for ever.

With what joy then should we think of those great and glorious things which
God has prepared for them that love him, of that inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, which fades not away, reserved for us in the heavens? How should we
welcome the thoughts of that happy hour when we shall make our escape out of
these prisons, when we shall pass out of this howling wilderness into the
promised Land, when we shall be removed from all the troubles and temptations
of a wicked and ill-natured world; when we shall be past all storms, and
secured from all further danger of shipwreck, and shall be safely landed in the
regions of bliss and immortality?

O blessed time! When all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and death and
sorrow shall be no more; When mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and we
shall enter upon the possession of all that happiness and glory which God has
promised, and our faith has believed, and our hopes have raised us to the
expectation of; when we shall be eased of all our pains, and resolved of all
our doubts, and be purged from all our sins, and be freed from all our fears,
and be happy beyond all our hopes, and have all the happiness secured to us
beyond the power of time and change: When we shall know God and other things
without study, and love him and one another without measure, and serve and
praise him without weariness, and obey his will without the least reluctance;
and shall still be more and more delighted in the knowing, and loving, and
praising, and obeying of God to all eternity.

How should these thoughts affect our hearts, and what a mighty influence ought
they to have upon our lives? The great disadvantage of the arguments fetched
from another world is this, that those things are at a great distance from us,
and not sensible to us; and therefore are not apt to affect us to strongly, and
to work so powerfully upon us. Now to make amends for this disadvantage we
should often revive these considerations upon our mind, and inculcate upon our
selves the reality and certainty of these things together with the infinite
weight and importance of them. We should reason thus with our selves; If good
men shall be so unspeakably happy, and consequently wicked men so extremely
miserable in another world: If these things be true and will one day be found
to be so, why should they not be to me as if they were already present? why
should not I be as much afraid to commit any sin as if Hell were naked before
me, and I saw the astonishing miseries of the damned? and why should I not be
as careful to serve God and keep his commandments, as if Heaven were open to my
view, and I saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God with crowns of glory in
his hand ready to be set upon the heads of all those who continue faithful to
him?

The lively apprehensions of the nearness of death and eternity are apt to make
men's thoughts more quick and piercing, and according as we think our selves
prepared for our future state to transport us with joy, or to amaze us with
horror. For the soul that is fully satisfied of his future bliss is already
entered into heaven, has begun to take possession of glory, and has (as it were)
his blessed Savior in his arms, and may say with old Simeon, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. But
the thoughts of death must needs be very terrible to that man who is doubtful
or despairing of his future condition. It would daunt the stoutest man that
ever breathed, to look upon death when he can see nothing but hell beyond it.
When the Apparition at Endor told Saul, to morrow thou and thy Sons shall be
with me, these words struck him to the heart, so that he fell down to the
ground, and there was no more strength left in him. It is as certain that we
shall die as if an express messenger should come to every one of us from the
other world and tell us so. Why should we not then always live as those that
must die, and as those that hope to be happy after death? To have these
apprehensions vigorous and lively upon our minds this is to have our
conversation in heaven, from whence also we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working of that mighty power whereby he is able
even to subdue all things to himself.

FINIS.
Books Writ by his Grace JOHN, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
FOrty Two Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, most at Court; in
Four Vol. 8 vo.

The Rule of Faith: Or, An Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sergeant, etc. 8 vo.

Six Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior; Of
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ; and of the Unity of the Divine
Nature, and the B. Trinity, etc. against the Socinians, 8 vo.

Six Sermons, (newly Printed) one concerning Resolution and Stedfastness in
Religion; One of Family Religion; Three of Education of Children; and One of
the Advantages of an Early Piety, 8 vo. Now Re-Printing in 12 mo.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 8 vo.
alone stitcht, price 3 d. or in 12 mo. bound, price 6 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation, 8 vo. alone price 3 d. stitcht.

The Exact Effigies of His Grace John Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; on a
Large Sheet of Paper Curiously Engraven by R. White, Price 12 d.

All Printed for B. Aylmer and W. Rogers.


