THE FRIAR DISCIPLIND OR ANIMADVERSIONS ON FRIAR PETER WALSH HIS NEW
REMONSTRANT RELIGION The articles whereof are to be seen in the following page.

TAKEN OUT OF HIS HISTORY AND VINDICATION OF THE LOYAL FORMULARY

Verber auerunt me, sed non dolui, traxerunt me, and Ego non sensi. Proverb.
23.35. THE AVTHOR ROBERT WILSON.

PRINTED AT GANT 1674.

Permissu Superiorum.

The 12. Articles of Friar PETER WALSH his new Remonstrant Religion.
1. THAT Bishops and Clergymen Hist. 1. part. Sect. 33. page 79.
(as such) can not in conscience contribute by money or any corporal means to
help or restore their lawful Soueraigns against the attempts or usurpation of
Rebels.

2. 1. part of the first Treatise page 417. fin.
That supreme temporal Princes could not, can not in conscience grant to the
Clergy (their subjects) the immunities and exemptions which the Church has
received from them.

3. Ibid.
That no spiritual power (as such) can inflict any corporal punishment.

4. Page 429.
That God may work miracles to testify the Sanctity and glory of one, who dies
for maintaining a falsehood in a controuerted point of Religion.

5. Ibid.
That therefore S. Thomas of Canterbury may be inuok't as a Saint, though he
sufferd for maintaining a falsehood.

6. In the Pref. page 40. Pref. page 49.
That temporal soueraigns may lawfully make laws in ecclesiastical matters,
even of Faith, by their own sole authority.

7. page 16. of the Dedic.
That the Roman Catholics sin in not taking the english oath of supremacy.

8. Dedic. page 20 Hence follows that all the General Councels of the Catholic
Church for many hundred years were composed of Traitors or perjured persons.
That all the Roman Catholic Bishops of the world, for as many hundred years as
they have taken the usual oath at their Consecration, have bin, and are now
either Traitors to their temporal Soueraigns, or perjured to the Pope.

9. Page 75.
That learned Roman Catholic Authors hold General Counsels confirmed by the
Pope, are not infallible in defining matters of Faith, or doctrine.

10. Page 79.
That neither Pope, nor Bishop, nor the General of an Order, can in conscience
inflict any corporal punishment upon an irregular Friar for misdemeanors, or
heresies.

11. Page 354. and 355.
That all Bishops are of equal authority by the ^mmediat law of God; and that
only JESUS CHRIST can, take cognizance of their faults.

12. Decic. p. 13.
That the Roman Catholic Church has followed enormous errors, ever since Pope
Gregory the 7.

THE CONCLUSION.
That honest men (for discovering Friar walsh his cheats, and opposing these
his erroneous Tenets) are Traitors to the King, and Ennemys to my Lord Duke of
Ormond.

TO HIS GRACE JAMES DVKE OF ORMOND etc.
YOUR grace will be surprised to see F^^ar PETER WALSH (the great Remonstrator
and Reformer of our Irish Loyalty) charged with treasonable principles copied
out of the tedious History he printed of his own speeches and contests. But if
this charge be made out against him, doubtless your grace will neither protect,
nor pity a Friar (though severely disciplined) for imposing upon Christians
(under the notion of Allegiance) Tenants inconsistent with loyalty, or
Monarchical government.

That your Grace forgave him his former faults (in particular that great one of
printing and preaching against the peace of 46. and the royal authority,
wherewith you were then invested) is an argument of your Christianity, and a
performance of one article of that peace; That you afterward made use of him
(for reasons of state) notwithstanding the experience you had of his treasons,
shows your wisdom, but is no proof of his honesty. As it would be great
presumption in me to examine why a minister of state did employ such a Friar so
I hope it is no want of respect to your Grace to let you and the world see,
that his late principles are as treasonable as his practices; and seeing its
very ordinary in statesmen to punish the crimes of malefactors, when they are
no more useful, I may rationaly conclude your Grace will not commend or reward
Peter Walsh for publishing a book stufft with errors, no less dangerous to the
state, then damnable to the soul.

My Lord, Peter Walsh his conduct and errors have rendered him so ridiculous and
odious, that he can not be any more useful to your Grace or to the government.
And though he still endeavors by nonsensical Pamphlets to make himself be
thought a fit instrument to promote the Protestant Reformation, inculcating
(among other absurdities) that the Roman Catholic Church of these last 600.
years has erred notoriously in the doctrine of loyalty due to temporal
Soueraigns, and that all the Bishops thereof have bin either Traitors to their
Soueraigns, or perjured to the Pope by taking the usual oath (hitherto never
excepted against) at their Consecration, yet your Grace will be conuinc't (if
you please to read this short Treatise) that this Friar's rash assertion is not
only groundless, but injurious even to Protestants, and in particular to your
Grace, whose Illustrious family has given to the Catholic Church loyal and
holy Prelates, as well as great Commanders of Armies, and Governors of Kingdoms
to the english Monarchy. And though Ireland had the misfortune of a meeting of
Bishops at Iamestown, from whom the distraction of the times drew a Declaration
and Excommunication, not approue^d of by the Supreme Pastor, or any other
Catholic Bishops, and as good as condemned even by themselves in the subsequent
Assembly of Loghreagh 7. Dec. 1650. Yet certain it is, and partly known to your
Grace, that Doctor Enos his libel against your Grace and the peace of 46.
together with Peter Walsh his printed approbation of the said libel, and the
Nuncius his Excommunication, (writ and fixed with Peter walsh his own hand upon
the gates of your Castle of Kilkenny) did greater mischief, and obstructed more
your noble design of preserving (by a seasonable peace in the year 46.) the
late King and his Kingdom of Ireland from ruin, then the Bishops Declaration,
and Excommunication dated at Iamestown could do; this being issued an. 1650.
after the King had bin murdered, Ireland lost, and past hopes of recovery,
though Peter Walsh (to remove the blame from himself) lays it altogether on
those Prelates, and writes an absurd History of his own vain endeavors to revive
a murderd King, to keep united a divided Nation, and to preserve a destroyed
Kingdom.

This book my Lord is dedicated to your Grace in hopes you will be pleased to
peruse it and thereby see the most blameable of the Irish Roman Catholic Clergy
was not so guylty of rebellion and the ruin of their country as Peter Walsh,
nor his principles so sound as at first sight they seemd to be. I am with all
reality and respect.

Your Graces most humble and obedient Servant N.N.

THE PREFACE.
I PRESENT to thy view Christian Reader, a disciplined (though I fear
incorrigible) Friar. Thou have seen him perhaps in a finer, but never in a more
proper dress. Nothing becomes so well an Apostat Friar, as stripped stuff, I
mean, sound Lashes, seasonably and charitably laid on. Friar Walsh his decaying
favor and age make it credible to some, that these my Animaduersions, may work
his conversion, I wish they do, I am sure they are published with no other
intention. I beseech thee not to judge of my education or temper by the
roughness of my language in answer to a foulmo^th'd Author, that makes the two
late greatest writers of the Church (Cardinal Baron^us and Bellarmin) whose
holy lives have put them in the list of those who are to be first canonised,
shameless Impostors; and all the Roman Catholic Bishops of the world (for many
ages) Traitors and perjured persons I am forced to answer this Fool according
to his folly, as the scripture bids me, and in his own language. Therefore I am
warranted to scold and scourge him into his habit and Convent. Yet I do it as
gently as his insolency permits, and as charitably as is consistent with my
vindicating the innocence of those he traduceth. I meddle not with his personal
frailties, I only take notice of his publik treasons, which he fathers upon
honest men; and, in my conscience, all the harm I wish him, is, that he become
one.

It is natural enough to desire to know, how a religious man came to be so
madly extrauagant? when excess of ambition, little wit, and a mediocrity of
reading meet in one subject, we may expect to find in his writings abundance of
nonsense, many novelties, but no true notions. Peter Wal^h his ambition of a
Miter was so excessive 30. years ago, that to obtain it be turned the greatest
Rebel and Nuntionist of the Irish nation: and had a greater hand in the
reiection of the peace of 46. (and by consequence in the destruction of the
late King, and his people) than any man living, or all the Clergy, which he
accuses for it. The repulse he then met with, after his eminent services to
the Nuntio, and Treasons against the King, deprived him of that little wit he
had; and ever since he has bin scribbling and printing of libels, and troubling
the world with an od kind of raw indigested heresies, stolen from the worst of
Authors, but so vnconnected, and absurdly applied by his dull pen, that though
you may see he has read some books, yet you will easily perceive he understood
very few; and such as he understood, he wrested to a wrong sense. No meruail
therefore if his notions be false, his discourses consuse, his arguments weak,
and his contradictions so frequent, that to confute him, you need go no further
than his own writings. He is so transported with passion against the Church of
Rome, and those two great pillars thereof Belarmin, and Baronius, that he treats
and terms them no better than men hired by the Roman Court to Sacrifice all the
world to the Popes ambition. The rage he is in for not finding out arguments to
make this, and his other calumnies credible, is so extraordinary, that he
forgets what he said in the foregoing page, or line, and through his whole work
never remembers to speak consequently in any one particular. But to the end
you may be conuinc't I do not iniure him, I will instance (even in this
Preface) one or two of his contradictions in the very main point he pretends to
prove, and clear most exactly, as being that whereupon he grounds his new
religion.

One of his chief errors is, Peter Walsh in his History and Vind. page 417 in
fine.
That supreme secular Princes neither could nor can grant any exemption from
their own supreme civil coerciue power, to the Clergy or Clerks their subjects,
living within their Dominions, and remaining subjects to them, because this
forsooth, implies a plain contradiction. Upon this paradox he raises a new
Church, or Reformation, and despairs not to draw Princes from their own, and
their Ancestors piety, by inculcating to them, it is an essential part of their
temporal sovereignty and Prerogative to have a Spiritual supremacy, but so
absurdly limited, that he thinks it their greatest security, to have their
hands tied (by the law of nature, and Gods word) from honoring the Divine
Majesty, and his Church, with an exemption to its Ministers from supreme
secular Courts. He is opposed in this foolish Tenet both by Protestants and
Catholics; for we all agree in this, that God can not (at least did not)
command temporal Soueraigns, not to oblige and honor (for his sake) the
spiritual Ministry by exempting them from the supreme coerciue power of the
secular magistrate; seeing that for the peace of the commonwealth, the safety of
Princes, and punishment of Malefactors, it is abundantly sufficient, that
delinquent Clergymen be proceeded against by ecclesiastical Judges.

Let us now see how palpably he contradicts himself, and wearies his Reader in
this absurd and fundamental Thesis of his vast volum, and new Religion. Every
Catholic as well as himself objects against it the Martyrdom and Miracles of S.
Thomas of Canterbury; it being evident out of all Histories, both sacred and
profane; that S. Thomas sufferd, was canonised and declared a Martyr, for
defending the immunities of the Church, and particularly that of Churchmen from
the coerciue supreme power of secular Courts. The Friar grants S. Thomas his
Sanctity, Miracles and Martyrdom, but says he sufferd, and God wrought all
those Miracles, not because he did or could in conscience pretend that Church
men were exempted from the supreme coerciue power of the Secular Magistrate, but
because he maintaind the temporal and municipal laws of England then in force,
by which, Clerks or Churchmen were so exempted from the secular supreme Courts.
Here is one contradiction. If there were municipal laws in force then in
England, which warranted S. Thomas his proceedings for the immunity of the
Church and Clergymen from the Kings supreme secular coerciue power, or Courts,
and Churchmen had a true right to those exemptions (as Friar Walsh confesses
from page 414. to page 418. of his History (quoting the laws themselves) how
can he without contradiction say, that Princes and Parliaments did not, nay
could not make such laws, or grant such exemptions to Clergymen. How can he
pretend such immunities or exemptions are contrary to the law of nature and the
word of God?

He solues this difficulty with an other contradiction. For, after granting
there were such laws exempting Churchmen, made by the Kings and Parliaments,
he says (page 422.) that S. Thomas at the instance, and with the concurrence
of all the other Bishops, condescended to the Repeal of those temporal laws,
which favored the Clergy's exemption. But then how was he a Saint, or Martyr
for defending the laws that had bin repeald? The answer to this is at hand
says Walsh, very facil and clear. S. Thomas (says he in the same page 422.)
though he swore to consent to the repeal of the laws exempting the Clergy from
the supreme coerciue power, yet Swearing alone was not enough, without further
signing and sealing, as it seems the custom then was of the Bishops and Peers
in making of laws; nor all three together, without a free consent in those, or
of those who swore so, or signed and sealed so; and that there was no free
consent, but a forced one, by threats of imprisonment, banishment, death,
appears etc. This answer may pass, if it be true; but immediately he confesses
its not credible that the substance and validity of a law, should depend upon
such formalities and indiuidual circumstances of every particular man, seeing
the mayor vote in Parliament made the law. For, after that he had maintained
positiuely in twelve pages the aforesaid answer, he sudenly falls off from it
in the 434. of his tedious volum, and says. It is not so clear in all respects
that those 16 heads of customs (which S. Thomas opposed as being against the
immunities of the Church) passed not legaly, and before the Saints death, into
a just municipal law of the land, or of England. For it may be said first, and
said also upon very probable grounds out of the several Historians, who writ of
purpose of those days and matters, that they all (Bishops) freely consented.
And secondly it may be said, that the greater vote enacts a law in Parliament,
having the consent Roial, whether one Bishop, or more, or even all the Bishops
dissent. And thirdly yet it may be said, that all laws most commonly, or at
least too often may be called in question upon that ground of fear of the
Prince.

Notwithstanding this third or fourth contradiction, and recantation of his
answer, building Saint Thomas of Canterbury's Sanctity upon his suffering for
maintaining the temporal laws of the land in favor of the Clergy's immunities,
notwithstanding, I say, he confesses there were no such temporal laws then in
England, (because they had bin repealed by Acts of Parliament, with concurrence
of Saint Thomas himself, and the other Bishops) yet he aduises his Readers (page
435.) to fix rather upon this answer, (both contradicted and adhered to by
himself) than on the others, no less absurd, which he gives. By this you may
guess how solidly grounded his religion is.

But then he supplies the fifth contradiction and weakeness of all his Answers,
by a notable and acute general rule, which he sets down in the beginning of the
page 435. in these words. Sixth and last reason. That we must rather give any
Answer, that inuolues not heresy or manifest error in the Catholic says, or
natural reason obuious to every man, than allow or justify the particular
actions or contests, or doctrine of any one Bishop or Pope, how great or holy
soever otherwise; or even of many such, or of all their Partakers in such,
against both holy scripture, plain enough in the case etc.

This sure, if well applied, I confess may justify this very absurd answer but
me thinks answers which inuolue contradictions, ought not to be comprehended in
that universal (any answer) which may be given to such pressing arguments
against the Friars new Religion, as this of S. Thomas his Martyrdom, sanctity
and Miracles. For, though an answer did not inuolue heresy or manifest error in
the Catholic faith, yet if it inuolues nonsense, or a plain contradiction, it
inuolues an error against natural reason obuious to every man, (except Peter
Walsh) and therefore it ought not be taken for a good answer; its much better
(in my opinion) to allow or justify the particular actions or contests, or
doctrine of one holy and learned Bishop, or Pope, and of all their partakers,
which in our case is the whole Roman Catholic Church, ever since S. Thomas his
Martyrdom) then the fancies of a dull ignorant Friar, that contradicts his own
answers so frequently; a Friar that ran mad for not obtaining a Bishoprik; for
which he sacrificed in the year 1646. the loyalty due to his King, the respect
due to his Lieutenant, and the love due to his Country, which he inuolued in
Blood by printing and preaching against the government, against a very
aduantagious peace, against the publik faith and the obligation of maintaining
it.

As for his maintaining the miracles and sanctity of S. Thomas of Canterbury,
it proceeds not either from devotion to the Saint, or any reverence he has for
the doctrine or practice of the Catholic Church (of these last 600. years) seeing
he says it has maintained and practiced since Gregory 7. those enormous
errors, which he now would fain reform; and by consequence, its honoring S.
Thomas for a Saint, may be also an error in his opinion. How then coms the
Friar to be so devout to S. Thomas, as to say he was no Traitor. You must know,
great part of his design in writing this vast volum, was, to make his Court to
my Lord Duke of Ormond, whose family owes and ownes its great Estate in Jreland
to the scruple King Henry 2. had for persecuting the Saint and his relations,
whereof one of the nearest was my Lord Duke of Ormonds Ancestor; to whom King
Henry 2. gave great privileges and Lands in Jreland, to expiat what fault he
had in the murder of so innocent and holy a Prelat. But if Peter Walsh had
known my Lord Duke of Ormond as well as his nearest Relations do, he would
never contradict himself so manifestly and frequently for making Thomas Becket
a Saint out of a complement to my Lord Duke, whose justice and integrity is so
eminent, that his favor is not to be gained by courting him in his relations;
as diverse noblemen and gentlemen can witness, who in hopes of being restored to
their Estates by marrying his Neeces, got nothing by the bargain, but the honor
of being allied to so illustrious a family. So that You see Friar Walsh is as
much mistaken in his Courtship, as in his doctrine.

Many perhaps will judge these my Animaduersions superfluous, 1. because Friar
Walsh his book sufficiently declares its own absurdities. 2. Its bulk is so
great, the style so vnpolish't, the parenthesis of his own praises so long, so
false, and so impertinent, that few will trouble themselves with reading a
History so little importing the publik, so injurious to particular persons, and
so false, ridiculous, and tedious in itself. But because Peter Walsh is a
likely man to fancy that others take as much pleasure in reading his book, as
himself does, I shall endeavor to disabuse him, and do the publik that service,
as to put this vain Friar out of conceit with himself and his work. If this may
be effected (which I confess is very difficult) it will be a great ease to the
publik and to the Press, which he threatens with a second Tome of the same dull
dirty stuff. Jadmire more the patience of many worthy and witty men, which this
pitiful Friar has endeavored to disgrace with lies, than I do the applauded
works, which some of them have printed to assert the truth of Faith. Perhaps
they do not think him worth their confuting. Though I am not particularly
concerned, yet seeing his book has so much barbarous railing, and heretical
nonsense, that it is a nuisance to ciuility as well as to Christianity, I will
shake his fundamental principles, to the end the world may not be further
abused by them, nor by the stories of a virulent pen, that vents nothing but
heresies against the Church, rebellion against Soueraigns, envy against his
superiors, malice against his equals, calumnies against his adversaries, and
commendations of himself.

THE FRIAR DISCIPLINED OR ANIMADVERSIONS ON FRIAR PETER WALSH HIS NEW
REMONSTRANT RELIGION.
MR. WALSH,
I DECLARE to you, and all the world, that my exceptions against your Religion
and Romonstrance, are not against the supreme temporal power of Soueraign
Princes, which I do believe and shall assert as much as any Catholic Divine. My
exceptions are against not only a Spiritual supremacy you attribute to Kings,
and deny to the Bishop of Rome but also against many new unheard of errors; and
in first place, against that rash and heretical Tenet of yours, viz. Friar
Walsh in his Dedicatory to the Catholics of the three Kingdoms page 13.
That all the Roman Catholic Bishops of the world are either Traitors to their
Kings, or perjured to the Pope, because they take before their consecration an
Oath which has bin taken in the Church many hundred years by all Bishops.
Item, That for the space of these 600. years past, the Popes and writers of the
Roman Catholic Church (for the most part) Idem Ibid.
have maintained enormous principles and practices, which have bin cried down
continually by most zealous and godly Prelates, and Doctors, as not only false,
wicked, impious, lxretical, unchristian, but as absolutely tyrannical, and
destructive of all Government, laws, property, peace etc. 2. That since the
owning of such intolerable maxims, and wicked actions, or the not disowning
them, are not amongst the marks of a Roman Catholic in general, but only Idem
page 14.
of a certain sect or faction, whom some calls Papalins, others Puritan Papists,
and others Popish Recusants, the Protestants could not but observe, how since
the Oath of supremacy (though framed only by Roman Catholic Bishops, Abots, and
Doctors, of the english nation, and defended by the principal of the same)
occasioned the first separation or schism amongst the subjects of England and
Ireland, the far greater part of such as continued in the Communion of the
Roman Church, did seem also to adhere to the foresaid dangerous doctrins and
practices (i. e. to all the pretenses and actings of the Roman Court, for as
much as they generaly refused to disown them, either by that Oath of supremacy,
or by other.

That it is unreasonable to think, and incredible to believe, Page 14. n. 10.
that so many judicious Princes, Parliaments, and conuocations, who had
themselves gone so far, and ventured so much, as they did, only because they
would not suffer themselves, or the Protestant people governed by them, to be
imposed on against their own reason, in matters of Divine belief, Rites etc.
should at the same time be so concerned to impose on others in the like, -- as
to enact laws of so many grievous punishments, yea of death itself, in some
cases etc.

That we have no cause to wonder at the Protestants Pap. 16. n. 10.
iealousy of us, when they see all the three several Tests, hitherto made use
of for trying the judgment or affection of Roman Catholics in these Kingdoms,
in relation to the Papal pretenses of one side, and the royal rights of the
other, I mean the Oath of supremacy first, the Oath of Allegiance next, and
last of all that which I call the Loyal Formulary, or the Irish Remonstrance of
the year 1661. even all three one after another to have bin with so much
rashness and willfullness, and so much vehemence, and obstinacy declined,
opposed, traduced, and rejected amongst them: albeit no other authority or
power, not even by the Oath of supremacy itself, be attributed to the King,
save only civil, or that of the sword: nor any spiritual or Ecclesiastical
power be denied therein to the Pope, save only that which the general Council of
Ephesus under Theodosius the younger, in the case of the Cyprian Bi^hops, and
the next Ecumenical Synod of Calcedon under the good Emperor Martianus, in the
case of Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople and the 217. Bishops of Afrik
(whereof Saint Augustine was one) both in their Canons and letters too, in the
case of Apiarius, denied unto the Roman Bishops of their time. See the same
Friar page 24. and 25. 1. part. of the first Treatise: saying that the sense
where in the sons of the Church of England take the Oath of supremacy, is very
Catholik^: and that they allow a politik (not spiritual) headship to the King;
and that, only in temporal causes or matters, not in spiritual; not even in
those which are by extrinsecal denomination only called Ecclesiastical, or
spiritual If this be so, Bishop Fisher, Sir Thomas Moor, and all the learned
english men who sufferd for refusing the Oath were great fools: and were
ignorant both in the english language and in Divinity. But if this be so Mr.
Walsh, why is it not declared by publik authority? can you be so stupid and
barbarous, as to think, that the King and Parliament of England would be so
unmerciful as to permit so much noble and honest blood to be spilt upon a
mistake, so easily rectified, if they or the Church of England understand the
Oath of supremacy, as you say they do.

Jn the 19 page of your Dedicatory, you set down the Oath which all Bishops and
Archbishops take before their Consecration or Pallium, and though it be very
ancient and accepted of by all not only Prelates, but Princes; yet you say page
20. they who take it, Must be perjured to the Pope if they prove faithful to
the King. Whether so or no to God? Judge you. I am sure if they were not
Traitors in taking the foresaid Oath to his Holiness, they were at least
Renouncers of their Allegiance to his Majesty, and of their obedience also to
the Catholic Church.

And because you could not but foresee that Catholics and rational men would
not be their own Guides in a matter of so great importance, as the determining
the rights of Popes and Princes; nor so rash, as to judge the whole Catholic
Church, or all the Bishops, thereof, were Traitors, Tyrants, Cheats, Usurpers,
and Heretics; you endeavor to divert the Catholic Layty from their duty of
consulting the sea Apostolik in this main point of Religion, by endeavoring to
raise in the same Layty a diffidence of all who advise so pious and prudent an
address; you telling the Catholics of the three Kingdoms page 22. n. 18. of
your Dedicatory? That in the last place, having your eyes thus prepared, all
these things being considered, you may clearly see thorough that other sly
artifice of those self same interested man, whereby they would persuade at least
to so much filial renerence to the great Father of Christendom, as to acquaint
him first which your present condition; send him a Copy of the publik instrument
you intend to fix upon, with the reasons also inducing you thereunto; pray his
approbation thereof in order to your signing it; and then expect a while his
paternal advice and benediction, before you make any further progress.

You may at the very first hearing of this proposal plainly discover, (say you)
their design to be no other, than by such indiscreet means of cunning delays
under pretense of filial reverence forsooth, to hinder you for ever from
professing (at least to any purpose, Ibid. page 22.
i. e. in a sufficient manner, or by any sufficient Formulary, that loyal
obedience you owe to his Majesty, and to the laws of your Country in all
affairs of mere temporal concern. This you can not but judge to be their drift,
unless per adventure you think them to be realy so frantik as to persuade
themselves, that from, Julius Caesar, or his successor Octauian, after the one
or the other had by arms and slaughter tyrannicaly seized the Commonwealth, any
one could expect a free and voluntary restitution of the people to their
ancient liberty; or (which is it I mean, and is the more unlikely of the two)
That from Clement the tenth, now sitting in the Chair at Rome, or from his
next, or from any other successor, now after six hundred years of continual
usurpation in matters of highest nature, and now also after the lives of about
fourscore Popes, one succeeding an other, since Hildebrand, or Gregory 7. his
papacy, and since the deposition of the Emperor Henry 4. by him, in the year of
Christ 1077. any one should expect by a paper petition, or paper Adress, to
obtain the restoring or manumitting of the Christian world, Kingdoms, states,
and Churches, to their native Rights and freedom; or that indeed it could be
other than ridiculous folly and madness to expect this?

J have quoted your own words Mr. Walsh, to the end all indifferent persons may
see I do not insure you in the account I give of your religion and doctrine;
which I intend to confute, reducing is to your twelve fundamental Tenets. Jn
this first Animaduersion I will treat of two. See Friar Walsh his twelve
Tenets or articles in the 6. Animaduersion. 1. That the Oath of Supremacy has
bin rashly and obstinatly declined, opposed, and traduced by Roman Catholics;
because it attributes to the King only civil authority and power, and denies to
the Pope no spiritual or Ecclesiastical, save only that which the two general
Counsels of Ephesus, and Calcedon, as also that of Afrik of 217 Bishops
(whereof S. Augustine was one) denied to the Bishops of Rome. 2. That the Popes
and Bishops of the Roman Catholic Church for these last 600. years, have taught
and practiced enormous principles, which godly men have continualy cried down,
as wicked, impious, heretical and tyrannical: and that the usual Oath (which
all Catholic Bishops have taken at their consecration for many hundred years)
is not consistent with the loyalty all Christians owe to their temporal
Soueraigns.

ANIMADVERSION I. Whether the Oath of supremacy attributes only civil authority
to the King, and denies no spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power or authority to
the Pope?
THE best way to decide this controversy, is to set down the words of the Oath,
which are.

I. A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience that the King's
Majesty is the only supreme Governor, of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: and that no forain Prince, Person, Prelate,
state or Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical or spiritual within this Realm; and
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all forain jurisdictions, powers,
superiorities, and authorities etc. so help me God, and the contents of this
Book.

Mr. Walsh, give me leave to ask you, whether you ever read this Oath, and if
you did, whether you are sure you understand English, or whether better than
Englishmen do? for, the common opinion is, that every nation understands its
own language better than strangers. Mr. Walsh, all Englishmen understand by the
word spiritual, a quite different thing from temporal, as you may see in Thomas
Thomasius his Dictionary. If this be so, I fear you will hardly persuade
Englishmen, that they do not understand english, at least as well as you, or
any other Irish man. Now to the point. Does not the Oath in clear terms auerre,
that the King is the only supreme Governor of England, and of all other his
Dominions, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as
temporal? Is temporal and spiritual the same? or do these words signify the
same? Jf not, how can you prove or pretend that no spiritual authority, or
power is given the King, or denied the Pope by this Oath of Supremacy? I pray
observe; if the King be the only supreme Governor of his Dominions in all
spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes or things, has he not all the spiritual
power and authority in his own Dominions? And if the Pope be a sorrain Prince,
Person, or Prelate, and no foreign Prince Person, or Prelate has, or ought to
have, any Ecclesiastical or spiritual jurisdiction, power, Superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority within his Majesty's Kingdoms, how can the Pope
have any spiritual power or authority in the same?

J doubt very much, whether your marginal note directing to I know not what
admonition after the Injunctions of Page 16. of his Dedicatory to the Catholics.
Q. Elizabeth, and upon the 37. article of the Church of England will bring you
or the oath off so clearly as you fancy. By that Admonition after the
injunctions of Q. Elizabeth, is pretended, the Church of England did not
attribute to the Queen, power to exercise any spiritual function, as that of
consecrating Priests, and Bishops, or ministering the Sacraments. Suppose this
interpretation (which came, I must tell you, some what too late) were not known
to be a pitiful shift, to stop the mouths of those who laughed at the
weakness of the Bishops in allowing, and at the vanity of the Queen in assuming
the spiritual supremacy of the Church; suppose, I say, the Queen could not
ordain Priests and Bishops, because herself was neither Priest nor Bishop; does
that hinder from having in herself, and giving to others spiritual iurifdiction
to ordain and minister the Sacraments? what think you of lay Princes, and
persons, that are Bishops elect? Have they not spiritual jurisdiction, and can
they not give it to others? Though Q. Elizabeth was incapable of such spiritual
jurisdiction, because she was a woman, yet her successors can not be excepted
against upon that score. But speak seriously, Mr. Walsh, do you think it was in
the power of those, who explained the Oath of supremacy (if any did explain it)
to alter the common known signification of words, and give them a quite
contrary, in matters of religion, Sacraments, and Oaths? If it were, there
would be no religion in the world, no Faith, either human or Divine. How could
you therefore imagine, the Convocation, or even the Parliament of England, did or
can alter the signification of words in an Oath, wherein a man professes his
Religion, or an important point thereof? Can any power upon earth declare this
form of baptism, valid; I Baptize thee in the name of the mother and sister,
and Brother, by pretending forsooth, that by an Admonition of the Convocation,
or any earthly authority, the word Mother signifies Father; sister son; Brother
Holy Ghost? Do you fancy, Mr. Walsh, that any judicious protestant, or any
Parliament man in England, will believe you, if you should tell him, that his
child is well-baptis'd by such a form, and explanation?

Jf you will read the Statuts 1. Eliz. 1. and 8. Eliz 1. You will find that the
Kings of Englands supremacy, is so spiritual and sublime, that there needs no
changing the signification of the word spiritual into temporal, and that a King
of England (if he should think fit) may, according to the principles of the
Protesta^e religion, establih'd by the laws of the land, give power by letters
patents, to any of his lay subjects to consecrate Bishops and Priests; which is
more than the Pope can do; for he must a point a Bishop to ordain Priests and
Bishops. That the Kings of England may give by their letters patents power to
any of their lay subjects to consecrat Bishops and Priests, is very clear in
the aforesaid statuts. For, by two of them, there is given to the Queen's
Highness, her Heirs, and Successors etc. full power and authority by letters
patents under the great seal of England, from time to time to assign, name and
authorize such person or persons at she and they shall think meet and
convenient, to exercise, use, enjoy, and execute under her Highness all manner
of jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and authorities, in any wise
touching or concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, or jurisdiction,
within this Realm, or any other her Majesty's Dominions or Countries. Now
Priestood being nothing but a spiritual power to consecrat Christ's body and
blood, and forgive sins; and Episcopacy including besides the same, a spiritual
power to consecrat and ordain Priests and Bishops, who can doubt but that by
virtue of these words and Statuts, the Queen might, and her successors may, by
their letters patents and great seal, give power to any of their lay subjects
to make a protestant Bishop or Priest; seeing by those letters patents any
person that is a subject, receives full power to exercise, use, execute, enjoy
etc. all manner of jurisdictions, preheminences, and authorities, in any wise
touching or concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, etc.

This is no vain speculation Mr. Walsh, but a known practice grounded upon the
25. article of 39. of the english Protestant Religion: it being declared
thereby, that no visible sign or ceremony (and by consequence no imposition of
Episcopal hands) has bin ordained of God for any of these five commonly called
Sacraments, whereof holy Orders or Episcopal consecration is one. And therefore
its no meruail the Parliament declared 8. Eliz. 1. that the first protestant
Bishops were and should be true Bishops, though it could not be proved that any
Bishops ever laid hands upon them. The Story is known. In the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's reign it was questioned, whether the Protestant Bishops were true or
real Bishops; the Catholic Bishops who refused to consecrat any of them,
maintained, they were not, because they had not any protestant, who was a true
Bishop to consecrat them, having nothing to show for the Episcopal caracter but
the Queens letters parents; and therefore the Catholic writers prouokt them (in
print) to name the Bishop, who ordained or consecrated them (as themselves
pretended) but five or six years before. This appears in D Stapleton in his
Counter blast against Horn fol. 79. and 301. and in his return of untruths
gaianst Jewel, fol. 130.
D. Stapleton, Dr. Harding, and other books against Jewel edit 1565. and 1563.
fol. 57. and 59. All the world perceiving at that time, how none of the two
protestant writers, who undertook to answer, ( Jewel and Horn) could name any,
that consecrated Parker (of whose consecration depended that of all the rest)
nor produce any Registers thereof (as Harding in express terms demanded) it was
thought necessary (for supplying this shameful silence, and repressing the
insolency of the popish Adversaries) to declare the ground whereupon the
protestants claimed to be true Bishops, and to be both legaly and validly
consecrated. Then was made the Statut 8. Elizab. 1. which begins, Forasmuch as
diverse questions by overmuch boldness of speech and talk -- has lately grown
upon the making and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm
etc. And though D. Bramhall late Protestant Archbishop of Armagh, and others in
their books, do endeavor to divert the protestant layty from reflecting upon
the consequences, which evidently follow from this Act of Parliament, as
favoring more the Kings supremacy and spiritual jurisdiction, than true
Episcopacy; and pretend, that this Statut does not give his Majesty power to
make Priests and Bishops hy letters patents; and that even Harding and
Stapleion excepted not against the validity, but against the legality of the
first protestant Bishops consecration, and caracter; yet the words of this
Statut, as also of those Catholic Authors, admit of no such interpretation. The
Statuts words are very clear, so are those of the Catholic writers, whose
design was not to prove, that Parker, Jewel, Horn etc. were not protestant
Bishops; but that they were not true Bishops, or Bishops at all. They knew very
well that they were legal protestant Bishops, because they knew they had the
Queens letters patents issued forth to the person or persons; whether Bishops
or not, that matters nothing, as clearly appears in the Statuts 1. Eliz. 1. and
8. Eliz. 1. And therefore D. Harding tells Jewel, he doubts not but that he may
show him the Queens letters patents for his Episcopacy; and by consequence that
he was a protestant Bishop; adding withal, that he was no true Bishop; because
(says he) the Queen may give the lands, but not the caracter of a Bishop.

To prove then that they were both legaly and vasidly protestant Bishops, the
Parliament (insisting upon the purest protestant principles) thought it
sufficient to declare, and make out that they were consecrated by virtue of the
Queens letters patents, and by some of her Majesty's subjects; whether lay, or
Ecclesiastiks, was not thought material; by any person, or persons, are the
words of the Act; and the title of the same, (which declares the substance and
scope thereof) is, All acts made by any person since 1. Eliz. for the
consecrating inuesting etc. of any Archbishop, or Bishop, shall be good.

The making of Bishops, and giving them spiritual jurisdiction only by the
Kings letters patents, was the primitive doctrine and spirit of the english
Reformation, as appears by an Act of Parliament an. 1. Eduard. 6. entitled, an
Act for the election of Bishops, and what scales and styles they, and other
spiritual persons, exercising jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, shall use. In which
Act (says D. Heylin the famous prelatik protestant writer) it is ordained that
Bishops should be made by the Kings letters patents, and not by the election of
the Dean and Chapters; and that all their processes and writings should be made
in the Kings name, only with the Bishops Test added to, and sealed with his
seal etc. it was plain and evident (says the aforesaid Doctor) that the intent
of the Contriuers was, by degrees to weaken the authority of the Episcopal
Order, by forcing them from their strong hold of Divine institution, and making
them no other than the Kings Ministers only; his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs, as a
man might say. I believe a man may say so still, according to the Statuts 1.
and 8 Eliz. what say you Mr. Walsh? will you yet say that the Oath of Supremacy
acknowledges no spiritual authority in the King? I am sure it ownes none in the
Bishops, bur that which they receive from his Majesty; and themselves own it in
their Act or Oath of homage, that they receive all their jurisdiction, as well
spiritual and ecclesiastical, as temporal, wholly and solely from the King. Are
not you a little out of countenance, Mr. Walsh, to see your confident assertion
so manifestly contradicted by the Oath it self, by the Statuts, by D. Heylin,
and the Bishops themselves?

A NIMADVERSION 2. Whether the general Counsels of Ephesus and Chalcedon, as
also the Prouincial of Afrik of 217. Bishops allowed as much to the Emperor and
no more spiritual authority to the Pope, than the Oath of Supremacy does?
BUT in the name of God Mr. Walsh, how com you to quote for the lawfullness of
the Eglish Oath of Supremacy, the general Counsels of Ephesus, and Chaltedon,
as also the Prouincial of Afrik, with S. Augustine? was not Nestorius and his
heresy, as also that of Pelagius, condemned in that Council of Ephesus by Pope
Celestinus spiritual authority, residing in his Legate Cyrillus of Alexandria?
Does not S. Prosper say, that all the Eastern Churches were purged of two
plagues by Celestinus, when the most glorious defender of the Catholic Faith
Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria was helped by the Apostolik sword? Did the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, pretend to any spiritual jurisdiction, or authority in
that Council? He sent indeed his Domestik Candidianus to it, not to act therein
(as the Emperor himself writes to the Synod) but with an express caution and
condition, that he should not have any thing to do with matters of Faith;
(because says he) it is not lawful for one that is not a Bishop, to
intermedle in Ecclesiastical buisness, or consultations. Why then was
Candidianus sent by Theodosius the Emperor? Mark well, Mr. Walsh, the reason.
That he might remove buisy Monks, and others from Ephesus; because it is not
lawful (says he) for such people to hinder by any tumult the examination of
holy Tenets etc. I fear most men will be apt to judge that you are more
concerned in these words and reason of Theodosius, than you are aware of. It Is
a wicked world, Mr. Walsh, we can not bridle ill tongues; men will talk idely,
let us be never so circumspect. I hope you do not buisy yourself in these
matters of the Church without your Superiors approbation, or commission from
the Bishops, to whom such matters apertain properly. And yet I know not what
muttering there is, that if any you had, its recalled long since, because you
acted quite contrary to it. Yourself does confess (page 5. of your first
Treatise) that your commission was to procure for Ecclesiastiks the benefit of
the peace of 48. whereof the principal article or end was freedom of conscience,
and that Vt saltem procuret nobis eas conditiones, fauores, and gratias quae in
articulis Pacis and Reconciliationis, An. 1648. compositae, ratae. and
confirmatae inter Excell^ntissimum Dominum Marchionem Ormoniae and Confederatos
Catholicos, pactae and promissae nobis fuerunt. These are words of the
Commission given to Friar Walsh by those few that employed him, as you may see
page 5. of his r. part. 1. Treatise.

The same Friar sets down page 49. of his Appendix in the 8. article of the
peace 1648. this enfuing Oath as the only to be exacted of Catholics.

I. A. B. do truly acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience
before God and the world, That our Soueraign Lord King Charles, is lawful and
rightful King of this Realm, and of other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries, and I will bear Faith and true Alleigance to his Majesty, his Heirs
and successors; and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power,
against all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
his, or their Crown and Dignity; and do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known to his Majesty, his (...) and successors, or to the Lord Deputy, or other
his Majesty's Chief Governor, or Go^ernors for the time being, all Treasons, or
Traiterous Conpi^acies, which I shall know; or hear to be intended against his
Majesty, or any of them; and I do make this Recognition and a knowledgment
heartily, willingly, and truly upon the true Fa^^h of a Christian. So help me
God, etc.


the Roman Catholics should not be required to take any oaths but one
specified in the 8. article, of the same peace. How came you then to act (as
their Procurator) quite contrary to this, and to your commission? Realy Mr.
Walsh, if this be true, you are wors than the buisy Monks of Ephesus. At least
you are very unfortunate in your allegations of Counsels: they always seem to
make against yourself. You bring against the Popes spiritual supremacy the
example of the Emperor Martianus, in the case of Anatolius, and make the 28.
Canon of the Council of Calcedon the ground of your objection; whereas you know
in your conscience (if you know or read any thing) that there are admitted but
27. Canons of the Council of Calcedon; and Theodoret, who was present at it,
testifies there were no more; the clandestin Decree, which Anatolius and some
Greeks made and foisted into the Canons, is rejected as ridiculous, and forged;
as you may see at large in learned Cardinal Perons answer to King James lib. 1.
cap. 34.2. That though the 28. were admitted as a genuine Canon, yet what is
that to your purpose, against the Bishop of Rome his spiritual supremacy? That
28. Canon pretends only precedence of Constantinople before Alexandria; not
before Rome.

But its much to my purpose (and I hope it will be for your profit) to mind you
how the Emperor Martianus, after that the Catholic Faith had bin confirmed by
the Bishops subscriptions, did propose somthings in favor thereof to the
Fathers; thinking it decent (says he) to have them rather formed or regularly
framed, by their Decree, than by his own Imperial law. And the first point of
the intended Reformation was, that to hinder heresies and the disorders of
irregular Monks, which of late had so disturbed and infected the Church of God,
it might be decreed, that they should be subject to the Bishops, and not meddle
with Ecclesiastical or civil affairs, but serve God, and keep within their
Monasteries. Well Mr. Walsh, I see, let your friends do all they can to excuse
or extenuate your faults, you are resolved to lay yourself and them open to
your Adversaries. Did not I but just now advise you, as your best friend, not
to meddle with ecclesiastical affairs, which are above your capacity, and
learning; especialy these general Counsels? You see what this of Calcedon and
the Emperor Martianus think of irregular religious men, and how the generality
of people take you to be one of that kind, a disturber of the peace of the
Church, and a broacher of heresies. Lord God! could not you be quiet? what made
you name at all this Council of Calcedon? Did you not know how severe it is
against such men as you are reputed to be? I wish with all my heart you had
never com out of your Convent, and that you were retired in your cell. For
God's sake quote no more general Counsels; they are very opposite to your ways
and doctrine. This of Calcedon consisting of 630. Bishops at least, owned S. Leo
Pope for Head of the universal Church; and in his name and by his authority
Dioscorus was condemned and deposed. See Leo his epistle (47.) to the Council,
sent by his Legates to reside therein, saying, In these Brethren a Paschasinus
and Lucentius Bishops, Boniface and Basil Priests, directed to you by the
Apostolical see your Fraternities may believe that I preside in your Synod. And
the Synod answers, Truly you did preside as Head to the Members. And the Legates
sentence against Dioscorus was, Sanctissimus ac Beatissimus Papa, The most holy
and blessed Pope Leo, Head of the uniuersal Church, by us his Legates, with
consent of the holy Synod, being endowed with Peter the Apostles dignity, who
is the foundation and rock of the faith, and called Porter of the heavenly
Kingdom, has deprived Dioscorus of Episcopal dignity, and of all priestly
functions.
Caput vninersalis Ecclesiae, Leo, per nos Legatos suos, S. Synodo
consentiente, Petri Apostoli praeditus dignitate, qui Ecclesiae fundamentum,
and petra Fidei, and coelestis regni Ianitor nuncupatur, Episcopali dignitate
Dioscorum nudauit, and ab omni Sacerdotali opere fecit extorrem. Mr. Walsh,
does the Oath of Supremacy allow the Pope to be Head of the universal Church,
or allow him so much spiritual jurisdiction as this Council of Calcedon? If
not, why do you quote it to that purpose?

Perhaps you may have better luck with Prouincial Counsels. Let us see. You
allege S. Augustine and 217. Bishops of Afrik against Appeals to Rome in the
case of Apiarius, and you apply the same to the Oath of Supremacy. Mr. Walsh,
if I be not mistaken, Belarmin has clearly answered that objection which you
borrowed from Calvin, as you do most others (in your tedious volume) from
heretics; and Baronius in the very year and place quoted by you (though you
conceal it) proves that S. Augustine and the Bishops of Afrik owned the Popes
Supremacy, and spiritual authority over them, instancing the case of Antony
Bishop Fussalensis of Numidia, deposed from his Episcopal administration and
revenue by the Bishops of that Province. He, obtaining a letter of his
pretended innocence from his Primat to Pope Boniface, appeald, to his Holiness.
Boniface dying, his successor Celestinus favored Antony, yet with this caution,
and Prouiso in his letters, if the matter of fact was true, and Antony his
narration not subreptitious. Antony boasted much of this savor, and writ to his
friends, that the Pope not only gave sentence for him, but also would command
the same to be executed by his Executors with military power. Whereupon S.
Augustine writ a letter to the Pope, informing him of the truth, and desired him
to give sentence for the people of Antony's Diocese (which was the other party)
because the right was on their side; and not to think upon that violent way,
wherewith Antony threatened the poor people. Permit not (says the Saint) these
things to be don, I beseech thee, per Christi sanguinem, by the blood of
Christ, by the memory of Peter the Apostle, who admonisht the Prelates of
Christian people, not to domineer violently amongst the brethren. Here you see
Mr. Wash, S. Augustine and the African Bishops admitting of Appeals to Rome; nay
admitting in the Bishop of Rome right to a coerciue power for executing his
sentence in Afrik; though indeed they advise him not to make use of it in that
case; so did Ireneus advise S. Victor the Pope, not to excommunicat the Asian
Churches, albeit he doubted not of his power to excommunicat them. Does the
oath of Supremacy, allow the Pope such a Supremacy, or such a latitude or
extent of spiritual jurisdiction out of his temporal estate? Let me once more
entreat you Mr. Walsh, per Christi Sanguinem, not to betray your ignorance so
manifestly, not to expose your-self to the Censure and laughter of all who read
Counsels or Fathers. Had it not bin much better for you, not to have
intermedled with these matters, whereof you understand so little, than to be
looked upon as a vain ignorant heretik? we your friends can not but be
concerned, though we can say but little for you.

ANIMAD: 3. Whether it be rashness, obstinacy, and a sin in Roman Catholics, to
refuse the Oath of Supremacy, and Friar Walsh his Remonstrance?
MR. Walsh, I couple these two instruments (the oath of Supremacy and your
Remonstrance) together, because yourself makes no distinction between them, as
to the lawfullness of their being taken by Catholics. For, though each of them
seem to renounce the Popes spiritual authority, Page 24. 1. part.
yet you tell us, there is no such matter, because Spiritual authority in those
oaths Formularies, signifies not Spiritual, but temporal authority. Seeing
therefore you are of opinion, that the oath of supremacy may be taken with a
good conscience by Roman Catholics, and that the whole Roman Catholic Church
belieues, and tells us the contrary, you have no reason to be angry with
Catholics, if they do not rely upon your word in any point that concerns their
conscience or religion: and though your Remonstrance had no other fault, but
that it is placed by you in the same line and predicament (as to the lawfulness
of taking it) with the oath of Suprecacy, Catholics are bound to refuse it;
neither can a Franciscan Friar, who reproaches Roman Catholics with rashness
and obstinacy for not taking the oath of Supremacy, expect to be their
Spiritual Director, but rather to be concluded by them an Apostat; and must not
take ill, if his writings should be rejected and burnt as heretical.

Seeing therefore Mr. Walsh, your arguments pretending to prove that the two
general Counsels of Ephesus, and Calcedon, as well as the Prouincial of Afrik,
taught the doctrine which Roman Catholics except against in the oath of
Supremacy, are found to be mistakes; what other arguments do you produce to
convince Catholics of rashness and obstinancy for not taking that oath? None
but your own authority; nothing but your saying, that the Roman Catholic Church
has erred rashly and obstinatly for these 600. last years, because it admitted
not a Spiritual Supremacy in temporal Soueueraigns. Realy Mr. Walsh, I do not
believe your sole authority is a sufficient argument to prove the Church has
erred. To prove so rash an assertion you would fain make us mistrust the
testimonies of holy and learned Authors of the Church History, as Baronius,
Bellarmin, and others; They are Impostors, you say, hired by the Court of Rome
to diuest Emperors and Kings of their right of governing spiritual and
ecclesiastical affairs; and to place it in the Pope. Your words (page 40. to
the Reader) are, If the truth were known it would be found that Baronius, and
the rest fallowing him were willing to make use of any malicious ungrounded
fictions whatsoever against lustinian the Emperor. -- This Justinian was in the
later end of his days, an heretik; and took upon him to make laws in matters
of Faith; but he dyed sudenly before he could publish them. Yet before he was
an heretik, he made good Edicts in favor of the true Faith; and for this he is
commended by Popes and Counsels, as a Catholic; as also because its said he
was reconciled at his death. Now you, Mr. Walsh, say, that the ancient and
modern writers knew well enough he was never an heretik, but that they diffame
him as an heretik, because his laws in Ecclesiastical matters, even those of
Faith, are a perpetual eysore to them, because these laws are a precedent to
all other good Princes to govern their own respective Churches in the like
manner without any regard, of Bulla Caenae, or of so many other vain
allegations of those men; that would make the world believe it unlawful for
secular Princes to make ecclesiastical laws by their own sole authority.

Truly Mr. Walsh, I have endeavored to know the truth of those two Cardinals,
Bellarmin, and Baronius; and do find, they were both, holy humble men, so far
from being hired by the Court of Rome, that neither of them could be persuaded
by it to accept of more for their maintenance, than what was absolutely
necessary for their dignity. They lived and dyed in the list of the poor
Cardinals; both were named Cardinals against their will: both industriously
sought to make themselves incapable of the Popedom. Twenty days did Baronius
resist in the Conclaue the offers and importunities of the Cardinals his
friends, who were able and resolved to make him Pope, until at length he
persuaded them to choose Leo 11. Both these Cardinals virtues are so
conspicuous, that many press for their Canonization, and its believed it will
be obtained, God working Miracles to testify that they deserve it. This is the
truth, Mr. Walsh, and the world blames you very much for calling such men
Hirelings, Impostors etc. What shall your friends say to excuse you when they
hear you called an ignorant spiteful heretik, for calumniating such holy men
as these? Some who observe your actions, say, you are hired to write these
calumnies, and that you have chosen rather so base and mercenary a way to damn
your self and others, than to live quiet, and serve God in your Cell, according
to your rule and profession. Good God, Mr. Walsh; is this possible? Can you
sell your own soul and the reputation of Saints for such paltrey stuff, and at
so low a rate as 200. per an. If this be true, you are unhappy; but Gods mercy
expects your repentance, for which we your friends can but pray.

Others think you despair not by your little books, and this great Volume to
gain the favor of temporal Soueraings. I can not believe they will (by your
persuasion) degenerat from the example of their renowned Predecessors, and
particularly from that of Constantin the great, who was so far from making laws
for ecclesiastical matters or persons, or meddling with matters of Faith, that
his saying and maxim was Rufinus lib. 10. hist. cap. 2. S. Gregor. lib. 4.
epist. 45.
(speaking to the Bishops) Ves Dij estis a summo Deo constituti, aequum non
est, vt homo iudicet Deos; I do not think I say Mr. Walsh, that Christian
Princes will degenerat from this example, (applauded by all the world when
Christianity was in its primitive purity) to follow that of the Emperor
Justinian, when he fell from the Faith of Christ. Would it not be rashness both
in Soueraigns and Subjects to prefer your bare testimony (who are (to my
grief) reported to be the greatest liar and Impostor in the world) before the
joint testimony of all orthodox writers, and the practice of the whole Roman
Catholic Church, ever since it began to flourish under Constantin the great?
Many except against your style as well as against the matter: You excuse (page
43. of your Preface) the meanness, or rather sadness of your style all along
your book, -- you took no care (you say) of the language, though you took
enough of the matter. In my opinion you are more faulty in the choice of your
matter, than in your expression of it. But you thought perhaps, the matter was
so good, and necessary for the Salvation of souls, that you Ibidem page 43.
enlarged often, and repeated the same things not seldom where you needed not,
were your design to write only for the learned, or those of quick apprehension.
But seeing those you intended chiefly to speak unto, were the Roman Catholic
Clergy of Ireland, whereof very few are great Clerks, you chose that manner of
writing for their sake, that the meanest of them might understand whateuer you
would be at. I am sorry to hear this Mr. Walsh; will you disgrace your own
nation? One of them spoke thus to me of you. How comes none of the Roman
Catholic Clergy of Ireland to have as quick an apprehension, and as much
learning, as Peter Walsh their Countreyman, and one who spent his time more
idely than most of them? Is it because his forwardness in promoting protestancy
against his conscience, and his importuning great men to be made an instrument
of sowing dissension, and dividing Roman Catholics by his Remonstrance, has
gained him a little credit and countenance in Court, therefore he must be so
learned and loyal, as to teach not only the Irish Catholic Clergy, but the
whole Catholic Church their duty (as if they were ignorant of it) to God and
Caesar? Whence had he all this learning? Did his teaching a year or two
Philosophy, and half a year, or therabouts Divinity in Kilkenny, to half a
dozen Scholars, make him an Ecumenical master, and adorn him with so
extraordinary knowledge, both Divine and human, as to instruct not only the
dull Clergy of Ireland, but the acutest wits of France, Spain, and Italy? The
man was so sensible of the aspersion you cast upon his, and your own
Countrymen, that I durst not excuse you; and indeed you spoke inconsideratly;
for its well known to most of the famous Universities of Europe, that as Irish
men have bin anciently their first Founders, so they have bin of late their
chiefest Professors and greatest Ornament. Your self might have known, or at
least heard of Richard Wadding the Augustine in Conimbria, of James Arthur the
Dominican in Alcala, Salamanca, and Conimbria; of Holiwood in Padua, and
Mussipont: of Luke Wadding and Richard Lynch in Salamanca: of Peter wadding in
Prague, all Jesuits: of many famous Doctors of Sorbon in Paris: of your own
Friars Hicky, Cauel, Lombard, and Luke Waddin, in Rome. Of the Jesuit Thomas
Talbot (alias de Leon) in Granada, the Oracle of all Spain, not only for his
profoundness in Divinity, but also for the vast extent of his knowledge in
other sciences and languages. You might have known the eminent Doctor of
Bologna, Riredan of Tolosa, not to speak of other famous Physicians, who
though not Professors, yet Practioners so far above the common sort, as Fenell
Fogotty, O Meara etc. That they may be recorded to posterity for patterns of
safe and successful prescriptions as others are for printed books. These and
others, though all dead (the two last only excepted) yet are a fresh and
everlasting evidence against your imputing dullness of apprehension, and
ignorance, to the Irish Clergy, and nation. I could name (said an other) four
of the Irish Bishops, yet living, and many of the inferior Clergy (especialy
Regulars) who taught with great applause in foreign and famous Universities
both Divinity and Philosophy. Without doubt they take ill that a petty friar
should pretend to teach them their duty either to God or the King. Why did he
not confute them in the Congregation of Dublin an. 1666. when he had the Lord
Lieutenants favor to countenance his doctrine, and fright them into his
opinions? Why did not he answer then the Prolocutor (Bishop Lynch) and Father
Nicholas Netteruilles reasons? Why did he not accept of Father John Talbots
offer, to show, in diverse particulars, Friar Redmund Carons gross inexcusable
falsifications in his Remonstrantia Hibernorum, and in his lesser libel
entitled Loyalty asserted? Why did he not answer the objections and reasons of
many others as learned men as these, who confounded him and his errors in that
Congregation? Then was the time to vindicat his doctrine and Remonstrance; but
if now after 6. years study, Walsh his volum of that subject is a nuisance to
the Academies, a bundell of errors raked out of the ashes of burnt heretical
books, how wat it possible for him to speak then any thing but heresies and
nonsense? This your Country men. What could I answer to this?

But it is wors yet. He gave me the ensuing writing, wherein he undertakes to
show, even to yourself, that those of the Irish Clergy you so much undervalue,
had, and have still the better of you, not only in wit, but in learning, even
in this controversy, after your 6. years study of this matter. Let us first of
all (says he) state it right. You pretend that the Supremacy of temporal
Soueraings, does not only give them power to make ecclesiastical laws, even in
matters of Faith (as appears by your foresaid own words, speaking of lustinian
the Emperor) but that the spiritual authority of the Church, can not warrant
its punishing by corporal penalties such an irregular Friar as you are thought
to be. And to make this your Tenet more plausible, you would fain infer from
the coerciue power in the Church of whipping such a fellow as you are, a
coerciue power to dethrone Princes; as if forsooth they could not sit securely,
nor be at ease in their thrones, if you should be disciplined. Mr. Walsh the
Sovereignty of Princes is so sacred a thing, that I dare not meddle with it, and
am forbid to write of that subject, as all others are; who live in France; (the
man is a Graduate of Sorbon.) But you know that Bellarmin himself confesses,
Princes can not be deposed for bare heresy, though Popes may. Their temporal
jurisdiction can not be questioned for their errors. How then can you infer
that if the Church may punish and whip you for heresy, it may also depose Kings
for the same? Therefore I hope it may be discussed without consequence or
offense.

ANIMAD: 4. Whether it be heresy or Treason to maintain, that the Superiors of
the Franciscan Order (by virtue of the spiritual power which they have from the
Pope of governing their Friars) may command Friar Peter Walsh to be whipped
against his own will, for misdemeanors?
BE not angry Mr. Walsh, until you hear me out. It is no disgrace for a
Religious man to be corrected by his Prouincial or General; neither is it the
first time that a Friar has bin whipped, and I am sure none ever deserved it
better than you do. But let us see, what can you say for your not being whipped
against your will for misdemeanors; we will now suppose there are some and shall
be proved time enough: My self and others of the Irish Clergy objected against
this your main Tenet, (viz. that no corporal punishment may be inflicted by
virtue of a spiritual power) the general practice of the whole Catholic Church,
and all Religious Orders, which not only put from Mass, and deprive of the
suffrages of the faithful, such Apostats, as they excommunicat, but also
forbid them any commerce, and conversation with others, nay command them to be
whipped, and impriprison'd, when hands can be laid on them. To this objection you
answer (page 79. sec. 33.) thus. I take in the first place their allegation of
the Faithful being whipped, and commanded to undergo austere pennances, to be
vnconclusure: Your reason Mr. Walsh? Because every Ghostly Father may in some
cases enioyn his Penitent such punishments; and by virtue of his mere spiritual
power may do so; but can inflict none either by himself, or by an other, if the
penitent will be refractory. And not only the Pope, not only the Bishop, but
every inferior Priest may in fore confessionali, enioyn his penitent, even a
King or Emperor, whateuer is judged necessary for his eternal Salvation: and
consequently in some cases a deposition of themselves from their whole temporal
estates, Kingdoms or Empires, as in that of a tyrannical and manifest
usurpation, and of necessary restitution; the true and legal heir suruiuing,
and known, and possible to be admitted without subversion of the state or
people; much more where it may be available to the support of both. Yet I hope
the Author of this Querie, and reasons for the affirmative, will not say that
every such Ghostly Father can proceed to execution, whether their penitents
will or not. Or can by force of Arms or other corporal means diuest them
respectively of their ill gotten goods, Estates, Kingdoms, Empires, though only
to put the lawful proprietors in possession thereof.

Mr. Walsh, the dullness and ignorance which you imputed to the Irish Clergy,
must be retorted upon yourself in this dispute. Are you so short sighted, as
not to discern the vast difference there is between the spiritual power of a
ghostly Father in soro confessionali, (as you call it) and the spiritual power
of a Bishop in his Diocese, or of your General in his Order, as they are
Pastors, and Judges in foro externo? The one is exercised and extended no
further than to absolve and punish privately a penitent, who is his own accuser,
and coms with a perfect submission and resignation to any penance or penalty
the Confessor shall think fit to give If the penitent coms not with this
preparation, there is no power in the Confessor to absolve him, or to give him
a penance. But the spiritual power, and authority of the Bishops, and Generals
of orders, as such, is not only to absolve priuarly one who submits
voluntarily, and confesses his frailties and faults of his own accord; but to
punish and correct publikly such as will not submit voluntarily to any penance,
nor confess their faults, but rather maintain their errors with obstinacy.
These can not be punished corporaly in foro externo by a spiritual Judge,
until their sin and perverseness, be proved by clear evidence of lawful
witnesses. So that it is a quite different power from that of a Confessor. If
this obstinacy therefore be not checked and corrected by temporal and corporal
penalties, independently of the voluntary acceptance of the offender, it will
encourage (and corrupt) others to the like insolency; and destroy the whole
Flock and the whole Order. Therefore they who are to ouersee the Church, or
flock, and a religious order, and to give a strict account for the souls
committed to their charge, must have annexed to their correctiue power, not
only that of applying spiritual Censures, which upon obstinat and incredulous
minds work little or nothing (as appears in your self Mr. Walsh) but also
corporal punishments; that Virga ferrea, whereof David prophecis'd Psalm. 2. That
therewith Christ should govern his inheritance, that is, the Church. Dabo tibi
gentes haereditatem tuam, and possessionem tuam terminos terrae, Reges eos in
virga ferrea. That iron rod wherewith S. Paul threatened the Corinthians, Vultis
vt in virga ferrea veniam ad vos? And wherewith he punished the incestuous
Corinthian, and delivered him over to Satan, not only by Excommunication, but
to be corporaly tormented, as the Expositors commonly understand those words in
interitum carnis, 1. Cor. 4. That iron rod, Mr. Walsh, whereof it is said
Proverb. 13. Qui par^it virgae, odit filium. He who spares the rod, hates the
child. Can you imagine, that Christ our Savior does hate his children, or that
he would not leave a rod in his Church, to chastie them with corporal
punishments, when vice and passion has rendered them insensible of all
spiritual admonitions and censures? If according to Scripture, Vexatio dat
intellectum, why should you think that Christ would forbid his Church to vere
by corporal punishments those souls, which are not troubled or moved at
spiritual ones? Jf corporal punishments or torments be proportionable or apt to
punish, correct, deterr, and amend delinquents in the Commonwealth, why not
also in the Church? would Christ have his Church wors governed, or more
destitute of proportionable means to govern, than a Commonwealth?

Do you grant Mr. Walsh, that the Church of Christ ought not to be destitute of
means sufficient to compass its ends? Do you grant one of the ends of the same
Church is, to convert the most incredulous and obstinat sinners? Can you deny
there are many sinners, so incredulous and obstinat, that no spiritual
admonitions or Censures do them good. This you can not deny, for it is most
evident in your self; how often have you bin admonished, how often
excommunicated by your lawful Superiors, for printing heretical, and non
sensical books, and for intermedling in Church and state affairs, contrary to
your profession, and without any commission or capacity for such employments?
If you do not see this, you are the only person that does not see it, and
therefore your not seeing, or at least not believing, it, demonstrats you are
incredulous and obstinat. This supposed, will not you acknowledge that this
incredulity and obstinacy of yours (which all the world does judge to be
grounded upon pride, and passion, may be lessened, and reclaimed by shutting
you up in a cell, giving you spare diet, keeping you from ill company, that
flatter and debauch you, and whipping you once or twice a day? I wish you would
try it. The Scripture tells you, Virga and correptio tribuunt sapientiam.
Proverb. 29. These corporal vexations questionless would work more upon you,
than the spiritual Censures have don; for I doubt not but that Gods grace, by
means of these helps, would make you reflect upon your self, and give you
understanding to see how ridiculous presumption it is in an inconsiderable
halfwitted, and not so much as half learned petty friar, to take upon himself
to teach the whole, or the most considerable part of the Catholic Church, Faith
and Loyalty, as if they had erred in both for these 600. last years, and has
the impudence to print that all the Catholic Bishops now living are either
Traitors to their Soueraigns, or perjured to the Pope.

Now, Mr. Walsh, let us see, which of the two doctrins is destructive to
Soueraigns, yours or that of the Catholic Church? You state the case in an
usurper, or Rebel against his lawful King. He coms to confession; the
Confessarius enioyns him to restore the Kingdom to the right Souerain. He will
not. I hope, say you (page 79.) the Author of this Querie will not say, that
every such Ghostly Father can proceed to execution whether the penitent will or
no: or can by force of Arms, or other corporal means, deuest them respectively
of their ill gotten goods, Kingdoms, etc. And from this private and penitential
power of a Confessarius, you infer, that neither Bishops nor Pope can in
conscience ferue their Soueraign, as not being allowed by God to proceed by
force of Arms, or other corporal means against usurpers and Rebels, though
their design be no other than to put the lawful Proprietor in possession.

Mr Walsh, see how heretical and destructive your doctrine is. Suppose a thing
which has happened, and may happen very often. Suppose, I say, an usurper or
Rebel will not go to confession, or if he does, will not restore the vsurp't
Kingdom or Province to his lawful Soueraign according to his Confessarius his
command. Hervpon the Bishops of that Kingdom or Province, according to their
duty, excommunicat the Tyrant, or Rebel for his publik sin, and contumacy in
keeping out of his Kingdom the lawful King. He contemns their Censures. Let me
ask you this question. Do the Bishops sin in raising (of their own accord, and
as Bishops) an Army against the Tyrant or Rebel, only to put their lawful
King in possession? Answer M. Walsh. Do they sin, I say, in doing this duty?
would the Pope sin, if (as Pope) he had don the same? would Innocen^ 10. have
sinned, if he helped to raise an Army in defense of the late King, or for the
restoration of the present against that usurper Cromuell? would other Pope^
have sinned in doing the same, in prosecution of their Spiritual Censures (in
case these had not served their turn) against the Barons, when they
excommunicated them for their rebellion against King John, or King Henry the
third? Is the whole Catholic Church guilt^ of heresy and impiety for
maintaining this doctrine Speak out Mr. Walsh, or at least retract for sham^
this wicked destructive principle; and accuse not the Church of God, as
asserting in itself a power preiudi^cial to Soueraigns; that power, I say,
which has bi^ so often applied, and of its own nature is so appli^ab^ to their
safety and service. Do not follow Blacklows he retical principles, whom you
(page 43. 1. p.) term^ learned Priest of the Roman Communion, though much (for
most of his books) censured at Rome. They are censured all, and censured as
Arch heretical. And one of them (obedience and Government) is censured for this
very doctrine of yours; viz. That Subjects sin if they endeavor to restore their
disposest and exiled lawful Soueraign. And this Blaklow (after all this) you
and the Blakloistes call a learned Catholic Priest. Do you imagine that any
Catholic or protestant Soueraign will permit you (or a Chapter and Clergy that
hold such an Author to be a Catholic, and of eminent learning) to live in their
Dominions, and instruct their Subjects? Retire, retire to your Convent good
Father Walsh, obey your Superiors; retract your heretical doctrine so
inconsistent with the safety of lawful Soueraigns; submit to the corporal
punishment your General will inflict upon you, when you are absolved from so
many spiritual Censures, you have incurred; buisy your-self no longer with
Church or state affairs, seeing you are not sit for either; and are so ignorant,
that pretending to favor the Sovereignty of Princes, you make it unlawful for
Bishops to ferue them; and accuse the Church of heresy for claiming a power to
correct with corporal punishments you, and such Friars as you are.

ANIMAD: 5. Whether the Roman Catholic Church has fallen into heresy, or
hatherr'd enormously, these last 600. years for contradicting Friar Peter Walsh
his doctrine of a spiritual supremary in temporal Soueraigns; and whether all
the Roman Catholic Bishops of all the world have bin for the same 600. years,
or as least are in this last Century, either Traitors to their Soueraigns, or
perjured to the Pope, for taking the ancient and usual eath before Episcopal
Consecration?
ITS evident Mr. Walsh by your own words quoted in the first and second
Animaduersion, that one of the enormous errors, wherewith you charge the Church
of God for these last 600. years, is, that the 80. Popes, the innumerable
writers, and all the Bishops thereof, denied to temporal Soueraigns that
Supremacy which is attributed in the English oath of Supremacy, and a
Legislatiue power of making laws, in ecclesiastical matters, even of Faith. We
have also quoted these your words of the page 40. n. 3. in your Preface to the
Reader, If the truth were known; it would be found that Baronius, and the rest
following him, were willing to make use of any malicious ungrounded fictions
whatsoever against Instinian the Emperor etc. by reason his Laws in
ecclesiastical matters, even those of Faith, are a perpetual eysore to them;
because these Laws are a precedent to all other good Princes, to govern their
own respectine Churches in the like manner, without any regard of Bulla Coenae,
or of so many other vain allegations of those men, that would make the world
believe it unlawful for Secular Princes to make ecclesiastical laws by their
own sole authority for the government of the Church, etc.

To reform therefore this so long erroneus Church, and to restore to Secular
Princes that spiritual jurisdiction, which is given them in the oath of
Supremacy, or a legislatiue power of making ecclesiastical laws, even in
matters of Faith, by their own sole authority, you Friar Walsh, have found out
a Remonstrance, wherein all this power and right is asserted and (as you say)
ought to be taken by all loyal Subjects; especialy the Bishops, who renounce
their allegiance by this ensuing oath to the Pope before their consecration,
which you set down in latin and I translate into inglish.

The Oath whereby (according to Friar Walsh) all Bishops are made Traitors. page
19 Dedic.
IN. Elect of the Church N. from this hour forward will be faithful and
obedient to S. Peter the Apostle, and to the holy Roman Church, and to our Lord
Pope N. as also to his Successors. I will not be in counsel, consent or fact,
that they may loose life or limb, or be imprisoned, or violent hands laid upon
them in any manner or any injury don to them upon any color whatsoever. The
Counsel wherewith they will trust me by themselves, their Nuncios, or letters,
I will not reueal to their prejudice. The Roman Papacy, and royalties of Saint
Peter I shall help to retain and defend, Saluo meo Ordine, against all men. I
will treat honorably the Legate of the sea Apostolik, as he passes by, and
returns, and shall help him in his necessities, I shall endeavor to conserve,
defend, increase and promote the rights, honors, privileges, and authority of
the holy Roman Church, of our Lord the Pope, and of his Successors. I will not
be in counsel, fact, or treaty wherein are plotted any sinister or prejudicial
things, against the Lord Pope or the Roman Church. And if I know of any such
plots against them, I will endeavor to hinder them to the best of my power, as
also discover them as soon as I can, to the Pope himself, or to some other that
may give him notice thereof. I shall observe, and cause to be observed to the
uttermost of my power, the rules of the holy Fathers, the Decrees, Ordinations,
or dispositions, reseruations, provisions, and Apostolik Mandats. I shall
impugn and prosecute to my power Heretics, Schismatiks and Rebels to our same
Lord, or his Successors. I will com to the Synod when I am called, if I be not
hindered by a canonical impediment. I will personaly visit limina Apostolorum
every three years, and render an account to the Lord our Pope, and his
Successors of my pastoral duty, and of all things belonging to the state of my
Church, and of the discipline of Clergy and people, and of the souls committed
to my charge, and shall humbly receive, and diligently execute the Apostolik
commands. If I be lawfully hinderd; or detained, I will fulfill all the a
foresaid things by one of my Chapter, or ^om other, or others, constituted in
Ecclesiastical dignity, or benefice; or for want of such, by some Priest of my
Diocese; or for want of such; by some other Priest secula^ or regular of
approved virtue and religion, who shall be fully instructed of all the
aforesaid things I will certify likewise of the impediment I have by lawful
proofs, which must be sent by the aforesa^^ M^sser get to some Cardinal to
propose it in the Congregation of the holy Courcel. I shall not without
consu^ting the Pope, sch, bestow, pawn, or infeu'd, or in any wise alienat,
even with consent of my Chapter, the possessions which belong to my Table. And
if I do alienat any thing, I am content to incurr the penalties which are
contained in a constitution made to that purpose.

So help me God, and these holy Ghospells. Then the Consecrator answers, Deo
gratias.

For my part, Mr. Walsh, I can not find any Treason in this oath, it contrains
but such general ties and words as are usual in other oaths of obedience, and
are restraind to a spiritual subjection, and superiority in Ecclesiastical
matters, and with a clause Saluo Ordine meo, which you confess King Henry 2. so
much excepted against in the oath S. Thomas of Canterb^ry, and the other
Bishops were to take at Clarendon to his Majesty as their temporal Soueraign.
But you say its no wonder the Irish Archbishops and Bishops were so disloyal at
waterford an. 1646. in rejecting the peace etc. because they took this oath to
the Pope, and none of them took the bath of Supremacy or alleigance to the
King. We know (Say you page 20. of your Dedicatory speaking of all Bishops)
they must be perjured to the Pope, if they prove faithful to the King. Whether
so, or no, to God? judge you. I am sure if they were not Traitors in taking the
foresaid oath to his Holiness, they were at least Renoun^ers of their
alleigance to his Majesty, and of their obedience also to the Catholic Church.

To accuse all Bishops, and by consequence the Representative Roman Catholic
Church, or (which is all one) its supreme Pastor together with all the other
Bishops of the said Communion, of holding and swearing the lawfullness of
Treason, and other enormous errors, even but for one year, is judged by General
Counsels, and all Roman Catholics, a great heresy. What then shall we say of
you, Mr. Walsh who maintains they have bin in that desperate condition and
heresy these ^00. Dedic. page 13.
last years and that they took no notice of the loud cries of many thousands
most learned godly Prelates, Priests, and Doctors, besides Laiks, putting all
those Popes, and all those traitorous or perjured Bishops in mind of their
false, wi^ked, impious, heretical, unchristian, and plainly destructine Tenets.
But first Mr Walsh, let me ask you, if all the Bishops take the foresaid oath
(and its certain they do, and have taken it for many hundred years) how can any
part of them be most, learned zealous, and most godly Prelates? Can heretics,
Traitors, and impious Bishops be most zealous, and godly men? why did you not
name at least one of those godly Prelates, or writers, that cried down the Popes
and Bishops as holding impious, heretical and destructive principles ever since
Pope Gregory 7? You name none but Blaklow, the two Barclayes (both lay men) and
the ablest of them but a Romantik Poet, one Preston, (alias widrington) hired
by Abbots of Canterbury, to write against the Pope, and make a schism in the
Roman Church; Redmund Caron, and your-self, not so much hired, as intruding
your-selues, and pressing state Ministers to hire you, for the same ends. Are
these your thousands of most learned, zealous, godly Prelates, Priests and
Laiks? Though bad these men be, I do not find that any of them does assert so
clearly the oath of supremacy as you do, or say, that all the Roman Catholic
Bishops, who take the usual oath at their consecrations, are Traitors or
periu^'d. What a pretty representative Church you make up of such Bishops? But
suppose Mr. Walsh, there had bin in every Century these 600. last years, or
since Gregory 7. thousands of such as these, or as your-self, that cried down
some principles and practices of the Roman Catholic Church as impious and
heretical, and all the Bishops thereof as Traitors. What then? All pious and
prudent Roman Catholics would value such men no more than they do you, or so
many cursed Currs barking at the moon and stars. Preston I did not know; some
who knew him, say, he repented his folly, and was very much ashamed of having
bin so egregiously foold by Archbishop Abbots. Caron I knew, and so did many
others, who judged him to be no better than a pleasant Friar, that had no more
s'kill in squsing out a doleful tune or Cronan, than science or sincerity in
quoting the Authors he wrests in favor of those errors, wherein he agrees with
you. My self have seen him convicted of inexcusable falsifications by Mr.
Leugar the late Lord Baltimores Priest: and all his defense and Apology was, to
say with heretical pride and passion to that good Priest his Confuter, Go, go
your ways, you little man. You have heard I suppose of his reply to one D. Pugh
a learned man, as I am told; who questioning Caron for printing contrary
doctrins in two books, answered, when he writ one of them, he was in the King
of Spains Dominions; but the other he writ in the King o^ ^^glands Dominions.
This indeed is a sincere confession and declaration of the genious and practice
of your new remonstrant Church, and of your self M. Walsh, in particular, as
shall be now proved.

ANIMADVERSION 6. Of Friar Walsh his Remonstrant Church. Which principles be
treasonable and impious; those of Friar Wal^h, or those of the Roman Catholic
Church for these last 600. years?
MR. Walsh, you charge the Roman Catholic Popes and Bishops ever since Pope
Gregory 7. with treasonable and impious principles and practices. Let us
compare yours with theirs, that so the truth may appear. You are Pope of this
new Remonstrant Church, which you confess, had (even in its prime) but sixty
nine Church men in all the world. I believe they are your Cardinals, you have
three caps yet to bestow; the Cardinals you know are 72. Its good policy to
keep some places vacant. But where are your Bishops and parish Priests? Must
your Clergy be composed only of Cardinals? Nay where are your sheep, your
flocks, Mr. Walsh; you name, but 97. Laiks, which number can not afford two
Parishioners to each Pastor. This is indeed a very little flock pusillus grex;
but great, I hope, in virtue and merit. Well! we will not say any thing against
their persons, but we will set down the fundamental principles, whereby you
distinguish this blessed flock from that of the Roman Catholic Church, which
you call Papalin, puritan papist, popish recusant etc.

Your 1. principle is, that the english oath of supremacy may br Page 16. of
the Dedicatory.
lawfully taken by all Roman Catholics; nay that they commit a sin of rashness
and obstinacy in refusing it You know Mr. Walsh, all rashness and obstinacy is
a sin.

2. In the Prof. page 40. Pref. page 49
That temporal Soueraigns may lawfully make laws in ecclesiastical matters,
even of Faith, by their own sole authority.

3. That for these 600. Dedic. page 13.
last years the Roman Catholic Church has erred enormously, for gainsaying
these principles of yours.

4. Pet. Walsh says page 75. And yet I must tell my Adversaries, that such
Catholic Divines as hold the absolute fallibility of general Councels, even I
mean in points of faith think they can say enough for themsel^es etc.
That Roman Catholic Authors hold and maintain, general Counsels are not
infallible in defining matters of Faith or doctrine. Do you hold such Authors to
be Roman Catholic Mr. Walsh? If you do your are not one your-self.

5. Page 20. Dedic.
That all the Roman Catholic Bishops of the world, for as many hundred years as
they have taken the usual oath before their consecration, have bin, and are
now, either Traitors, or perjured persons for taking it. So that for all this
time all general Councels were composed wholly of Traitors, or perjured persons.

6. That Popes as Popes, and Bishops, as Bishops, H^^ory 1. p. sect. 33. page 79
can not in conscience contribute or concur (by raising Troops, or any other
temporal ways) to defend the lives or rights of their lawful soueraigns
against Rebels; or endeavor to restore them to their Kingdoms and Dominions,
if possessed by usurpers and Tyrants.

7. That the supreme secular Princes can not grant to Clergy 1. part. of the 1.
Treatise page 417. sin.
men (their subjects) an exemption from the supreme secular judicature, or from
their supreme coerciue power. Whence must follow, that all Christian Princes,
have sinned in doing so, and the whole Catholic Church erred in commanding their
piety for granting those immunities.

8. That Page 79, cit.
no spiritual power, as such, can inflict upon any score a corporal punishment
for any misdemeanors whatsoever, particularly for heresy. So that the Kings of
England by virtue of their spiritual supremacy can not punish heresies. And as
supreme heads in temporal affairs, they can as little. Whence follows that
neither as spiritual, nor as temporal Heads they can punish heretics. This is
good news for you and the Blakloists Mr. Walsh.

9. That neither the Pope nor the Friar Walsh in his page 430. 1. part of the
first Treatise says, I do my self (as I confess I am bound) most Religiously
allow the ^anonization vencration and invocation of Saint Thomas of Canterbury,
and all three of him, as of a glerious Martyr too, and not with standing I
allow also all the mercies raported of him.
Generals of Regular Orders, can inflict any corporal punishment upon their
inferior Priests or Friars, for the greatest misdemeanors, or for writing such
follies, as these of yours are Mr. Walsh. This also may comfort you.

10. That notwithstanding supreme temporal Princes can not in conscience, or
reason, Page 429.
exempt Clerks from their supreme coerciue power, or Courts of secular
judicature, according to your 7. principle, yet God may and has wrought great
Miracles (in the case of S. Thomas of Canterbury) to confirm they may so exempt
them; and by consequence God, according to your principles, may encourage men
to sin, by miracles.

11. That God may in all like cases work Miracles to assure the Church, Page 429.
that a man who dies for defending the Church immunities, is a Saint, and
enjoyes his Divine sight, notwithstanding those immunities could not be
lawfully granted by Princes to the Church, and the man who dyed for maintaining
them, dyed maintaining an error.

12. F^iar Walsh his words ibid page 4^9.
One may be inuok't as a Martyr in the Church, (largely, or not so strictly,
yet properly still) if he dies for witnessing, or bearing testimony to a good
zeal, and great piety, and excellent conscience in being constant to a cause
which one esteems the more just, and generaly seems the more pious, for all he
knows, though it be not an euangelical trnth, and though perhaps too, he may be
deceived in the obiectiue truth of what he dies for.

This is your Creed Mr. Walsh, the twelve articles of your Remonstrant
Religion. By this last, all Jews, Turks, and heretics, that are pious in their
own way, and dye for their erroneous Tenets, are properly Martyrs, though not
so strictly; and God may work Miracles to confirm the belief of their bliss,
piety, and good conscience; and by consequence, all our Christian Miracles
signify nothing, as to the proof of the obiectiue truth of what we believe;
they only prove that we mean well in believing the Mysteries of Faith, though
falie in themselves only such Christian and Catholic Martyrs whose Miracles as
were wrought, say you, at the invocation of God (by the Saint himself, or by
any other) that God might be pleased by working such Miracles Page 429.
to evidence the justice of such a cause, do confirm the truth of the doctrine
professed by such a Martyr or Maintainer of it. For, if they had bin ^rought
so, the case would be clear enough (as to such who saw those Miracles, or to
whose knowledge authentik proofs of them di (sufficiently com) that enen the
obedience, truth, and justice of things in such a controversy, had bin on such
a Saint, or Martyr's side. But otherwise wrought, they can be no more but
Divine testimonies of his having wonderfully or extraordinarily ser^ed God
either ^n his life or death, or both, whether he was deceived or no in some
things. And besides, they can be no more, or at least on any rational ground
can not be said to be any more, than Divine testimonies of his being now with
God in glory. Do you say all this Mr Walsh, to make the world believe, that
Turks and Jews are now with God, or Saints in Gods glory? Or only to prove
that the Miracles wrought by God for S Thomas of Canterbury, may stand very
well with having no truth or justice on his side in his known controversy with
King Henry 2. And that the Churches ho^ouring and innoking him, as a true
Martyr for maintaining its immunities, is no argument, that he defended therein
justice or truth; because forsooth neither himself, nor any other did inuoke
God to work the Miracles to evidence the truth or justice of those immunities
S. Thomas maintained against the 16. or 12. laws or customs of Henry 2. which
were all in order to take away or diminish the Popes external spiritual
jurisdiction and supremacy, and to assert in the King a coerciue power over the
Clergy.

I pray Mr. Walsh, where do you find it declared necessary, that the Mysteries
of Christian faith be made credible or confirmed by a formal or express
invocation of God to work miracles for every one of them in particular? Christ
himself taught, that Miracles confirm any general doctrine preached by him who
works them; neither does he put that condition or caution of a particular and
formal invocation of God, without which you pretend the doctrine taught, or
sufferd for, may be false. But let that pass. What more express invocation or
declaration of God, can you desire for the truth and justice of S. Thomas of
Canterbury's doctrine, than that so notorious and so long depending a
controversy between the Church and state, should suspend all Christendom, there
being on the one side a powerful Monarch, who stood for the pretended right of
Kings, on the other but a poor banished subject, though a Bishop, to maintain
that of the Church? and that this poor man having bin murdered (by flattering
Courtiers) for maintaining the Church immunities, God should work so many, and
so undeniable Miracles, at his dead body and Tomb, that you are not only fore't
to confess they are true ones, but that King Henry 2. himself acknowledged S.
Thomas had the truth and justice on his side. And therefore to satisfy God and
the world, rather for his unjust contest against the Church, than for the
Saints murder (which the King neither intended nor desired) that great Monarch
did undergo those corporal punishments, which the Pope (as his spiritual
Pastor) commanded him to do; though you say he has (as spiritual Pastor) no
power to inflict upon your self, as much as a Disiplin, like that which the
Monks of Canterbury gave King Henry 2. We have related the principles of your
religion and Remonstrance, out of your own Alcoran (your great volum is no
better than Mahomet's Alcoran) now let us see what practices did flow from such
principles.

ANIMADVERSION 7. Of the practices of Friar Walsh his Remonstrant Church.
IF the Roman Catholic Church of these last 600. years, has fallen from the
ancient Christian principles, of loyalty due to temporal Princes, as Friar
Walsh pretends; and all the Roman Catholic Bishops are Tray^ors to their
Soueraigns, (by the oath they take at their consecration) we may rather wonder
God did not send sooner a holy man to reform these enormous errors, than that
after so long a time, he should at length send Saint Peter Walsh to do it, who
by his good example, as well as by his learned writings, does teach Catholic
Subjects that allegiance, from which they have bin withdrawn for these six last
Centuries Blessed be God, who albeit for our sins, he deferreth his mercies,
yet never fails to impart them sooner than we deserve. Nor indeed could this
age, so infamous for murders and rebellions against lawful Soueraigns, expect
so Apostolik a Reformer, as Peter Walsh has proved himself to be.

You complain Mr. Walsh (page 43 of your Preface to the Reader, as also page 50
and seqq.) that F. Peter TAlbot (the titular Ar^h^ishop of Dublin, and Ring
leader of the ^i^h Anti Remonstrants has perseented the said Remonstrants to
death, as far as in him lay; and that his answers to the petition you presented
against him, contained manifest untruths; you suggest also that he is thought
to be Author of the Dublin Libel, written against your Remonstrants directly,
but withal indirectly, or even principaly aiming at the most illustrous
personof his Grace the Duke of Ormond. Though I have not the honor to be
acquainted with that Prelat, yet his being one, and his writing against your
accusations in his own defense, mad me curious and concerned; and having
inquired after the Papers which past between you, I obtained a sight of them,
as also of that which you call the Dublin libel, which is termed by the Author
thereof, a Vin^ication against Friar Walsh his Calumnies, written by a Pastor of
the Diocese of Dublin.

If all be true, Mr. Walsh, that is there in alleged against you with
particular circumstances, you are the greatest Traitor and Rebel that breathes.
You are charged likewise (not by Peter Talbot nor in the answer to your
petition, nor in the Vindication or Dublin libel) but in another paper a part,
of murdering five poor English Soldiers of the garrison of Raroffy in the
County of Kildare, at the bridge of Iohnston, in the very beginning of the
Irish commotion; and that, with such barbarous breach of faith, or at least of
the law of arms, and incredible cruelty, that its to be admired, how any, who
values the name or blood of an englishman, can see you, much less profess to be
your friend, before you clear your-self of that accusation.

2. You are charged (in the Vindication) of being a most seditious Preacher, or
seducer of the people against their allegiance to the King, and the royal
authority residing in the Marquis of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, upon
the proclamation of the peace of 1646. you seconded one Doctor Enos, by
approving his infamous libel against the person and authority of his
Excellency. The drift and matter of the libel was, to dissuade the people from
admitting, or adhearing to that good peace, and from any agreement with the
said Matques of Ormond, because forsooth, he designed the Kings ruin, as well
as theirs. This calumny Enos pretended to prove (and you approved of all, by
commending the libel, and the Author in print, in the first leaf thereof)
because his Excellency would not conclude before the year 46. any peace with
the Irish, though he had positive and pressing commands from the King to do it;
but for three or four years delayed it by unprofitable and suspicious
cessations, in which time the King was subdued, and imprisoned, and therefore
his said Lieutenant might pretend and plead that service (or at least a
neutrality) to the Parliament, when they came to be Masters of all. And
besides, his Excellency observing that the Earl of Glamorgan had given the
Irish full satisfaction in the article of Religion (most insisted upon by them)
the Lord Lieutenant would not condescend thereunto, but rather declared against
it, imprisoned the Earl in the Castle of Dublin, and thereby dispersed 10000. men
ready to be shipped at water ford for his Maiesty's relief in England, and ruined
him by hindering that succor. This was the Subject of Enos and your libel Mr.
Walsh; the common sort of the Irish nation believed you and D. Enos, and by
your means conceived such hatred against their Countreyman the Duke of Ormond
(very popular before that time, for his extraction and good parts) that it
could never be rooted out of their hearts, nor put out of their heads, but that
he hated the royal family and his Country. This made his most loyal actions
and attempts (if not successful) be looked upon as so many plots to ruin the
King, and the only subjects then capable of helping him, the Irish. From hence
proceeded the Towns refusing to receive his garrisons, from hence the divisions
and diffidencies of the people, and Clergy; from hence the factions of Ormond
and Oneal, of old English and old Irish; from hence the Censures and
Declarations of the Bishops at Iameston against his grace; from hence all other
disorders, whereof you and Enos are more guilty than the Bishops, or the common
people.

Mr. Walsh, you may as well pretend this repetition and repr^hension of your
Knavery is writ against the Lord Duke of Ormond, as that the Dublin libel aimed
at the most Illustrious Person of his Grace. But I assure you, I ho^ or and
love my Lord Duke of Ormond and his family much more than you do. And if you
had had any respect for his Grace, you would not pin yourself upon him; nor
abuse the generosity of so noble and discerning a person, who would easily
perceive (if he had heard what others know) how ill Englishmen must take his
protecting and countenancing a suspected Murderer of innocent English, and one
who by the great hand he had in rejecting the peace of 46. and thereby vnsetling
and dividing Ireland, concurred very much to the Murder of the late King. This
countenancing of you is the greatest fault I think can be found in my Lord Duke
of Ormond. There is not any who considers his descent, and how his interest can
not be separated from that of the Crown, will entertain the least suspicion
against his Loyalty; some indeed admire how so wise a man should think, it the
interest of the Crown, to permit those who fought for it, to be destroyed, and
disinherited; and admire his want of memory in not remembering so many meriting
men, who lost all for the King, and stuck to his Excellency, as the Kings
Lieutenant, in all his misfortunes. He has forgot, they say, even those few,
whereof the Act of Parliament puts him in mind by special name, and therefore are
called the Nominees. But seeing his nearest relations complain, that they also
are forgot, we must not accuse him of any thing but want of memory; especialy
since he has forgot your treasons, Mr. Walsh, as that of your wresting the
Castle of Kilkenny out of the Kings and his own hands, and delivering it to the
Nuntius But to convince you, and all the world of the veneration I have for
that great Minister's loyalty, it is sufficient that notwithstanding I have
read D. Enos his libel, and your approbation of it, I shall still continue to
think my Lord Duke of Ormond one of the faithfullest Subjects our King has,
and the fittest to be employed in great affairs, provided he never belieues nor
trusts you, when he is satisfied that what is generaly reported, and believed
of you, is true. Mistake me not Mr. Walsh, I would not have his Grace advise to
put you to death, but would have you not trouble him, avoid the occasion, and
retire into your Convent. But I fear you had rather venture hanging, than do
that. If you be not guilty, in Gods name make out your innocence. The
vindication or Dublin libel says, you writ with your own hand that fatal
excommunication of the Popes Nuncius, whereby the Castle of Kilkenny (the key
then of Ireland) was put into the Nuntius his hands; and that with this
Excommunication you marched up to the Castle gate in your Franciscan habit, and
fixed it thereupon with the same hand which writ it. What I know certainly is,
that this Excommunication writ with your own hand, was delivered to my Lord
John Berkley when he was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and am confident he has
it still in his custody, as an evidence of your loyalty, and of your being a
fit man to preach it to others.

To these three particulars, of the murder of innocent English, of your
approving Enos his libel against the Lord Marquis of Ormond, and rejecting the
peace of 46. and of your wresting from the King, by an Excommunication of your
own hand writing, and fixing, the Castle and City of Kilkenny (and by
consequence the whole Kingdom of Ireland) I expected a clear and particular
answer in this great volume of yours, wherein you answer other objections of
less moment; truly seeing you named the Dublin libel, me thinks you ought rather
to have confuted it, at least briefly, than spend so much time and paper in
quoting the penalties, which the Canon and civil Law prescribe against
libellers. For the sake of F. Peter Talbot the titular Archbishop of Dublin
(say you page 51. of your Preface) and of his Accomplices, I took the pains to
quote these Laws and Canons. Me thinks, I say, you ought rather for the sake of
Friar Peter Walsh have confuted the pretended libel, then have quoted the
Laws, that punish Libellers; because none can be punished by such Laws,
before it be proved that the writing is a Libel. Indeed, Mr. Walsh, I was much
surprised to see you remit English Readers Page 50.
(for the confutation of these accusations) into your latin Hibernica, a book
not as yet printed, and when printed, not understood by the generality of the
English nation, which you ought to satisfy, and clear your-self from that
horrid aspersion of Treasons, and english innocent blood cast upon you; you
shall see how your titular Archbishop of Dublin does clear himself of what you
have printed to his disadvantage. I thought fit to give the publik a view of
the letter he writ for that purpose to a friend of his, who desired it to
satisfy himself and others.

SIR
I Esteem the concern you are pleased to have for my reputation, as much as I
do contemn Friar Walsh his calumnies. I send you a short and true confutation
of them, to satisfy your-self, and those friends you say are so desirous to see
it.

As to what he says of my being dismissed out of the Society, Page 528. and
Seqq.
and of his own knowledge of the cause thereof, and of the person that procured
it, you may believe him; because he has most reason of any body (except my
self) to know it, For, when F. Richard Barton then Prouincial of England, and
his So^ius F. Gray, offered to me in London very charitably (as from Father
General) my choice of Province and College of the Society, to live and teach
in, provided I would depart sudenly out of England, I confess I was too
positive in rejecting that offer; but they desiring me to take some time to
consider o^ it, I went to Peter Walsh (of whom I had then a good opinion) to be
advised by him, and told him sincerely, that neither desire of liberty, or
auersion from regular discipline enticed me to leave the Society, whereof I was a
member, and might continue, if I would; but that I was in circumstances, wherein
I thought I might do God, the King, and all who depended of him, more
considerable service, than I could in the Society, or ever again would be in my
own power, or of any other of my profession. That I only scrupled the promise I
had made (as all others do, who are not professed) of entering into the Society.

He answered, that he judged in his conscience I might without any scruple
leave the Society upon the aforesaid considerations; and as for the promise of
entering thereunto, that he had power to dispense therein, because it was but
votum simplex. And I was so simple as to take his word. So that you see I
dismissed my self, and upon what score, and by whose approbation. You see also
what Kind of man Friar Walsh is, who both in his great English volum, and in
his latin epistle to Harold, proclaims me an Apostat, and a Traitor to the
King, as acting against him in the year ^9, whereas none knew the contrary
better than Walsh himself.

I will briefly tell you the truth of all my Treasons. Upon Cromuells death,
the divisions of his Army, and the submission of his two sons, the
Commonwealths party was most like to preuail; a thing the Spanish Minister very
much app^^hended; whereupon they sent me to London to observe and obstruct (by
their friends) he Commonwealths men design, but would not permit me to acquaint
my own King with it, though indeed it was altogether for his interest. This
journey of mine from Brussells to England raised a iealousy in the King and his
Ministers, as also in the Caualeers in London, who thought I came in that
coniuncture, to further some ouertures of peace, which the Commonwealth party
had made to the Spanish Ministers. The Earl of Clarendon, who was very angry
with me upon the account of an imaginary Cardinal (I mean of an odd story
attributed to his Lordship) continualy inculcated to his Majesty, the prejudice
my negotiation might do his affairs. I satisfied as many of the Caualeers in
London as I thought I might trust with a secret, and assured them my endeavors
were, and always should be, to serve the King; and that there would be no
peace with the Commonwealth party. The same I assured Peter Walsh upon his
telling me he was going then to Brussells, and delivered to him a letter for my
Lord of Ormond, wherein I gave his Excellency the same assurances, I did the
London Caualeers, adding that a little time would prove me to be an honest man;
for that I was then upon my journey to the Conferences of the Pirenees, where
the general peace was to be concluded; wherein I hoped England would not be
included, notwithstanding the Ambassy and diligence of Sir Willian Locart to
have it comprehended in the Treaty

Arriving at Fuenterabra, I went straight to our Kings Residents house, and he
telling me that he had many aduertissements of my ill intentions of obstructing
his Majestyes affairs, desired me to assure him of the contrary by my word,
which he would take, because he thought I was an honest man, and knew that
those who writ against me to him, had bin formerly (in Flanders) mistaken, both
in my interest and intention of serving the King. I showed to the Kings
Resident all my papers, gave him an account of my design, assured him, that Don
Luis de Haro would give me credit (as to my relation of the Kings interest
being the only considerable in England) in case Don Alonso de Cardenu, and the
Marquis of Caracona (as was generaly feared) should represent it otherwise. He
finding the success did answer my undertaking, and his own expectation, gave
full satisfaction to the King of my fidelity and endeavors to serve him after
that his Majesty came to Fuenterabia. The same testimony was given to his
Majesty by Don Luis de Haro himself; and then the King was pleased to receive
me into his former grace and good opinion, as also my Lord of Ormond; who then
trusted me with his concerns in the Court of Spain; (a pension promised, but
never paid, until I sent him from Madrid three thousand eight hundred pounds
in one Bill, the sum due to him) Notwithstanding that my Lord of Clarendons
anger did still continue (he never forgave the story of the Cardinal, wherein I
had no hand) yet the King (after his happy restoration) was graciously pleased
(against the Lord Chancelors will) to name me one of the Queens Almoniers; but
his Lordship, and the Marquis of Sandy Ambassador of Portugal, found ways soon
after to deprive me of that honor. Here you have all my Treasons which Peter
Walsh has disguised and dispersed in print with mysterious words, and
malititious reflections, contrary to his own conscience, and the knowledge of
the whole Court.

As to his railing and saying (page 530.) that I went to his Chamber in London
an. 1644. to importune him to take off a certain nobleman (he means my Lord
Duke of Ormond) from hindering my being made a Bishop; the truth is, I went to
Friar Walsh his Chamber; but with greater indifferency than importunity; for I
showed him the letter I had then received from the Inter-Nun^ius of Flanders
(as I did to many others) offering me from Rome a Bishoprik; and I remember
very well, I told Peter Walsh, I valued not the offer so much as to accept of
it, without my Lord of Ormonds (then Lieutenant of Ireland) approbation; and
that I was very indifferent, whether he would allow of such a thing or no. And
indeed if I had not bin very indifferent, I would never have made use of Friar
Walsh his mediation, whose design then was known to be, to hinder all such
promotions until himself had bin named Archbishop of Dublin, And his Camerade
Caron Archbishop of Armagh. But I admire Walsh is not ashamed to touch this
passage; his Diabolycalenuy, and foolish ambition having hurried him
(immediately upon the sight of my Letter) to my Lord of Ormond, informing him of
his fears, that the Talbots had a plot to assasinat his Grace, as he had ground
to suspect by a word that fell from one of the Brothers, either Thomas or Peter
Talbot (he knew not which forsooth) and therefore as his Graces Servant, he came
to advertise him of it; whereupon ensued the imprisonment of three brothers,
which gave occasion of murmuring to many, and laughter to most, to see such a
noise made of what was found to be nothing else but the malice and plot of a
knauish friar, that endeuor'd to destroy a whole family, least one of them
might lie in his way, or hinder him from that miter he looked after. But a man
who had Sacrificed the preservation of his King and Country (by preaching and
publishing Excommunications against the peace of 46.) to the vain hopes of
obtaining a Bishoprik from his master the Nuncius, would make no scruple to
have three brothers put to death for a feigned conspiracy against the life of a
privy Councellor. What troubled me most in this intrigue, was the loss of Sir
Robert Talbots Estate, and of a considerable sum for ten years Agency, settled
by Act of Parliament, upon him, and the other Agents; into which was inserted,
I know not how an obscure odd kind of clause of preference of payment in favor
of Mr. Milo Power (as if he had bin a mor meriting and suffering Caualeer)
before Sir Robert Talbot and others both Agents, and Caualiers. And though
every one knows Mr. Milo Power to be a very worthy gentleman, and pleasant
company, its also well known, that though his affection to the Kings service
be as great as any man's, yet the possibility of showing it, or of loosing much
for it, was not comparable to the sufferings and services of those, who lost
the benefit of the Act upon his account. And indeed Sir Robert Talbot ought to
be pitied, because having bin employed by the publik, he neglected his own
particular concern, merely out of honor; least it should be thought (as it was
reported, but groundlesly, of others) that to secure his own estate he
concurred to the ruin of his Country.

As for Friar Walsh his no less ridiculous than malicious observation and
Comments upon the most R. Father Olina his letter to me, and my devotion and
respect to him, and the whole Society, I must own to the whole world, I should
be as ill a man, and as great a liar as Wash himself (and that is the worst can
be said of any man) if I did not esteem very much, and speak well of the
virtue and learning of that Society. Few can speak with more knowledge, and
none shall with less partiality. I have bin in most of their Provinces of
Europe, I have lived in their most famous Colleges, and taught in some: I never
was in any College or Community of theirs, where there was not one, or more, of
known eminent Sanctity; many of extraordinary virtue, and none, that I knew,
vicious; I always found their Superiors charitable and sincere, their
Procurators devout, their Professors humble, though learned; their young masters
of humanity, and students of Philosophy, or Divinity, very chaste; and if any
gave the least suspicion of being otherwise, he was presently dismissed. It is
my greatest admiration how so great a body, so generaly employed, and trusted
by the greatest Princes, so conversant in the world (according to their holy
institut) can savor so little of it, and live so innocently as they do; and even
forsake the best part of it (Europe) their many conueniencies, and relations
(which are illustrious) and banish themselves to Asia, Afrik, and America, upon
no other account but that of saving souls. In their Schools they teach not
those infamous doctrins, which that foulmouthd Friar Walsh asperseth their
Authors with, and says I do practice; but are very reserved in delivering any
larger opinion, even of the most famous writers; for fear men should abuse and
misapply their authority. This is the substance of what I always said, and
must say, if I will speak truth, of an Order wherein I have lived many years
with great content; and truly so innocently (through Gods grace, and their
example) that the greatest sin I can charge my self with, during my abode
amongst them, is the resolution I took of leaving them, though (perhaps
erroneously) I framed then a judgment, that the circumstances wherein I found
my self, did excuse it from being mortal.

But afterward reflecting with more maturity and less passion upon the
positiueness of that my resolution, notwithstanding the charitable offers of
the Superiors above mentioned, as soon as I knew I was designed to be made
Bishop, I offered to F. General Oliua, and F. Joseph Simons, then Prouincial of
England, to reenter into the Society; but they (thinking perhaps I could not be
of any great service, to it, and edified with my sincere resignation of being
directed in that particular as they judged best for my salvation) did of their
own accord, forward by favorable informations, and a better caracter than I
deserved, the promotion which the Court of Rome had designed for me. I having
notice of this ciuility, could do no less than write a letter of thanks to
Father General Oliua, and he answered me in those, usual vnsignificant and
general terms, wherewith Generals of Regular Orders congratulat new made
Prelates; and whereupon Peter Walsh makes very silly but malicious reflections, to
persuade the simpler sort of people, that my promotion was carried on by the
Jesuits, as if it had bin a buisness of great importance for their Order, or as
if their Order had bin hugely concerned in the discredit of his ridiculous
Remonstrance, which needed not be disgraced otherwise than by saying it was his.

As for my answer to his petition against me, presensented to the Council in
England, I could not excuse answering it, having bin commanded by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, where I was, to put in my answer, which
containd nothing but truth; and so it appeared to that honorable Board, which
declared me innocent. It was no other, but that I never persecuted, him nor any
of his seven Friars Remonstrants, in whose behalf he petitioned; neither did I,
nor could I excommunicat any Regulars, who (by the Roman Canons) are exempted
from the Ordinarys jurisdiction; neither indeed did their own regular Superiors
punish them for signing the Remonstrance, but for cheating the people of money,
and for exacting it from the Kings Subjects by virtue of a counterfeit
commission from the Pope. I did afterward tell some of the privy Counselors,
and others, that I was surprised to see such criminal persons countenanc't in
prescribing ruler of loyalty to men whose families (an well old Irish, as old
english) had for these 500. years past, stuck (according to duty) to the Crown
of England, and themselves had suffered so particularly upon the same account.
That as to my own family the Nuncius, and his Dean of Fermo endeavored to have
myself banished out of Rome, as an Ormonian; that Sir Robert Talbots houses and
Tenants were destroyed by the Nuncius party in Ireland, his command taken from
him, himself imprisoned, as having bin the only man in Ireland (even of the
Ormonian party) who would not give his voto in a subsequent general Assembly
for rejecting the peace of 46. notwithstanding that General Oneals Army was at
hand, and the Bishop of Clogher enraged at his speeches for the Assemblies
reassuming the same peace, which Peter Walsh had so disloyaly cried down from
pulpit and press, by commending so seasonably for the Nuncius, and so
seditiously against the Kings interest and safety, D. Enos his libel against
that peace, and the proceedings of my Lord of Ormond.

But what is most falsely asserted by Peter Walsh is, that in my answer I did
give a touch of the murder he is charged with. I touched not any such thing, I
am sure I did not intend to be his Accuser in any cause of blood, and I hindered
others from accusing him, as my Brother John Talbot had also don; nay I had him
advertised of his danger (by a friend of his own) as soon as Father Cauenagh,
and Father Bremingham attested the murder at Castleton in presence of my Lord
Dongan, Mr. Chasles White of Leixslip, my self, and others; For, though his
barbarous inhuman cruelty (if what is said of him be true) deserves ten
thousand deaths, yet I would not for all the world concur to it. The thanks
he gave me for letting him know his danger (to the end he might retire to his
Convent, and do penance for his sins) was, to misinforme the honorable House
of commons and the committee of Religion, by one of the two Mr. Warnhams
(commonly known by the name of Flahertys Varnham) that I did most impudently
exercise papal jurisdiction in Ireland, by excommunicating and censuring his
Majesty's most loyal Subjects for subscribing to the Remonstrance. And though
this was known in Ireland to be a fable, yet Mr. Varnham, and some others of
Friar Walsh his friends, auerring it to be very true, I have sufferd much upon
that account; and that infamous Friar, though a known Traitor to God and the
King, laughed in his sleeue, after abusing the Parliament with notoriously false
informations; and insults for having bin so succesfull in exasperating the
Caualeer party against one who endeauored to serve many of them in their exile
abroad; as some of them since were pleased to teftify, though too late for my
relief, and redress of the injury don to me.

My buisness is not to exaggerat this man's misdemeanors, but rather to warn him
once more of his danger, and advise him not to be so publik in London,
frequenting great Prelates and Noblemens houses, upon whom he must needs draw
inconueniencies, if he does not clear himself of treasons and murders better
then by saying in his great english Tome of Irish Rapsody, that all these
accusations are lies, or libels of the titular Archbishop of Dublin, or of his
friends; and then tell his Readers he will vindicat himself in his latin Irish
work. Me thinks he might have reserved some of his unnecessary uncouth speeches,
and tedious repetitions, for that work; and in lieu thereof clear himself of
those foul aspersions, at least in a parentesis; some of his, being long enough
to weary any patient Reader, and to justify any honest man. This I hope is
enough to vindicat me from Peter Walsh his calumnies, which do not much trouble
me, it being the greatest honor of an honest man, to be raild at by an heretik.
I am

Your most obliged Servant PETER TALBOT.


Mr. Walsh, I have bin assured by credible persons, that what this Prelat says
here of you and himself, is very true; and that a man would be laughed at in
Ireland (where these things happened) if he questioned so notorious matters of
fact, whereof there are yet living many legal witnesses. This supposed I must
needs blame you for printing such lies to discredit a Bishop, or at least for
not proving what you say of him by more credible arguments than the bare
assertion of your-self in your own cause. If you, being but a private person,
and a petty Friar, say (page 51. of your Preface) that the Author of the Dublin
libel (for writing against you some pretended untruths) ought by the civil laws
to be put to death; and by the Canon of Pope Adrian, be stripped naked, and whipped
with scourges, if he can not prove the truth of the particulars of his libel;
what will the world say of you, for writing manifest untruths of an Archbishop?
Especialy when you can not prove that he is the Author, or that you are injured
by that Dublin libel, as you call it; and for want of an answer to the
particulars therein alleged against you, remit your english Reader to a latin
Irish work, not yet composed, not ever like to be printed? I am troubled Mr.
Walsh, at this malicious folly of yours. But patience. I will now consider how
your Remonstrant Church came to fail and fall.

ANIMADVERSION 8. How the Protestants who had formerly a good opinion of Friar
Walsh his Remonstrant Church came at length to alter it, and be fully conuinc't
that both he and his Remonsttant Churchmen are Cheats.
MR. Walsh, you complain very much (page 577. and seq. of the second part of
your first long Treatise) that the Anti Remonstrants notwithstanding their
opposition against you, lost nothing either of liberty, or other benefits or
fanors at home from the Civil Magistrate, from the Lord Lieutenant, or Kings
Majesty, or his Court, Council, or Parliament; being equal in all such (for any
material thing) to the Remonstrants: and on the other side were sure of all
even extraordinary favors etc. from their own Church, and from the Conrt of
Rome abroad, while the Remonstrants were sure of nothing from either, but
slight from the one, and extreme persecution from the other. And these fate
last years, from 1667. to the end of the present year 1672 have given
sufficient arguments of both the one and the other. During which time, those
poor Remonsirants had nothing to ball^nce all their sufferings, but the bare
satisfaction of conscience, to be slighted so by their friends, and persecuted
so by their Ennemies, for professing and performing their duty to the King,
atterding to the law of God.

This is a very sad story Mr. Walsh, but the Dublin libel (as you call it)
tells you an other quite contrary; and you know it to be true; nay you give a
hint of it in the page 3. of your Preface to the Catholics (which needed an
other Preface, itself being a large book.) There you say, that the
Anti-Remonstrants persecuted your (holy) Church in a most surious manner with
all the vilest arts of malicious Cabals, Conspiraties, Plots, libels, and an
Impostor Commissary and a forged Commission. What Is that Mr. Walsh? An Impostor
Commissary! A forged Commission! I pray explain yourself. Did the Anti
Remonstrants persecute your Remonstrance and Church by an Impostor Commissary
and a forged Commission? did the court of Rome, send such a person, and give
him such a commission? If so, he was no Impostor. Well: I see those Romans are
strange men. Is it possible they could be so ill natured as to persuade a poor
Friar to play the Impostor? or that he would be persuade to play the fool and
knave so egregiously, merely to undermine your Remonstrant Church? Good God, in
what a great mistake has the world bin these 9. or ten years. Truly Mr. Walsh,
it is the persuasion of all England, Ireland, France, and Italy, that you and
the Impostor Commissary agreed to persecute the Roman Catholic Clergy; and
understood one an other so well, that you combined to cheat the Kings Subjects
of money, and to establish the Remonstrant Church by virtue of the same
imposture, and forged Commission, whereby your visitators and Collectors raised
good sums for the Commissary Apostolyks occasions and expense.

This common persuasion seems to be well grounded. 1. You could not be ignorant
the Commissary was an Impostor, because he had no other Commission to show for
his authority over all the Clergy of Ireland, both secular and regular, but a
copy of the pretended Original; and that so little authentik, that to gain it
credit, you got the unwary Bi^hop of Ardagh to confirm it as a true one 2. the
Commissary had no instructions; a thing unusual and unheard of in any person
authorized with such an employment. But this defect you supplied, by drawing
instructions for his visitators (which are extant of your own hands writing)
all which tended to the establishment of your Remonstrant Church. And these
instructions written with your own hand Mr. Walst, shall be produced whenever
you please. So that if you did not forge the Commission, you drew for the
Commissarys Instructions. 3. You knew very well, it was not a likely thing that
the Court of Rome would give so ample a power to an ordinary Friar, over
Bishops, and all regular Superiors. 4. When the It suits made difficulty to
submit to your Impostor Commissary, standing upon the Privileges of their
Order, you reprehended them severely, and gave God thanks that your-self was so
devoted to the Pope, as not to dispute his Commissaries authority, when they,
who by a peculiar vow are tied to obey his Holiness, were refractory; and upon
this, you, and by your example the rest kneeld down, craving the Impostor
Commissaries benediction, and owning his authority. 5. He was wholly directed by
you, still in your company; he was your old acquaintance, and of your own
Order. How is it then possible, so remarkable an imposture as this, could be
conceald from a man so curious and corcern'd as you were in this intrigue? Be
not so filly Mr. Walsh, as to fancy you can impose upon the world that you went
not halfs in a cheat, your-self ma^ag'd from first to last.

You have no reason to say that during this time, the poor Remonstrants had
nothing to balance all their sufferings but the bare sati, sactten of
conscience to be slighted by their friends and persecuted by their Fnnemies,
for proses^ing and perso^ming their duty to the King, according to the law of
God. Mr. Walsh, call you suffering, to have a Commissary cum plenitudine
potestatis at your command? To see your dearest Remonstrants made his
Visitators and Collectors, taxing and raising moneys? and that, with Censures
and Excommunications against such as refused or delayed punctual payment? Call
you suffering, to see these your spiritual Children return home to you with
money in their purses, and treat you and your Commissary, very splendidly at
the sign of the Harp, and Croun in Dublin, almost every night, with good Cheer,
dancing, and Danes, or Irish Cronans; especialy that famous Macquillemone;
which was styled in a letter to Rome, Cantio barbara and aggrestu; and called
by the Soldiors of the Guards in Dublin (hearing it every night at midnight)
Friar Walsh, and Friar N. singing of Psalms? Call you suffering to see your
grave Remonstrants dance Giggs and Country dances, to recreat your-self and
the Commissary, who was as ready and nimble at it, as any of his Collectors?
but indeed its said, you danced with a better grace than any of the Company.
Call you suffering, that your Remonstrants in their visitations and exactions
of money, were so well horst as to run races, and that your Saint N. should
excommunicat and pursue the honest Priest Philip Draycot, and cry ^^^d the N.
because he would not submit to his authority and tax? Call you suffering, that
the rest of your Collectors should do the like, and make you and the Commissary
merry with telling stories of the frights, they put the simple people into, and
of the sums they extorted from them? None durst complain of these exactions,
the Collectors pretending your power and favor with the government was so
great, as to wink at these your most illegal proceedings.

These were your sufferings and persecutions Mr. Walsh. But you know
persecution if not suffered for justice, is not meritorious. You say your
Remonstrant Church suffered this great persecution, for professing and
performing their duty to the King, according to the law of God. I pray is it a
duty to the King according to the law of God, to impose upon and leuy from his
Subjects money by the Popes authority, either counterfeit or real? We
Anti-Remonstrants maintain the Pope has no such power nor authority. Your
Remonstrants maintain he has, as appears by your Excommunications and
suspensions yet extant. Js this your duty to the King? Is this according to the
law of God? Is this a bare satisfaction of conscience for professing and
performing your duty? Complain not then Mr. Walsh, that you and your
Remonstrant Church was slighted by the King, by the Council, by the
Parliaments, and Lords Lieutenants. They clearly perceived ye were but a
company of Cheats, that pretended loyalty, and practiced treason; to be for the
King, and ruined his Subjects by the Popes pretended authority.

Besides Mr. Walsh, you cheated my Lord Duke of Ormond as well in the beginning
as in the whole progress of your Remonstrance. You made his grace believe, that
you were commissioned and had power to present that Formulary to his Majesty,
and to him, in the name of the Clergy of Ireland, both secular and regular; and
yet the power you had, was but from very few; and that power was in order to
obtain for the Clergy the benefit of the peace 1648. (as appears by their
instrument page 5. of your History) whereof one atticle is, there should not be
tendered any other oath, or Formulary of Allegiance to them, but one which is
set down in the same articles, to which your Remonstrance is manifestly
opposite. Moreover you confess page 6. that you were soundly checked by his
Grace (as you expected) for daring to retain such an instrument from such men;
that is, men, as to the generality and chief of them, formerly and lately too
so caractered as they were for being in their indignations and carriage very
much disaffected to his Majesty's interests, and very obnoxious to the Laws.
You see Mr. Walsh, what thanks such buisy Friars as you get, for intermedling
in aflairs, whether Ministers of state, and the people concerned will or no. On
the other side you cheated the Irish Clergy and Gentry, making the Clergy
believe, they should have liberty to exercise their functions; and the Gentry
that they should be restored to their estates, if they signed your
Remonstrance. I pray Mr. Wash, how many of the 95. noblemen and Gentlemen that
subscribed, are restored to their Estates by your Remonstrance? name at least
one, who has bin the better for his subscription? A man would think that my
Lord of Iueaghs extraction, innocence, and merit; his breaking General Oneales
Army; his raising and loosing two or three Regiments in the Kings service; his
venturing himself, and his nearest relations in the towns besieged by Cromu^ll;
his constant following his Majesty's person and fortune in exile, needed no
further remonstrance of his loyalty; but howeuer, that nothing might be
objected against him, he signed yours; and yet is nothing the nearer his
Estate. I know you pressed my Lord Duke of Ormond very much in Sir Robert
Talbots behalf, saying it would be a great scandal, if the only gentleman in
Ireland, who never would reject the peace of 46. and sufferd so much upon that
account, were not restored to his Estate, and yet you see he was, and his son
is, in the same condition with the rest of your subscribers.

But the most damnable cheat of all Mr. Walsh, is, that you made the
subscribers believe, your Remonstrance was only a recognition of his Majesty's
supreme temporal authority and right to his Kingdoms; but now you declare that
it asserts, all which the oath of Supremacy does, and that Roman Catholics are
rash and obstinat (and by consequence commit a sin) in denying to take the oath
of supremacy, whereof (as was well known to such as refused to subscribe) this
your Remonstrance contains the substance; which is, that temporal Soueraigns
may by their own sole authority govern the Church, and make laws in
Ecclesiastical matters, even of Faith. To prove this and the lawfullness of
your Remonstrance, renouncing all those papalin or popish recusants doctrins,
against which the oath of supremacy was made, and is tendered, is the subject
and scope of this great Tome of yours: This is your own ingenious confession;
these your endeavors since the year 61. You should have told this in the
beginning to the Layty, and to such of the Clergy as understood not your design
and doctrine. Now that they all know both, you must not admire, if even the
subscribers detest you as a betrayer of their souls, as well as of the Kings
interest, not only by your former actions, but now also by your books and
writings, inculcating to all Bishops and other Churchmen, that they commit a
sin, if, (as Churchmen) they concur and contribute with their revenues, or any
other corporal means, to preserve their King, or to restore him, if God should,
for our sins, permit an other revolution, and that his right were possessed by
a rebel or Tyrant. Is this Christian or Catholic doctrine? Has the spiritual
calling or caracter of a Bishop, or of a Clergy man, such antipathy with the
duty of a subject, and of spiritual Father, that a Bishop or Priest must sin,
if either of them apply his temporal goods to the support of his lawful
Prince? You may as well maintain, that the caracter of Baptism, or
Christianity, must make it a sin (in lay subjects) to defend or restore their
lawful Soueraign; for Christianity is as solemn and spiritual a profession of
following Christ's doctrine, as Episcopacy Friar Walsh is half a Blakloist.
and Priestod is. I see Mr. Walsh, you are half a Blakloist: Blaklow and you
agree in saying, that Subjects can not in conscience concur to restore a
dispossessed lawful soueraign; but you say it only of the Clergy; he, of all.
You ground your error upon the spirituality, and supernaturality of the
Clergyes caracter; Blaklow upon the nature of man; which (as that heretical
Traitor pretends in his book of Obedience and Government) inclines him
rationaly, and obliges him to prefer his quiet and share of the human
conueniencies of an usurped government before the Divine right which hereditary
Soueraigns have to be temporal Governors (under God) of their Subjects, and the
obligation Subjects have to venture their lives and fortunes to assert that
right, and restore their lawful Soueraigns in case they should be disposest
thereof. Its no more a meruail to me, that the Sea Doctor Ceorge Leyburns
Apology.
pretended Dean and Chapter of England, which commended Blaklows doctrine as
eminent, after he had writ this destructive Tenet, did also commend your
Remonstrance. But I admire, you should boast so much (page 55.) of their
approbation, as to print, their Dean's letter to the Bishop of Dromore, for an
evidence thereof. Consider, what credit can such men's approbation as cry up
Blaklows condemned doctrine and books, for eminent, be to yours? I am sure such
principles as these, are not to be tolerated either in the Church, or
commonwealth.

Cease then to complain, and to wonder Mr. Walsh, that our King, our
Parliaments, our privy Counselors, and the Lords Lieutenants of Ireland,
slight a Remonstrance and doctrine which does inculcat or infer so unchristian
Tenets as yours, so destructive to Monarchy and morality, so incontinent with
the safety of Soueraigns, and the duty of Subjects. What think you Mr. Walsh of
the Clergy of France? Do they sin when every fifth or third year in their
Assemblies they voluntarily tax themselves, and give so considerable sums to
their King for his occasious? They do not give this help as temporal Peers or
Barons of the Realm, but as Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Curats etc. Do they sin, I
say, in doing this? Does the Spanish Clergy sin in giving their Milliones
voluntarily, and as a Clergy, to their King? Does the Pope sin for concurring
as Pope with them by Bull or license for these donations? If your Remonstrant
Church had com to that perfection you flattered yourself with, sure your Clergy
would have bin very rich, for they must not have given voluntarily as Bishops
one penny of their Revenues to the King, to defend himself or the Kingdom
against Rebels, or foreign Inuaders. But if an Impostor Commissary comes, he
way by a forged commission and the Popes authority impose a tax upon the Kings
Subjects, and leuy it by Excommunications and Censures. Js your loyal
Formulary, and Reformation of the Roman Catholic Church of these last 600.
years com to this Mr. Walsh? Who is the Traitor, who is the heretik? You, for
your Remonstrance, or all the Bishops in the world for taking the usual oath at
their Consecrations? For shame, Mr. Walsh, repent, retract, and retire to your
Convent, and never write more of matters you understand not. But before you
retire, I will solue a very curious and material question, put by yourself in
the page 579. of the second part of your first Treatise.

But if any demand (says Friar Walsh sect. 2. page 579) how it came to p^ss,
that in the year 1648. there was so great and numerous a party of the Roman
Catholic Clergimen of Ireland, who together with Father Peter Walsh, appeared
so realy, zealously, constantly, and successfully too, for the King against the
Nun^ios Censures of Excommunication and Interdict, that they quite worsted the
other side, and preuaild, even for and to the actual reduction of the
Consederates to an absolute submission to the King and his Lieutenant in that
Kingdom; and yet now since his Majeslyes happy restoration, sixty nine only of
a great body of 200. Clergymen at home in Ireland, should be found to appear
professing so their Allegiance to his Majesty? And yet also these very few so
professing to be therefore, and only therefore, by their Adversaries without any
fear or shame opposed, yea to their power, persecuted?

This is, Mr. Walsh, a rational doubt, if rightly proposed. You mistake the
question; it ought to be this. How coms it to pass that of the great and
numerous body of the loyal Irish Catholic Clergy, that approved themselves so
in the occasion of trial, an, 1648. there should be found so many as 69. an.
1662. that subscribed to Peter Walsh his Remonstrance, so destructive to the
Kings safety, right and authority, as he has bin demonstrated? Now I will
solue this question.

You know Mr. Walsh when ambitious and irregular Friars, who aspire to
Bishopriks, and hate the poverty and discipline of their institute, want friends
and money, they invent twenty devices to compass both. Now, Redmund Caron and
you, were resolved to be Bishops, the one of Armagh, the other of Dublin. You
despar'd of obtaining Miters by your merit, and the ordinary ways; therefore
you resolved to fright the Court of Rome into it by setting up this your
Remonstrance; and including yourselues into ecclesiastical and state affairs;
you importuned two great Ministers of state to countenance the pressing of your
Formulary, upon the Irish Clergy and Gentry, which had so faithfully served and
followed the King in the worst of times, by shedding their blood and spending
their Estates in his quarrel, that they needed not any paper instrument to
manifest or confirm their loyalty. And though the Ministers knew this very
well, and understood as well that it was not any good zeal, but your ambition
and couetousness, which moved Caron and you to buisy yourselues in a matter
very improper for your calling, and much above your capacities; yet for reasons
best known to themselves, and common to all statesmen, they were content to
let two such fellows as you, preach and press a Formulary, which they foresaw
would divide the Catholics amongst themselves, discredit their Religion, and
give the government the color and advantage of excluding from their Estates
many meriting gentlemen, for not professing that allegiance, which learned
Friars of their own persuasion, maintained to be absolutely necessary in a
faithful Subject: So that your Remonstrance served to exclude many honest men
from their right, but never restored any to his inheritance; though many (foold
by you and Caron) put their hands to it in hopes of receiving thereby the
benefit of the peace 48.

As for your 69. Clergymen that subscribed the Remonstrance, yourself does
confess (page 578. part. 2.1. Treat) Some fell off immediately after their
signing in the year 1662. -- Others were content only to have signed it, like
so many Nicodemus de nocte; not acknowledging amongst the Opposers what they
had don. Some, who albeit they had sufficient judgment to guide themselves, or
their own personal duty in order to themselves alone; yet had not those
abilities either to persuade or satisfy others. Finaly there was not wanting
amonst them a false and treacherous troublesome and impudent Brother etc. who
discovered all might do them prejudice, and betray, them too wherein soever he
might.

I see Mr. Walsh, that of your 69. Ecclesiastical subscribers, some fell off
immediately; others durst not own their subscription; others knew not how to
justify it; and one false Brother betrayed your Counsels or cheats. The matter
is wors than I thought. I pray how many able constant subscribers are there
left in your Remonstrant Church? When you petitioned the King and Council in
its behalf against the titular Archbishop of Dublin, you could name but seven;
and four of the seven fell off then: and I believe the other two have don the
same since. What? A Church, and none but one Friar Walsh to profess its Faith?
Is AntiChrist com? Even in his time the Professors of Christianity will be more
then one. One makes no Congregation, and by consequence no Church. But you say
(page 577.) the deceased Bishop of Dromore, Oliner Darcy, was one. What then?
Does his authority weigh more than that of all the Bishops who condemn your
Remonstrance?

I abstain as much as I can from censuring the dead; but I can not well in this
occasion, you relying so much upon this deceased Bishops authority, who was the
only that subscribed to your Remonstrance. This obliges me to diminish a little
his credit. Father John Talbot, of whom you said when he dyed (as if it were a
rarity, or kind of miracle) There lies one honest Jesuit, assured me, that
after his Brother Sir Robert Talbot had with the rest of the Commissioners, at
length, concluded with my Lord of Ormond the peace of 1646. Sir Robert went in
great have from Dublin to Conaght, where General Presion then was with his
Army, and persuaded that General to have the peace proclaimed in the head of
the same. A little after, the Nuntius began to treat with you, and Friar Oliner
Darcy (before he was Bishop of Dromore) who was General Preston's Ghostly
Father; and upon that score could do much with him. Sir Robert Talbot having
bin made Prisoner for his zeal to the Kings service, and to that peace, charged
his Brother John Talbot, to keep still near General Preston, to the end he
might keep him constant to the peace; for that he feared Friar Oliver Darcy
(upon the hopes which were given him of a Bishoprik) would make the General
alter his resolution. F. John Talbot did so, and having certain intelligence
that Friar Darcy had undertaken to the Nuncius to gain Preston to his party, he
ask't the General (at Lucan) whether he was still constant to the resolution he
had taken of reassuming and adhering to the peace of 46. as he had lately
promised to my Lord of Ormond. He said he was, and the rather because Friar
Oliver Darcy told him, he ought to be so. Father John replied, my Lord, will
you give me your word, and hand, to continue so, though Father Darcy should
advise you to the contrary? The General laughed at the improbability of such a
thing. But the weak, though honest General, fell from his resolution by the
Friars importunity, who had bin gained by the Nuncius; and upon this Friar
Oliver Darcy was made Bishop of Dramore.

Now I will tell you Mr. Walsh, how he came to be the chief subscriber of your
Remonstrance. Be not startled; do not think I am a witch; there are hundreds
can tell you as well as I, though you make it a secret. This poor Bishop had
the misfortune to hinder his Brother Sir I^mes Darcy from doing his duty of
following the King into Flanders with the Duke of yorks Regiment (which he
commanded) when he received Orders to take his pass, as the other Colonells
did. Hereby the Bishop incurred his Kings displeasure, and ruined the fortune
of his Brother, a very loyal worthy gentleman, and a good Commander. After the
Kings happy restoration, this undutiful carriage of the Bishop was not forgot
at whitehall; and he not knowing how to live in France, having also a desire to
return to his own Country, writ to you Mr. Walsh, that he would do any thing
you would have him do, so he might be permitted to return and live at home. A
large offer, and an argument of a large conscience, in circumstances wherein he
knew you wanted and sought (at this very time) a Bishop to head your vpstart
Church. You took him at his word, and he set his hand to to your Remonstrance.
Whether he repented, or no, at his death, I know not, but I am sure Friar
Redmund Caron, whom you canonize for a Saint (page 759.) ought to have
retracted the doctrine of his Remonstrantia Hibernorum, which was stuff't with
so notorious and palpable falsifications, that he can not be presumed to have
bin ignorant of them. But his last advice and Adieu to you is sad, and
remarkable; for, he declared (as you say page 760.) That you were bound in
conscience to prosecute still, even after his death, that matter (of the
Remonstrance) and continue the defense or advancement of that doctrine, which in
his life time you had for so many years, and notwithstanding so much
contradiction, maintained.

You do a great injury, Mr. Walsh, to the memory and merit of that Illustrious
and Catholic Prelat, Thomas Dease, quondam Bishop of Mead, in joining him (in
the same page) with Caron, as approving at his death of your Remonstrance, and
doctrine. What if he did approve of the book of Queries? Was there any thought
or knowledge then of your Remonstrance? Is there any thing in that book of
Queries, asserting a spiritual supremacy in Princes, or denying it to the Pope?
Does it say that Secular Princes by their own sole authority may govern the
Church, and make Ecclesiastical laws, even in matter of Faith? Does it
maintain that Catholics both rashly and obstinatly deny to take the oath of
Supremacy, and by consequence commit a sin for not taking it? Does it say the
General Counsels of Ephesus and Calcedon gave as much to temporal Princes, and
as little to the Pope of spiritual authority, as the oath of Supremacy does?
Does it say that some Catholics hold General Counsels are fallible? Where will
you find in the book of Queries, that the Roman Catholic Church has erred
enormously in its principles and practices these last 600. years, and that all
the Bishops thereof, are either Traitors to their Princes, or perjured to the
Pope in taking the usual oath at their consecration? Does the book of Queries
teach that if Bishops, as Bishops, help their Soueraigns with money or arms
against Rebels or Usurpers, they offend God? As also that temporal Soueraings
offend God in exempting the Clergy from their Secular Supreme Courts? Does the
book of Queries teach that God may work Miracles to confirm a falsehood, or at
least the Sanctity of a man who has a good intention and zeal in maintaining
it or dying for it, thinking it to be a truth? Or that a man who dies so for
maintaining an error, is properly (though not strictly) a Martyr? Or that the
whole Church, when it celebrats the feast of a Saint as (properly and strictly)
a Martvr, may be mistaken in declaring and believing him such a Martyr, though
not in believing him a Saint in Heaven? All this you maintain (in Saint Thomas
of Canterberies case) as necessary consequences flowing from the doctrine of
your Remonstrance. Did Bishop Thomas Dease, nay did Caron himself, defend these
heresies? The book of Queries only asserted the lawfullness of making peace and
Confederacies with Protestants, and that the Popes Nuncius could not validly
excommunicat the Irish Catholics for doing so; and that it was lawful to
appeal to the Pope in those circumstances, and that the said Appeal did suspend
the Nuncius Censures. No learned Catholic denies this doctrine. But not one
Catholic in the world does or can maintain your doctrines now mentioned, and
therefore you are not only heretik, but an Impostor, pretending that they who
opposed the Nuntius his Censures and practices in Ireland, were your
Remonstrants.

ANIMADVERSION 9. Whether temporal Soueraigns can exempt from their Supreme
coerciue power the Clergy of their Dominions?
THAT they have don so de facto, is evident by the laws and practice of all
Christian Emperors and Kings, especialy in England, ever since Christianity
flourished. But what is that to the purpose, if Friar Walsh say they could not de
iure, or in conscience? Pardon me, it is something. For, though Friar Walsh his
authority be very great, (Especialy when he has Barclay the Poet, or Romantik
writer, to back him) yet I hope the persuasion and practice of the whole
Catholic Church, the belief of all Christian Princes, and Prelates, for so many
hundred years, will weigh more than the opinion of a Romantik Poet, or a
Remonstrant Friar. Excuse then, I pray, Mr. Walsh, poor Cardinal Belarmin
(whose ignorance you so much pity) for being mightily startled at this
position of yours and Barklay's, The temporal Friar Walsh 1. part. of his first
Treatise page 267 and Seq.
Princes themselves, how otherwise Supreme soever, could not, can not by any
law, right, authority, or power given them by God, or man, exempt from
themselves, that is, from their own Supreme Civil, and even coerciue power, the
Clergy men of their Dominions.

Sure you must needs have a very clear demonstration for this Tenet, that
forces you to hold it being so contrary to the doctrine and practice of the
Church. You say you have. Out with it then, Mr. Walsh, and let not the
Faithful be any longer foold. Good Reader, be attentive; it is a profound acute
argument, you will find it page 271. cit. in these words. Whosoever have, and
continue any office, which essentially inuolues a power Supreme, both directive
and coerciue, of all Clerks within their Dominions, may not deuest themselves
of the power of directing and coercing the same Clerks, unless they do withal
deuest themselves of that office as toward the self same Clerks. Because they
can not deuest themselves of the essence of that which they hold still; this
arguing a plain contradiction. But the Office of Kings inuolues a power
supreme, both directive and coerciue of all Clerks within their Dominions. Ergo.

The Minor you must prove Mr. Walsh, I have already don that (says he) and at
large, by very natural reason. I find none but that desinition of a King, for
which you quote your great claslik Author Almainus de sup. potest etc. cap. 5.
thus. Aliquem esie Regem nihil aliud est, quam habere Superioritatem erga
subditos, and in subditis esse obligationem pariendi Regi. etc. This is all you
set down of Almainus his definition, and I have no exception against it, though
I have against your sincerity in delivering the sense of it in English. The
true translation of it is this, One to be a King; is nothing else than to haus
Superiority toward Subjects, and that in Subjects there be an obligation of
obeying the King. This you translate thus, One to be a King is nothing else but
to have a politik both directive and coerciue power of Superiority over all the
people of his Dominions; and that consequently there be obligation answerable
on the same people as Subjects to obey him. These are your words page 271. Take
my humble advice Mr. Walsh, and let it be a general rule to you her after;
never falsify, never add words to a definition, or Author, whereupon you build
the force of your argument; especialy in a matter of so great importance as
this: For, if you do, most men will be tempted to say you are a knave; and if
your dispute be against the doctrine and practice of the Church, they will add,
you are so obstinat, that though you see the weakness of your cause, you had
rather support it against the Church by corrupting Authors, and abusing
illiterat Readers, than embrace and declare the truth.

Our Controversy with you, Mr. Walsh, is reduced to this point, whether a King
deuests himself of his Kingship, when he grants to the Clergy, his own
Subjects, an exemption from his Supreme coerciue power, or from being cited or
punished for crimes by his Secular Supreme Courts of Judicature; but withal
leaves them to be cited and punished by Bishops, or some other Spiritual power;
which in cases of Treason, degrades the delinquent and delivers him over to the
Secular Courts? You say, a King does deuest himself of his Kingship by granting
such a privilege to the Clergy. And you prove it by the definition of Kingship.
But not finding in the definition of Kingship any mention of coercire power, as
if it were essential to a King not to dispense in it, or exempt a Subject from
it, you thrust into the desinition the word coerciue power, and very clearly
conclude from your own forgery that if a King does exempt any Subjects from it,
he does unking himself as to them, and makes them no Subjects. To be a King Mr.
Walsh, as your own friend Almain tells you, is to have a Superiority over
Subjects, and Subjects to have an obligation of obeying their King. Both are
consistent with such an exemption from the supreme coerciue secular power as
the Clergy pretends to.

You say no. Why not? page 269. Because the point of Lording, commanding,
judging; punishing, at least in some cases, is the very essence of principality;
so that the Prince can not remit, or quit this, and withal continue Prince.
Certainly you are mistaken. Do you believe Mr. Walsh, that God is a Soueraign
Prince or Lord of his Angels and Saints in Heaven? This is no impertinent
question to one of your principles. If God then be a Soueraign Prince or Lord
of his blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven, without doubt Sovereignty may well
stand with an exemption from the Soueraigns coerciue power of punishing ever,
or in any case his Subjects; for the Saints in Heaven are Gods subjects, and
yet by his special favor and gracious privilege are exempted from his supreme
coerciue power of inflicting ever pain or punishment upon them. If therefore it
be not against the Divine Kingship or Sovereignty of God, to have Subjects
exempted from his supreme coerciue power, I see no reason why human Kingship
and Sovereignty, (which is not so absolute, but a shadow of the Divine) may not
be consistent with an exemption from the supreme human coerciue power, sure you
will grant the Angels and Saints in Heaven are as properly Gods subjects, and
he (at least) as properly their Soueraign, as any King is of his subjects upon
earth. Therefore the nature, notion, and essence of Kingship, Sovereignty, or
Superiority, as such, is consistent with an exemption of the subjects from the
coerciue power of the Soueraign.

Perhaps you will say, That the Saints in Heaven can not sin, and therefore
there can not be any coerciue power in God their King to punish them. This, Mr.
Walsh, makes nothing for you. Though the Saints in Heaven can not sin, yet
still they are Gods subjects, and he their Soueraign; they are exempted from
his coerciue power, though his subjects. Therefore Sovereignty and subjection
does not necessarily exclude an exemption in subjects from the soueraigns
supreme coerciue power. Let me ask you an other question. Was the mother of
God, or S John Baptist, and other Saints, who by a singular privilege were
preserved from sinning, Gods subjects upon earth? And yet there was no absolute
impossibility of their not sinning upon earth, and by consequence none of being
punished by Gods coerciue power for sinning. And yet they were exempt from any
such coerciue power upon earth. Therefore an exemption from coerciue supreme
power, is consrstent with subjection, and a possibility of sinning.

Be not startled at this Mr. Walsh, its no new doctrine, it is but a small parcel
of that ordinary Theology and common sense which you want. I will give you a
reason for all this, and you can not deny it without declaring yourself an
Atheist. The proper nature, notion, and essence of Sovereignty or Superiority
does not consist in not exempting subjects from a supreme or superior coerciue
power of punishing them, but rather in having power to pardon or exempt them,
as well as to inflict the punishment they have deserved, or may deserve. Nay if
you be not very stupid, you will easily perceive, that the notion of exemption
or privilege, inuolues a subjection and dependency in the person exempted, or
priuileg'd as does independency, Sovereignty or Superiority, in him that grants
it. How then can it be inferred from an exemption from a supreme coerciue power
of Secular Soueraigns granted to their Subjects of the Clergy, that these are
no Subjects, and they no Soueraigns? Learn a little wit, Mr. Walsh, and know,
that nothing argues greater Sovereignty in a Prince than a power of exempting
such of his subjects, as he thinks fit from his own supreme coerciue power: for
that very exemption is still a dependency or an argument of their subjects
dependency and subjection, as well as a mark of the Prince his favor to them. I
hope you comprehend now how it was and is in the power of temporal Soueraigns.
(Without deuesting themselves of their Kingship) to exempt from their own
supreme coerciue power their subjects of the Clergy. You say they never did so
de facto; that shall be now examined.

A NIMADVERSION 10. Whether Christian temporal Soueraigns have de facto
exempted their Subjects of the Clergy, from their Supreme Secular Judicature,
and coerciue power.
FRiar Walsh says they did not, and proves by particular instances that they
never intended any such thing. The first Prince therefore I bring to my purpose
(says this honest Friar page 345. 1 part.) is that very same first, and
greatest of all Christian Emperors, Constantin himself. A Prince who as by the
Confession of all sides, and all writers, was most pious, and of all Princes
deserted best of the Christian Catholic Churches, so no man I think will have
the confidente to accuse him of having usurped any kind of authority over
Churchmen, or practiced any at all over them, but what was allowed him by the
laws of God and nature, The Accusations of the Bishops offered to Constantin,
but rejected by him, as being an incompetent Judge.
and approved also by the state civil and Ecclesiastical. And yet this very
great and pious Coustantin is he who in the General Council of Nice, or when
it sat, himself being present with them at Nice, and often in the very session
hall amidst the Council, which was in his own Palace there, commanded the
libels or petitions of accusitions and criminations offered to him by Priests
and Bishops against other Priests and other Bishops, and as a Judge of them all
of both sides, and in such criminal matters, commanded the same libels to be
brought before him, and received them; albeit immediately thereupon, having first
brought all parties to a friendly atonement by his Princely wisdom and piety,
and rebuking severely both the Accusers and accused, for criminating and
recriminating one an other with personal failings, he cast before their faces
all those libels into a fire. -- Indeed Sozamen tells us that Constantin said
in this occasion; It was not lawful for him, as being a man, to take upon or
unto himself the cognizance of such causes, when the Accusers and the accused
were Priests. But if Constantin said so at all, without any kind of doubt he
must be supposed to have said so, partly out of somexcess of reverence and
piety to their Order etc.

Mr. Walsh, you tell us here a long story, but let me tell you, it is not every
one can tell a story well, or to purpose. You must never bring a story for a
proof of what you say, if it makes against yourself, and proves the quite
contrary of what you quote it for: you bring this passage of Constantin the
great, to prove that Secular Princes never exempted the Clergy from their own
suprem Judicature; and yet S. Gregory Greg. 4. Epist. 75. Nicol. Ep. ad Mich.
Imp.
the great, and Pope Nicholas, quote the very same passage in their letters to
the Emperors Mauritius and Michael, to show those Princes how much they
degenerated from the piety and proceedings of the great Constantin, who
acknowledged it was not lawful for him to judge or punish the Clergy. You say
Constantin received those libels as Judge of the Bishops and Priests; but
Constantin himself said it was not lawful for him to take upon himself the
cognizance of such causes. But (say you) if Constantin said so at all, without
any Kind of doubt he must be supposed to have said so partly out of some excess
of reverence --. For, if Constantin had said so indeed, and withal mean'd to
be understood of even mere lay crimes, or in a strict sense of the word fas or
lawful, in order to such crimes of Priests, or even also to signify that
himself was not a competent Judge, nor the sole Judge for the punishing of
heresy in them by external coercion etc. He had never received the petitions
either of the accusers or accused, but remitted them on both sides to their own
proper Judges and Iudicatories, the Tribunals of Bishops. Nay the Bishops
themselves, at least such of them as were not particularly concerned in such
criminations, had likely admonished him not to give ear or audience to the
accusers of Bishops, or at all received their libels, as not being their
competent Judges. -- And yet for any thing out of History, none of them ever
admonished, much less reprehended him in this matter.

You doubt, or at least would fain make others doubt, whether Constantin said
it was not lawful for him, to take cognizance of Ecclesiastical complaints or
causes. If Constantin said so at all. You perceive at length this story is not
much for your purpose. Why then did you mention it? But why do you doubt of
this part of the story, and not of the rest? You have the same authority for
this, which you have for the whole: and when you take any thing upon authority,
you must take all or nothing. It had bin more for your purpose to have
resolutely denied the whole story, (as most men do, who defend such an ill
cause as yours) when the story makes so pat against you. But if Constantin said
so at all, he must be supposed to have said so partly out of some excess of
reverence and piety to their Order; for if he mean'd to be understood in a
strict sense of the word fas or lawful, or to signify that himself was not a
competent Judge, he had never received the petitions, but remitted them to
their own proper Judges. What do you mean Mr. Walsh? Must Constantin be
supposed to have spoken one thing, and meant the quite contrary? Had he no
other buisness ac Nice, but to compliment the Bishops, and tell them lies so
prejudicial to his own right and authority? Is it the style of Soueraigns to
declare that their Subjects ought not be judged by the Supreme Secular
Judicature? Why must men suppose these absurdities Mr. Walsh? Because forsooth
if Constantin meant to be understood in a strict sense of the word lawful,
when he said he was no lawful or competent Judge of the Clergy, he had never
received the petitions, but remitted them to their own proper Judges. I beg
your pardon, Sir. Princes can not divine what men put in their petitions; they
can not well reject them, before they are informed of the contents. Jndeed you
are in the right, when you lay that Constantin ought to have remitted the
Clergy to their own proper Judges, if he did not think himself one. And the
same Authors Deus vos constituit Sacerdotes, and potestatem dedit de nobis
quoque iudicandi: and ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur, vos autem non potestis
ab hominibus iudicari, propter quod Dei Solius inter vos expectate iudicium,
and vestra iurgia, quaecunque sunt, ad ^^ud Diuinorum reseruentur examen Soz,
lib. 1. cap. 16.
who tells you the story, tells you he did so; his words are, God has
constituted, you Priests, and gave you power to judge also of us, therefore we
are rightly judged by you, but you can not be judged by men, wherefore expect
the judgment of God alone, and reserve your differences, whateuer they be, to
that divine examination. What cause then had the Catholic Bishops to admonish,
or reprehend so pious an Emperor, who remitted them to God, and his Divine
Tribunal? What wonder is it you find no mention of any Bishops complaint,
admonition or reprehension in his History against Constantin?

You will needs have it that Constantin by his own sole authority banished and
restored Bishops and Priests; amongst others you instance both S. Athanasius,
The case of Athanasius and Arius.
and the heretik Arius. You impart to us (page 347.) this general observation.
You shall never find that any Council, especialy this of Nice, forced or gave
sentence of forcing corporaly a Bishop from his see and City, and haling him
into banishment; but only a bare spiritual sentence or declaration of his being
now deposed from such authority as the Church gave him formerly. And on the
other side you shall ever see (So the the print must be corrected putting) (
Never for Ever) it was the Prince alone that by his own royal power only sont
Bishops to exile. Nay and this too not seldom without any preuious sentence of
deposition by other Bishops, as also, that not seldom also, the sole exile of a
Bishop from his see by the only sentence of the Secular Prince, was by the
Church held for a sufficient deposition of such a Bishop, and that the Clergy
proceeded to election and consecration of an other, when the Prince desired it;
as holding the sea absolutely vacant.

Mr. Wash, General rules and observations ought to be well considered before
they be prescribed; because there are few which admit not of some exceptions.
But yours is so totaly false, that you can not name as much as one partioular
to give the least color of probability Mr. Walsh his general rule, failing in
every particular.
to your universal proposition. I challenge you to name any one Catholic
Emperor or Soueraign, that banished or deposed any Catholic Bishop or Priest by
his own sole authority, or before they had bin deposed by the Pope, or other
Bishops. Your instance of S. Athanasius, and Arius are ridiculous. Was S.
Athanasius banished by Constantin before the Tyrian Synod (such as it was) had
deposed him, and banished him also from Alexandria? Were not the Arian Bishops
deposed and banished also by sentence of the Nicen Council, as well as Arius
himself? Jts true the sentence was not put in execution, because they submitted
and subscribed to the Counsels Creed. But yet you see how Socrates and others
tell you, that though Arius submitted, yet the Council reserved upon him that
part of his sentence, which banished him from his home, Alexandria. Was this no
coerciue corporal punishment inflicted by a spiritual power, or by Bishops as
Bishops? How ignorantly or disingeniously then do you reprehend Baronius in
this particular (page 347.) That great Annalist (as you call him) knew very
well how to distinguish twixt a mere ecclesiastical, or merely spiritual
sentence of deposition, and a civil imperial sentence of exile. Constantins
sentence of exile against Arius was long after this of the Council, and was but
a continuation or confirmation of it as Baronius tells you. Neither did
Constantin recall Arius from his banishment until he thought he was canonicaly
pardoned or cleared and restored by the Synod of Jerusalem. But why name you
not at least the Bishop whose exile by the sole temporal authority was judged
by the Church for a sufficient deposition of such a Bishop.

Now Mr. Walsh, I will give you a general rule or observation, against which
you can not find any exception, and it is, that the general practice of the
Church is, eo ipso that a Clergyman is declared an heretik, and therefore
deposed or degraded, in that declaration or sentence is inuolued and understood
exile, imprisonment, or whatsoever corporal punishment, the laws prescribe.
This appears by the ancient Canons of Counsels, and true practice of the
Church; and yourself grant it by what you quote (page 348.) out of the Council
of Calcedon Act. 4. Si autem permanserit turbas faciens, and seditiones
Ecclesiae, per extraneam potestatem, tanquam seditionem debere corripi. If a
Churchman will continue to make tumults, and seditions in the Church, he ought
to be punished as a seditious man by the secular power. Reflect Mr. Walsh, upon
yourself, and consider whether according to this general rule of the Church,
you ought not be punished by the secular power as a seditious man. You continue
still your seditious doctrine. You would fain set the Church and state by the
ears, and incense temporal Soueraigns against their spiri^ual Fathers and
Pastors. God gave the temporal sword to Princes, that they may protect his
Church, and that is the principal end of their power, and hitherto most of the
Christian Soueraigns have employed their power and sword that way; therefore its
neither necessary nor decent, that Churchmen should take the sword out of their
hands, or manage it against heretics and Preachers of sedition. That's don to
their hand. But indeed rather then such an heretik, and seditious fellow as
you, should pass without correction, the lay Brothers of your Order (if they
had you in any of S. Francis his Conuents) would imprison and whip you soundly;
and that (I dare say) without offending any one of those temporal Soueraigns
you flatter, and would fain persnade, that if such a seditious Friar as you, be
corporaly punished by your spiritual Superiors; they are in danger of loosing
their Kingdoms.

And as we grant that the temporal sword is more properly in the hands of
temporal Soueraigns, than of the Clergy, so we deny not but that it has bin a
constant custom in the Church to let Treason and murder be tried and judged by
the Princes themselves, to take away the occasion of ialousies, Treason being
against the Princes person, and murder so horrid a crime, that the Church
thinks not fit any way to excuse, or exempt Clerks who commit them, from the
cognizance and sentence of Secular Courts. This is the reason why S. Athanasius
when he was fasly accused both of treason and murder to Constantin, was
content to leave the cognizance of those crimes to his Officer Dalmatius, as
were also the Catholic Egyptian Bishops, whose words you quote page 348. But
you thought it not for your purpose to quote Constantins own words, after that
Athanasius had presented himself before him. The pious Emperor writ to the
Bishops of the Province of Alexandria, as Athanasius Athan. Apol. 2. Theod.
lib. 1. c. 17.
himself, and Theodoret testify, these words, Vestri autem est, non mei
iudicij, de ea re cognoscere. It belongs to your judgment, not to mine, to take
cognizance of that matter. But the matter was treasonable, for Athanasius was
accused to have sent a quantity of gold to abett the rebellion of Philemenus
against the Emperor.

Mr. Walsh, you are accused both of treason and murder. Why do you not imitat
S. Athanasius, and clear yourself of both? Why do you not present yourself
before the King, All applied to Mr. Walsh himself.
or his Lieutenant in Ireland, and say, Sir, I am charged with a barbarous
murder of six Englishmen at the bridge of Iohnston, I am also accused of
having wrested the Castle of Kilkenny from your Majesty's faithful subjects,
the Lord Viscomt Montgacret, and put it into the Nuntius hands, and this by
virtue of an Excommunication writ and fixed by my own hand, which is said to be
(the very original) in my Lord John Berkley's custody. Sir, all these are but
calumnies, here I offer my self to the trial of both. Why do you not do this
Mr. Walsh, if you be innocent? You are very forward in accusing others, both to
the King and Parliament of treason; and after your accusations were found to be
mere calumnies, you have the considence to print them in this your bundle of
lies, as truths. But if you scruple presenting yourself, as S. Athanasius did,
before the King, or his Lieutenant, me thinks you might imitat that Saint in
writing at least an Apology for yourself, and confuting the calumny, especialy
having mentioned and complained of it in this large volum of yours, wherein you
repeat over and over many of yours own tedious and impertinent speeches. Js it
possible Mr. Walsh, that you can not bring one argument or example to defend
your principles, that is not retorted against your person and proceedings.

You coin not off much better with your story and instance of Constantin the
same Emperor, The Controversy of the Donatists with Caecilianus and Felix.
about the controversy between the Donatists and Caecilianus the Primat of
Afrik, whom those heretics or schismatiks had accused of betraying and burning
the holy scriptures in time of persecution. Constantin admiring at their
troubling himself, a lay Prince, with such matters, answered them in great anger
(as Optatus tells you) with those words, Optat. lib. 2.
Petitis a me in saetulo iudicium, cum Ego ipse Christi iudicium expecto; Yet
they extorted by their importunity from him (being then but a new Cathecumen)
the naming of three Bishops for Judges of the cause, but considering afterward
that without the Bishop of Rome, such causes could not be canonicaly decided,
he remitted both parties to Melchiades then Pope, bidding each take along with
them ten Bishops of their own faction, together with the three aforesaid French
Bishops. Sentence being given by the Pope and his Colleagues in Rome against the
Donatists, and Caecilianus by the same sentence declared innocent, the
Donatists appealed from it to the Emperor, who in a rage (for their appealing
to him) said, O rabida furoria audatia! Sicut in causis Gentilium fieri solet,
appellationem interposuerunt. But the Donatists, pretending that Bishop Felix
(the Ordainer of Caecilianus) was as guilty as any one of the Traditores, and
that Caecilianus, and the matter of fact had not bin well examined, the
principal things having bin omitted, the Emperor commanded the Proconful
Aelianus to inquire very diligently into the whole buisness again; which he
having don, declared Caecilianus and Felix innocent, and condemned again the
Donatists. From this sentence also they appeald to the Emperor, who (as S.
Augustine says Ep. 162. Aug. Contra Donatistatum pertinaciam Ep. 162. Dedit
ille aliud Arelatense iudicium, aliorum scilicet Episcoporum, non quia iam
necesse erat, sed eorum peruersitatibus cedens, and omnimodo cupiens tantam
impudentiam cohibere. Noque enim ausus est Christianus Imperator sic little
tumultuosas and saliaces querelas suscipere, vt de iudicio Episcoporum qui
Romae sederant, ipse iudicaret: sed alios, vt dixt, Episcopos dedit, a quibus
tamen illi ad ipsum rursus Imperatorem provocare maluerunt. Qua in re illos
quemadmodum detestetur, audistis. Atque vtinam saltem ipsius iudicio
infanislimis animositatibus suis finem posuissent, atque vt eis ipse cessit, vt
de illa causa post Episcopos iudicaret a Sanctis Antistibus postea veniam
petiturus etc. Sic and illi aliquando cederent veritati.
) like a Christian Emperor not daring to humor so much their peruersness as to
judge of the sentence formerly given by the Bishop of Rome and his Colleagues,
appointed other Bishops at Arles to judge the cause, not because it was
necessary to have an other judgment, but to give way to their impudent
obstinacy, resolving afterward to beg pardon of the holy Bishops. The
Donatists having bin cast also in the Council of Aries, they appeald again to
the Emperor, who then vtter'd those remarkable words recorded by Optatus, Dico
enim (vt se veritas habet) Sacerdotum indicium ita debet haberi, ac si ipse
^ominus residens iudicet, nihil enim licet his alind sentire, vel aliud
iudicare, nisi quod Christi Magisterio sum educts. I speak the truth as it is
(says Constantin) The Priests (or Bishops) judgment ought to be esteemed so as
if our Lord himself residing amongst them did judge. For they may not think nor
judge otherwise than they are taught by Christ.

This is the truth of the story Mr. Walsh, which you corrupt (page 348 and
seqq.) concealing Constantins sentences and sentiment of the incompetency of
his own judicature in Ecclesiastical matters (related by Optatus) and your
contradicting Saint Augustins plain text, to impose Caluins ridiculous answer
consured by Belarmin (and other heretics errors) upon such as believe you have
so much common honesty and shame, as not to be a wicked falsifier and Forger.
It Is true (say you page 349.) Constamin breaks out into this no less just than
admiring exclamation, O rabidi furoris audacia! sicut in causa Gentilium fieri
solet, appellationem interposuerunt. Yet this imports not, signifies not by any
means, that Constantin abominats the ignorance of the Appellants, for having,
or as if they had against any Divine or human rule or Canon, had recourse to a
lay Tribunal. For had it bin so, or had this been the Motive of his
Exclamation, he had dismissed them, and remitted them back again to their own
proper Episcopal Judges, which yet he did not, but admitted their Appeal. But
how ever this be, or what ever moved Constantin to this exclamation the matter
of fact which followed, can not be denied. For sure enough it is that
Constantin admitted this appeal. You add page 349. This admission of the
Appeal, and this reexamination by Constantin, and by his Council of Orleans
(you ignorantly mistake all the way Orleans for Arles) seems very harsh to
Baronius. And therefore says that Constantin was drawn against his will to
admit so unjust an Appeal from the judgment or sentence of the great Pontiff.
But to that of being drawn against his will, we have said before enough, or
that there was none could force him. And for his admission (of the Appeal) I am
sure Augustine never reprehends it.

I pray Mr. Walsh, did not Constantin remit the Donatists to Melchiades Bishop
of Rome, and those others joined with him when they appeal to Constantin
himself? Therefore (even according to your own Confession) the Emperors admiring
Exclamation imports and signifies the Appellants ignorance or peruersness in
appealing to himself, a lay person, in ecclesiastical affairs. For you confess
if he did remit them to Episcopal Judges, that is a sufficient proof of his
reproving their appealing to himself. But howeuer this be (say you) its enough
that Constantin admitted the Appeal. How did he admit of it? Does not Saint
Augustine tell you how he admitted of it, yielding to their mad animosities, to
put an end to them, insanissinus animositatibus suis. How did he admit of it?
with a resolution to ask pardon of the Pope, and those Bishops who joined with
him in the sentence given by them against the Donatists in Rome. Eis ipse
cessit, vt de illa causa post Episcopos iudicaret, a Sanctis Antistitibus
postea veniam petiturus. He knew very well that himself could not judge of
Ecclesiastical matters; he knew also very well that after the Bishop of Romes
sentence given in the same, there was no need of any other, even of Bishops in
a Council, Dedit ille aliud Arelatense iudicium, aliorum scilicet Episcoporum,
non quia iam necesse erat. Why then did the Emperor Constantin admit and remit
the Donatists appeal, after the Pope had condemned them, to the Council of
Arles? The Saint tells you in the very next following words, Non quia iam
necesse erat, sed eorum peruersitatibus cedens, and omnimodo cupiens tantam
impudentiam cohibere. Are not you then as perverse and as impudent as the
Donatists, when you quote S. Augustine for your imposture? when you deny that
Constantin was drawn against his will to admit an Appeal from the judgment or
sentence of the great Pontiff. I am sure (say you) S. Augustine never reprehends
it. What needed S. Augustine, the Pope, or any Bishop reprehend a pious Emperor,
that acknowledged his own fault, and resolved to ask pardon for it, veniam
petiturus, though he was forced to commit it by the impudency and peruersness
of a powerful faction of the Donatists, threatening to disturb the whole Empire?

Are not you wors than the Donatists, Mr. Walsh, when you say (page 349.) S.
Augustine insinuates, that the sole judgment of Melchiades (Pope) had he
undertaken any such himself alone in this controversy, as it was then, had bin
usurped; or had bin so, if he had without the Emperors special delegation
presumed to determine it, but together with those other his French Colleagues.
For Augustine treating of the pertinacy of the Donatists in their proceedings,
etc. objects to himself in behalf of the Donatists Ep. 162. thus. An forte non
debuis Romanae Ecclesiae Melchiades Episcopus cum Collegis transmarints
^pipopts illud sibi vsurpare iudicium, quod ab Afris septuaginta, vbi Primas
Tigisitanus prasedit, fuerat terminatum? To this what does Augustine answer
Certainly he does not deny that such judgment of Melchiades might be justly
thought in the case to be usurped; but excuses the judgment of Melchiades,
which realy de facto was (not that which only ^ight be falsely supposed, or
bruited to have bin) and defends it (that so was truly) by saying again thus.
Quid auod nec^^ipse vsurpauit? Rogati^s quippe Imperator Iudites misit
Epis^opes, qui cum eo viderent, and de tota illa causa quodinsium videretur,
Hoc probamus, and Donatistarum precibus, and verbis ipsius Imperatoris. So
Augustine.

S. Augustine abused by Mr. Walsh.
Js it possible Mr. Walsh, you will have the Pope be an usurper of the Imperial
authority, in case he should (without the Emperors delegation or leave) decide
a Controversy between Bishops, which caused so great a schim in the Church as
that of the Donatists? Js it possible you will quote for this mad error S.
Augustine? Do you believe Melchiades received his authority for judging the
Controuerly of the Donatists and Caecilianus from Constantin? Js it because
Constantin commanded three french Bishops to ioyn with the Pope in that matter,
therefore they must be of equal authority with the Pope in deciding it, or any
other Controversy of Religion? Was this S. Augustins opinion? Read over again
that 162. Epistle of Saint Augustine. You will find you mistake or abuse him and
your Readers all along. Almost in the beginning of that Epistle he tells the
Donatists that Caecilianus needed not fear or value the conspiring multitude
of his Adversaries (who were 70. Bishops with their Numidian Primat.) And why?
Because he was in Communion with the Roman Church, wherein always the
principality of the Apostolik Chair was of force, in qua semper Apostolicae
Cathedrae viguit principatus, and where he was ready to have his cause tried,
vbi paratus esset causam suam dicere. Not a word here of usurpation of
authority to judge of this or any other cause, in case the Pope should do it
without the Emperors delegation or desire. The principality of the Apostolik
Chair, is the Popes warrant to judge of all Ecclesiastical controversies,
according to Saint Austin; not the Emperors Commission or delegation.

But how coms the Emperor Constantin to make the Pope his delegat in this
matter? How coms Saint Augustine to say the Pope did not vsurp his judging it
because the Roman Emperor being desired, sent Bishops Judges, who might sit
with the Pope, and judge of the whole cause what might seem just? First I do
not see that Constantin delegated or gave the Pope any power to judge, but only
sent, other Bishops to sit and judge with him. The usurping therefore which S.
Augustine speaks of here, is not any usurpation of authority, as if the Pope
had not any to judge such matters, without the Emperors delegation, or
approbation; but the Emperor having bin chosen by the Donatists as Arbiter, and
not having bin excepted against by Caecilianus; or having bin desired to name
Ecclesiastical Judges in this cause, it might seem to the Donatists, that
Melchiades had thrust himself into a matter, which was with the consent or
permission of both parties to be determined by the Emperors arbitration, or by
Judges which he was desired to appoint. Rogatus quippe Imperator Iudices misit
Episcopos, qui cum eo sederent. But the Emperor sending these Judges he had
appointed to Pope Melchiades, and bidding them ioyn in judgment with him, is
not to give authority of judging to the Pope, but rather to confirm by the
Papal authority the Bishops judgment. And therefore S. Augustine had reason to
tell the Donatists, the Pope did neither vsurp any authority, or intermedle in
their controversy officiously without having bin appeald to, or without being
desired by the Emperor, to whom they had remitted both the matter, and the
manner of deciding it.

But what shall we say of your ingenuity, Mr. Walsh, if it appears out of the
very places, or Epistles you ou^te of Saint Augustine for maintaining temporal
So^^raigns judicature in ecclesiastical matters, and his insinuating that the
Pope would vsurp the Emperors authority if he had judged this cause of
Caecilianus without his Majesty's commission, it should be demonstrated, that
Saint Augustine maintains the quite contrary, and reproaches the Donatists that
even against their own holding the Emperor not to be a competent Judge of
Ecclesiastical differences, they made use of him in this controversy; and at
the same time found fault with Caecilianus and Felix, An forte, sicut quidam
dixit, quod quidem cum nobis diceretur, displicuit, sed tamen praetermittendum
non est. Ait enim quidam, non debuit Episcopus Proconsulari iudicio purgar^,
etc.
for defending themselves before a Secular Judge? A Certain man (says Saint
Augustine; meaning one of the Donatists themselves) said a thing which you are
not willing to hear, but must be told you, this man said, A Bishop ought not
be cleerd by the judgment of a Proconsul. This the Donatists objected against
Bishop Felix, because Aelianus by Constantins command had examined the whole
matter again, and declared Felix innocent. What does Saint Augustine answer to
this objection? As if forsooth Felix or Caecilianus had sued or desired such a
judgment; quasi vero ipse sibi hoc comparauerit. It was at the instance of the
Donatists, not of the Catholics, a lay man judged the matter; and supposing the
Emperor took upon him the arbitration or judgment of it (whether with consent
of the parties, or only with permission of Felix and Caecilian, who could not
help themselves any other way) supposing, I say, the Emperor took upon himself
the examination of the matter, he was bound in conscience to have a great care
to find out the truth, that innocence might not be oppressed; and the innocent
Bishops had no reason to refuse or hinder the relief and remedy they found by
that examination. And therefore S. Augustine answers the Donatists objection, Non
debuit Episcopus Proconsulari iudicio purgari; Quasi vero ipse sibi hoc
comperauerit, ac non Imperator ita quaeri iusserit, ad cuius curam, de qua
rationem Deo redditurus esset, res illa maxim pertinebat. Arbitrum enim and
Iudicem causae traditionis and Schismatis illi eum fecerant, qui ad eum etiam
pretes miserant, ad quem postea prouocarunt, and tamen iuditio eorum
acquiescere noluerunt. Out of these words you see Saint Augustine says it
belonged to Constantins care most of all to examine or inquire into that matter,
because the Donatists had desired him to be Arbiter or judge of it; and
Caecilianus and Felix did not, or rather durst not, except against him; as
appears by the Saints words excusing these two for not excepting against that
lay Judge, which the Donatists imposed upon them; and taxing these for
recurring to him.

Wherefore (says Saint Augustine Ep. 162. Itaque si culpandus est quem Iud^x
^errenus ab^o^uit, cum ipse ^bi hoc non proposcisset. qu^nto magi^ culpandi
sunt, qui terrenum R^gem suae causae iudicem esse voluerun^? Si autem criminis
non est, prouocare ad Imp^ratorem; non est criminis audiri ab Imperatore. Erg^
nec ab illo c^^ causam delegauerit imperator. D Aug ibid. Quendam euam
suspen^um eculeo in causa Felicis Episcopi, amicus ille vo^uit criminati etc.
quoted by yourself Mr. Walsh) if he ought to be blamed who is de^lared by a
temporal Judge, when he desired none such, how much more are they to be blamed,
that would needs have a temporal King to be Judge of their cause? But if it be
no crime to appeal to the Emperor, sure it is no crime to be heard by the
Emperor. Therefore neither is it any to be heard by him to whom the Emperor did
delegat the cause. This is a good argument ad hominem against the Donatists.
They also objected against the Bishop Felix, that one was tortured in the
examination of his cause, to wrest the truth from him. Saint Augustine excuses
Felix, from being any way blameable in that buisness. Nunquid poterat Felix,
says he) contradicere ne tanta diligentia vel seueritate quaereretur, cum eius
causam inueniendam cognitor agitaret? Quid enim erat aliud nolle sic quaeri,
quam de crimine confiteri? How could Felix hinder the diligence or severity of
him that inquired into that cause? would he not have confessed himself guilty,
if he had obstructed that examination? Here you see Mr. Walsh, how S. Augustine
blames the Donatist Bishops for repairing to a lay Judge, but excuses the
Catholic Bishop Caecilianus and Felix, for defending themselves before a lay
Judge, whom they did not desire to be Judge of that Ecclesiastical cause. There
is great difference between the Plaintiff and the Defendant. Many things are
lawfully don in a man's defense, when he is violently or unreasonably
assaulted, which are not lawful when don otherwise.

The same practice of the Donatist Bishops recurring Friar Walsh imitats the
Donatists example in his persecuting Catholics Bishops.
to a secular Judge of their own accord, and taxing the Catholic Bishops with a
crime, for answering and defending themselves when they are recommanded to
appear before the same Judge, does Saint Augustine object in his 48. Epistle
also, which you quote as favoring the quite contrary. Nay Saint Augustine
himself (say you page 350.) openly says and auers, that neither the accusing
or appealing Bishops themselves were to be reprehended on this account, that
they drew or brought the affairs or causes of, or accusations against other
Bishops, to a secular Iudicatory. For thus he writes Ep. 48. Si autem sicut
falso arbitramini, vere criminosum Caecilianum, iudicandum terrents
potestatibus tradiderant quid obij^itis quod vestrorum praesumptio primitus
fecit (he speaks to the later Donatists) quod eos non arguerimus (says he)
quia fecerunt; si non animo inuido and noxio, sed emendandi and corrigendi
voluntate fecissent. Therefore Saint Augustine says that where and when the
dispute, concerns the correction and amendment of Ecclesiastics, to demand the
judgment or sentence, and to appeal to the power of earthly Princes, is not
reprehensible, if the accusers proceed not in such (or indeed any other)
application, out of envy or malice. Thus you.

Is it the part of a Christian writer, Mr. Walsh, to impose upon his Readers
such falsehoods as you do, and then upon that great Doctor of the Church Saint
Augustine? This great Doctor writ that Epistle 48. to prove it was lawful for
Churchmen to implore the protection and help of secular Princes, and the
execution of their laws against heretics and schismatiks (but not their
Judicature) as is evident by the text. And because Rogatus and other Donatists,
reprehended the Saint for changing his former opinion into this which he now
defended, he retorts their arguments, and puts them in mind of the ancient
Donatists practices against Caecilian; showing how inconsequently and absurdly
they argued against the punishment of convicted heretical Bishops by secular
laws, whereas themselves made the Secular Soueraigns Judges of Caecilianus and
Felix, Catholic and innocent Bishops. This being the whole drift of S. Augustine
in that epistle, you quote some words of it, which, even as you order them, make
against you. For even in them the Saint taxes the ancient Donatists with
presumption, for accusing Caetilianus (though he were criminal) before a
Secular Judge; and you pretend, Saint Augustine only reprehended their envy and
malicious intention in accusing him, but not the accusation itself If you had
don your Reader the favor, and Saint Augustine the justice, to quote his words
but four lines after those, you would have cleared the whole matter, and not
have forced me to call you a shameless Impostor. What think you of these words
of S. Augustins Mr. Walsk? (Ibid.) Illos autem magis hine arguimus, qui apud
Imperatorem vltro Caecilianum accusauerunt, quem prius apud Collegas
trransmarinos conuincere debuerunt, ipso autem Imperatore long ordinatius
agente, vt Episcoporum causam ad se delatam, ad Episcopos mitteret) ne victi
pacem cum fratribus habere noluerunt; sed rursus ad eundem Imperatorem
venerunt, rursus non Caecilianum tantum, verum etiam datos sibi Episcopos
Iudices apud terrenum Regem accusauerunt. But we reprehend them (the Donatists)
the more, that they accused of their own accord before the Emperor Caecilian,
whom first they ought to have conuinc'd before the Colleagues beyond the seas
(he means Bishops;) the Emperor himself having proceeded much more orderly,
sending the cause of Bishops which was brought to him, to Bishops;) and yet
they (the Donatists Bishops) being cast, would not have peace with their
brethren, but came again to the same Emperor, and again accused before the
earthly King not only Caecilian, but also those Bishops which had bin appointed
their Judges.

Friar Walsh his arguments applied to himself.
You have not hitherto Mr. Walsh, produced any argument against the doctrine and
practice of the Catholic Church, which has not bin retorted against, and
applied to yourself. This also is of the same nature. You censure and condemn
your titular Archbishop of Dublin (as the Donatists did Caecilian) for
defending himself against that petition and accusation of yours, which you
presented to his temporal Soueraign. And because upon that occasion, some
Inquiry was made into your own, and your Remonstrant brethrens actions, and some
thereof appear to be Treasonable, you complain of the said Archbishop, as if he
had sought to take away Churchmens lives by a secular power; whereas, if the
truth were known, he hindered the witnesses to give in evidence against you,
because they were Priests, and could not lawful concur to the death you
deserved. But if by your own prosecuting him, your crimes vere casualy
discovered, and published by others, he was no more obliged to save you from
the gallows, than Bishop Felix was to save the Donatist from the rack.
Notwithstanding this danger you were, and are still in, of hanging, you are
still as obstinat in persecuting that Prelat, and in importuning the King and
Parliament with false and forged accusations against him, as the Donatists were
against Archbishop Caecilian. You criminat him in print, after that your
petition and accusations had bin cast out of the Conncel of Ireland, as false;
and he dismissed as innocent. But you print not a word to clear yourself of the
Murders and Treasons laid to your own charge; not by him, but by many others,
who say they will make them out whenever commanded. The vindication of
yourself from these aspersions you remit to your Latina Hibernica, or latin
Irish volum, consisting for the most part of ridiculous impertinent speeches of
your own; as if it were not to purpose, or there were no room, to insert a
confutation of calumnies, which endanger your life, and have ruined your
reputation; or as if english men could not be conuinc't of your innocence as
well in english, as in latin or Irish; for your Latina Hibernica must be writ
in one of these languages.

Page 354 and 355. Peter Walsh his parity of Bishops, and independent Episcopal
Church.
Well, now you have don (say you) with Constantin, only this you will add in
relation to that his famous saying, wherein he desired the Bishops to referr all
their accusations to the great Judge of all, Christ our Savior himself on the
final day, and to use no other means of punishing, constraining, or forcing one
the other by their own authority, and at least in such things as properly
concerned the execution of their Episcopal office toward their respective
flocks: in relation I say to this part of that saying, or the meaning of
Constantin, I, will add (say you) that Constantin might have heard, of others,
or perhaps of himself learnd and read in, Saint Cyprian's works (for Cyprian
was before his days), what even this great and holy Martyr Bishop himself,
said to this purpofe openly in a great Council of his, African Bishops, (of
all whom as being himself the, Archbishop of Carthage, he was Primat;) Neque
enim, (says he in Conc. Afric. de Haeret. baptis.) quisquam, nostrum
Epis^opumse esse Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico, terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem Collegas suos adegit: quando, habeat omm^ Episcopus prolicentia
libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicartab alio non
possit, cum, nec ipse possit alterum indicare; sed expectemus vniuersi indi
ium, Domini nostri Jesus Christi qui vnus and solus habet potestatem, and
praeponendi nos in Ecclisiae suae gubernatione de actu nostro, indicandi. So
this blessed Cyprian, intending and signifiing (if I be not very much deceived)
the parity of, Bishops amongst themselves, or independence from, the judicial
authority, or authoritatiue judgment of, one an other (if we regard only the
immediate law of, God) and therefore exhorting them all not to judge, one an
other by any such pretended authority, but to, leave all their differences and
dissuasions whatsoever, (about several or distinct ways of discipline, or of,
the government or spiritual direction of their respec^, ture flocks) to the
judgment of our Lord JESUS, Christ, who (says he) is the only and sole he,
that, has power both to prepone us in the government of, the Church, and to
iudg^ of our act -- Which final, and peaceable advice of Saint Cyprian to the
Bishops, of that above mentioned African Synod, Constantin, the great may be
thought to have alluded unto in, his advice also (being it is so like) given to
those, other Bishops of the Nicen Council. But whether, certainly it be so or
not, it matters not much here, or any more at all than to show upon what ground
Constautin might have advised the Bishops to peace amongst themselves; and for
pure ecclesiastical differences in point of mere discipline, or reformation of
manners, or of the lives or conversation of the Bishops themselves in peace and
unity to expect (if they were not otherwise of one sentiment or equal
edification) the judgment of God alone, and not proceed to the Censure of one
an other, especialy in the occasion then present of the grand Controversy with
Arrius of the chiefest fundamental of the Christian Faith itself; and in itself
abstracting so much from all personal failings in life and conversation of
either Bishop, Priest, or Laik. Nor does it matter it at present how, or in
what sense we must understand this saying of Cyprian, or every or any
particular branch of it, further than that of Constantin, and in his right
meaning (which I have before given) is parallel to it.

ANIMADVERSION 11. Friar Walsh his Idea of the doctrine and discipline of the
Catholic Church, and of the equality of its Bishops.
THIS Explication and Comment of yours Mr. Walsh, upon Saint Cyprian and
Constantins words, concerning the Judicature and Privileges of the Clergy, does
declare very well that entertaining and pleasing Idea you tell the Catholics of
the three Kingdoms Page 5. Dedicat.
you have had these many years, wherein they are so much concerned. It can not
be denied but that its a very pleasant thing (especialy for the Bishops, to be
so absolute, so at peace, and enjoy such liberty, amongst themselves, that none
but our Savior Jesus Christ can question them, for the government of their
flocks, or for any scandal of their own lives and conversation. This is your
Idea, and you say it was the sentiment of Saint Cyprian, if you be not much
mistaken, and that Constantin the great had it from his writings, and advised
the Bishops of the Nicen Council (according to this Idea) to fall upon the
Arians, and never trouble themselves with reprehending or correcting their own
faults and frailties, because all such things must be remitted to the day of
Judgment; in the mean time every Bishop has his own proper abitrement, pro
licentia libertatis and potestatis suae, according to the pleasure of his own
liberty and his own power. I confess this is a great privilege, and more than
ever the Roman Catholic Clergy (even the Pope himself) prerended to: for the
Pope may be vnpoped, at least for heresy. But the Bishops of your Idea, or
Church, Mr. Walsh, are all Popes, and yet can not be declared by any other
Bishops or Cardinals to be deposed by Christ for any heresy or fault committed
in governing their flocks. Now, though you declare yourself to be no Roman
Catholic by this your parity of all Bishops, and saying that (by the immediate
law of God) the Pope has no spiritual superiority or authority over other
Bishops; yet I hope you will give temporal Soueraigns a superintendence, or some
power to keep those independent Bishops in order, and Church discipline; at
least you pretended so hitherto. But now you say, no. For, Constantin and Saint
Cyprians rule is, that no Emperor, no King, none but Jesus Christ alone may
order or judge Bishops: Vnus and solus (Jesus Christus) habet potestatem and
proeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro iudicandi.
How com you then to fool us hitherto, and make the world believe (from the
first page of your great volume unto this 345) that temporal Soueraigns have
power and authority from God, to correct not only the lay crimes, but the
Ecclesiastical faults of Bishops, and to force them to keep the Canons,
Customs, and discipline of the Church? Js this your zeal for the right of
temporal Soueraigns Js this the scope and sense of your loyal Remonstrance?
Certainly it will be suspected you are a Cheat.

Jf you be such a man Mr. Walsh, you either were too scrupulous, or did over
act the Hypocrite, when you refused the Bishopric (you say) was ofterd to you
(by the Protestants I suppose) in Ireland. What could you desire more than to
be equal with the Pope, Mr. Walsh his opinion of the validity of the (...)
Protestant Episcopacy.
and not accountable to any spiritual or temporal Superior upon earth for the
government of your flock, or yourself? Especialy you having declared (page 42.
n. 13. of your Preface) that you hold yourself obliged in conscience (for any
thing you know yet) to concur with them who doubt not the ordination of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Protestant Church of England, to be (at
least) valid. And yea you have read all whateuer has bin to the contrary
objected by the Roman Catholic writers, whether against the matter or form, or
want of power in the Consecraters, by reason of their Schism or heresy, or of
their being deposed formerly from their sees. By the way Mr. Walsh, let me tell
you, that the Roman Catholic Church does not ground its practice of ordaining
(absolutely and without any condition at all) protestant Ministers, who are
converted and desire to be Priests amongst us, upon their want of true and
valid ordination proceeding from any Schism, heresy, or deposition of their
Ordainers, and first protestant Bishops; for, we all grant that neither Schism,
nor heresy of the Consecraters, or their deposition, makes an Ordination
inualid; as you see by what we hold of heretical Bishops but we ground the
nullity of the protestant Episcopacy and ordination both upon the inualidity of
the protestant form of Episcopacy and priestood, and upon their first
Consecrater (Parker) (upon whose consecration all theirs does depend) never
having bin consecrated a Bishop himself; for, (besides many other proofs) Jewel
and Horn pretending to make out his and their own Episcopal consecration, could
never in their books printed to that purpose, and in answer to Harding and
Stapletons printed books and questions, name then (when it concerned them
most) the Bishop that consecrated Parker; nor produce as much as one witness of
so publik and solemn a Consecration as his was pretended to be 50 years after.
This together with the 25. article of the Church of England, declaring, that
Ordination is not properly a Sacrament, because it requires no visible sign or
ceremony (and by consequence no imposition of Episcopal hands) together with
the Act of Parliament 8. Eliz. 1. is one of the chief grounds we have to
believe the Protestant Bishops are not validly consecrated, nor the Catholics
guilty of sacrilege in reordaining them, when they are made Priests amongst us.

An other ground is the inualidity of the protestant Form for ordaining Priests
and Bishops; the Form I mean that had bin used since King Eduard 6. reign
until the hapy restoration of King Charles 2 For, after his restoration, the
Bishops themselves found our exceptions against the validity of King Eduards
Form, were reasonable, and thereupon were pleased to alter it adding thereunto
the words Bishop and Prust, as we directed; which (or the equivalent) are
necessary to express the caracter received by the form; and which were wanting
in the old form. Sanders in Schism. F. H^livood, or Sacrobosco in hode^nuestig.
vera Christ's Ecclesia c. 4. Fitz Simons in Britonomachia. D. Champney. D
Harding. D. Scapleton. Treatise of Catholic Faith and Heresy. Polit.
Cathechism. Nullity of the Clergy of England in answer to D Bramhalls vind.
Religion and Government. Erassus Sentor and Iumor.
This and much more you might have seen in the Catholic writers objections,
Answers and replies to Mason Btamhall, Heylin, and other Protestant writers.
And if you have seen them, you ought to be ashamed of being more obstinat than
the Protestant Bishops themselves, who (by the amendment of their old Form)
confess it was defective, and that a new Form was necessary; otherwise they
would never have altered the old in so material a point, after an hundred years
dispute. But seeing you are satisfied with the protestant Episcopacy, and
believe the oath of Supremacy to be so lawful, as to vpraid Roman Catholics
with rashness and obstinacy for not taking it, I see not how you could scruple
accepting of a protestant Bishopric in your own Country; and therefore I can
hardly beliue any such thing was ever offered you. But if ever it will be offered
you, its twenty to one you will be desired first to clear yourself, and wash
off that stain of innocent English blood, wherewith you are asperst, and reputed
irregular.

But to return to Constantin and Cyprian, I can assure you, that you are very
much deceived (or at least you design to deceive others) in the interpretation
you give of their words. Its generaly believed that S. Augustine understood
Saint Cyprians works and words better than you do, Mr. Walsh. Now Saint
Augustine after setting down lib. 3. de Baptisino cap. 3. those words of Saint
Cyprian which you quote for the equality of Bishops, as if none of them ought
to be judged by an other, but only by God etc. Says, that S. Cyprian meant
this of Controversies, wherein the Church has not declared or defined the truth
as yet in debate, Opinor (says he) in his quaestionibus quae nondum
eliquatissima perspectione discussae sunt, etc. Jn such questions it is very
certain that not only Bishops in Prouincial and Gene-Councils, but that every
private Doctor in the Schools, may speak freely, and not be forced to any side
or sentence; and this is all that S. Cyprian meant, if S. Augustine be not very
much deceived. S. Cyprian was also in the right, in telling his African
Bishops, that neither himself, nor any of them, was Episcopus Episcoporum,
Bishop of Bishops. That is a title given only to the Bishop of Rome, and has
bin given by a Primat of Afrik, and Saint Cyprians successor (Stephen) in his
letter to Pope Damasus; in a letter, I say, writ to him in the name of three
African Councils; Beatissimo Domino, and Apostolico culmine sublimato, S. Patri
Patrum, Damaso Papae etc. Father of Fathers, and Bishop of Bishops Tertullian.
in lib. de Pudicrtia calls the Bishop of Rome iscopus Episcopor^m Bishop of
Bishops.
, signify the same thing in those Circumstances: and himself declares it,
saying in the same Epistle, and summo omnium Praesulum Praesuli. That the
Bishop of Rome had authority and jurisdiction over other Bishops, independently
of any general Councils, or their Canons (and consequently had this authority
from God immediately) is confessed by S. Cyprian, who lived before any of the
four first general Councils; and yet desired Stephen Pope (lib. 3. Ep. 13.) to
depose the Bishop of Arles, and put an other in his see.

Now to end with your Idea of the Church. It is observed in the lives of such
Saints as are Fundators or Reformers of Regular Orders, that God did reveal to
them, or give them an Idea of their Congregations. Was it God or the Devil gave
you the Idea of your reformation? yourself is much pleased with it; but the
Catholics to whom you communicate and dedicate it, have no reason to be pleased
with it. For, it is a wild wicked fancy of independency: an unreasonable
liberty without subordination or discipline: A company of dissolute fellows
without fear of correction: A commonwealth of Libertins without any coerciue
power to keep them in awe, or in order. How can you imagine Mr. Walsh, that
Christ, being infinite wisdom, would institute a Commonwealth of frail men, or a
Church and not inuest the Governors thereof (who are the Clergy) with any
coerciue power to punish and correct such frailties of their sheep or subjects,
as he foresaw would be committed, and corrupt others? This is a pretty Idea of
your Church, but not of Christ's. An Idea your Remonstrants did practice whilst
you were in power, and gouernd them, but too scandalous to continue.

ANIMADVERSION 12. Of the Emperors succeeding Constantin the Great.
TO proceed therefore from Constantin to more instances of matter of Fact in
other Emperors and Kings who succeeded him (says Friar Walsh page 345. and
seq.) Constantius (Constantins son) offers himself first. For this Constantius
would have, and accordingly had the criminal cause of Stephanus the Patriatch
or Bishop of Antioch, as being accused (de vi. publica, and lege Cornelia de
Sicarijs) of murder, to be tried in a secular Indicatory, and before himself
in the Palace; and not by any means in the Church etc. Neither is it material
to object here, that Constantius was an Arrian, for the Arian Bishops stood as
much for the immunities of the Church and Church men, and so did the Arrian
Princes advised by them, as any Catholics, when the crime objected was not
diversity in Religion.

To prove that Catholic Emperors judged the causes and persons of Catholic
Bishops in their lay Courts, you quote the case of Stephen the Arrian Bishop of
Antioch, punished by Constantius the Arrian Emperor. And yet Theodoret, whom
you cite for the murder (as you say) committed by Stephen (though Saint
Athanasius speaks not of murder) tells you, according to your own translation
of his words, that Stephen pleaded against the Emperor, Clerks ought not be
whipped or wounded, At cum Stephanus petulanti ore illis contradiceret,
affirmaretque, plagas non esse infligendas Clericis. I will tell you the story
as S. Athanasius Ep. ad Solit.
recounts it, and you may apply it to yourself and other heretics, whose custom
it is, and has always bin, to discredit and defame their Catholic Confuters,
when they can not answer their arguments. This Stephen you speak of, having
bin with other Arrian Bishops condemned and deposed as an heretik, Stephen the
Arian Bishop.
in the Catholic Council of Sardica, persecuted most barbarously those who had
condemned him and the rest; he laid spies and Catchpols for them in all sea
ports and inland Towns, when they returned from that Synod; just as you did in
Dublin and other Towns for the poor old Archbishop Burk of Tuam, Father
Farcell, Tully, Moor, add all who were against your Remonstrance. Amongst
others, he persecuted the two Bishops (Vincent and Euphrates) who had bin sent
by the holy Synod to give an account to the Emperor of their proceedings. And
Stephen not finding any crime against them, he and some of his Priests hired or
persuaded a Harlot to accuse Euphrates, as if he had artempted to be dishonest
with her; but she not having bin fully instructed, or not following punctualy
his instructions, the fraud of Stephen and his Priests was discovered, and
himself deposed by the Arian Bishops, by command of the Arian Emperor; who
began then to suspect that a religion maintained by such villainies, could not
be good. How Stephen's case (recounted either after your own way, or that of
Saint Athanasius) can be for your purpose, I do nor perceive; for, we Catholics
not only confess, but desire, that such declared and condemnd heretics as
Stephen and you, be corrected and punished by the secular power, though you
should plead the privileges of Churchmen. You have forfeited all such
exemptions as soon as you declare yourselues heretics.

But you tell us an other pretty story, how S. Athanesius Bishop of Alexandria,
and Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, being deposed from their sees by other
Bishops, and having their refuge to the Emperor Constance in the west, he at
their instance and earnest petition, and even in a cause merly ecclesiastical,
but for the relief of innocence oppressed wrongfully, sent letters to his
brother Constantius wherein (as Socrates writes lib. 2. c. 12. and Sozom. lib.
3. cap. 9.) he signifies his pleasure, that three Bishops be sent from the
east, to give him an account of the causes, why Athanasius and Paulus had bin
deposed etc. In which procedure of Constance, I believe our very Antagonists
will not have the confidence to say there was any usurpation; being that such
religious Orthodox Bishops as this Paul and Athanasius, and so rigidly
obseruant as they of ecclesiastical discipline, were his Authors and
Petitioners to reassume the judgment of themselves, albeit in a cause purely
ecclesiastical, or which only, or at least chiefly concerned a spiritual
sentence of deposition of two Bishops from their Episcopal sees, pronunced
against them by a Council of other Bishops. But whether our said Antagonists
will (or no) pretend therein any usurpation, I am sure the matter of fact is
true; as I am sure also that even natural reason itself will force them to
confess there was a supreme right in ^onstans to relieve by all due means,
oppressed innocence; and that there was no other way so ready, just, and
equitable as this which he took.

The case of S. Athanasius and Paulus.
I have in other occasions aduiled you Mr. Walsh; never to bring stories which
make against yourself; but I see you are resolved to continue that course.
Howeuer I will now advise you, that when you quote such passages, let them not
be those which are most obuious, and of persons so generally known, that its
impossible to conceal your imposture. Is there any thing more known or
celebrated in the ecclesiastical History, than Saint Athanasius his disputes
and differences with the Arians? Why then are you so unwary in your wicked way
of corrupting Authors, and abusing Readers, as to say, that S. Athanasius and
Paul were earnest Suitors and Petitioners to the Emperor Constance to reassume
the judgment of themselves, albeit in a cause purely ecclesiastical? Does
Socrates or Sozomen say this? Does any writer, but your lying self, say it?
Would any but so dull and senseless a man as you, print it? To what purpose
should those two Patriarks of the East, petition the Emperor of the west to
reassume the judgment of a cause or fact that had no relation to his Dominions
or jurisdiction? Do not you know that this Emperors jurisdiction was limited by
the Alps; and that Epypt and Asia was under that of Constantius his brother;
How com you then to say that Athanasius Patriark of Alexandria in Egypt, and
Paul Patriark of Constantinople, were earnest Petitioners to an Emperor only of
the west part of Europe, for reassuming the judgment of a cause depending in
Constantinople and Egypt? That out of his zeal he writ to his Brother
Constantius, and threatened to make war against him, if he did not let those
Patriarks return and govern their sees, we confess; but that these two holy men
ever petitioned to him to reassume the judgment of that matter (which only can
make for your purpose) is one of your accustomed fictions and impostures. Would
not they be Rebels against their lawful Soueraign (according to your own
principles) if they had don so? Has the passion you have to establish your
heresies, so blinded you, and blotted out of your soul all truth and common
sense, that you can not see your own contradictions? You do not tell your
Reader that those two Patriarks were restored to their sees by the Catholic
Council of Sardica, and that they were deposed by an Arian Conuenticle. You
only say they were deposed by other Bishops. What Bishops? Do you incline to
Arianism also? make you no difference between Bishops and Bishops? Catholics
and Arians? Jf Athanasius and Paul had bin deposed by such a Catholic
aecumenical Council as that of Sardica, which restored them to their sees, they
had bin as justly banished by the Emperor, as you may be by any Christian
Soueraign, after you have bin excommunicated by your Superiors, and declared an
heretik by yourself in print.

You have an admirable wit and faculty Mr. Walsh; in arguing against yourself.
To prove that Emperors and temporal Soueraigns have a power inherent in them to
make ecclesiastical laws, and that de facto they did punish Church men by
their own sole authority, you quote examples of Bishops punished and banished
by them, after they had bin deposed and degraded by the Pope and Councils How
many times has Belarmin told Calvin, and others from whom you borow all your
objections (but as they also do you conceal his answers) that temporal
Soueraigns not only may, but are bound in conscience to protect the Church by
punishing according to law, such as are declared by it heretics, deposed from
their Bishopriks, or degraded? You argue against yourself, when (page 360.) you
quote S. Leo the Popes words Ep. 81. to Leo the Emperor, wherein he begs of him
to banish from Constantinople those of the Clergy which favored heresy, seeing
Anatolius the Bishop of that see, was remiss in doing that his duty; Vouchsafe
(says the Pope) for your Faiths sake, to do this favor to the Church, or to
apply this remedy to it: you argue against yourself Mr. Walsh, when you quote
the words of the Pope Simplitius Ep. 9.11. beseeching the Emperor Zeno, Vt quod
per nos Ecclesiae serio postulat imo quod ipsi specialius supplicamus, Petrum
Alexandrinae Ecclesiae Peruersorem ad exteriora tranferri pijssima praereptione
inbeatis. Suppose Mr. Walsh, the Pope or the General of your Order should write
to the King or England these very same words, The Church by me, does seriously
desire, and I more particularly do supplicat your Majesty, you be pleased to
command by a most pious order, that Peter Walsh a disturber of the peace (in
lieu of Peter the Inuader of the Church Alexandria) be transported to foreign
parts. Would any man of sense judge by this humble request, that our King or
any other to whom it were made, had that spiritual authority in Ecclesiastical
matters, which you would fain flatter Soueraigns with? Nay suppose his Majesty
or the Parliament were pleased (for the peace of the three Nations, and to
punish you for teaching and printing, that Bishops, as Bishops, can not
lawfully help or succor their King to pull down an usurper, or oppose any
rebellion) to send you to row in the Galleys of Tangiers, or to the Ba^bados,
to labor with the slaves in the Sugar Mills (as you say page 357.) one
Chronopius a Bishop was sent to digg in the Silver Mines by the Emperor
Valentinian, for appealing to him after he had bin condemned by an
Ecclesiastical sentence of 70. Bishops; would any one think that this Mission
of yours to Tangiers or Barbados (after you had bin condemned by the Church, as
an heretik for this doctrine) could prove that the King or Parliament had power
to govern the Church, or to make laws in spiritual matters? It Is therefore to no
purpose for me to confute these and other wild arguments of yours, seeing
themselves sufficiently lay open your gross mistake, and demonsttat your little
wit and judgment.

But I will beg my Readers leave and patience to relate your Achilles, The case
of S. John Chrysosiom.
in the controversy of S. John Chrysostom. Arcadius, an Emperor also very
Orthodo^ ((...) Friar Walsh page 360.) received the accusations against John
Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, and thereupon having first ordered a
judicial procedure against this great and holy Bishop, at last condemned and
sent him with a guard of Soldiers far off to exile. Socrates lib 6. c. 16. and
Falad. in Dial. And certainly Pope Innocent (the first of that name) who then
governed the sea of Rome, where he inueighs bitterly against Arcadius, and
against Endoxia, his Empress, as against most grievous Persecutors of so great
and so holy a man, does not at all object that Arcadius, being a mere lay man,
usurped a i^d^^iary power in Ecclesiastical matters, or so against his own
Bishop; nor that he proceeded so against him, out of, or by a tyrannical power,
and not by any legal authority, over him in the case; but only reprehends
Arcadius in that he had not proceeded justly against Chrysostom; or in that he
had not made right use of the power which he had in the case; and in a word, in
that he expelled Chrysostom from his Episcopal throne, before his cause had bin
legaly, and thoroughly sifted or judged, as it ought, and consequently without
observing the due formaliues, or even substantial or essential procedure in
such case required by the law. (...) (says he) e throno suo, re non iudicata,
magnum totius orb^s Doctorem. Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 34. Nor does Chrysostom
himself any where complain of the Emperor as having usurped a power of judging,
condemning, or banishing him. And yet we know he writ to several, especialy to
Pope Innocent, many letters f^aught with complaints of the Emperors unjust
judgment and proceedings against him; acknowledging Arcadius, or at least
supposing him still a legal Judge, though unjust as to the sentence in the case.

You have the misfortune Mr. Walsh, to contradict yourself in every story you
tell, and by consequence you have a special gift of discrediting your own
writings, and making your relation and comments upon it incredible and
ridiculous. You say in the beginning of this story, that Arcadius received the
accusations against Saint John Chrysostom, and thereupon, having first ordered a
judicial procedure against that holy Bishop, at last condemned and sent him
with a guard of Soldiers far off to exise. A judicial procedure, Mr. Walsh,
is, to proceed secundum allegata and probata; if Arcadius did so, and was
Chrysostoms lawful Judge Pope Innocent could not reprchend Arcadius as
proceeding unjustly against him, or say that he condemned him re non iudicata.
Js to condemn one according to a judicial procedure, and by a lawful
authority, to condemn him re non iudicata? When therefore the Pope reprehended
Arcadius for banishing Chrysostom re non iudicata? before his cause was
sentene't, he meant (as is understood by every man of sense) that Arcadius was
not his lawful Judge, and that he ought to have expected the sentence of the
Apostolik sea, or a Catholic Council of Bishops to which the Saint had appeald?
You see Mr. Walsh, how you contradict yourself, and how difficult a thing it is
to contradict truth, and to corrupt such Authors as tell it, without being
caught in a lie.

Hear then the true story of S. John Chtysostoms controversy with the Emperor
Arcadius, as it is related by S. John himself, Palladius, and the same Authors
which you quote. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and others ill affected to S.
John Chrysostom, were employed by Eudoxia the Empress to depose that holy
Prelat from his see, his chief Accusers were some of his own Priests, who could
not endure his just reprehensions for their faults. Amongst other things
himself says, he was accused of too much familiarity with a certain woman, and
that he permitted people to receive the communion after eating. This accusation
was heard by Theophilus, and 36. Bishops of his and the Empress faction, met at
Calcedon; and exhibited by two Priests of Constantinople, which Chrysostom had
excommunicated for notorious crimes. The Saint had with him in Constantinople
forty Bishops assembled to hear a charge of 70. articles given in against
Theophilus; but Thophilus who should have stood at the bair in Constantinople,
sat as a Judge in Calcedon, and without any lawful authority summoned
Chrysostom to appear before him at Calcedon, to answer the charge put in
against him by the two excommunicated Priests. But though the S. said he would
appear when soever the Judges were lawful and not parties, yet the 40.
Bishops who stuck to him, signified to Theophilus, that he should rather com to
Constantiuople, to clear himself, than call others to judgment at Chalcedon?
Upon this Chrysostom had sentence of deposition past upon him at Chalcedon, for
contumacy forsooth. And though he appeald to a Council of Catholic and
indisterent Bishops, yet those of Chalcedon had so much interest with the
Empress, and she with the Emperor, as to have Chrysostom halled out of his
Church by Soldiers; whereupon he retired to Bernetum of Bithinia. But a sedition
being feared in Constantinople for this injustice, the Emperor (and the Empress
also) sent to desire him to return withal diligence; which he did; but as soon
as he returned, he desired the Emperor (as may be seen in his Epistle to Pope
Innocent) that his cause might be tried in a lawful Synod of Bishops; so far
was he from acknowledging the Emperor to be lawful Judge either of his cause,
or of his banishment.

Some months after Chrysostoms return, he reprehended the sportes and plays
which were acted almost at the Church door, with so much profaness and noise,
that the Divine service and Sermons could scarce be heard. But because this
stir was kept in honor of the Empress Endoxia, and at her statue, which was
set up near the Church upon a noble pillar, she interpreted Chrysostoms zeal to
be but animosity against herself, and sent privately for those Bishops which had
formerly condemned and deposed him at Chalcedon, to the end they might renew or
confirm that sentence, or any other by virtue whereof he might be deposed and
banished. They finding no crime whereupon to ground his deposition, pretended it
was a sufficient cause for it, that having bin lately deposed by themselves in
their Synod of Calcedon, he returned to take possession of his see without the
sentence of an other Synod greater than that which had deposed him; alleging
this to be against a Canon made in a Council of Antioch. But the Saint
replied, it was a Canon made by some Arian Bishops, against S. Athanasius, and
therefore of no force. Heerupon the aforsaid Bishops and Eudoxia importuned the
Emperor Arcadius to banish Chrylostom, assuring him that their sentence thereof
was just, taking upon their own souls the sin and blame thereof. The Emperor at
their instance sent a Message to Chrysostom, to be gone; but he answering that
he had received the charge of that Church from God, to procure the salvation of
souls, and therefore could not leave it unless he were forced away, the Emperor
sent soldiers to do it. Then Chrysostom appeald to Pope Innocent the first,
using these words. I beseech you write, and by your authority decree, that
these wicked transactions be of no force, as of their own nature they are void
and null, we having bin absent, and not refusing judgment; those who have don
them, make them subject to the Censure of the Church. But we who are innocent,
and not co^^cted nor found guilty of any crime, command to be restored to our
Churches, to the end we may enjoy peace and charity with our brethren.

You see Mr. Walsh, whether S. John Chrysostom owned the Emperor to be his
lawful and supreme Judge. You see how he appeals from his judgment to the
Pope. Now you shall see how the Pope not only reprehended, but punished,
judged, and excommunicated the Emperor, declared void Theophilus, and all the
other Bishops sentence. Innocent his words are, I the last of all, and a
sinn^r, yet having the throne of the great Apostle Peter committed to me, do
separat thee and her (Eudoxia) from receeiuing the immaculat Mysteries of
Christ our God; and every Bishop or any other of the Clergy which shall presume
to minister or give to you those holy Mysteries after the time that you have
read these present letters of my binding, I pronounce them deposed from their
dignities etc. Arsacius whom you placed in the Bishops throne in Chrysostom's
room, though he be dead, we depose, and command that his name be not written in
the role of Bishops. In like manner we depose all other Bishops, which of
purposed advice have communicated with him etc. To the deposing of Theophilus,
we add Excommunication.

Arcadius writ a submissiue letter to the Pope, excusing himself, and laying
all the blame upon the Bishops and Eudoxia, saying he was ignorant of their
injustice against Chrysostom, therefore begged that himself and Eudoxia (who he
said was sick, and had bin severely reprehended by him) might be absoluted from
his Holiness Censures. The Pope accepting of this excuse and submission,
restored them both to the Ecclesiastical communion. This is the true story of
S. John Chrysostom, out of which Mr. Walsh, you may gather 1. That Areadius did
not as much as pretend to be Judge of S. John Chrysostom, or of his cause. 2.
That neither the Saint nor the Pope, nor even the factious Bishops who met at
Chalcedon, pretended there was any power in the Emperor to judge or sentence
the person, or cause of John, but only to banish him pursuant to the sentence
of the Conuenticle of Calcedon, who took upon themselves the sin of that
action, at which the Emperor scrupled as you have heard. 3. That when the
Emperor commanded John to be gone from his Church, the Saint would not obey him,
as not being his Judge; and therefore the soldiers forced him away. Would such a
great Saint as this, have disobeyed, if he thought the Emperor had any lawful
power or judicature over him in that matter?

It were an endless and superfluous labor to follow this wild Friar, wandering
up and down the Ecclesiastical History with so little judgment, that though he
can not find therein any thing for his purpose, yet is sure always to fix upon
those examples which make most against him, as we have seen hitherto, and any
one may see in his own book, wherein he instances half a dozen other Princes
actions, some whereof were confessed heretics, as Theodoricus the Arrian, This
Prince, though an Arian (says the judicious Friar page 357.) as to his belief
of the Trinity of persons, or Divinity of Jesus Christ, yet in all other points
of Christian Religion --, he was precise, wary, and strict enough. Its very
likely a man who denied the Trinity and the Divinity of Christ, would be very
precise in believing, and strict in not violating the Clergyes Privileges. The
Catholic Princes did but execute the laws against Bishops, when these were
deposed and declared heretics by the Church; and that, sometimes at the express
petition of the Popes or Counsels themselves; and yet this dull Friar thinks
this is a confession and acknowledgment of the Clergyes subjection in spiritual
matters to temporal Soueraigns, as Judges thereof. What man in his wits would
quote (as this Friar does page 361.) these words of Pope John 2. in his letter
to the Emperor Justinian, as an evidence of ^ay Soueraigns judicature or
supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs, Its fit that they who obey not our
Statuts, be esteemed out of the Church. But because the Church never shuts her
bosom to those, who return to it, I beseech your Clemency, that if those men
having for saken their error, and bad intention, will return to the unity of
the Church, and be received in your Communion, that you will remove the sting
of your indignation, and at our entreaty, grant them the favor of a benign
mind. Perhaps you, Reader, see not any thing in those words for Peter Walsh his
purpose; at least I do not see where the acumen lies. But we are dull. Observe,
says this acute Friar, that he (the Pope) says your indignation, not, our
condemnation. Mark that Sir. Well? I see these searching and subtle wits are
strange things; they find out Mysteries where there are none. Mr. Walsh, would
you have the Pope speak nonsense like yourself? Would you have him exhort the
Emperor to remove from his mind the Popes thoughts, or a papal condemnation?
What would you be at? The Pope desires the Emperor to be charitable, and to be
recoucil'd to the Church. Is this to acknowledge in him a full, proper, legal,
and supreme power of coercion of Clerks? write sense Mr. Walsh, and beg pardon
of the prinrer and Reader, for your book is a manifest nuysance to common sense.

The case of Hermannus Archbishop of Cullen in Charles 5. time.
I will presume a little further upon my Readers patience, to let him see how
wittily you confute Belarmins answer to Barclay, obiecting against the
Ecclesiastical immunity, the case of Hermanus Archbishop of Cullen, whom the
Emperor Charles 5. summoned to iudment. Belarmin says he did it, as Hermanus
was a Prince of the Empire, and not as he was a Bishop. To this you say (page
264.) That Belarmine writes so of this matter as he may be refuted with that
Ieer, wherewith a certain Boor pleasantly checked a great Bishop, as he, rode by
with a splendid pompous train. The story is, that a Country clown having first
admired, and said, this pomp was very unlike that of the Apostles, to whom
Bishops did succeed; and some of the Bishops train answering, that this Bishop
was not only a successor of the Apostles, but also Heir to a rich Lordship; and
that moreover he was a Duke, and a Prince too; the Clown replied, but if God
(says he) condemn, the Duke and Prince to eternal fire, what will become, of
the Bishop? Even so does Belarmin write (as that seauant spoke) that this
Hermanus, whom Charles 5. summoned to appear, was not only an Archbishop, but
a Prince also of the Empire. And even so do I say, and reply with the Country
swain, when the Emperor judged the Prince of the Empire, did he not, I pray,
judge the Archbishop too? But you will say, that though indeed he judged the
Archbishop, yet not as an Archbishop, but as a Prince of the Empire. Let it be
so; for neither do I intend or mean (or at least urge, or press now) that
Clerks, as Clerks, are subject to the coercion or direction of Kings; but as
men, but as Citizens, and politik parts of the body politik; which Kind of
authority, as Belarmin confesses, Charles 5. both acknowledged and vindicated
to the Emperor.

Mr. Walsh, if Belarmin does confess (as indeed he does) that Clerks as men and
Citizens, are subject to the coerciue power and secular judicature of temporal
Soueraigns, does it follow, that the Soueraigns can not exempt them as they are
Clergymen from that very coerciue power and secular judicature? Here you grant
they are exempted as Clerks from it, though in other places of your book you
say its impossible they should be exempted, unless their Soueraigns cease to be
Soueraigns. I wish you did exempt and free yourself from these contradictions.
Indeed your story of the Country swain, does sufficiently convince us of your
great erudition, but me thinks the application does not so clearly show your
incomparable acuteness. You take the material man somewhat toogrossely. You, who
are a Scotist, should be better at your formal distinctions, and consider in a
man the form or quality of a Clerk, or Churchman, as raising him a degree above
the natural or material manhood, and common sort of mankind. Saint Peter was
more subtle; he called the Priestood Regale Sacerdotium. Not that the
spiritual caracter of Priesthood or Episcopacy changes man's nature, but his
quality; it places the person in a higher rank, than naturally he could arrive
unto. Even in human Creatures (as such) you may see this metaphysical
distinction explained. A Peer of the Realm is a man, and as a man ought to be
tried by a common jury; but his Peerage exempts him from that ordinary way of
trial; and yet he is still a man, and can not, even as a man, be tried by
twelve Commoners, but by his Peers. Jf the example of Subjects will not satisfy
you, consider that of Soueraigns. Our ancient Kings of England did homage to
the ancient Kings of France, as Dukes of of Normandy, Aquitain etc. You will
not deny they were men, both as Kings and Dukes, and did homage as men. Does it
follow, that because they were men, and did homage as men, they must needs do
homage as Kings? Or does it follow that the King of France could not (out of
his respect to their Kingship) exempt them even as Dukes of Normandy and men,
from the supreme coerciue power of his Courts? Would this unking the French
Kings? I have proved this to be consistent with Sovereignty and subjection, in
the 9. Animaduersion, to which I remit you, if you understand not as yet how
the same man may be privileged and punished upon different scores. What the
Clown said, is very true, if God condemns the Bishop, as he is a Prince, to
hell fire, he must go thither also as he is a Bishop; yet there is this comfort
left to Bishops who are Princes, God will never send them thither for
maintaining the just privileges either of a Prince or Bishop; but for some
mortal sin unrepented; for which there is no privilege or exemption.

I have heard your story of the Bishop and Prince told otherwise, viz that the
Bishop lying a dying, the Devil appeared to him (as some think he does to all
men in that passage) and tempting him to despair, said, he had don such and
such things, which were not suitable to his Episcopal function. The Bishop
answered, he did not do those things, as a Bishop, but as a temporal Prince. To
this the Devil replied, I am a dull Devil, and can not understand well those
subtle distinctions, as a Prince, and as a Bishop, therfote I will carry you
to hell as you are such a man, and as I find you, without questioning whether
you go as a Prince or as a Bishop. I fear Mr. Walsh, this will be your fate.
You will meet with some dull Devil, one as dull as yourself, a Devil that knows
not how to distinguish between Peter Walsh the Procurator, and Peter Walsh the
Friar. He must be a very acute Devil that can find out any formality or
distinction to excuse your actings, either as Procurator, or Friar. As
Procurator you betrayed your trust, and acted quite contrary to your commission;
and as a Friar you ought not to have taken any without your Superiors leave.
Therefore you being neither Prince, Bishop, nor lawful Procurator, but a poor
simple Franciscan Friar, suppose the Devil had met you when you set out from
Dublin, well mounted (and much finer, I believe, in clothes and ribands, than
the Bishop your Country swain was so much scandalized at) and attended to
search after those poor souls that hid themselves from your persecution,
suppose, I say, the Devil should meet you, and endeavor to hurry you with him
to hell; how could you find out any pretext to excuse, your persecution, your
dress, retinue, and equipage? Was not every Country Clown or swain that saw
it, scandalized? Did not a certain Lady object to you, that S. Francis never
wore such clothes, or trauell'd so; much less persecuted Priests? You object
against F. Netteruille in your book, that he wore a sword in Dublin an. 1666.
If he did, I believe it was to disguise his caracter, and out of respect to the
government; and I am sure it was no silver sword, like yours. But you needed no
disguise. You were and are still a privileged person, because you sent the
poor Priests to prison, and when you could give no legal cause for it, you
said, They were Prisoners of state. But that circumstance of Father Netteruille
putting his hand to his sword, and saying he would never take it from his side,
until he saw the french King, is not credible, though you auerr it very
positiuely. It would incommode him very much in his long journey; and none
would be more surprised at a religious man's wearing a sword in France, than the
French King; neither would such an unnecessary disguise be the way for F.
Netterinlle to make his Court to him.

But the Devil will not in the last hour inueigh so much against you for your
sword, or the fineness of your dress, as for the foulness of your soul, your
persecution, your treasons, and your heresies. These are damnable, whether in a
Bishop, Prince, or Friar. Your pretended Procuratorship for the Irish Clergy
(which is the only excuse you pretend for your actings) can not warrant such
crimes. Will you say at the hour of your death to Satan, when he charges you
with your irregularities, that you acted not as a Friar, but as Procurator of
those few Clergymen who commissioned you, and you confess my Lord of Ormond
checked you soundly for speaking in their behalf? will you answer the Devil
when he charges you with your extorting the Castle of Kilkenny from the Kings
party, to deliver it to the Nuncius, that you committed not that treason as
Friar Walsh, but as Procurator Walsh? He will reply, and prove you did it as
Friar Walsh, and in your Franciscan habit, by virtue of an Excommunication
written and fixed by your own hand. Will you pretend to the Devil, that you
joined with D. Enos in his infamous libel against the peace of 46, as
Procurator Walsh, when you ruined the Kings interest, his Lieutenants credit,
and the Irish Nation? He will grant, you acted as Procurator, but as the Devils
Procurator; and will show your approbation of the libel in print in the first
page thereof; and besides will prove the trust the Nuntius reposed in you, and
how he joined you in a Comittee, at that very time with the same D. Enos, by
your own words page 614. of your great History, where you confess, that by
command from the Nuntius, a Small Comittee of three was appointed, viz. the
Bishop of Ferns, Walter Enos D. of Divinity Author of the book against the
Peace of 1646.) and yourself, to consider of, and draw in writing a Formulary
of precept and Censures, to command all the Roman Clergy, Secular and Regular
out of the English Quarters But this you opposed, and quasht, you say. Why did
not you oppose and quash also (seeing you were in such trust and power) a
greater mischief, the Formulary and excommunication yourself drew and writ for
wresting the Castle of Kilkenny out of the Kings hands? and your own
approbation of D. Enos his libel? Will you pretend you acted as Procurator
Walsh, and not as Friar Walsh, when you struck up with your Impostor Commissary
(as your self terms him) to cheat the King and his Subjects of Money by a
forged Commission of the Pope? and when your Remonstrant brethren went up and
down the Country imposing and raising a Tax and sums of money, wherewith you
and they made good cheer, and were so often merry at the sign of the Harp and
Croun in Oxmontown? Did you draw up your Impostor Commissioners Instructions to
his Visitators and Collectors (who were your Remonstrants) as Friar Walsh, or
as Procurator Walsh? This and much more will the Devil object against you. What
will you answer? You must confess that in all these practices you were not
Procurator for the Irish Clergy, but that you were the Devils Procurator.

You return to the Emperor Charles the 5. and (page 265.) must tell the
Defenders of Belarmin, that Spondanus in his continuation of Baronius his
Annals and an. 1545. says, Charles did summon the aforesaid Hermannus of Colen
to the Diet of Worms at the instance of the Clergy and Vniuerfity of Colen, for
introducing heresy into it by the advice of Buter; and therefore (say you) this
Emperor summond that Archbishop, even as an Archbishop. Why so Mr. Walsh? Might
not the Emperor summon him as an Elector, or as a temporal Prince, for
introducing heresy into the Empire, or into an Imperial Town? Can not a
temporal Prince be guilty of such a fault as well as a Prelat? But if you will
needs have Charles the 5. to be an Infringer of the Ecclesiastical immunities,
our answer is, that he might do so de facto, but not de iure; and that therein
he offended God very grievously. Some say his renuntiation of the Empire, and
his Dominions, proceeded from the particular sense of that sin (if he was
guilty of it) and that the scruple of the Bishops of Segouia's death made him
bury himself alive in a little Cell of the Monastery of Sancta Iusta. Had the
Judge who executed that cruelty bin so penitent as the Emperor, he might have
bin as happy. But perhaps he exceeded his Commission, because I know not of any
other proof that the Emperor consented to the Bishops murder, but that he
never questioned the murderer. The story is this, the Bishop of Segouia, a
popular Prelat in Spain, having bin almost as active in the rebellion of the
Commoners of that Kingdom against Charles the 5. as you Mr. Walsh in the
reiection of the Irish peace of 1646. under the pretense of a visit (because it
was difficult to put him to death publikly) was strangled in his own Palace
and Chamber by Judge Ronquillo, deputed by the Emperor to inquire after, and
punish the Heads of that Rebellion. This clandestin execution, and open breach
of Ecclesiastical immunity, occasioned the usual Censures of the Church against
Ronquillo, who (perhaps being of your opinion, Mr. Walsh, in this matter) took
little notice of the Censures; but in his last sickness he begd the favor of
King Philip the second of Spain, to honor him with his presence, because he had
some thing to communicate to his Majesty of great importance for his service. The
King was pleased to grant him his request. His business was to tell him, that
he had served his Father Charles 5. very faithfully, in putting the Bishop of
Segouia to Death with so little ceremony; therefore to stop his Adversaries
obloquies against that action, he beseecht his Majesty to own and justify the
Act; and then he would dye contented. The King answered it was don in his
Father's reign, and that he might show his Fathers Orders, if he gave him any
to do it; and so aduising him to make his peace with God, the King left him;
and Ronouillo dyed, and was buried in the Church of a religious Convent in
Madrid.

The Story of the Spanish Judge Ronquillo.
What now follows of the Story will seem incredible to such as do not believe
the real presence and Transubstantiation; but I do not hear that you Mr.
Walsh, deny either as yet. Whether your opposing the lawfullness of the
Ecclesiastical Immunities will incline you to doubt of this matter of fact,
generally believed, and frequently printed in Spain, without the least
contradiction, I can not tell; but I am sure you can have no reason to question
a thing confirmed by the sight and testimony of a numerous Community of
religious, who lived by burying the dead; and therefore against whose interest
it was, to publish what happened in their own Church, and to one of their
Benefactors. Some of these religious were living when you were in Spain, and
repeated to as many as desired it of them, what I shall now relate.

That very night wherein Ronquillo's body was buried in their Church, about
midnight one rung the Porteria Bell, and rapt so furiously at the door of the
Convent, that the Porter reprehended the extrauagancy and impatience: but
asking what the matter was, and who they were; (for he saw two) they answered
they were Ministers of Gods justice, which they came to execute in that house
by the Divine Majesty's command; they bid him open the door immediately,
otherwise they would find a way to do it themselves. The Porter gave an account
to the Superior of what he had seen and heard; the Superior assembled all the
Fathers, who were (at the usual hour) preparing to sing Matins in the quire;
they all, much frighted with the Message and the noise, which still continued
at the door, resolved to go in procession thither, to examine the matter, every
Friar confessing, and preparing himself for death, not knowing but that those
Messingers might be sent for himself. The door being opend, the Superior asked
the two persons, who they were and what was their business? They answered, we
are Gods Ministers of justice, and come to execute his command. The Superior
told them, that Convent was Gods house, and therefore it was fit to obey his
Orders. Then the fellows bid the Fathers go to the Church, where the blessed
Sacrament had bin taken out of the Sacrarium and in the Ciborium set upon the
Altar; they followed the Fathers, and when they came to the Church, made a low
bow toward the blessed Sacrament, and bid the Fathers go toward the grave of
Ronquillo, who had bin buried that evening: One of the two, touching the great
Marble stone that lay upon the grave, removed the same without any difficulty;
the other took up Ronquillo's body, and bid one of the Fathers bring the
Ciborium from the Altar to receive in it the blessed Sacrament, which that
wretch had unworthily received before he dyed; and the Friar holding it before
the mouth of the Corpse, he that took Ronquillo out of the grave, struck him on
the back, and the particle fell into the Ciborium, without any coaruption, or
change of the species. Then both those Ministers of Gods justice told the
Fathers, they were sent by his Divine Majesty to carry that body into hell,
where the soul expected it; and sudenly they and the body vanished. All
attributed this manifestation of Gods judgment, to Ronquillo's breach of the
Ecclesiastical immunity, and to his contempt of the Censures thereupon ensuing.
Let this example be a warning for you Mr. Walsh; if God wrought such a Miracle
as this, to discountenance your doctrine, against a rash act of a lay Judge,
whereunto he was tempted by fear perhaps of loosing his employment; or for
being too forward in his Princes service, what judgments ought not you (a
Churchman and a Friar) to fear, even in this world, for wilfully maintaining
that temporal Soueraigns do sin, and dethrone themselves if they grant or make
good to the Clergy those privileges and monuments of piety, whereby Princes are
justly styled Protectors and nursing Fathers of Gods Church; and wherein
consists the greatests glory of their renowned Ancestors?

I have don Mr. Walsh, and beg your pardon for the harshness of my language,
though in a cause and circumstances wherein it would be a crime to be more civil
to such an Adversary as you. I defend the doctrine of the Church, together with
the right of temporal Soueraigns, and the dignity of Bishops against the
virulent passion and bitter pen of a barbarous Friar; and therefore it would be
as ridiculous to treat you with ceremony in this occasion, as it would be
blameable in any other, not to give you the respect due to a gentleman. You say
you are one, I believe, and partly know you are: but if you were not, I should
honor your habit more than your extraction. It is a sad misfortune, that I must
not regard either, and that the same habit which might justly challenge respect
for him that wears it, must be made your greatest reproach, and justify the
contempt of your person. The obligations of a gentleman, and of a Seraphik
Regular, which you have so notoriously violated, makes me use violence against
my nature and inclination, whenever I am severe upon you. I have a great
affection for your person Mr. Walsh, and am sorry I can not as yet express it in
other terms. As I am a defender of the Church, and you an Adversary of the
same, I can not conceal the ways whereby you abuse the illiterat sort of
people, and must in plain english say, you are a Cheat. But if you and I ever
meet, and discourse as private persons, without relation to our Churches, you
shall find me as civil an Admirer of those few good qualities you yet retain,
as I now am a publik Censurer of your errors. We are Countrymen, we are
neighbors Children, we are old acquaintance, we have bin bred together, all our
Ancestors have bin Roman Catholics, our Relations are still so, and you pretend
to be and continue one. Why then should we fall out irreconciliably? Let us
therefore be friends; but first you must be reconciled to the Church, and to the
Superiors of your Order. I have no particular pike to yourself, all my quarrel
is against your book, and I believe few writers will be more moderat, than I
against your opinions, when any takes the pains to consider them.

All I can say to excuse you is, that you writ as you thought, or rather as you
imagined. You know the best wits may be misled by extrauagant fancies.
Imaginatio laesa is a strange thing, Mr. Walsh. I have known a Professor of
moral Divinity, much esteemed for his learned and judicious resolutions of
cases of conscience; and yet this man was fully persuaded he was Don Sebastian
the King of Portugals son, and conuersed with his old Father (inuisibly) every
day. Your disease Mr. Walsh is Imaginatio laesa, you fancy yourself to be a
very learned man; you pity our ignorance, and are resolved to reform the Roman
Catholic Church, so horridly defaced with errors ever since Pope Gregory the
7. I will endeavor to correct this imagination of yours, by letting you see,
that you are not right; that is, I will prove by one of Saint Augustins
arguments (in the following Exhortation) that you are absolutely mad. This is
the only way to cure you, and to reconcile you to God, and his Church. I pray
read these Animaduersions in one of your lucid interuals, and I hope (with the
assistance of God) it will dispose you to repent and retract your follies.

A Charitable Exhortation to Friar Peter Walsh, taken out of S. Augustins works.
MR. Walsh, the great Doctor of Gods Church S. Augustine (Ep. 118.) teaches,
that it is most insolent madness to dispute against that which the universal
(or Catholic) Church practices. Jf this be true it must be concluded, that you
are fallen into that distemper, as I am almost in despair of your cure. For,
one of the effects of madness, is, to deprive the distempered person so totaly
of his wits, that he does not perceive his own follies. A weak or half witted
man has so much sense left, as to see his own weakness and want of advice, but
a madman does not see his own weakness, nor will he be advised. This is your
condition Mr. Walsh, and only God can remedy it, by opening your eyes to see
how ridicul^us it is in you, or any other private person, to pretend and
maintain, that the Church of God has bin infected with the very highest
enormities of principles and practices these 600. years; ever since Pope
Gregory 7. Item that all the Roman Catholic Bishops of the world are either
Traitors to their temporal Soueraigns, or perjured to their Spiritual Superior,
the Pope, for taking before their consecration an oath, which never was
excepted against by any Soueraign Prince, or even private person, but yourself.
Certainly you are persuaded that all Christian Soueraigns, as well as their
Ministers of state, and Counselors, for many ages were mad; seeing they not
only did not except against the Bishops oath, but after the Bishops had taken
it, permitted them to enjoy the great revenues of the Bishopriks in their
Dominions, and trusted them with their consciences and Counsels, employing
them in state affairs, and Embassies, notwithstanding their being Traitors, or
perjured persons. Would any one but a mad man trust a Traitor, or believe a
perjured person?

Mr. Walsh, when a man coms to be stark mad, he thinks all the world is mad,
and that himself alone is wise. You are arrived to this perfection. All
Soueraign Princes, all their Counselors, all their learned and loyal Subjects,
are so notoriously mad (according to the best of your judgment) as to put their
nearest concerns into the hands of Traitors, or perjured Bishops. Good God! How
coms this to pass? I confess our sins are great, and deserve the seuerest
punishments; but sure Gods mercy would never inflict in this life a punishment
of sin, whereby is taken away the possibility of its repentance, and certainly
mad men can not possibly repent. But how com you Mr. Walsh, to be the only man
that escaped this sad punishment? Are not you a sinner like the rest of the
world? Are you the only man in Gods favor, and in your wits? Alas! what an age
is this? Nay what a world, what a Church is this? A Church, that for six entire
Centuries had not one sober man but Peter Walsh? Peter Walsh! A man whom we all
that knew him, took to be no better, nor wiser, than ourselves. But it seems we
are all mad, and therefore can not frame a right judgment, either of him, or of
ourselves.

But Mr. Walsh, Jf all the world besides yourself is mad, how will you persuade
us that you are sober, and we all mad? For my own part, I declare before hand,
I will not believe you in this point, and I am consident most men will be as
obstinat as I, in the good opinion they have of themselves. Remember I tell
you, it will be a difficult thing to alter it. To what purpose then have you
taken the pains to write and print this volume? To persuade people they are
mad, and that their Predecessors have bin so these 600. years past? Set your
heart at rest. None will believe you. So far perhaps we may agree with you,
that either you, or we are mad. The question then will be, whether all the
Roman Catholic world, or you Mr. Walsh, be distracted? who shall be Judge of
this Controversy? Not the Pope, say you; for 80. of them in a row (ever since
Gregory 7.) have bin mad. Let that pass; will you be judged then by the
General Counsels of Lateran, Lions, Florence, or Trent? You can have no other
exception against them, but that every member of them took the oath, which you
say must needs make them Traitors, or perjured persons. I confess if the oath
does work that effect, your exception is rational, and all the Catholic world
was mad in submitting to the Definitions and Decrees of those Councills, and
you are the only sober man that has lived in six ages.

Without doubt these or the like objections occurr to yourself, if you have any
lucid interualls. They occurred to all such Reformers of the Catholic Religion
as you are. They occurred to Luther (whose Ape you are said to be) when he
writ, How often did my trembling heart beat within me, and reprehending me,
object against me that most strong argument; Art thou only wise. Do so many
worlds err? Were so many ages ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so
many into error to be damned with thee eternally? And again. Do thou o sole
man, and of no account, take upon thee so great matters? What if thou being but
one offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all to err, why may he not
permit th^e to err? Hitherto appertain those arguments, the Church, the Church,
the Fathers, the Fathers; the Counsels, the cusloms, the Multitudes, and
greatness of wise men whom do not these clouds, and doubts, yea these seas of
examples ouerwhelm? You see what lucid interualls and illustrations Luther had,
I hope you have the like sometimes. These considerations will infallibly cure
your most insolent madness of disputing against that which the universal Church
belieueth and practices, if you will entertain them.

But if you will reject them, and imitat Luther in preferring your own private
ingment and interpretation of the Scriptures before that of the Church, these
iliustrations and considerations will not cure your disease, nor correct your
erroncous fancies. When a pleasing impression does strike, or affect the
brains, it sinkes so deeply into them (especialy if they be shallow) that the
fancy which it begets, does stick almost inseperably to the person pleased with
it; and becomes a real persuasion, if the man's soul be so much a slave to
vanity and sensual pleasures, as not to reject those, which are against reason.
Its thought Mr. Walsh, by men whom we Catholics take to be sober and judicious
persons, that this is your case. You are hugely pleased with the fancy and
conceit you have of your own abilities and wit, as being much more penetrating,
and your judgment more profound, than that of other men; this fancy is so
deeply rooted in your shallow brains, that you look upon the rest of the world
as distracted persons, when they contradict you. This fancy you prefer before
all contrary evidences, which are as many as your errors. You are so besotted
with it, and with your own sentiments, that you do not perceive their non sense
and contradiction; in this condition you will continue (I fear) until you
resolve to be humble, and forsake those pitiful pleasures, which divert your
reason from correcting your foolish imaginations.

Now that you know the cause of your distemper, though the cure must be
miraculous, and proceed from Gods supernatural grace, yet it is (by his help) in
your own power to obtain it, whenever, like the prodigal child, you will
return to that merciful Father, who with open arms expects you, and will meet
you half way. Return therefore to your heavenly Father, to your holy Mother the
Catholic Church, to your Seraphik Order of S. Francis, and to yourself. Return,
I say, before you be prevented by approaching death, whose herbingers are
already lodged in your diseased body. Your days can not be many; let not that
horrid everlasting night and darkness oppress you at unawares. Let not the
terrible Judge find you in flagranti. Burn your heretical books, that they may
not increase the flames, which otherwise will torment you in hell fit. Jn this
world you can not expect any comfort, but that of an humble and contrite heart.
Your Tenets, so inconsistent with the safety of Soueraigns, render you
incapable of being trusted or rewarded by your own, as your age does of long
enjoying preferment, if any should by mistake be so mad as to move for your
promotion. Though you had bin in the spring of your years yet the uncertainty
of human life, and the length of eternity after it, would make your pleasures
very short and inconsiderable; how much more now, when you draw so near your
end. Jf the apprehended sound and summons of the last days trumpet did keep
Saint Hierom (when he was much younger than you are) in such awe, that he buried
himself alive in the Cave of Bethleem, to the end his mortified body might be
glorified in the day of judgment, with how much more reason ought it to terrify
you, and make you retire to your religious Cell, and there chastise your
pamperd body with the usual disciplines of your holy Order to prepare both for
your particular judgment (which is so near at hand) and for the general,
wherein you will be publikly conuinc't of the falsehood of your doctrine, and of
the folly of your attempts. Let not the punctilio of mistaken honor, nor the
discontinuance of a regular life, nor the pride of obstinat heresy, work more
upon your ambitious and discontented mind, than the example of Christ's
humility, or that of many greater wits than yours, who retracted their
opinions, and submitted their judgments to the Roman Catholic Church, in every
age since the Apostles. Take courage then Father Walsh, set on a brave
resolution; God is at hand to comsort and help you; the Church militant prays
for you; the triumphant longs to rejoice at your conversion, which will be more
glorious to you, even in this world, than your frailties have bin dishonorable.
For my own part, I shall commend your repentance more than I have condemned
your errors and in the mean time shall not cease to offer my best devotions
that you may return to your wits and a virtuous regular life.


