A Seasonable VINDICATION OF THE B. Trinity.

Being an Answer to this Question, Why do you believe the Doctrine of the
Trinity?

Collected from the Works of the Most Reverend, Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. And the Right Reverend, Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Now
Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE.
OUR Modern Socinians (who are pleased to call themselves Unitarians) having
not only Disputed, but most Blasphemously Ridiculed the Doctrine of the B.
Trinity; for the Conviction of such Gainsayers, and the Confirmation of Others,
it is thought fit to Publish the following Discourse, faithfully Collected from
the Learned Works of Archbishop TILLOTSON, and Bishop STILLINGFLEET.

Concerning Bishop STILLINGFLEET, I shall say nothing, because he is alive to
Answer for himself. But as to Archbishop TILLOTSON, I hope it will appear even
from this Collection, That his Grace was very far from being a Socinian;
however his Memory has been very unworthily Reproached in that, as well as
other Respects, since his Death.

A VINDICATION OF THE B. TRINITY.
Q. WHY do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity?

A. Because it is a very Rational Doctrine, that is, there is the highest
Reason to believe it.

Q. What do you mean by this word Trinity? And, What Doctrines concerning it
are proposed to our Belief?

A. I shall Answer this Question in the very words of the Church of England;
Whose Doctrine, I am fully persuaded, is Orthodox and Catholic.

There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without Body, Parts, or
Passions; of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, the Maker and Preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this Godhead there be
Three Persons, of One Substance, Power and Eternity; the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. Art. 1.

The Catholic Faith is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity; neither confounding the Persons; nor dividing the Substance. For
there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy
Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all
one; the Glory equal; the Majesty coeternal. The Father is God, the Son is God,
and the Holy Ghost is God. And yet they are not Three Gods, but One God. Athan.
Creed.

It is very meet, right, and our bounden Duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places give thanks unto thee, O Lord Almighty, Everlasting God. Who art
One God, one Lord; not one only Person, but three Persons in one Substance. For
that which we believe of the Glory of the Father, the same we believe of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any difference or inequality. Pref. on the
Feast of Trinity.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, Three Persons and One God, have mercy
upon us miserable Sinners. Lit.

This is what we believe concerning the Trinity. And that this is very Rational
Doctrine; and that we have the highest Reason thus to believe, I shall
endeavor to evince, when I have first explained the Nature of Faith in
General, by showing, What it is to Believe; and what this act Believe does
denote when applied to any Object.

Q. What is Faith, or Belief in General?

A. Belief in general I define to be, an Assent to that which is Credible as
Credible. V. Bishop Pearson on the Creed, p. 2.

Q. What is meant by this word Assent?

A. By the word Assent is expressed that Act or Habit of the Understanding, by
which it receives, acknowledges, and embraces any thing as a Truth, Id. Ib.

Q. But are there not several other kinds of Assent, besides Faith, by which
the Soul does receive and embrace whatsoever appears to be true?

A. This Assent, or Judgment of any thing to be true, being a general Act of
the Understanding, is applicable to other Habits thereof as well as to Faith.
Id. Ib.

Q. How then is this Assent which we call Faith, specified and distinguished
from those other kinds of Assent?

A. It must be specified as all other Acts are, by its proper Object. Id. Ib.

Q. What is this Object of Faith?

A. This Object of Faith is that which is Credible as Credible.

Q. Why do you repeat the word Credible, and say Credible as Credible?

A. To denote the twofold Object of Faith, viz. Material and Formal.

Q. What is the Material Object of Faith?

A. The Material Object of Faith, is the thing to be believed, or something
which is credible.

Q. What is the Formal Object of Faith?

A. That whereby it is believed, or the Reason why it is believed.

Q. What is it to be Credible?

A. That is properly Credible, which is not apparent of it self (either in
respect of our Senses or Understanding) nor certainly to be collected, either
antecedently by its Cause, or reversely by its Effect, and yet though by none
of these ways, has the Attestation of a Truth. V. Bishop Pearson, p. 3.

Q. What then is that kind of Assent, which is called Faith?

A. When any thing propounded to us is neither apparent to our Sense, nor
evident to our Understanding in and of it self; neither certainly to be
collected from any clear and necessary Connection with the Cause from which it
proceeds, or the Effects which it naturally produces; nor is taken up upon
any real Arguments or Relations to other acknowledged Truths; and yet
notwithstanding appears to us true, not by a Manifestation but Attestation of
the Truth; and so moves us to assent, not of it self, but by virtue of the
Testimony given to it. In plain terms; When we therefore acknowledge a thing to
be true, for this only reason, because we are told that it is so: Then, and in
such a Case we do properly believe it. And the Assent that we give to such a
Truth thus attested, is neither Science nor Opinion, but Faith. Id. Ib.

Q. The nature of Faith in general being thus explained, I am now prepared to
be instructed by you in this important Question; Why do you believe the
Doctrine of the Trinity?

A. Though this Doctrine of the Trinity, viz. That there are Three distinct
Persons in One and the same undivided Divine Essence, is neither apparent to my
Sense, nor evident to my Understanding (for being a great Mystery, I could
never have known it, unless it had been Revealed; and now it is Revealed, I am
not able to comprehend it) yet since it is testified and declared by an
All-knowing, and most just and faithful God, who can neither deceive nor be
deceived, I do therefore give my Assent unto it, as a most credible Truth, and
as such, I do firmly believe it.

Now that God, who is infinite in Wisdom and Knowledge, does fully know
himself, and perfectly understand his own Nature: And also, that He who is
infinitely Good and Faithful cannot deceive us ( for it is impossible for God
to Lie) this I shall not pretend to prove, but can fairly suppose it, as being
granted by the Socinians themselves. The only thing therefore for us to prove,
and which they deny, is this, viz. That the Doctrine of the Trinity is Revealed
by Almighty God. For if we can make it appear, that an infinitely Wise and
Faithful God has Revealed it; we shall then easily convince them, That there
is the highest Reason to believe it.

Q. How then do you prove that God has Revealed it? Where has God told us,
That there are Three distinct Persons, in the same undivided Divine Essence and
Nature?

A. Were I to Discourse an Atheist, or a Deist, then, since all Conviction must
be ex concessis, I ought to prove these Two Things,

1. The Possibility and Necessity of Divine Revelation. 2. That the Books of
the Old and New Testament, which by way of Eminency we call the Scriptures, do
contain this Divine Revelation. And that in these Books God has Revealed so
much of his own Nature, as is necessary for us to know in order to our
Salvation.
But since these Unitarians do profess themselves Christians, and consequently
to believe the Holy Scriptures, I shall have so much Charity for* them at
present, as to suppose it: And shall treat them as such. And then the only
thing I am to prove, is this, viz. That the Doctrine of the Trinity is Revealed
in the Scriptures.

Q. But neither the word Trinity, nor the word Person are to be found in
Scripture. How then can you pretend to prove a Trinity of Persons from the
Scriptures?

A. Though neither the word Trinity, nor perhaps Person, in the Sense in which
it is used by Divines when they treat of this Mystery, be any where to be met
with in Scripture; yet it cannot be denied but that Three are there spoken of
by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name every Christian is
Baptized, and to each of whom the highest Titles and Properties of God are in
Scripture attributed. And these Three are spoken of with as much distinction
from one another, as we use to speak of Three several Persons.

So that though the word Trinity be not found in Scripture, yet these Three are
there expressly and frequently mentioned. And Trinity is nothing but Three of
any Thing. And so likewise though the word Person be not there expressly applied
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; yet it will be very hard to find a more
convenient word whereby to express the distinction of these Three. For which
reason I could never yet see any just Cause to quarrel at this Term. For since
the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture has thought fit in speaking of these Three
to distinguish them from one another, as we use in common Speech to
distinguish* Three several Persons, I cannot see any reason why in the
Explication of this Mystery, which purely depends upon Divine Revelation, we
should not speak of it in the same manner as the Scripture does. And though the
word Person is now become a Term of Art, I see no cause why we should decline
it, so long as we mean by it neither more nor less than what the Scripture says
in other words. V. Archbishop Tillotson's Sermon on 1 Timothy 2. 5. p. 19.

Here then I fix my foot: That there are Three Differences in the Deity, which
the Scripture speaks of by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and every
where speaks of them as we use to do of Three distinct Persons. And therefore I
see no reason why in this Argument we should nicely abstain from using the word
Person. Id. Sermon II. on John 1. 14. p. 120.

Q. You confess then that the word Trinity is not to be found in Scripture.
However, (may these Unitarians reply) Have you not found it in the Athanasian
Creed? And because the Church of England has owned this Creed, by taking it
into her Liturgy, that you may approve your Selves true Sons of the Church,
therefore, say they, you are resolved to Defend it. V. Pref. to Mr. Milb. p. 7.

A. We assert Three Persons in the Godhead, Not because we find them in the
Athanasian Creed; but because the Scripture has Revealed that there are Three,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom the Divine Nature and Attributes are
given. This we verily Believe, that the Scripture has Revealed; and that there
are a great many Places, of which we think no tolerable Sense can be given
without it, and therefore we assert this Doctrine on the same Grounds, on which
we believe the Scriptures. And if there are Three Persons which have the Divine
Nature attributed to them; what must we do in this Case? Must we cast off the
Unity of the Divine Essence? No, that is too frequently and plainly asserted
for us to call it into Question. Must we reject those Scriptures which
attribute Divinity to the Son and Holy Ghost, as well as to the Father? That we
cannot do, unless we cast off those Books of Scripture, wherein those things
are contained. V. Bishop Stillingfleet's Vind. of the Trinity, p. 112.

Q. But is it not trifling to prove a Doctrine by Scripture, which ( as the
Socinians pretend) is contrary to Reason? It being a known Rule (which I shall
express in the words of Bishop Stillingfleet) That, Whatever speaks a direct
Repugnancy to any of the Fundamental Dictates of Nature, cannot be of Divine
Revelation. V. Orig. Sacr. p. 172. For the Law of Nature, and of Right Reason,
imprinted in our hearts, is as truly the Law and Word of God, as is that which
is printed in our Bibles. V. Bishop Sanderson's Ser. 4. ad Cl. p. 78. And
therefore since Truth is never contrary to it self, is it not impertinent to
prove this Doctrine of the Trinity by the Scriptures, which is not only above
Reason, but plainly contrary to it?

A. As to its being above Reason, which they are loath to admit any thing to be;
this I think will bear no great Dispute: Because if they would be pleased to
speak out, they can mean no more by this, but that our Reason is not able fully
to comprehend it. But what then? Are there no Mysteries in Religion? That I am
sure they will not say, because God, whose Infinite Nature and Perfections, are
the very foundation of all Religion, is certainly the greatest Mystery of all
other, and the most incomprehensible. But we must not, nay they will not for
this reason deny, that there is such a Being as God. And therefore if there be
Mysteries in Religion, it is no reasonable Objection against them, that we
cannot fully comprehend them: Because all Mysteries, in what kind soever,
whether in Religion, or in Nature, so long, and so far as they are Mysteries,
are for that very reason incomprehensible. Vid. Archbishop Tillotson, Sermon. II.
on Joh. 1. 14. p. 117.

I desire it may be considered, That it is not repugnant to Reason to believe
some things which are incomprehensible by our Reason; provided that we have
sufficient ground and reason for the belief of them: Especially if they be
concerning God, who is in his Nature Incomprehensible; and we be well assured
that he has revealed them. And therefore it ought not to offend us, that these
Differences in the Deity are incomprehensible by our finite Understandings;
because the Divine Nature it self is so, and yet the belief of that is the
Foundation of all Religion.

There are a great many things in Nature which we cannot comprehend, how they
either are, or can be. Id. Ser. on 1 Timothy 2. 5. page 22.

For my own part, I confess it to be my Opinion, that we converse every day
with very many things, none of which we comprehend. Who is he that comprehends
either the Structure, or the Reason of the Powers of Seminal Forms or Seeds? Or
how the Parts of Matter hold together? Or how, being in their own nature
Lifeless and Senseless, they do (for all that) in some Positures and Textures,
acquire Life, Sensation, and even Volition, Memory and Reason? Or how the Sun
and other vast Heavenly Fires subsist for so many Ages, without any Nourishment
or Fuel; which Fire, of all other Bodies, most requires? Or how, when the Sun
arrives at the Tropicks, he never goes further, either Northward or Southward,
but returns toward the Equator, and thereby preserves the World by his Vital
Warmth? V. Consider. on the Trinity, to H. H. p. 4.

There are many things likewise in our Selves, which no man is able in any
measure to comprehend, as to the manner how they are done and performed. As the
Vital Union of Soul and Body. Who can imagine by what device or means a Spirit
comes to be so closely united, and so firmly linked to a Material Body, that
they are not to be parted without great force and violence offered to Nature?
The like may be said of the Operations of our several Faculties of Sense and
Imagination, of Memory and Reason, and especially of the Liberty of our Wills.
And yet we certainly find all these Faculties in our selves, though we cannot
either comprehend or explain the particular manner in which the several
Operations of them are performed.

And if we cannot comprehend the manner of those Operations, which we plainly
perceive and feel to be in our Selves, much less can we expect to comprehend
things without us; and least of all can we pretend to comprehend the infinite
Nature and Perfections of God, and every thing belonging to him.

Thus you see, by these Instances, that it is not repugnant to Reason to
believe a great many things to be, of the manner of whose Existence we are not
able to give a particular and distinct account. And much less is it repugnant
to Reason to believe those things concerning God, which we are very well
assured he has declared concerning himself, though these things by our Reason
should be incomprehensible.

And this is truly the Case as to the matter now under debate. We are
sufficiently assured that the Scriptures are a Divine Revelation, and that this
Mystery of the Trinity is therein declared to us. Now that we cannot comprehend
it, is no sufficient Reason not to believe it. For if it were a good Reason for
not believing it, then no Man ought to believe that there is a God, because his
Nature is most certainly incomprehensible. But we are assured by many Arguments
that there is a God; and the same natural Reason which assures us, that He is,
does likewise assure us that He is incomprehensible; and therefore our believing
him to be so, does by no means overthrow our Belief of his Being.

In like manner, we are assured by Divine Revelation of the truth of this
Doctrine of the Trinity: and being once assured of that, our not being able
fully to comprehend it, is not reason enough to stagger our belief of it. A Man
cannot deny what he sees, though the necessary consequence of admitting it, may
be something which he cannot comprehend. One cannot deny the frame of this
World which he sees with his eyes, though from thence it will necessarily
follow, that either that or something else must be of it self: Which yet is a
thing, which no man can comprehend how it can be.

And by the same Reason a man must not deny what God says, to be true; though
he cannot comprehend many things which God says: As particularly concerning
this Mystery of the Trinity. It ought then to satisfy us that there is
sufficient Evidence, that this Doctrine is delivered in Scripture, and that
what is there declared concerning it, does not imply a Contradiction. For why
should our finite Understandings pretend to comprehend that which is infinite,
or to Know all the real Differences that are consistent with the Unity of an
Infinite Being; or to be able fully to explain this Mystery by any similitude
or resemblance taken from finite Beings? V. Archbishop Tillotson's Sermon. on 1 Timothy 2. 5. p. 23.

Great Difficulty I acknowledge there is in the explication of it, in which the
further we go, beyond what God has thought fit to reveal to us in Scripture
concerning it, the more we are entangled; and that which men are pleased to
call an explaining of it, does, in my apprehension, often make it more obscure,
that is, less plain than it was before. Which does not so very well agree with
a pretense of Explication. Id. Ser. on Joh. 1. 14. p. 119.

And therefore, though some Learned and Judicious Men may have very commendably
attempted a more particular Explication of this great Mystery by the strength
of Reason, yet I dare not pretend to that, knowing both the difficulty and
danger of such an Attempt, and mine own insufficiency for it.

All that I ever designed upon this Argument, was to make out the Credibility
of the Thing from the Authority of the Holy Scriptures; without descending to a
more particular explication of it than the Scripture has given us: Lest by
endeavoring to lay the Difficulties which are already started about it, new
ones should be raised, and such as may, perhaps, be much harder to be removed,
than those we have now to grapple withal. Nor indeed do I see that it is any
ways necessary to do more; it being sufficient that God has declared what he
thought fit in this matter, and that we do firmly believe what he says
concerning it to be true, though we do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of
all that he has said about it. Id. Ser. on 1 Timothy 2. 5. p. 17.

Q. But these Unitarians do urge the matter much further, and pretend; That
this Mystery of the Trinity, now under debate, is not only above Reason, but
plainly contrary to Reason. For thus they expostulate with the Bishop of
Worcester.

He utterly mistakes ( to give you their own words) in Thinking, that we deny
the Articles of the New Christianity, or Athanasian Religion, because they are
Mysteries, or because we do not comprehend them; we deny them, because we do
comprehend them; we have a clear and distinct perception, that they are not
Mysteries, but Contradictions, Impossibilities, and pure Nonsense. V. Consid.
on Expl. of the Trinity, in a Letter to H. H. p. 4.

Now what Reply has his Lordship made to this?

A. This is a very bold Charge, and not very becoming the Modesty and Decency
of such, who know at the same time that they oppose the Religion publicly
established, and in such things which they look on as some of the principal
Articles of the Christian Faith. V. Vind. of the Trinity. p. 54.

These words contain in them so spiteful, so unjust, and so unreasonable a
Charge upon the Christian Church in general, and our own in particular, that I
could not but think my self concerned, especially since they are Addressed to
me, to do what in me lay (as soon as my uncertain State of Health would permit)
toward the clearing the Fundamental Mystery of the Athanasian Religion, as
they call it, viz. The Doctrine of the Trinity, which is chiefly struck at by
them. V. Pref. p. 2.

Q. It Is a seasonable Service to the Christian Church in general, and our own
in particular, that a Person so eminent for Learning and Prudence, has at this
juncture undertaken the Defense of the B. Trinity. But in what manner does his
Lordship propose to Defend it?

A. Without running into any new Explications, or laying aside any old Terms,
for which he could not see any just occasion.

For however thoughtful Men may think to escape some particular Difficulties
better, by going out of the common Roads; yet they may meet with others, which
they did not foresee, which may make them as well as Others judge it, at last,
a wiser and safer course to keep in the same way, which the Christian Church
has used ever since it has agreed to express her Sense in such Terms, which
were thought most proper for that purpose.

Why then are new Explications started, and Disputes raised and carried on so
warmly about them? We had much better satisfy our selves with that Language
which the Church has received* and is expressed in the Creeds, than go about
with new Terms, to raise new Ferments, especially at a time, when our united
Forces are most necessary against our common Adversaries. No Wise and Good Men
can be fond of any new Inventions, when the Peace of the Church is hazarded by
them. And it is a great pity, that any new Phrases, or Ways of Expression,
should cause unreasonable Heats among those who are really of the same Mind.
Vtd. Pref. p. 2. and 31. and Vind. p. 106.

Q. But how can these Unitarians pretend, that the Doctrine of the Trinity is
contrary to Reason? How, and in what manner have they attempted to prove it?
What Grounds have they for such a Charge as this, of Contradiction and
Impossibility?

A. I shall draw up the Charge in their own Words:

Theirs, they say, is an Accountable and Reasonable Faith, but that of the
Trinitarians is absurd, and contrary both to Reason and to it self; and
therefore not only false but impossible. But wherein lies this Impossibility?
That they soon tell us. Because we affirm that there are Three Persons, who are
severally and each of them true God, and yet there is but One true God. Now,
say they, this is an Error in counting or numbering, which when stood in, is of
all others the most Brutal and inexcusable; and not to discern it, is not to be
a Man. V. Hist. of the Unit. p. 9. n. 7. For we cannot be mistaken in the
Notion of One and Three; We are most certain that One is not Three, and Three
are not One. V. Def. of Hist. of Unit. p. 7. So that here is an Arithmetical,
as well as Grammatical Contradiction. For, in*saying, God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, yet not Three Gods, but One God; a man first
distinctly numbers Three Gods, and then in summing them up, brutishly says, not
Three Gods, but one God. V. Acts of Athanasius, p. 13. Which is plainly, as if
a man should say, Peter, James, and John being three Persons, are one Man; and
One Man is these Three distinct Persons, Peter, James and John. Is it not now a
ridiculous Attempt, as well as a barbarous Indignity, to go about thus to make
Asses of all Mankind, under pretense of teaching them a Creed? V. Notes on
Athanasius's Creed, p. 11.

This is their Charge. And it is very freely spoken, with respect, not merely to
our Church, but the Christian World; which owns this Creed to be a just and
true Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. But there are some Creatures
as remarkable for their untoward Kicking, as for their Stupidity. V. Bishop of
Worcester's Defense of the Trinity, p. 101.

It is strange boldness in men to talk thus of Monstrous Contradictions in
things above their reach. But some have so used themselves to the Language of
Jargon, Nonsense, Contradiction, Impossibility, that it comes from them, as
some men swear, when they do not know it. Id. p. 76.

But that the Rudeness of these Unitarians, in thus condemning the Christian
Church, may more fully appear, let us proceed very distinctly to examine this
matter. Do you therefore, First, give their Objection its full strength, and
then, through Divine Assistance, I Will return you my Answer.

Q. Are not Peter, James, and John, Three distinct Humane Persons?

A. It Is granted.

Q. Are not Peter, James, and John, Three distinct different Men?

A. Who doubts it?

Q. Is it not a Contradiction to say, That Peter is James, or that James and
John are Peter?

A. This likewise must be acknowledged.

Q. Is it not a Contradiction to affirm, That Peter, James and John, being
Three Men, are but One Man? And is it not equally absurd to Declare, That One
Man is these Three Men?

A. Sure I cannot be mistaken in the Notion of One and Three. But am most
certain, That One is not Three, and Three are not One. But what of all this?

Q. Observe what follows. Are not the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
(according to the Athanasian Creed) Three distinct different Divine Persons?

A. I firmly believe it.

Q. And if these Three Divine Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are Three
Gods, is it not a Contradiction to say, there is but One God?

A. To say, there are Three Gods, and yet but One God, is doubtless a
Contradiction. But who affirms, There are Three Gods?

Q. Does not the Athanasian Creed?

A. No. That Creed expressly says, There are not Three Gods, but One God.

Q. If you will not renounce your Reason, I do thus prove it to you. The Father
is God, There is One. The Son is God, There is Two. The Holy Ghost is God,
There is Three. Are not here Three Gods? Do you think me such a Fool, that I
cannot count, One, Two, and Three?

A. Thus indeed the Unitarians do wisely argue. But can these Men of Sense and
Reason think, that the Point in Controversy ever was, Whether in Numbers, One
could be Three, or Three One? If they think so, I wonder they do not think of
another thing; which is, the begging all Trinitarians for Fools; because they
cannot count One, Two and Three; and an Unitarian Jury would certainly cast
them. One would think such Writers had never gone beyond Shop-books; for they
take it for granted, that all depends upon Counting. But these terrible Charges
were some of the most common and trite Objections of Infidels. St. Augustine
mentions it as such when he says; The Infidels sometimes Interrogant enim nos
aliquando Infideles, and dicunt, Patrem quem dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus
Deum. Filium quem dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus Deum. Spiritum Sanctum
quem dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus Deum. Ergo inquiunt, Pater and Filius,
and Spiritus Sanctus tres sunt Dii. Respondemus, Non. Turbantur, quia non
illuminantur, cor clausum habent quia clavem fidel non habent. Aug. in Job. Tr.
39.
ask us, What do you call the Father? we answer, God. What the Son? we answer,
God. What the Holy Ghost? we answer, God. So that here the Infidels make the
same Objection, and draw the very same Inference. Then, say they, the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are three Gods. But what says St. Augustine to this? Had
he no more skill in Arithmetic, than to say, there are Three, and yet but One?
He says plainly that there are not three Gods. The Infidels are troubled,
because they are not Enlightened; their heart is shut up, because they are
without Faith. By which it is plain, he looked on these as the proper
Objections of Infidels, and not of Christians.

But St. Augustine does not give it over so. When you begin Ubi cogitare
coeperis, incipis numerare: Ubi numeraveris, quid numeraveris, non potes
respondere. Pater, Pater est; Filius Filius; Spiritus Sanctus, Spiritus Sanctus
est. Quid sunt isti Tres? non tres Dii? Non. Non tres Omnipotentes? Non, sed
Unus Omnipotens. Hoc solo numerum insinuant, quod ad invicem sunt, non quod ad
se sunt. Id. Ib.
to count, says he, you go on; One, Two and Three. But when you have reckoned
them, what is it you have been counting? The Father is the Father, the Son the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost. What are these Three? Are they not
Three Gods? No. Are they not Three Almighties? No. They are capable of Number
as to their Relation to each other; but not as to their Essence, which is but
one. V. Bishop Stillingfleet's Vindic. of the Trin. p. 58.

Will men never learn to distinguish between Numbers and the Nature of Things?
For Three to be One is a Contradiction in Numbers; but whether an Infinite
Nature can communicate it self to Three different Subsistences, without such a
Division as is among Created Beings, must not be determined by bare Numbers,
but by the Absolute Perfections of the Divine Nature; which must be owned to be
above our Comprehension. Id. Sermon. on 1 Timothy 1. 15. p. 16.

This is plain and convincing to all Modest Unprejudiced Persons. But it seems
our Unitarians are not thus to be convinced: Who do further Object; That it is
as ridiculous to affirm; That the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, being
Three Persons, are One God; as it is to say, that Peter, James, and John, being
Three Persons, are One Man.

Q. If I rightly apprehend them, their Argument is this. Three Human Persons
are Three Men, Therefore Three Divine Persons are Three Gods. And this they
repeat with great Triumph in several of their Pamphlets. What Answer therefore
can you return to this?

A. How can any Man of Sense be satisfied with such kind of Arguments as these?
One would think, they wrote only for such as would take their words; they join
so much Confidence with so very little appearance of Reason. For is not this
great skill in these Matters, to make such a Parallel between three Persons in
the Godhead, and Peter, James and John? Do they think there is no Difference
between an infinitely perfect Being, and such finite limited Creatures as
Individuals among Men are? Do they suppose the Divine Nature capable of such
Division and Separation by Individuals, as Human Nature is?

Q. No, they may say, but ye who hold three Persons must think so.

A. For what reason? We do assert Three Persons, but it is on the account of
Divine Revelation, and in such a manner, as the Divine Nature is capable of it.
For it is a good Rule of Boethius, Talia sunt praedicata, qualia subjecta
permiserint. We must not say that there are Persons in the Trinity, but in such
a manner as is agreeable to the Divine Nature; and if that be not capable of
Division and Separation, then the Persons must be in the same undivided
Essence. Id. Vind. p. 102.

So that herein lies the true Solution of the Difficulty, by considering the
difference between the Humane and Divine Nature. The Humane Nature, being
finite, is capable of Division, Multiplication and Separation. But the Divine
Nature, being Infinite, is not capable of any Division, Multiplication and
Separation.

Now the Divine Essence is that alone which makes God; that can be but One, and
therefore there can be no more Gods than One. But because the same Scripture,
which assures us of the Unity of the Divine Essence, does likewise join the Son
and Holy Ghost in the same Attributes, Operations and Worship, therefore as to
the mutual Relations, we may reckon Three, but as to the Divine Essence, that
can be no more than One.

Here then is the true Reason why we affirm; That Three Human Persons, Peter,
James, and John, are Three Men; and yet Three Divine Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are but One God, Because, The Divine Essence is not
capable of such Division and Separation, as the Human Nature is. Id. p. 64, and
76.

Q. This is full, and to the purpose; and has given great Satisfaction to my
Self, as well as others.

But is there nothing further Objected against the Doctrine of the B. Trinity,
wherein I may be instructed by you?

A. There is an Objection lately started; and I wonder you have not charged me
with it.

Q. Pray let me hear it?

A. It Is this.

Three Divine Substances are Three Gods.

But Three Divine Persons, are Three Divine Substances.

Therefore, Three Divine Persons are Three Gods.

This has most insultingly been repeated by our Unitarians, and has made no
little noise in their late Papers and Pamphlets.

Q. Who revived this old Objection, and how came it now to be brought again
upon the Stage?

A. To understand this matter rightly, we must consider that when the Socinian
Pamphlets first came abroad, some years since, a Learned and Worthy Person of
our Church, who had appeared with great Vigor and Reason against our
Adversaries of the Church of Rome in the late Reign (which ought not to be
forgotten) undertook to defend the Doctrine of the Trinity against the History
of the Unitarians, and the Notes of the Athanasian Creed: But in the warmth of
Disputing, and out of a desire to make this matter more intelligible, he
suffered* himself to be carried beyond the ancient Methods* which the Church
has used to express her Sense by, still retaining the same Fundamental Article
of three Persons in one undivided Essence, but explaining it in such a manner,
as to make each Person to have a peculiar and proper Substance of his own. V.
Bishop of Worcester's Pref. to Vind. of Trin. p. 20.

Q. Let me hear the Opinion of that Learned Person more distinctly.

A. In short it is this: That the same Author asserts, (1.) That it is gross
Sabellianism to say, That there are not three Personal Minds, or Spirits, or
Substances. (2.) That a distinct substantial Person must have a distinct
Substance of his own, proper and peculiar to his own Person. But he owns, that
although there are three distinct Persons, or Minds, each of whom is distinctly
and by himself God, yet there are not three Gods, but One God, or one Divinity.
Which he says, is entirely, and indivisibly, and inseparably in three distinct
Persons or Minds. That the same one Divine Nature is wholly and entirely
communicated by the Eternal Father, to the Eternal Son, and by the Father and
Son to the Eternal Spirit, without any Division or Separation; and so it
remains one still. V. Modest Exam. p. 15, 17, 29, 30.

This is the substance of this new Explication, which has raised such Flames,
that Injunctions from Authority were thought necessary to suppress them. V.
Pref. p. 25.

Q. Pray tell me your Thoughts with freedom. Is this Explication of the
Trinity, by Three distinct Infinite Minds and Substances, Orthodox, or not?

A. Now to deal as impartially in this matter as may be, I do not think our
Understandings one jot helped in the Notion of the Trinity by this Hypothesis;
but that it is liable to as great Difficulties as any other.

Q. You begin then to suspect his Explication.

A. None ought to be fond of it; Or to set it against the general Sense of
others, and the current Expressions of Divines about these Mysteries: Nor to
call the different Opinions of others Heresy or Nonsense, which are provoking
Words, and tend very much to inflame Men's Passions, because their Faith and
Understanding are both called in question, which are very tender Things. V.
Pref. p. 41.

Q. Is it then your Opinion, that this Hypothesis, of Three distinct Substances
in the Trinity, can scarce be Defended?

A. I fear it will be impossible to clear this Hypothesis as to the reconciling
Three Individual Essences with One individual Divine Essence; which looks too
like asserting, That there are Three Gods, and yet but One. Id. p. 31.

Q. Will you please to explain this more fully, that I may better understand it?

A. Can One whole entire indivisible Substance be actually divided into Three
Substances? For if every Person must have a peculiar Substance of his own, and
there be Three Persons, there must be Three peculiar Substances. And how can
there be Three peculiar Substances, and yet but One entire and indivisible
Substance? I do not say, there must be Three divided Substances in Place, or
separate Substances; but they must be divided as three Individuals of the same
kind, which must introduce a Specific Divine Nature, which I think very
inconsistent with the Divine Perfections. Ib. p. 29.

Q. But every Person must have his own proper Substance, and so the Substance
must be divided if there be Three Persons.

A. That every Person must have a Substance to support his Subsistence is not
denied. But the Question is; Whether that Substance must be divided, or not? We
say, where the Substance will bear it, as in Created Beings, a Person has a
separate Substance; that is, the same Nature diversified by Accidents,
Qualities, and a separate Existence. But where these things cannot be, there
the same Essence must remain undivided; but with such Relative Properties as
cannot be confounded. V. Vind. p. 105.

When we speak of Finite Substances and Persons, we are certain that distinct
Persons do imply distinct Substances, because they have a distinct and separate
Existence. But this will not hold in an Infinite Substance, where necessary
Existence does belong to the Idea of it. Id. p. 261.

Q. But say our Unitarians, A Person is an Intelligent Being: and therefore,
Three Persons must needs be three Intelligent Beings. So true it is, that
whosoever acknowledges Three Persons in the Godhead (if he takes the word in
its proper sense)* must admit Three Gods. Which the Learned Doctor cannot
avoid, who says they are Three distinct Minds, Three Substantial Beings, Three
Intelligent Beings: Therefore unavoidably Three Gods. V. Defense of Hist. of
Unit. p. 5.

A. The full and adequate Definition of a Person (from which the Learned Doctor
does. draw his Argument, and the Unitarians their Objection) is not this, as
they suppose, viz. A Person is an Intelligent Substance. For this is but part
of the Definition. But the full and adequate Definition of a Person is this. A
Person is a complete Intelligent Substance, with a peculiar manner of
Subsistence. So that, An Individual Intelligent Substance, is rather supposed
to the making of a Person, than the proper Definition of it. For a Person
relates to something which does distinguish it from another Intelligent
Substance in the same Nature: and therefore the Foundation of it lies in the
peculiar manner of Subsistence, which agrees to One, and to none else of the
kind; and this is it which is called Personality. Which does not consist, I
say, in a mere Intelligent Being, but in that peculiar manner of Subsistence in
that Being, which can be in no other. So that the proper Reason of Personality,
whereby one Person is constituted and distinguished from another, it is the
peculiar manner of Subsistence, whereby one Person has such Properties as are
incommunicable to any other. V. Vind. p. 260, and 72.

From these Premises we are instructed, Why in the Blessed Trinity, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are Three Persons, and yet but One God. The Reason
is this,

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are but One God; because
the Divine Essence, Nature, and Substance, which alone makes God, is entirely
One, and is not capable of any Separation, Multiplication or Division.
Therefore, there can be no more Gods than One. But since these Three, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, have each of them a peculiar manner of Subsistence; That
is, each of these Three has a peculiar Property, incommunicable to any other;
Therefore as to their mutual Relations and Personalities they are Three, but as
to the Divine Essence and Godhead, they are but One. And this is so far from
being contrary to Reason, as the Socinians pretend, that it is highly Rational
to Believe, a Trinity in Unity. That is, Three distinct Persons, and yet but
One God.

As I hope has been fully proved, and that to your Satisfaction.

Q. Before you talk too much of Satisfaction, you must Answer me a Question.

A. What is it?

Q. Do you believe Transubstantiation?

A. No, I do not. But what is this to the purpose? Will you not allow me to
believe the Trinity, unless I will believe Transubstantiation? And must I
renounce the Trinity, because I reject Transubstantiation?

Q. The Unitarians pretend that the Case is parallel.

A. Pray give me their Objection in their own words; and then I shall instruct
you, what Answer to return to these Men of Sense and Reason.

Q. I find that the Belief of a Trinity does Contradict Reason as much as
Transubstantiation. Now who should not scruple an Opinion perfectly parallel
with Transubstantiation, and equally fruitful in Incongruities and
Contradictions? Well then, if the Trinity implies no less Contradiction than
Transubstantiation; why cannot we say, that it cannot be contained in Scripture?
We say, Transubstantiation cannot be found in Scripture, because it is a plain
Contradiction to our Reason; but if the Trinity be also a plain Contradiction
to our Reason, why shall not we be allowed to say, that it cannot be contained in
Scripture? V. Def. of Brief Hist. of Unit. p. 4, and 6. But oh! were the Press
as free for the Unitarians, as it is for other Protestants; how easily would
they make it appear, that the Follies and Contradictions so justly charged on
Transubstantiation; are neither for Number, Consequence, nor Clearness, any way
comparable to those implied in the Athanasian Creed; and that the Trinity has
the same, and no other, Foundation with Transubstantiation? So that we must of
necessity admit Both, or neither. V. Acts of Athanasius, p. 16.

This is the Sum of what they Object. To which I expect an Answer according to
your Promise.

A. As preparatory to a just Answer, I cannot but observe, how exactly these
Socinians do Symbolize with the Papists. For as on the one hand, they of the
Church of Rome are so fondly and obstinately addicted to their own Errors, how
mishappen and monstrous soever, that rather than the Dictates of their Church,
how absurd soever, should be called in question, they will question the truth
even of Christianity it self: and if we will not take in Transubstantiation,
and admit it to be a necessary Article of the Christian Faith, they grow so
sullen and desperate that they matter not what becomes of all the rest: And
rather than not have their Will of us in that which is Controverted, they will
give up that which by their own confession is an undoubted Article of the
Christian Faith, and not controverted on either Side: In like manner; These
Unitarians are so impertinently zealous in their designs against the Trinity,
that rather than admit that Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, they
will plead for Transubstantiation; and this even contrary to the Light and
Dictate of their own Conscience. For the Socinians are hearty Enemies to
Transubstantiation, and have exposed the Absurdity of it with great advantage.
V. Arcbishop Tillotson' s Sermon. on 1 Timothy II. 5. p. 30.

Q. Have you nothing further to say in this matter?

A. You must give me leave to add; I did not expect to have found this Parallel
so often insisted upon, without an Answer to Two Dialogues purposely written on
that Subject, at a time when the Doctrine of the Trinity was used as an
Argument to bring in Transubstantiation, as that is now now alleged for
casting off the other.

But I must do them that right to tell the World, That at that time a Socinian
Answer was written to those Dialogues, which I saw, and wished it might be
Printed, that the World might be satisfied about it and them. But they thought
fit to forbear. And in all their late Pamphlets where this Parallel is so often
repeated, there is but once, that I can find, any notice taken of those
Dialogues, and that in a very superficial manner: for the main Design and Scope
of them is past over. V. Vind. of Trinit. p. 287.

And I must needs remind these Unitarians, that it is not fair nor
Scholar-like, so insultingly to repeat the Parallel between the Trinity and
Transubstantiation, which has been so fully confuted in those Two Dialogues.

Q. You promised an Answer, and you bring me a Challenge: Which I shall send to
the Unitarians. Who indeed are obliged, in point of Honor, to give
Satisfaction, by a just Reply to those Two Dialogues.

A. If they would consult their Reputation, and credit their Cause, they ought
not to defer it. For those Two Dialogues were writ by an Author, Who (to give
you the very words of an Unitarian) has all the Properties, for which an
Adversary may be either feared, or Reverenced. He understands perfectly the
Doctrine of the Church; and the Points in Question. He will commit no
oversights through Ignorance, Have, or Inadversion. He is too experienced and
Judicious to hazard his Cause, as others have lately done, on the Success of a
Half-thought Hypothesis, a Crude Invention, a pretty New Querk. In a word, we
can only say of him, since there is no Remedy, Contenti simus hoc Catone. V.
Consid. etc. in a Letter to H. H. p. 3.

Such an Adversary as this is worthy the Pens of their Ablest Writers. If
therefore at this Juncture, when the Press is open, these Unitarians shall not
Answer those Dialogues, I must with freedom tell them, It is not because they
dare not, but because they cannot.

Q. Leaving these Unitarians to defend their Parallel at their leisure; let me
now hear your Answer which you were pleased to Promise.

A. I shall endeavor to return a more particular Answer to this Objection; and
such a One as I hope will satisfy every considerate and unprejudiced Mind, that
after all this confidence and swaggering of theirs, there is by no means equal
Reason either for the receiving, or for the rejecting of these two Doctrines of
the Trinity and Transubstantiation. Vid. Archbishop Tillotson's Sermon. on 1 Timothy
II. 5. p. 30.

Q. First; Let us examine, whether there be equal Reason for the Belief of
these Two Doctrines?

A. If this Suggestion of theirs be of any force, we must suppose that there is
equal Evidence and Proof from Scripture for these Two Doctrines.

Q. How do you prove there is not?

A. From the Confession of our Adversaries themselves. For several Learned
Writers of the Church of Rome have freely acknowledged, that Transubstantiation
can neither be directly proved, nor necessarily concluded from Scripture. But
this the Writers of the Christian Church did never acknowledge concerning the
Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ; but have always appealed to the clear and
undeniable Testimonies of Scripture for the Proof of these Doctrines. And then
the whole force of the Objection amounts to this; That if I am bound to Believe
what I am sure God says, though I cannot Comprehend it; then I am bound by the
same reason to believe the greatest Absurdity in the World, though I have no
manner of assurance of any Divine Revelation concerning it.

Q. You think then, that as there is not equal reason for the Believing, so
neither is there equal reason for the rejecting of these Two Doctrines.

A. This the Objection supposes; Which yet cannot be supposed but upon one or
both of these Two Grounds. Either 1. Because these Two Doctrines are equally
Incomprehensible. Or, 2. Because they are equally loaded with Absurdities and
Contradictions.


Q. As to the First; Is not the Trinity as Incomprehensible as
Transubstantiation, and as such equally to be rejected?

A. It is not good ground of rejecting any Doctrine, merely because it is
Incomprehensible; as I have abundantly showed already. But besides this, there
is a wide difference between plain matters of Sense, and Mysteries concerning
God. And it does by no means follow, that if a man do once admit any thing
concerning God which he cannot comprehend, he has no reason afterward to
Believe what he himself Sees. This is a most unreasonable and destructive way
of arguing, because it strikes at the Foundation of all Certainty, and sets
every Man at Liberty to deny the most plain and evident Truths of Christianity,
if he may not be humoured in having the absurdest things in the World admitted
for true. The next step will be to persuade us, that we may as well deny the
Being of God, because his Nature is incomprehensible by our Reason, as deny
Transubstantiation because it evidently contradicts our Senses. Id. Ib. p. 32.

Q. As Transubstantiation evidently contradicts our Senses; So these Unitarians
pretend, that the Trinity as evidently contradicts our Reason. And then, say
they, are not these Two Doctrines loaded with the like Absurdities and
Contradictions?

A. So far from this, that the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is delivered in
the Scriptures, and has already been explained, has no Absurdity or
Contradiction either involved in it, or necessarily consequent upon it. But the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is big with all imaginable Absurdity and
Contradiction. As the Unitarians themselves do acknowledge: And therefore I am
not now concerned to prove it.

Q. However you are concerned to defend the Trinity. The Contradictions and
Absurdities of which (as these Unitarians pretend) are as great as those of
Transubstantiation.

A. I cannot help their Pretenses. But if their Prejudices will allow them to
examine my Reasons, I shall yet further endeavor their Conviction. And that I
may do it the more effectually, I shall desire You (as their Advocate, and in
their Name) to produce those Absurdities which appear the most dreadful.

Q. I shall reduce all to these Two, which comprehend the rest. 1. How there
can be Three Persons, and but One God. 2. How these can agree in a Third, and
not agree among themselves.


For the First, it seems very absurd, that there should be Three Persons really
distinct, whereof every one is God, and yet there should not be Three Gods. For
nothing is more Contradictious, than to make Three not to be Three; or Three to
be but One.

A. I hope now you will give me leave to make an Answer to your Difficulty, as
distinct as possible.

It is very true, that according to Arithmetic, Three cannot be One, nor One
Three. But we must distinguish between the bare Numeration, and the Things
numbered. The repetition of three Units, certainly makes three distinct Numbers;
but it does not make Three Persons to be Three Natures. And therefore as to the
Things themselves, we must go from the bare Numbers to consider their Nature.

We do not say, that Three Persons are but One Person, or that One Nature is
Three Natures; but that there are Three Persons in One Nature. If therefore One
Individual Nature be communicable to Three Persons, there is no appearance of
Absurdity in this Doctrine. And on the other side, it will be impossible there
should be three Gods, where there is one and the same Individual Nature. For
Three Gods must have Three several Divine Natures, since it is the Divine
Essence which makes a God. V. Two Dial. Part. II. p. 24.

But of this there has been given so full an Account in this Collection, that
those who shall seriously and attentively consider it, will, I hope, through
God's Blessing, receive Satisfaction.

Q. But yet you have not Answered the other great Difficulty in Point of
Reason, viz. That those Things which agree or disagree in a Third, must agree
or disagree One with the Other. And therefore if the Father be God, the Son
God, and the Holy Ghost God; then the Father must be Son and Holy Ghost, and
the Son and Holy Ghost must be the Father. If not, then they are really the
same, and really distinct; the same as to Essence, distinct as to Persons; and
so they are the same, and not the same, which is a Contradiction.

A. Now I think you have drawn out the most refined Spirits of Socinianism, to
make the Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation parallel, because, you
say, it implies a Contradiction; Which is the nearest Parallel you have yet
offered at. But this terrible Argument is grounded on this mistaken
Supposition, viz. That the Divine Essence is no more capable of communicating
it self to Three distinct Persons, than any Created Being is. The Reason of
that Axiom being, That Created Things, by reason of their finite Nature, cannot
diffuse or communicate themselves to more than one; and therefore those which
agree in a Third, must agree together. But supposing it possible that the same
finite Nature could extend it self to several Individuals, it would be
presently answered; The Axiom did hold only, where they did adequately and
reciprocally agree, and not where they did agree only in Essence, but differed
in the manner of Subsistence. For where a different manner of Subsistence is
supposed possible, in the same Individual Nature, the Agreement in that cannot
take away that Difference which is consistent with it; which we attribute to
the unlimitedness and perfection of the Divine Nature.

Q. But you can bring no other Instance but the thing in Question; and
therefore this is a Petitio Principii, or taking that for granted which is in
Dispute.

A. I do not think it to be so, where the Reason is assigned from the peculiar
Properties of the Divine Nature, to which there can be no Parallel. And I think
it very unreasonable in the Socinians, to send us to Created Beings for the
Rules and Measures of our Judgment, concerning a Being acknowledged to be
Infinite.

Q. Are not the Divine Persons Infinite, as well as the Divine Nature? And
therefore as Created Persons do take in the whole Nature, so Infinite Persons
will do the Infinite Nature.

A. No question, but the Persons are Infinite in regard of the Nature which is
so; but if an Infinite Nature be communicable to more Persons than One, every
such Person cannot appropriate the whole Nature to it self.

Q. If the Difference be on the account of Infinity, then there must be an
infinite number of Persons in the Divine Essence.

A. I answer; that infiniteness of Number is no Perfection; and as to the
Number of Persons, we follow not our own Conjectures, nor the Authority of the
Church; but Divine Revelation, which has assured us, that there is but One
God, and yet there are Three that are One. Which depends not merely on the
Place of St. John, but the Form of Baptism is remarkable to this purpose; which
joins together the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; without any other
distinction besides that of Order and Relation: And it is against the
Fundamental Design of Christianity, to join any Created Beings together with
God in so solemn an Act of Religion. And St. Paul joins them together in his
Benediction: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God* and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen. 2 Cor. 12. 14. From whence
the Christian Church has always believed a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of
the Divine Nature. V. Two Dial. Part II. p. 31.

THE CLOSE.
THE Unitarians themselves cannot deny, that many Things certainly are, the
particular manner of whose Existence we can neither Comprehend nor Explain.
Therefore, though the particular Manner of the Existence of these Three
Differences or Persons in the Divine Nature, expressed in Scripture by the
Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is incomprehensible by our finite
Understandings, and inexplicable by us; that is, though the manner of the Union
and Distinction between them, is above our Reach and Comprehension; yet
considering the infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature, which are so far
above our reach, God may justly oblige us to believe those Things concerning
Himself, which we are not able to Comprehend.

And of this, I hope, I have given a sufficient Account in the foregoing
Discourse.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Doctrine of the Trinity is a very Rational Doctrine. P. 1 What is meant by
this Word Trinity, and what Doctrines concerning it are proposed to our Belief?
2 What is Faith or Belief in General? 5 Why we believe the Doctrine of the
Trinity? 10 How it can be proved that God has Revealed it? 12 Object. Neither
the word Trinity, nor the word Person are to be found in Scripture. Answered.
14 Object. It Is the Doctrine of the Athanasian Creed, Therefore, the Clergy of
the Church of England are resolved to Defend it. Answered. 19 Object. It Is
above Reason. Answ. 22 It Is not repugnant to Reason to believe some Things
which are incomprehensible by our Reason. 24 Object. It Is contrary to Reason.
Answ. 44 Object. Three Divine Persons, are Three Divine Substances, Therefore
Three Gods. Answ. 59 The Parallel between the Trinity and Transubstantiation
largely considered. 75 The Close. 104
Catalogue of some Books Printed for B. Aylmer.
A Conference with an Anabaptist. Being a Defense of Infant Baptism. In 8vo.
Price 12 d.

A Theological Discourse of Last Wills and Testaments. In 8vo. Price 12 d.

A Discourse concerning a Deathbed Repentance. Price 6 d.

A Seasonable Vindication of the B. Trinity. Being an Answer to this Question,
Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the Works of the
Most Reverend, Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. And the
Right Reverend, Dr. Edward Stillingsteet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester. Price
12 d

A Short Exposition (of the Preliminary Questions and Answers) of the Church
Catechism. Being an Introduction to a Defense of Infant Baptism. Price 2 d.

Directions in order to the Suppressing of Debauchery and Prophaneneness. 2 d.

A Discourse against Blasphemy. Being a Conference with M. S. Concerning 1. The
Rudeness of Atheistical Discourse. 2. The Certainty and Eternity of
Hell Torments. 3. The Truth and Authority of the Holy Scripture. 2 d.

A Discourse against 1. Drunkenness. 2. Swearing and Cursing. 2 d.

The Plain Man's Devotion. Part 1. Being a Method of Daily Devotion, fitted to
the meanest Capacities. 2 d.

The Plain Man's Devotion. Part 2. Being a Method of Devotion for the
Lord's Day. 2 d.

These are the price of each of these small Books single; but for the
encouragement of those that are so charitably inclined to give away some
quantities of them, they may have them at Ten shillings a hundred, At Brab.
Aylmer' s, in Cornhill.

These above, all Writ by the Reverend William Assheton. D. D.

Six Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of Our Blessed Savior;
His Sacrifice and Satisfaction: And of the Unity of the Divine Nature in the B.
Trinity. By his Grace, John, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. In 8vo.

Certain Propositions by which the Doctrine of the H. Trinity is so explained,
according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not contradictory to Reason.

A Second Defense of the Propositions.

Both by Edward, Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

A Brief Exposition on the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments. To
which is added the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. And late
Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. This on the Creed never before Published:
Being very different from the Volume of Sermons on it. In 8vo.

Now in the Press.
A Defense of the Blessed Trinity. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. Never before Printed.
Price 1 s.


