A SERMON Preached at White Hall, April the 4th, 1679.

By JOHN TILLOTSON D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil: And William Rogers, at the Maidenhead over against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXIX.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL April the 4th, 1679.
i JOHN iv.i. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


THis caution and counsel was given upon occasion of the false Prophets and
Teachers that were risen up in the Church, who endeavored to seduce men from
the true Doctrine of the Gospel delivered by the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior. And these teaching contrary things, could not both be from God: and
therefore St. John calls upon Christians to examine the Doctrines and Pretenses
of those new Teachers; whether they were from God or not. Believe not every
Spirit; that is, not every one that takes upon him to be inspired and to be a
Teacher come from God: But try the Spirits; that is, examine those that make
this pretense, whether it be real or not; and examine the Doctrines which they
bring: because there are many Impostors abroad in the World.

This is the plain sense of the Words: In which there are contained these four
Propositions.

First, That men may, and often do, falsely pretend to Inspiration. And this is
the Reason upon which the Apostle grounds this Exhortation: Because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World, therefore we should try who are true, and
who are false.

Secondly, We are not to believe every one that pretends to be inspired, and to
teach a Divine Doctrine: This follows upon the former: because men may falsely
pretend to Inspiration, therefore we are not to believe every one that makes
this pretense. For any man that has but confidence enough, and conscience
little enough, may pretend to come from God. And if we admit all pretenses of
this kind, we lie at the mercy of every crafty and confident man, to be led by
him into what delusions he pleases.

Thirdly, Neither are we to reject all that pretend to come from God. This is
sufficiently implied in the Text; for where the Apostle says, believe not every
Spirit, he supposes we are to believe some; and when he says, try the Spirits
whether they be of God, he supposes some to be of God, and that those which
are so, are to be believed. These three Observations are so plain that I need
only to name them, to make way for the

Fourth, Which I principally designed to insist upon from these Words. And that
is this, That there is some way to discern mere pretenders to Inspiration, from
those who are truly and Divinely inspired: And this is necessarily implied in
the Apostles bidding us to try the Spirits whether they are of God. For it were
in vain to make any trial, if there be no way to discern between pretended and
real Inspirations.

Now the handling of this will give occasion to two very material Enquiries,
and useful to be resolved.

I. How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines: those which
really are from God, and those which only pretend to be so?

II. To whom this judgment of discerning does appertain?

How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines and Revelations? For
the clearing of this I shall lay down these following Propositions.

1. That Reason is the faculty whereby Revelations are to be discerned; or to
use the phrase in the Text, it is that whereby we are to judge what Spirits are
of God, and what not. For all Revelation from God supposes us to be men, and
to be endued with Reason; and therefore it does not create new Faculties in us,
but propounds new Objects to that Faculty which was in us before. Whatever
Doctrines God reveals to men are propounded to their Understandings, and by
this Faculty we are to examine all Doctrines which pretend to be from God, and
upon examination to judge whether there be reason to receive them as Divine, or
to reject them as Impostures.

2. All supernatural Revelation supposes the truth of the Principles of
Natural Religion. We must first be assured that there is a God, before we can
know that he has made any Revelation of himself: and we must know that all his
Words are true, otherwise there were no sufficient reason to believe the
Revelations which he makes to us: and we must believe his Authority over us,
and that he will reward our obedience to his Laws, and punish our breach of
them; otherwise there would neither be sufficient obligation nor encouragement
to Obedience. These, and many other things, are supposed to be true, and
naturally known to us, antecedently to all supernatural Revelation; otherwise
the Revelations of God would signify nothing to us, nor be of any force with us.

3. All Reasonings about Divine Revelations must necessarily be governed by the
Principles of Natural Religion: that is, by those apprehensions which men
naturally have of the Divine perfections, and by the clear Notions of good and
evil, which are imprinted upon our Natures. Because we have no other way to
judge what is worthy of God and credible to be believed by him, and what not,
but by the natural notions which we have of God, and of his essential
perfections: which, because we know him to be immutable, we have reason to
believe he will never contradict. And by these Principles likewise, we are to
interpret what God has revealed; and when any doubt arises concerning the
meaning of any divine Revelation (as that of the Holy Scriptures) we are to
govern our selves in the interpretation of it, by what is most agreeable to
those natural Notions which we have of God, and we have all the reason in the
World to reject that sense which is contrary thereto. For instance, when God is
represented in Scripture as having a humane shape, eyes, ears and hands, the
Notions which men naturally have of the divine Nature and Perfections do
sufficiently direct us to interpret these expressions in a sense worthy of God,
and agreeable to his perfection: And therefore it is reasonable to understand
them as rather spoken to our capacity, and in a Figure, than to be literally
intended. And this will proportionably hold in many other cases.

4. Nothing ought to be received as a Revelation from God which plainly
contradicts the Principles of Natural Religion, or overthrows the certainty of
them. For instance, it were in vain to pretend a Revelation from God, That
there is no God, because this is a contradiction in terms. So likewise to
pretend a command from God, That we are to hate and despise him; because it is
not credible that God should require any thing of Reasonable Creatures so
unsuitable to their Natures, and to their Obligations to him: Besides, that
such a Law as this does tacitly involve a contradiction; because upon such a
supposition, to despise God would be to obey him; and yet to obey him is
certainly to honor him. So that in this case to honor God, and to despise
him, would be the same thing, and equal contempts of him. In like manner, it
would be vain to pretend any Revelation from God, That there is no life after
this, nor rewards and punishments in another World: because this is contrary to
those natural apprehensions which have generally possessed mankind, and would
take away the main force and sanction of the divine Laws. The like may be said,
concerning any pretended Revelation from God, which evidently contradicts those
natural Notions which men have of good and evil; as, That God should command,
or allow Sedition and Rebellion, Perfidiousness and Perjury; because the
practice of these would be apparently destructive of the peace and happiness of
Mankind, and would naturally bring confusion into the World: But God is not the
God of Confusion, but of Order, which St. Paul appeals to as a Principle
naturally known. Upon the same account nothing ought to be entertained as a
Divine Revelation which overthrows the Principles of natural Religion; because
that would take away the certainty of Divine Revelation it self, which
supposes the truth of those Principles. For instance, whoever pretends any
Revelation that brings the Providence of God into question, does by that very
thing make such a Revelation questionable. For if God take no care of the
World, have no concernment for humane affairs, why should we believe that he
makes any Revelation of his Will to men? And by this Principle Moses will have
false Prophets to be tried: Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise among you a Prophet, and
gives thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof
he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods, and let us serve them;
thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet: And he gives the reason
of this, ver. 5. because he has spoken unto you to turn you away from the Lord
your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt. Here is a case wherein a
false Prophet is supposed to work a true Miracle, to give credit to his
Doctrine, (which in other cases the Scripture makes the sign of a true
Prophet), but yet in this case he is to be rejected as an Impostor: Because the
Doctrine he teaches, would draw men off from the worship of the true God, who
is naturally known, and had manifested himself to the people of Israel in so
miraculous a manner, by bringing them out of the Land of Egypt. So that a
Miracle is not enough to give credit to a Prophet who teaches any thing
contrary to that natural Notion which men have, That there is but one God, who
only ought to be worshipped.

5. Nothing ought to be received as a Divine Doctrine and Revelation, without
good evidence that it is so: that is, without some Argument sufficient to
satisfy a prudent and considerate man. Now (supposing there be nothing in the
matter of the Revelation that is evidently contrary to the Principles of
Natural Religion, nor to any former Revelation which has already received a
greater and more solemn attestation from God) Miracles are owned by all Mankind
to be a sufficient Testimony to any Person, or Doctrine, that they are from
God. This was the Testimony which God gave to Moses to satisfy the people of
Israel that he had sent him; Exodus 4.1, 2. Moses said, They will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, The Lord has not appeared
unto thee. Upon this God endues him with a power of Miracles, to be an evidence
to them, that they may believe that the God of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob has appeared unto thee. And all along in the Old Testament, when God
sent his Prophets to make a new Revelation, or upon any strange and
extraordinary message, he always gave credit to them by some Sign or Wonder
which they foretold or wrought. And when he sent his Son into the World, he
gave Testimony to him by innumerable great and unquestionable Miracles, more
and greater than Moses and all the Prophets had wrought. And there was great
Reason for this; because our Savior came not only to publish a new Religion to
the World, but to put an end to that Religion which God had instituted before.
And now that the Gospel has had the confirmation of such Miracles as never
were wrought upon any other occasion, no Evidence inferior to this can in
reason control this Revelation, or give credit to any thing contrary to it.
And therefore though the false Prophets and Antichrists, foretold by our
Savior, did really work Miracles, yet they were so inconsiderable in
comparison of our Saviors, that they deserve no credit in opposition to that
Revelation which had so clear a Testimony given to it from Heaven, by Miracles,
besides all other concurring Arguments to confirm it.

6. And Lastly, No Argument is sufficient to prove a Doctrine or Revelation to
be from God, which is not clearer and stronger than the Difficulties and
Objections against it: Because all Assent is grounded upon Evidence, and the
strongest and clearest evidence always carries it: But where the evidence is
equal on both sides, that can produce nothing but a suspense and doubt in the
mind whether the thing be true or not. If Moses had not confuted Pharaoh's
Magicians by working Miracles which they could not work, they might reasonably
have disputed it with him who had been the true Prophet: But when he did works
plainly above the power of their Magic and the Devil to do, then they
submitted, and acknowledged that there was the Finger of God. So likewise,
though a person work a Miracle (which ordinarily is a good evidence that he is
sent by God) yet if the Doctrine he brings be plainly contrary to those natural
Notions which we have of God, this is a better objection aginst the truth of
his Doctrine than the other is a proof of it; as is plain in the case which
Moses puts, Deuteronomy. 13. which I mentioned before.

Upon the same account no man can reasonably believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation to be revealed by God: because every man has as great
evidence that Transubstantiation is false, as any man can pretend to have that
God has revealed any such thing. Suppose Transubstantiation to be part of the
Christian Doctrine, it must have the same confirmation with the whole, and that
is Miracles: But of all Doctrines in the world it is peculiarly incapable of
being proved by a Miracle. For if a Miracle were wrought for the proof of it,
the very same assurance which a man has of the truth of the Miracle, he has
of the falsehood of the Doctrine, that is, the clear evidence of his senses for
both. For that there is a Miracle wrought to prove, that what he sees in the
Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ, he has only the evidence of his
senses; and he has the very same evidence to prove, that what he sees in the
Sacrament is not the body of Christ, but bread. So that here arises a new
controversy, whether a man should believe his senses giving testimony against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or bearing testimony to the Miracle which
is wrought to confirm that Doctrine: For there is just the same evidence
against the truth of the Doctrine, which there is for the truth of the Miracle.
So that the Argument for Transubstantiation, and the Objection against it, do
just balance one another; and where the weights in both Scales are equal, it
is impossible that the one should weigh down the other: and consequently
Transubstantiation is not to be proved by a Miracle; for that would be, to
prove to a man by something that he sees, that he does not see what he sees.

And thus I have endeavored, as briefly and clearly as I could, to give
satisfaction to the first Enquiry I propounded, viz. How we may discern between
true and counterfeit Revelations and Doctrines? I proceed now to the

To whom this judgment of Discerning does appertain. Whether to Christians in
general, or to some particular Person, or Persons, authorized by God to judge
for the rest of mankind, by whose judgment all men are concluded and bound up.
And this is an enquiry of no small Importance; because it is one of the most
fundamental Points in difference between Us and the Church of Rome. And however
in many particular Controversies, as concerning Transubstantiation, the
Communion in one kind, the Service of God in an unknown Tongue; the business of
Indulgences, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, they are not able
to offer any thing that is fit to move a reasonable and considerate man; yet in
this Controversy, concerning the Judge of Controversies, they are not destitute
of some specious appearance of Reason which deserves to be weighed and
considered. Therefore that we may examine this matter to the bottom, I shall do
these three things.

1. Lay down some Cautions and Limitations whereby we may understand how far
the generality of Christians are allowed to judge in matters of Religion.

2. I shall represent the grounds of this Principle.

3. Endeavor to satisfy the main Objection of our Adversaries against it: And
likewise to show, that there is no such reason and necessity for an universal
infallible Judge as they pretend.

I. I shall lay down some Cautions and Limitations, by which we may understand
how far the generality of Christians are allowed to judge in matters of Religion.

First, Private Persons are only to judge for themselves, and not to impose
their Judgment upon others, as if they had any Authority over them. And this is
reasonable, because if it were otherwise, a Man would deprive others of that
liberty which he assumes to himself, and which he can claim upon no other
account, but because it belongs to others equally with himself.

Secondly, This liberty of judging is not so to be understood as to take away
the necessity and use of Guides and Teachers in Religion. Nor can this be
denied to be a reasonable limitation; because the knowledge of revealed
Religion is not a thing born with us, nor ordinarily supernaturally infused
into men; but is to be learned, as other things are. And if it be to be
learned, there must be some to teach and instruct others: And they that will
learn, must be modest and humble; and in those things, of which they are no
competent Judges, they must give credit to their Teachers, and trust their
skill: For instance, every unlearned man is to take it upon the credit of those
who are skilful, That the Scriptures are truly and faithfully translated; and
for the understanding of obscure Texts of Scripture, and more difficult points
in Religion, he is to rely upon those, whose proper business and employment it
is to apply themselves to the understanding of these things. For in these cases
every man is not capable of judging himself, and therefore he must necessarily
trust others: And in all other things he ought to be modest; and unless it be
in plain matters, which every man can judge of, he ought rather to distrust
himself than his Teacher.

And this respect may be given to a Teacher without either supposing him to be
infallible, or making an absolute resignation of my judgment to him. A man may
be a very able Teacher (suppose of the Mathematics) and fit to have the
respect which is due to a Teacher, though he be not infallible in those
Sciences: and because Infallibility is not necessary to such a Teacher, it is
neither necessary nor convenient that I should absolutely resign up my Judgment
to him For though I have reason to credit him, within the compass of his Art,
in things which I do not know, I am not therefore bound to believe him in
things plain contrary to what I and all mankind do certainly know. For example,
if upon pretense of his skill in Arithmetic, which I am learning of him, he
should tell me, That twice two do not make four, but five; though I believed
him to be the best Mathematician in the World, yet I cannot believe him in this
thing: Nor is there reason I should; because I did not come to learn this of
him, but knew as much of that before as he or any man else could tell me. The
case is the same in matters of Religion, in which there are some things so
plain, and lie so level to all capacities, that every man is almost equally
judge of them: As I shall have occasion farther to show by and by.

Thirdly, Neither does this liberty of judging exempt men from a due submission
and obedience to their Teachers and Governors. Every man is bound to obey the
lawful Commands of his Governors: and what by public consent and Authority is
determined and established, ought not to be gainsaid by private Persons, but
upon very clear evidence of the falsehood or unlawfulness of it. And this is
every man's duty, for the maintaining of Order, and out of regard to the Peace
and Unity of the Church; which is not to be violated upon every scruple and
frivolous pretense: And when men are perverse and disobedient, Authority is
Judge, and may restrain and punish them.

Fourthly, Nor do I so far extend this Liberty of judging in Religion, as to
think every man fit to dispute the Controversies of Religion. A great part of
people are ignorant, and of so mean capacity, as not to be able to judge of the
force of a very good Argument, much less of the issue of a long Dispute: and
such persons ought not to engage in disputes of Religion; but to beg God's
direction, and to rely upon their Teachers; and above all to live up to the
plain dictates of natural Light, and the clear Commands of God's Word; and this
will be their best security. And if the providence of God have placed them
under such Guides as do seduce them into Error, their Ignorance is invincible,
and God will not condemn them for it, so long as they sincerely endeavor to do
the will of God so far as they know it. And this being the case of many,
especially in the Church of Rome, where Ignorance is so industriously
cherished, I have so much charity as to hope well concerning many of them: And
seeing that Church teaches and enjoins the people to worship Images, it is in
some sense charitably done of them not to let them know the second Commandment,
that they may not be guilty of sinning against so plain a Law. Having premised
these Cautions, I proceed in the

II. Place, To represent to you the grounds of this Principle of our Religion,
viz. That we allow private persons to judge for themselves in matters of
Religion.

First, Because many things in Religion, especially those which are most
necessary to be believed and practiced, are so plain that every man of ordinary
capacity, after competent instruction in matters of Religion (which is always
to be supposed) can as well judge of them for himself, as any man or company of
men in the world can judge for him. Because in these he has a plain Rule to go
by, Natural Light and clear Revelation of Scripture. And this is no new
Principle of the Protestants, but most expressly owned by the ancient Fathers:
Whatever things are necessary, are plain, says St. Chrysostom. All things are
plainly contained in Scripture which concern faith and a good life, says St.
Austin. And nothing can be more reasonable than that those things which are
plain to every man should be left to every man's judgment. For every man can
judge of what is plain; of evident Truth and Falsehood, Virtue and Vice; of
Doctrines and Laws plainly delivered in Scripture, if we believe any thing to
be so, which it is next to madness to deny. I will refer it to no man's
judgment upon earth to determine for me, Whether there be a God or not? Whether
Murder and Perjury be Sins? Whether it be not plain in Scripture, That Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, That he became man, and died for us, and rose again.
So that there is no need of a Judge in these cases. Nor can I possiby believe
any man to be so absolutely infallible, as not to call his infallibility into
question, if he determins any thing contrary to what is plain and evident to
all mankind. For if he should determine that there is no God, or that he is not
to be worshipped, or that he will not punish and reward men, or, which is the
case that Bellarmine puts, that Virtue is Vice, and Vice Virtue; he would
hereby take away the very foundation of Religion; and how can I look upon him
any longer as a Judge in matters of Religion, when there can be no such thing as
Religion if he have judged and determined right.

Secondly, The Scripture plainly allows this liberty to particular and private
Persons to judge for themselves. And for this I need go no farther than my Text,
which bids men try the Spirits whether they be of God. I do not think this is
spoken only to the Pope or a General Council, but to Christians in general; for
to these the Apostle writes. Now if St. John had believed that God had
constituted an infallible Judge in his Church, to whose Sentence and
Determination all Christians are bound to submit, he ought in all reason to
have referred Christians to him for the trial of Spirits, and not have left it
to every man's private judgment to examine and to determine these things. But
it seems St. Paul was likewise of the same mind; and though he was guided by an
infallible Spirit, yet he did not expect that men should blindly submit to his
Doctrine: Nay, so far is he from that, that he commends the Bereans for that
very thing for which I dare say the Church of Rome would have checked them most
severely, namely, for searching the Scriptures to see whether those things
which the Apostles delivered were so or not: This liberty St. Paul allowed; and
though he was inspired by God, yet he treated those whom he taught like men.
And indeed, it were a hard case that a necessity of believing divine
Revelations, and rejecting Impostures, should be imposed upon Christians; and
yet the liberty of judging, whether a Doctrine be from God or not, should be
taken away from them.

Thirdly, Our Adversaries themselves are forced to grant that which in effect
is as much as we contend for. For though they deny a liberty of judging in
particular points of Religion, yet they are forced to grant men a liberty of
judging upon the whole. When they of the Church of Rome would persuade a Jew,
or a Heathen, to become a Christian; or a Heretic (as they are pleased to call
us) to come over to the Communion of their Church, and offer Arguments to
induce them thereto; they do by this very thing, whether they will or no, make
that man Judge which is the true Church, and the true Religion. Because it
would be ridiculous to persuade a man to turn to their Religion, and to urge
him with Reasons to do so, and yet to deny him the use of his own judgment
whether their Reasons be sufficient to move him to make such a change. Now, as
the Apostle reasons in another case, If men be fit to judge for themselves in
so great and important a matter as the choice of their Religion, why should
they be thought unworthy to judge in lesser matters? They tell us indeed that a
man may use his judgment in the choice of his Religion; but when he has once
chosen, he is then for ever to resign up his judgment to their Church: But what
tolerable reason can any man give, why a man should be fit to judge upon the
whole, and yet unfit to judge upon particular Points? especially if it be
considered, that no man can make a discreet judgment of any Religion, before he
has examined the particular Doctrines of it, and made a judgment concerning
them. ^s it credible, that God should give a man judgment in the most
fundamental and important matter of all, viz. to discern the true Religion, and
the true Church, from the false; for no other end, but to enable him to choose
once for all to whom he should resign and inslave his judgment for ever? which
is just as reasonable as if one should say, That God had given a man eyes for
no other end, but to look out once for all, and to pitch upon a discreet person
to lead him about blindfold all the days of his life. I come now to the

III. Thing I propounded, which is, To answer the main Objection of our
Adversaries against this Principle; and likewise to show that there is no such
Reason and necessity for an universal Infallible Judge, as they pretend. Now
their great Objection is this, If every man may judge for himself, there will
be nothing but confusion in Religion, there will be no end of Controversies: so
that an universal infallible Judge is necessary, and without this God had not
made sufficient provision for the assurance of men's Faith, and for the peace
and unity of his Church: Or, as it is expressed in the Canon Law, a liter
Dominus non videretur fuisse discretus, otherwise our Lord had not seemed to be
discreet. How plausible soever this Objection may appear, I do not despair but
if men will lay aside prejudice, and impartially consider things, to make it
abundantly evident, that this ground is not sufficient to found an Infallible
Judge upon. And therefore in answer to it, I desire these following particulars
may be considered.

First, That this which they say, rather proves what God should have done
according to their fancy, than what he has really and actually done. My Text
expressly bids Christians to try the Spirits, which to any man's sense does
imply that they may judge of these matters: But the Church of Rome says they
may not; because if this liberty were permitted, God had not ordered things
wisely, and for the best, for the peace and unity of his Church. But, as the
Apostle says in another case, What art thou, O man, that objectest against God?

Secondly, If this Reasoning be good, we may as well conclude that there is an
universal infallible Judge, set over the whole World in all Temporal matters,
to whose Authority all mankind is bound to submit. Because this is as necessary
to the peace of the World, as the other is to the peace of the Church. And men
surely are every whit as apt to be obstinate and perverse about matters of
Temporal Right, as about matters of Faith. But it is evident in fact and
experience that there is no such universal Judge, appointed by God over the
whole World, to decide all Cases of temporal Right; and for want of him the
World is fain to shift as well as it can. But now a very acute and scholastical
man that would argue that God must needs have done whatever he fancies
convenient for the World should be done, might by the very same way of
Reasoning conclude the necessity of an universal infallible Judge in Civil
matters, as well as in matters of Religion: And their aliter Dominus non
videretur fuisse discretus, otherwise God had not seemed to be discreet, is
every whit as cogent, and as civil, in the one Case as the other.

Thirdly, There is no need of such a Judge, to assure men in matters of
Religion; Because men be sufficiently certain without him. I hope it may be
certain and clear enough That there is a God; and That his Providence governs
the World; and That there is another Life after this, though neither Pope nor
Council had ever declared any thing about these matters. And for Revealed
Doctrines, we may be certain enough of all that is necessary, if it be true
which the Fathers tell us, That all things necessary are plainly revealed in
the Holy Scriptures.

Fourthly, An infallible Judge, if there were one, is no certain way to end
Controversies, and to preserve the unity of the Church; unless it were likewise
infallibly certain, That there is such a Judge, and, Who he is. For till men
were sure of both these, there would still be a Controversy, whether there be
an infallible Judge, and who he is. And if it be true which they tell us, That
without an infallible Judge Controversies cannot be ended, then a Controversy
concerning an infallible Judge can never be ended. And there are two
Controversies actually on foot about an infallible Judge; One, Whether there be
an infallible Judge or not? which is a Controversy between Us and the Church
of Rome: and the other, Who this infallible Judge is? which is a Controversy
among themselves, which could never yet be decided: And yet till it be decided,
Infallibility, if they had it, would be of no use to them for the ending of
Controversies.

Fifthly, There is no such absolute need, as is pretended, of determining all
Controversies in Religion. If men would divest themselves of prejudice and
interest, as they ought, in matters of Religion, the necessary things of
Religion are plain enough, and men would generally agree well enough about
them: But if men will suffer themselves to be biased by these, they would not
hearken to an infallible Judge, if there were one; or they would find out some
way or other to call his Infallibility into question. And as for doubtful and
lesser matters in Religion, charity and mutual forbearance among Christians
would make the Church as peaceable and happy, as perhaps it was ever designed
to be in this World, without absolute unity in Opinion.

Sixthly and Lastly, Whatever may be the inconveniences of men's judging for
themselves in Religion, yet taking this Principle with the Cautions I have
given, I doubt not to make it appear, that the inconveniences are far the least
on that side. The present condition of humane Nature does not admit of any
constitution of things, whether in Religion or Civil matters, which is free
from all kind of exception and inconvenience: That is the best state of things
which is liable to the least and fewest. If men be modest, and humble, and
willing to learn, God has done that which is sufficient for the assurance of
our Faith, and for the peace of his Church, without an infallible Judge: And if
men will not be so, I cannot tell what would be sufficient. I am sure there
were Heresies and Schisms in the Apostles Times, when Those who governed the
Church were certainly guided by an infallible Spirit. God has appointed Guides
and Teachers for us in matters of Religion, and if we will be contented to be
instructed by them in those necessary Articles and Duties of Religion, which
are plainly contained in Scripture; and to be counseled and directed by them
in things that are more doubtful and difficult, I do not see why we might not
do well enough without any infallible Judge or Guide.

But still it will be said, who shall judge what things are plain and what
doubtful? The answer to this, in my opinion, is not difficult. For if there be
any thing plain in Religion, every man that has been duly instructed in the
Principles of Religion can judge of it, or else it is not plain. But there are
some things in Religion so very plain, that no Guide or Judge can in reason
claim that Authority over men, as to oblige them to believe or do the contrary;
no, though he pretend to Infallibility; no, though he were an Apostle, though
he were an Angel from heaven. S. Paul puts the case so high, Gal. 1.8. Though
we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than what you
have received, let him be accursed: which plainly supposes that Christians may
and can judge when Doctrines are contrary to the Gospel. What? not believe an
Apostle, nor an Angel from heaven, if he should teach any thing evidently
contrary to the plain Doctrine of the Gospel? If he should determine Virtue to
be Vice, and Vice to be Virtue? No; not an Apostle, nor an Angel; because such
a Doctrine as this would confound and overturn all things in Religion. And yet
Bellarmine puts this very Case, and says, If the Pope should so ^^termine, we
were bound to believe him, unless we would sin against Conscience.

I will conclude this Discourse by putting a very plain and familiar Case; by
which it will appear what credit and authority is fit to be given to a Guide,
and what not. Suppose I came a Stranger into England, and landing at Dover,
took a Guide there to conduct me in my way to York, which I knew before by the
Mapp to lie North of Dover: Having committed my self to him, if he lead me for
two or three days together out of any plain Road, and many times over hedge and
ditch, I cannot but think it strange, that in a civil and well-inhabited
Country there should be no Highways from one part of it to another: Yet thus
far I submit to him, though not without some regret and impatience. But then if
after this, for two or three days more he lead me directly South, and with my
face full upon the Sun at Noonday, and at last bring me back again to Dover
Pere; and still bids me follow him: Then certainly no modesty does oblige a man
not to dispute with his Guide, and to tell him, surely that can be no way
because it is Sea* Now though he set never so bold a face upon the matter, and
tell me with all the gravity and authority in the world, That it is not the Sea
but dry Land under the species and appearance of Water; and that whatever my
eyes tell me, having once committed my self to his guidance, I must not trust
my own senses in the case; it being one of the most dangerous sorts of
Infidelity for a man to believe his own eyes rather than his faithful and
infallible Guide: All this Moves me not; but I begin to expostulate roundly
with him, and to let him understand that if I must not believe what I see, he
is like to be of no farther use to me; because I shall not be able, at this
rate, to know whether I have a Guide, and whether I follow him, or not. In
short, I tell him plainly, that when I took him for my Guide, I did not take
him to tell me the difference between North and South, between a Hedge and a
Highway, between Sea and dry Land; all this I knew before, as well as he or
any man else could tell me; but I took him to conduct and direct me the nearest
way to York: And therefore after all his impertinent talk; after all his
Motives of Credibility to persuade me to believe him, and all his confident
sayings, which he gravely calls Demonstrations, I stand stiffly upon the shore,
and leave my learned and reverend Guide to take his own course, and to dispose
of himself as he pleases; but firmly resolved not to follow him. And is any
man to be blamed that breaks with his Guide upon these Terms?

And this is truly the Case, when a man commits himself to the Guidance of any
person or Church: If by virtue of this Authority, they will needs persuade me
out of my senses, and not to believe what I see but what they say; that Virtue
is Vice, and Vice Virtue, if they declare them to be so: And that because they
say they are infallible, I am to receive all their Dictates for Oracles, though
never so evidently false and absurd in the judgment of all Mankind: In this
case there is no way to be ridd of these unreasonable People, but to desire of
them, since one kindness deserves another and all Contradictions are alike
easy to be believed, that they would be pleased to believe that Infidelity is
Faith, and that when I absolutely renounce their Authority I do yield a most
perfect submission and obedience to it.

Upon the whole matter, all the Revelations of God, as well as the Laws of men,
go upon this presumption that men are not stark fools; but that they will
consider their Interest, and have some regard to the great concernment of their
eternal salvation. And this is as much to secure men from mistake in matters of
Belief, as God has afforded to keep men from sin in matters of Practice. He
has made no effectual and infallible provision that men shall not sin; and yet
it would puzzle any man to give a good Reason, why God should take more care to
secure men against Errors in Belief, than against Sin and wickedness in their
Lives.

I shall now only draw three or four Inferences from this Discourse which I
have made, and so conclude.

1. That it is every man's Duty, who has ability and capacity for it, to
endeavor to understand the grounds of his Religion. For to try Doctrines is to
inquire into the grounds and reasons of them: which the better any man
understands, the more firmly he will be established in the Truth, and be the
more resolute in the day of Trial, and the better able to withstand the Arts
and assaults of cunning Adversaries, and the fierce storms of Persecution. And,
on the contrary, that man will soon be moved from his stedfastness who never
examined the grounds and Reasons of his belief. When it comes to the Trial, he
that has but little to say for his Religion will probably neither do nor
suffer much for it.

2. That all Doctrines are vehemently to be suspected which decline Trial, and
are so loath to be brought into the light; which will not endure a fair
Examination, but magisterially require an implicit Faith: Whereas Truth is
bold and full of courage, and loves to appear openly; and is so secure and
confident of her own strength, as to offer her self to the severest Trial and
Examination. But to deny all liberty of Enquiry and Judgment in matters of
Religion is the greatest injury and disparagement to Truth that can be, and a
tacit acknowledgement that she lies under some disadvantage, and that there is
less to be said for her than for Error.

I have often wondered why the People in the Church of Rome do not suspect
their Teachers and Guides to have some ill design upon them, when they do so
industriously debar them of the means of Knowledge, and are so very loath to let
them understand what it is that we have to say against their Religion. For can
any thing in the world be more suspicious than to persuade men to put out their
eyes, upon promise that they will help them to a much better and more faithful
Guide? If any Church, any Profession of men, be unwilling their Doctrines
should be exposed to Trial, it is a certain sign they know something by them
that is faulty, and which will not endure the light. This is the account which
our Savior gives us in a like Case, It was because men's deeds were evil that
they loved darkness rather than light. For every one that does evil hates the
light; neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved: But
he that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God.

3. Since Reason and Christianity allow this liberty to private persons to
judge for themselves in matters of Religion, we should use this privilege with
much modesty and humility, with great submission and deference to our Spiritual
Rulers and Guides, whom God has appointed in his Church. And there is very
great need of this Caution, since by experience we find this liberty so much
abused by many to the nourishing of Pride and self-conceit, of Division and
Faction; and those who are least able to judge, to be frequently the most
forward and confident, the most peremptory and perverse: and instead of
demeaning themselves with the submission of Learners, to assume to themselves
the authority of Judges, even in the most doubtful and disputable matters.

The Tyranny of the Roman Church over the Minds and Consciences of men is not
to be justified upon any account; but nothing puts so plausible a color upon
it, as the ill use that is too frequently made of this natural Privilege of
men's judging for themselves in a matter of so infinite concernment, as that of
their eternal happiness. But then it is to be considered, that the proper
remedy in this Case, is not to deprive men of this Privilege, but to use the
best means to prevent the abuse of it. For though the inconveniences arising
from the ill use of it may be very great, yet the mischief on the other hand is
intolerable. Religion it self is liable to be abused to very bad purposes, and
frequently is so; but it is not therefore best that there should be no
Religion: And yet this Objection, if it be of any force and be pursued home, is
every whit as strong against Religion it self, as against men's liberty of
judging in matters of Religion. Nay I add farther, that no man can judiciously
embrace the true Religion, unless he be permitted to judge, whether that which
he embraces be the true Religion or not.

4. When upon due Trial and Examination we are well-settled and established in
our Religion, let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering;
and not be like Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, through the sleight of men, and the cunning craftiness of those
who lie in wait to deceive. And above all, let us resolve to live according to
the excellent Rules and Precepts of our holy Religion; let us heartily obey
that Doctrine which we profess to believe. We, who enjoy the Protestant
Religion, have all the means and advantages of understanding the Will of God,
free liberty and full scope of enquiring into it, and informing our selves
concerning it: We have all the opportunities we can wish of coming to the
knowledge of our Duty: The Oracles of God lie open to us, and his Law is
continually before our eyes; his word is nigh unto us, in our mouths, and in
our hearts; (that is, we may read it and meditate upon it) that we may do it:
The Key of Knowledge is put into our hands, so that if we do not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, it is we our selves that shut our selves out. And where
there is nothing to hinder us from the knowledge of our Duty, there certainly
nothing can excuse us from the practice of it. For the End of all knowledge is
to direct men in their duty, and effectually to engage them to the performance
of it: The great business of Religion is, to make men truly good, and to teach
them to live well. And if Religion have not this effect, it matters not of what
Church any man lists and enters himself; for most certainly, A bad man can be
saved in none. Though a man know the right way to Heaven never so well, and be
entered into it, yet if he will not walk therein, he shall never come thither:
Nay, it will be an aggravation of this man's unhappiness, that he was lost in
the way to Heaven, and perished in the very Road to Salvation. But if we will
in good earnest apply our selves to the practice of Religion, and the obedience
of God's holy Laws, his Grace will never be wanting to us to so good a purpose.

I have not time to recommend Religion to you at large, with all its
advantages. I will comprise what I have to say in a few words, and mind them at
your peril. Let that which is our great concernment be our great care, To know
the Truth and to do it, To fear God and keep his Commandments. Considering the
Reasonableness and the Reward of Piety and Virtue, nothing can be wiser: and
considering the mighty assistance of God's Grace, which he is ready to afford
to us, and the unspeakable satisfaction and delight which is to be had in the
doing of our duty, nothing can be easier: Nothing will give us that pleasure,
while we live; nothing can minister that true and solid comfort to us, when we
come to die: There is probably no such way for a man to be happy in this World;
to be sure, there is no way but this, to escape the intolerable and endless
miseries of another World.

Now God grant that we may all know, and do, in this our day, the things that
belong to our peace, for his Mercies sake in Jesus Christ; To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas there is surreptitiously printed, from very false and imperfect Notes,
a Sermon preached December. 3 d. 1678. at the Yorkshire Feast; to the great
abuse and injury of the Author, and of the Buyers of it: It is thought fit to
give this notice of it; and that it is since published by the Author, Dr.
Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, in Quarto. The false Copy being but two sheets,
and printed in Octavo.

There is now in the Press, a Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy, in
Quarto; By Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in Cambridg.

To be sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.


