A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church OF WORCESTER UPON THE Monthly
Fast Day, September 16. 1691.

By WILLIAM TALBOT, D.D. and DEAN of Worcester.

Published at the Request of the MAYOR and ALDERMEN of that City.

London: Printed for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.

A SERMON ON AMOS iv. 21. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and
because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
THE Occasion and Design of the appointment of this days Fast having been at
large declared in the Royal Edict set forth for that purpose, and after so many
monthly returns of it, are, I suppose, so well known that it will not be
necessary for me to spend much time in opening them to you.

Only thus much give me leave to observe by way of Preface, that we are at this
time necessarily engaged in a very great Undertaking, upon the success of which
depends the safety and establishment of all that can be dear to us as Men,
Englishmen, or Protestants, the security of our Lives and Liberties, of our
Civil Rights and Properties, and, which I hope we hold dearer than all, our
Reformed Church and Religion.

The Enemies who from Abroad (and O that they were all, that we had none at
Home joining with them in carrying on the same Black Design;) the Enemies, I
say, that are contriving and laboring the ruin of all these; are furnished
with all those Qualities and Provisions that can make an Adversary either
Odious or Formidable, to be abhorred or feared; Baseness, Treachery, Cruelty,
Numbers, Wealth, Policy. The Head of them is one who breaths nothing but Blood,
Fire, and Devastation; whose only glory is to make Orphans and Widows, to lay
Countries Waste, and Cities in Ashes, and tinge their Rivers with innocent
Gore; whose barbarity to those of the Reformed Religion, who hold the Faith as
it is in Jesus, and was by him delivered to the Saints, is so unpresidented,
that the Persecuting, whether Heathen or Arrian, Emperors were comparatively
Nursing Fathers of the Christian and Orthodox Church; whose regard to the
Sacred Ties of Promise or Oath are so small, that he seldom gives either with
any other design than to make advantage by breaking them: in a word, whose
Injustice, Tyranny, Cruelty and Perfidiousnes have justly rendered him the
common Nuisance, as well as Pest of Mankind. The whole Body of them are such as
are obliged by all the ties that a pretended Infallible Church, or cunning
Priests, can lay upon their credulous Proselites, that are muffled up in an
Implicit Faith, and blind Obedience to their Spiritual Guides, by all methods,
how Barbarous and Unchristian soever (the end will Sanctify the Means) to
Extirpate us Heretics, as they are pleased to call us: a piece of whose
Religion it is to ruin us, and who think that by Murdering us they do God, as
well as their Church, good Service. A War, with such Enemies, has given
occasion to this days Fast.

The design of which, is not that we should only impose upon our selves the
easy Penance of a few hours Abstinence from the refreshments of our Tables;
spend two or three in our attendance upon the Public Solemnities, or a day in
fruitless Lamentations and Complaints; but that we should seriously, and in
good earnest, set about a strict and impartial examination of our selves,
search out by what sins we have been affronting and provoking our God, and
consequently serving our Enemies, and contributing to our own Ruin: That we
should Penitently acknowledge, humble our selves for, and resolve against them
for the future; that we should put on Holy Purposes, enter into strict
Obligations of new Obedience to our God, of pursuing those Means whereby we may
engage Heaven to come into an Alliance with us, that we should endeavor to
Know and Practice in this our Day the things that belong unto our Peace, before
they be hid from our Eyes; in short, that we should exercise an unfeigned and
Universal Repentance, and engage in a thorough and general Reformation:

For the furthering of which great and pious Design, The words which I have now
Read, will give occasion to some Meditations, that may prove, I hope, not
altogether unserviceable. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and
because I will, etc.

The first word the illative Particle, Therefore, shows us that the Verse is a
Conclusion grounded upon something that went before, and for our more clear and
prositable Understanding of it sends us back to the Context.

From the 6th. Verse we find God, by the Prophet, enumerating several Judgments
that he had exercised them with, and yet complaining that for all that they had
not returned unto him, such as Famine, Verses 6, 7, 8, 9. I have given you
cleaness of teeth in all cities, and want of bread in all your palaces, etc.
Such as Pestilence and Sword, Verse 10. I have sent among you the pestilence
after the manner of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the sword, and made
the stink of your camp to come up into your nostrils, etc. Fire and
devastation, Verse 11. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, etc. but still the burden of all is, Yet have ye not returned unto
me, and then follows in the words of the Text, Therefore thus will I do unto
thee, etc.

Therefore, (i. e.) Because ye have defeated the Designs and Ends of my
Judgments, have resisted the powerful Efforts of those Dispensations which were
intended for your Admendment, and to have brought you Home unto my Self,
because ye have not been Reformed by them, but continue incorrigible under
them: Therefore, Thus will I do unto thee.

There is some little difference among Commentators concerning the Meaning of
this Phrase; some think that God refers to those Judgments which he had before
spoken of, as if the meaning of I will do thus unto thee, was, I will again
inflict the same Judgments upon you, the Famine, Pestilence, Fire and Sword,
which you have already smarted under.

But I rather conceive with others, that here is a Figure in the words,
commonly known to Rhetoricians by the name of Aposiopesis, by which a person
that is in anger or threatens speaks short, and suppresses part of the
Sentence, as if his Passion would not give him leave to speak out all that he
meant: Thus Neptune in Virgil, when he was wroth with and chid the Winds, cries
only, Quos Ego -- whom I -- meaning, whom I will besure severely to chastise:
So in Sacred Writ we read often this Expression, God do so unto me, (i. e.) let
him inflict the severest of his Curses upon me: And it is no new thing for God
in Scripture to speak after the manner of Men, and for the Holy Spirit,
although they are most abhorrent from his Nature, yet in condescension to our
Capacities, to attribute Passions, as well as Parts to him; and therefore I
apprehend there is that Figure here, I will do thus unto thee, i. e. I will
inflict Judgments upon thee which I have conceived in my angry mind, but are
too big to be worded. And because I will do thus unto thee, because thou have
provoked me to come out in Judgment and great fury against thee, Prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel. This Clause is likewise capable of a double
Construction, and may either be taken for a biting Sarcasm, as if the great God
spoke to them in derision, as he threatens his wretched obstinate Enemies in
the first of the Proverbs, that he will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when
their Fear comes, as if he did deridingly Challenge them to come forth and
Combat with him, bid them Arm themselves with all the defensatives they could
provide, and try if they could make their parts good with him.

Or else it may be Understood in another Sense, as a Kind and Compassionate
Exhortation to them to come and meet him in a way of Penitence and
Supplication, that so they might appease his Anger, and reverse the terrible
Decree that was gone forth against them: as if, according to the Parable, he
bid them sit down and consider whether they were able with ten thousand to meet
him that came against them with twenty thousand, whether poor Dust and Ashes
were able to cope with Omnipotence, the Children of Israel with the Ancient of
Days; and if not while he was yet a great way off, before he came nigh to them
in Judgment and Fury, to send an Embassy and desire conditions of Peace, to
send those prevalent Ambassadors, penitential Tears and Prayers, which never
fail of success at the Court of Heaven, and so the Septuagint Translates the
Phrase, prepare to call upon the Lord thy God, and agreeably St. Hierome and
others understand it. And to me the softness of the Expression seems to favor
this Interpretation, wherein he styles himself Their God, prepare to meet Thy
God, intimating to them, that however they by their heinous Provocations had
justly forfeited it; yet he was unwilling that that Covenant Relation between
them, whereby he was to be their God, and they his People, should be dissolved.
They were indeed a sinful People, but yet he was still ready to own himself
Their God, thereby encouraging them to make their Applications to him.

The Meaning then of the whole Verse may be this, because thou have been proof
against those Judgments which I have in Mercy inflicted upon thee for thy
Reformation, I am now resolved to pour out those upon thee which shall be for
thy utter Ruin and Excision, unless thou make use of that one opportunity
which is yet left, which thy Long-Suffering God now tenders to thee; (and O
that thou would embrace it!) of Returning and Reconciling thy self to me by
true and sincere Repentance. Therefore Thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, etc.

In the words thus explained we have three things Observable. 1. A dreadful
Judgment denounced against Israel, Thus will I do unto thee. 2. The provoking
cause thereof employed in the word Therefore (viz.) their incorrigibleness under
former Judgments, because I have punished you, and yet ye have not returned,
Therefore. 3. Lastly, here is a gracious way pointed out for their Escape,
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.


I shall Treat of the first and second together, and from the Judgment
denounced, with the provoking cause thereof, observe to you this Position,

That when God's Judgments, upon a People or Nation, fail of their designed
ends, which are to lead them to Repentance, when they are not Reformed, or made
Better, but rather the Worse by them, the State of that People is desperate,
they are nigh unto Excision.

Which Proposition, when I shall have briefly consirmed, I will by way of
Application enquire whether God has not used these Methods to reclaim us of
this Nation, and what Effects his Judgments have had upon us: and if it shall
appear that notwithstanding he has Exercised us with those Dispensations, yet
we have not returned unto him, but gone on incorrigibly in our sins. I suppose
I may with good Reason in the last place endeavor to persuade you to prepare
to meet your God by a speedy and thorough Repentance, that so we may avert
those severer Retributions that hang over our Heads, and escape that ruin,
which otherwise we must expect to be unavoidably involved in, which is the
great Business and Design of the Day.

1. I am to show that when God's Judgments, upon a People or Nation, fail of
their designed ends, which are to lead them to Repentance, when they are not
Reformed, or made Better, but rather the Worse by them, the State of that
People is desperate, they are nigh unto Excision.

Now that God's design in inflicting Judgments upon a People is to bring them
to Repentance, which is employed in the Proposition, is very evident from
Scripture, Isa. i. After God had complained of his People Israel, that tho he
had nourished and brought them up, used all Methods to institute and keep them
in his Ways and Service, yet they were a rebellious and sinful Nation, a People
laden with iniquity: he adds, Why should ye be stricken, ye will revolt more
and more? As if he should have said, to what end should I bestow my Corrections
and Chastisements upon you? I find they do but make you revolt more, and go the
further backward from me; and they are but thrown away upon you if they have no
better Effects; my ends in them are to reduce you when you are going astray, to
prevent your future Deviations from me, and if they obtain not these Purposes,
to what end should I Exercise you with them? If ye only revolt more, why should
ye be stricken any more? It Is not the design of my striking to drive you
farther from me, but to bring you nearer to me. Nay, In Jer. iii. God makes
those Punishments, which he had inflicted upon Israel, an aggravation of Judahs
Crime, that she did not return unto him, Though I put away, says he,
backsliding Israel for her adulteries, and gave her a bill of divorce, yet her
treacherous sister Judah feared not, but played the harlot also, and returned
not unto me. Verse 8. But now why should God make those Judgments, which he had
laid upon Israel, an Aggravation of Judah's Crime in not Repenting, and a
ground of his severer Anger against her, if the design and tendency of his
Judgments had not been to Reform not only those that smart under them, but even
all those also to whom any notice of them should come? And to name no more
places, the Apostle puts the thing out of all doubt, Heb. xii. 10. The fathers
of our flesh chasten us for their own pleasure, to gratify it may be an angry
Passion; but he the Father of Spirits, God chastens us for our profit, that we
may be partakers of his holiness. This is the end of his Chastisements and
Punishments to work Goodness and Virtue in us, to make us partakers of Holiness.

And it is evident that Punishments have a natural tendency to these ends.
Nothing more apt to make us out of love with our sins than the smarting a
little for them; the tasting of the bitterness that is hid under these gilded
Pills, if any thing, will make us disrelish and nauseate them; when we feel
nothing but the pleasure of the sin we are enamoured with it, and greedily
pursue it; but when we are sensible of the smart and misery that attend it,
then we begin to abate of our love and value for it. A long Series of Impunity
and Prosperity is apt to make a People wax Fat and forget God, but in their
Afflictions they will seek him early or diligently, as the Prophet speaks. When
therefore he sees a Nation revolting from him, committing Whoredoms against
him, prostituting themselves to their Lusts, forsaking him and cleaving to
their Vices, then he lays his Rod upon them to convince them how bitter and
grievous a thing it is to depart from the living God; then he throws in a dash
of Gall of Wormwood to embitter those satifactions and delights to them, which
they are so in love with.

Which as it is a very great demonstration of the goodness of our Heavenly
Father, when the very severest of his Dispensations to the Sons of Men are
instances of his Mercy to them, his very Judgments tokens of his Paternal Love,
and the designed ends of his Punishments and Corrections, the Good and
Reformation of his People, so must it mightily inhance the guilt of those
sinners that are not wrought upon by such gracious and efficacious Methods.

Chiefly because these are commonly the last remedies that God tries to reduce
them, he does not ordinarily use these till he finds softer Methods
ineffectual, and if these work not with a People, but they are proof against
them also, what will become of them? When a Phisician has Cupt and Scarified,
and used his last methods upon a Patient, if they have no Effects he gives him
over, if he continues stupid and insensible under those Operations, it is a
sign he is near his end.

Beloved, God Almighty does not strike or inflict Punishments, till he finds he
cannot win us by fair means; Punishing is his strange Work, he afflicts not
willingly, nor grieves the Children of Men; he had rather allure us by
Kindness, draw us with the Cords of a Man, with the Bands of Love: but when he
finds that his gentler dealings will not reduce us, that we are made loose and
dissolute by kindness, emboldened and encouraged in our sins by his
forbearance, then he uses his severer Dispensations, then he lashes and strikes
us, visits our Iniquities upon us, to make us in some measure feel the dreadful
Consequences of them; but if this will not do, this his last method cannot
affect or amend us, there remain no more for us.

And when once a Nation has overcome all God's Arts of preserving them, and
made themselves ripe for Destruction, Execution will quickly follow.

For it is not with a Nation as with a particular Person; a particular Person
may have filled up the measure of his sins, made himself ripe for Ruin, and yet
his Punishment may be deferred, it may be not Executed all his Life; yea
possibly he may enjoy the affluence of all good things. The Scriptures
frequently speak of the flourishing condition of particular wicked Men, and
their exemption from those Plagues and Miseries, which others better than
themselves are subject to, and labor under; their iniquities may have been
full, and yet no present Judgment awarded out against them: but as to Kingdoms
and Nations God's Procedure is quite different, when the sins of a Nation are
full, present Execution succeeds, as is plain from the History of God's
dealing, whether with his own People or with other Nations.

And there is this Reason for this difference in God's Procedure; particular
Persons are capable of Retributions in another Life after this, there is a time
coming when they may be called to account, and sufficiently punished for their
sins; though their Iniquities are not visited here, though they do not smart
under God's Judgments in this Life, but seem rather to inherit the Favors of
Heaven, yet as long as there is a Day appointed; a day of destruction which
they are reserved to, wherein their short lived Impunity, it may be Jollity
here, shall be turned into an eternity of Tribulation, and Anguish, and Pain;
this may be without any impeachment of God's Holiness, Truth, or Justice.

But for Nations or Kingdoms it is otherwise, for a Nation or Kingdom,
considered as such, is not capable of any Retributions in a Life after this;
for in the Resurection we shall not be considered as Persons embodyed in such
or such a Community: In the Resurrection there is no Marrying, or giving in
Marriage says our Savior: In the other World we shall not live in those
Capacities we do here, all Relations that are among us now will then cease; all
such as Husband and Wife, Prince and People, King and Subject, be quite
swallowed up in that World: And therefore since the Relations and Societies of
this World shall then be Dissolved; it is clear that a Nation, as a Nation,
cannot receive any Retributions in another Life after this, because then it
will cease to be a Nation, and cannot therefore be Rewarded or Punished as
such; from whence it is certain that every Nation shall meet with the present
Returns of their wickedness here, because God will be sure to show himself as
Just in his Dealings with Nations as with particular Persons, and that he can
no more pass by the sins of one than of the other.

From all which we may conclude, that when a People or Nation have resisted all
God's endeavors for their Reformation, the strivings of his Mercies, and the
efforts of his Judgments, too; will neither hearken to the still Voice of his
Kindness, nor the louder Voice of his Rod; are not only made bold and secure by
his forbearance, but hardened in the fire of Affliction; when they defy all his
Arts for their amendment, and have no impressions made upon them by his utmost,
last, most effectual Method; the state surely of that Nation is desperate, and
the day of their Ruin and utter Excision not far off.

To apply then what has been said to our selves: Let us, I beseech you, take an
impartial view of our selves, and of God's Dispensations toward us of this
Nation; let us examine whether he has not been using the same Methods to
reclaim us that he Exercised Israel with, and what Effects they have had upon
us.

I need not go so far back as to the Ages of our Forefathers, I need only
refresh your Memories, and put you in mind of various Judgments that God has
poured out upon this Kingdom in your own time, even the very same that he here
in the Text threatens Israel for their incorrigibleness under.

For has he not overthrown some of us as well as them, as he did Sodom and
Gomorrah, consumed not only the greatest part of the Metropolis of our Land
with a devouring Fire, and made it a heap of Rubbish and Ashes, but many other
of our lesser Towns, as the frequent Briefs, of late years especially, inform
us, and some of them with Fire immediately from Heaven?

Has he not also sent the Pestilence among us after the manner of Egypt,
visited this Land with a sweeping Plague that carried away many thousands to
their long Home?

Have not our young Men too been slain with the Sword, have we not been engaged
in Wars at Home and Abroad? and all those three of his sore Judgments befallen
us within the memory of most of us?

And as for the fourth, which the Prophet mentions, that of cleanness Teeth,
though, blessed be his name, we have not lately labored under a Famine of our
daily Bread for the support of our Natural Lives; yet, Has he not been lately
threatening us with a far severer Famine, a Famine of the Word of God? and Man
shall not live by Bread only, but by every Word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God. Were we not apprehensive not long since, and had we not too good
Grounds for it, that he was going to remove our Candlestick, to deprive us of
that pure Religion, and excellent way of Worship we are blessed with, and to
give us up to Popish Superstition and Idolatry, into the Hands of those Men
that would have taken from us the sincere Milk of the Word, that Food which God
has afforded us for the nourishment of our Souls to Eternal Life, and would
have starved us with lying Legends instead thereof?

Were not the Emisaries of Rome, the implacable Enemies of our Church and
Religion, laboring with all their might: and industriously improving the
favorable opportunities, they enjoyed under the last Reign, to destroy ours
and establish their own Religion? and were they not too likely in all human
appearance to have been too succesful? Had they not made a very large Progress
for so short a time? Did not their Priests appear every where barefaced in
despite of our Laws? Did they not commit their Abominations, celebrate their
Idolatrous Services in the most public and conspicuous places in the Kingdom?
Had they not built many Altars and High Places for that purpose? Had they not
seized some of our Seminaries, part of our Universities, to breed up a
Succession of disciplined and instructed persons to carry on and finish the
Work they had begun? Did they not openly solicit all they had opportunity or
hopes of Perverting, using all Methods, offering Rewards and Preferments to
some, threatening, menacing others to make them comply with them: in a word, Did
they not look upon themselves as secure of gaining their Point? And had they
not all the Reason to hope, as we to fear, that they should have triumphed in
the ruins of this Church and Religion, that either a furious Zeal for their
Cause, an irreconcilable Hatred to us, a Serpentine Subtilty, indefatigable
Industry, the favor of the Government, the Laws as they were managed, the
Army, almost all Offices Military and Civil in their Hands, and the assured
expectation of a Foreign Assistance could afford them? And if we seem now in
some measure to be delivered from these designs of theirs, if God seem now to
have removed this Judgment, yet believe me, if we answer not his ends and
designs in Threatening us with it, the present suspension of it will not prove a
total removal, but only a lightning before death, a putting back of his Arm to
strike with a greater force.

Nay, Is not God at this time making bare his Arm against us? Are we not
unavoidably engaged in a War with a neighboring and very potent Prince? and
May we not expect all the Hostilities and Injuries that his equal Hatred to our
Nation and Religion, his Politic Counselors, the Wealth of his whole Kingdom,
or his numerous Forces can suggest to, or enable him to put in Execution?

And which is yet a more sad consideration? Has not God sent a Spirit of
Faction and Division among us? Are we not unreasonably disunited among our
selves, broken and crumbled into Sects and Parties, regardless of the Common
Enemy, and only jealous of, and watchful against one another? And can a Kingdom
so divided against it self long stand?

Thus, my Brethren, has God been Manuring and Cultivating this Land of ours,
with various Chastisements and Corrections, to try if he could make it bring
forth the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness: when he found that though favor
were shown to us we would not learn righteousness, he sent his Judgments, his
last reserve, to try if they could teach our Inhabitants that Lesson.

And what effects have his Judgments had upon us? Have we hearkened unto the
Voice of his Rod, and answered the ends of his Corrections? Has the Fire of
Affliction refined and purged us from our Dross and Corruption? Have his
Severities mortified our Sins and Vices? Has the Lance let out the
imposthumated Putrefaction? Has his visiting our Iniquities upon us made us out
of love with them, and his Terrors persuaded us to forsake them? Have we been
more fearful to offend him, more careful to please him, more awfully regardful
of his Majesty, more Zealous for his Honor, more diligent and constant in our
attendance upon his Service and our Duty?

It Is certainly no time to dissemble with God, and impose upon our selves, the
Day calls for sincerity and impartiality in our examinations: and, if we will
speak the truth, Have we not been proof against these Methods of Gods too, and
as we have abused his Mercy, and despised his Goodness, so defied his Judgments
also?

For does there not every where appear barefaced the same daring Impiety
against God, the same Atheistical Scoffing at Religion, the same Neglect and
Contempt of his Worship, the same Profanation of his Word by drolling upon it,
and lightly using it in common Conversation; the same Profanation of his Name
by horrid Oaths, Curses, and Imprecations; the same Profanation of his Day by
converting it to Secular uses, spending it in worldly Business, idle Pastimes,
and vicious Practices; the same Profanation of his House by wilfully abstaining
from it, or coldly, formally, or irreverently behaving our selves at it? Does
there not appear the same injustice and uncharitableness to our Neighbors, the
same Circumvention and Defraudation in Bargaining, the same false Weights and
Measures in Buying and Selling, the same Extortion, Oppression, and Deceit in
all Dealings, the same uncharitable Censuring, Backbiting and Detraction? Does
there not appear the same Intemperance and Incontinence against our selves, the
same Revelling and Drunkeness, the same Chambering and Wantonness? In a word,
Is there not the same general Dissolution of Manners, the same unrestrained
Practice of Wickedness of all sorts and degrees, as there was before God made
use of those his Judgments, which I have enumerated, to Reclaim and Reform us?

Nay, Are we not by insensible degrees arrived to a strange impudence in
sinning, not known to former Ages? Men were content formerly to sin secretly,
would look out for the most private places and closest Retirements to
perpetrate their Villainies in: Time was when the Fool could think it enough to
say in his Heart there is no God, when the Adulterer would watch for the
twilight, that the darkness might cover his foul Embraces, when those that were
Drunk would be Drunk in the Night, that the Sun and Men might not be Witnesses
of their worse than brutal Practices: Sinners were then so modest that they
would blush upon a Discovery:

But now Men have worn off all that silly bashfulness, are so far from seeking
privacies to commit, or excuses to palliate their Sins, that they publish them
as Sodom, and glory in their shame. The Streets the most conspicuous places are
conscious to the most daring Blasphemies, the most provoking Oaths and Curses,
the most beastly Intemperances and Uncleanness, the most crying Murders; nay
these are things which Men value themselves upon, take a pride in recounting
how many Men they have Murdered with the Sword, or with the Bottle, how many
Women they have abused and ruined, how many Proselites they have made to
Atheism, and how effectually cleared themselves from all suspicion of Virtue
and Probity.

And then if this be our case, if God has smitten us and we remain
incorrigible, and all his Discipline has only served to advance us to a greater
proficiency in the Devils School, if he has used the same Methods to reduce us
that he did to Israel, and we give him the same Reason that they did to
complain, that yet we have not returned unto him; what can we expect but that
he should threaten us as he did them in the Text, that Therefore thus he will
do unto us, pour out upon us Vials of severer Judgments then we have yet felt,
even till he has made a full end of us?

And what shall we do, as the Prophet asks, in the day of visitation, and in
the desolation that shall come from far, and to whom shall we fly for help?

Why, Behold God has answered the Prophets question in the latter part of the
Text, Prepare to meet thy God O Israel, endeavor to appease him as Jacob did
his angry Brother Esau by sending a Present before him, and peradventure he
will accept of us.

But wherewithal shall we come before the Lord, and bow our selves before the
high God? shall we come with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?

(...) Shall I tell you that this is it which Authority is this day calling you
to? The meaning and design of this Monthly Fast enjoined by their Majesty's, as
I observed in the beginning, is not that you should only deprive your Stomachs
of a Meals Meat, much less that you should ^pare from your Tables to consume
upon your Lusts, least of all that should abstain from your Food and Vices one
day, that you may return to both with the greater Appetite the next; Not that
you should hang down your heads like bullrushes, and spread sackcloth and
ashes, as the Prophet speaks, not that you should only put on a dejected
Countenance, and some outward shows of sorrow, but that you should humble your
souls for your sins, that You should loose the bands of wickedness, undo the
heavy burdens, and break every yoke; that you should wash and make clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before the eyes of the Lord, and turn to him
with full purpose of heart.

This design of working a general Reformation in their Subjects their Majesty's
have been endeavoring to accomplish, not only by appointing such frequent days
of Humiliation, but by Letters and Orders of Council directed to the
Subordinate Magistrates, and to the Clergy, whereby we are obliged to Read in
our Churches, and the Magistrates to put in Execution our wholesome Laws
against those Pests and Troublers of our Israel; our common Drunkards,
Swearers, and Sabbath Breakers: And let me beseech those of you to whom the
Execution of Justice is committed, by the Bowels and Mercies of God that you be
Zealous and Impartial in Animadverting upon such scandalous Offenders, that so
those Wretches, whom the future and unseen Retributions of another World can
make no Impressions upon, may be deterred by the inflictions of the Penalties
of the Laws from their bold and fearless Commission of those crying Sins, which
are so reproachful to our Holy Profession, so provoking in the Eyes of God, and
of such dangerous Consequence to our Church and Nation.

Shall I to this add, what the last words suggest to me, that this is it which
the said deplorable Estate of our divided Church and Nation calls you to, whose
Fall and Ruin must unavoidably attend your refusing to answer these Calls: And
were you but affected as Holy Men of old have been, as Jeremy who wished his
head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears that he might weep for the slain
of the danghter of his people, or as Isaiah who wept bitterly, and would not be
comforted because of the spoiling of the Daughter of his People; had you but
the same Affection to our Jerusalem, did you wish as well to our Sion as they
did to theirs, you would give Ear to her pitiful Cry, compassionate her
lamentable Condition, and endeavor by your Repentance to raise her up, and
prevent her ruin. And what shall I say more to press you to it, what Motives
can I add to these I have now suggested? If neither the Pathetical beseeching
of your Native Kingdom and Reformed Church, in whose Welfare or Misery every
one of us must more or less share; nor the Pious Injunctions of your Governors,
whose Just and Righteous Commands ought to be of weight with you; nor the more
forcible Call of God himself, who will be sure severely to revenge the Affront
you will offer by turning the Deaf Ear to him: If none of these can prevail
with you, neither love to your Selves and Country, respect to your Sovereigns,
nor fear of God work with you; what Arguments can be effectual? If you will
neither hearken to the loud importunate Call of God nor Man in a matter of such
vast importance to your selves, it is to be feared, you will never hearken to
any thing till you hear God say depart ye Cursed.

But, My Brethren, give me leave to hope better things concerning you, and
things that make for Peace, that you will at last hearken to, and obey these
earnest and affectionate Solicitations, that you will break off your sins by
Repentance, and cast away your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed,
and become new creatures, that iniquity may not be our ruin; that you will each
and every of you set about Reforming and Amending one; and this day resolve and
enter upon a course of Penitence and Newness of Life, that so God may be
entreated for the Land.

But some one may object, of what great concern to the Nation can my single
Repentance or Impenitence be? I am but one, and surely cannot by one or the
other much forward or hinder the Kingdoms either welfare or ruin: There are
enough besides to do the Work without me, I may enjoy my Lusts and Vices, and let
others Repent for the Nation.

But 1. What if all, and every one in the Nation, should think and do the same,
would not the Work be well done then? And all have just the same Reason, i. e.
none at all, For

2. The sins of every single Person, and thine in particular have added to, and
made up that Measure of Iniquity, which has angered God, and provoked him to
shake his Rod over the Kingdom, and therefore it is but Reason and Justice that
since thou have contributed to that Mass and Weight which is ready to sink the
Kingdom into ruin, thou should bear thy part in taking off the Load. Besides,

3. How know thou but thy single Repentance may Save, or at least Reprieve
the Nation? Time was when ten Righteous Men, if so many could have been found
in Sodom, would have preserved that place; and how can thou tell but by thy
sincere Conversion thou may make up that number for whose sakes God will
spare this Land? And would it not be matter of Melancholy Reflection to thee,
if for want of thee such a number should not be found for which God would spare
it? But

4. Should there be enough without thee to do the Work, should God for the sake
of others of his Servants, that cry day and night to him, spare us, and turn
our days of Humiliation into days of Thanksgiving, yet what right can thou
pretend to any share in the Mercy? Thou that refusest to hearken to the Words
of Gods Ambassadors, how can thou expect any other Fate than that of the
incredulous Lord, that disbelieved Elisha's Prophecy of Plenty, 2 Kings vii.
That with thine Eyes possibly thou may see, but shall not partake of the
blessing. Whereas,

Lastly, If thy Repentance should prove unsuccessful for the Kingdom, if the
Sins thereof should be so Ripe, their Iniquities so Full that God will not
spare it, yet assuredly thou shall deliver thine own Soul, so the Spirit of God
assures thee Ezekiel xiv. That when a land has sinned so grievously against God
that his hand is stretched out, and he will not accept of the fasting tears and
prayers of Noah, Daniel, and Job, for the deliverance of the land, yet they
shall deliver their own souls.

Away then with such idle put offs, let us not shift off this necessary duty
from one to another, but having such invitations and such encouragements, let
every of us set to our Parts, and contribute each ones Tears, Prayers, and
Repentance to the Reversing the Decree that is gone forth against us: so let us
prepare to meet our God who is still ready to own that Relation; yea desirous
to Repent him of the evil that he thought to do unto us, and to make our
Jerusalem yet a praise upon the whole Earth.

Where then are the Penitent David's and Jeremy's, that may weep Tears for the
sins of a Nation to wash away the guilt thereof? Where are the Meek Moses's,
the chosen ones of God, that may stand in the Gap, and turn away his wrath that
he destroy us not? Where are the faithful Abraham's, the Friends of God, that
may intercede powerfully, and successfully for a sinful and disobedient People?
Yea, where are the ten Righteous for whose sakes God will spare the Place?
Would it not, my Brethren, be a glorious thing for you and me to make a part of
that number for whose sakes God would spare this Nation, to be the Saviors of
the Kingdom? Why such are all the truly Contrite and Penitent Souls in the Land.

O then let us favor the Stones of Sion, let it pity us to see her in the
Dust, let us pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, and let us live and Repent for it
too; and then we shall not need to fear all the Enemies of our Sion, for God
will be for us, and if he be for us who can be against us? Then let the
Children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, the Philistines, with them that
dwell at Tire, come forth to Battle against us, they shall not be able to
prevail over us, for there will be many with us: Then we may bid defiance to
all the Power and Policy of France, and treachery of homebred Enemies, for our
God will be our Guide and Protector, our Shield and Buckler, will secure us
from Foreign and Domestic Adversaries, yea, will bless us in making a visible
return of Mercy upon us, will cause our Nation to Flourish, and be the
Admiration and Envy of its Neighbors, will continue to us our excellently
Constituted Government, and preserve our Primitive Apostolical Church, that
neither the designs of those who would betray us into Slavery or Anarchy shall
succeed to the Subversion of one, nor the Gates of Hell or Rome prevail against
the other. Amen.

FINIS.

