A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 25th 1675/6.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

Published By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for Edward Gellibrand, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1676.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 25th 1675/6.
1 JOHN 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.


IT is certainly a matter of the greatest consequence to us, both in order to
our present peace and future happiness, truly to understand our spiritual state
and condition, and whether we belong to God and be his Children or not: And it
is not so difficult as is commonly imagined to arrive at this knowledge, if we
have a mind to it, and will but deal impartially with our selves; For the Text
gives us a plain mark and character whereby we may know it, In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God.

From which words I shall endeavor, by God's assistance, to lay men open to
themselves, and to represent to every one of us the truth of our condition; and
then leave it to the grace of God, and every man's serious consideration, to
make the best use of it.

I shall briefly explain the words, and then consider the matter contained in
them.

By the children of God, and the children of the Devil, are meant good and bad
men; It being usual in the phrase of Scripture, to call persons or things which
partake of such a nature or quality, the Children of those who are eminently
endued with that nature and disposition. Thus they who are of the faith of
Abraham, and do the works of Abraham, are called Abraham's children: In like
manner, those who in their disposition and actions imitate God, are called the
Children of God; and on the contrary, those that addict themselves to sin and
impiety are counted of another race and descent, they resemble the Devil, and
belong to him as the Chief and Head of that Faction.

By righteousness, is here meant universal goodness and conformity to the Law
of God, in opposition to sin which is the transgression of that Law.

By being manifest, is meant, that hereby good and bad men are really
distinguished; so that every one that will examine his condition by this mark,
may know of which number he is, and to what Party he belongs.

I come now to the main argument contained in the words, which is to give us a
certain character, and mark of distinction between a good and bad man; (...),
by this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God.

In the management of the following Discourse, I shall proceed in this method.

First, We will consider the character and mark of difference between a good
and bad man, which is here laid down; Whosoever does not righteousness, is not
of God.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, that by this mark every man may, with due
care and diligence, come to the knowledge of his spiritual estate and condition.
By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil.

Thirdly, I shall enquire whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding this,
so many persons are at so great uncertainty concerning their condition.

I. We will consider the character and mark of difference between a good and
bad man, which is here in the Text, Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of
God; which implies likewise on the contrary, that whosoever does righteousness,
is of God. Now in the strictest sense of this phrase, he only who lives in all
the commandments of God blameless, can be said to do righteousness: But in
this sense there is none that does righteousness, no not one, and consequently
none could be the Children of God; but the Text supposes some to be so, and
therefore by doing righteousness the Apostle must necessarily be understood to
mean something that is short of perfect and unsinning obedience. So that the
question is, What doing of righteousness is sufficient to denominate a man a
Child of God, and to put him into a state of grace and favor with Him.

And I do not intend nicely to state this matter. It Is not perhaps possible to
be done; nothing being more difficult, than to determine the very utmost bounds
and limits of things, and to tell exactly and just to a point where the line of
difference between Virtue and Vice, between the state of a good and bad man is
to be placed: And if it could be done, it would be of no great use; for I take
it to be no part of my business to tell men how many faults they may have, and
how little goodness, and yet be the Children of God: but rather to acquaint
them, what degrees of holiness and goodness are necessary to give men a clear
and comfortable evidence of their good estate toward God; and then to persuade
them, in order to their peace and assurance, to endeavor after such degrees.

Wherefore to state the business so far as is necessary to give men a
sufficient knowledge of their condition, I shall briefly consider who they are
that in the Apostles sense may be said to be doers of righteousness, or not
doers of it. And because the Apostle lays down the Rule negatively, I shall
therefore

In the first place, enquire who they are that in the Apostles sense may be
said not to do righteousness.

1. They that live in the general course of a wicked life; in the practice of
great and known sins, as injustice, intemperance, filthy and sensual lusts,
profane neglect and contempt of God and Religion; so that by the whole course
and tenor of their actions, it is plain beyond all denial that there is no
fear of God before their eyes. Concerning these the case is so very evident,
that it seems too mild and gentle an expression to call them not doers of
righteousness.

2. They who live in the habitual practice of any one known sin, or in the
neglect of any considerable part of their known duty. For any vicious habit
denominates a man, and puts him into an evil state.

3. They who are guilty of the single act of a very heinous and notorious
crime; as a deliberate act of blasphemy, of murder, perjury, fraud or
oppression, or of any other crime of the like enormity. For though ordinarily
one single act of sin does not denominate one a bad man, when the general
course of the man's life is contrary; yet the single acts of some sorts of sins
are so crying and heinous, and do so stare every man's conscience in the face,
that they are justly esteemed to be of equal malignity with vicious habits of
an inferior kind; because they do almost necessarily suppose a great
depravation of mind, and a monstrous alienation from God and goodness in the
person that deliberately commits them. And they who are guilty in any of these
three degrees now mentioned are most certainly not doers of righteousness, and
consequently it is manifest that they are not the Children of God.

In the second place, I shall enquire who they are, that in the Apostles sense
may be said to do righteousness. In short, they who in the general course of
their lives do keep the Commandments of God. And this implies these two things;
That the tenor of our lives and actions be agreeable to the Laws of God; And
that these actions be done with a sincere and upright mind, out of regard to
God and another World, and not for low and temporal ends.

And I choose rather to describe a righteous man by the actual conformity of the
general course of his actions to the Law of God, than (as some have done) by a
sincere Desire or resolution of obedience. For a desire may be sincere for the
time it lasts, and yet vanish before it come to any real effect. And how
innocently soever it was intended, it is certainly a great mistake in Divinity
and of very dangerous consequence to the souls of men, to affirm that a Desire
of grace is grace; and consequently, by the same reason, that a desire of
obedience, is obedience. A sincere desire and resolution to be good is indeed a
good beginning, and ought by all means to be cherished and encouraged; but yet
it is far enough from being the thing desired, or from being accepted for it in
the esteem of God: For God never accepts the Desire for the deed, but where
there is no possibility, no opportunity of doing the thing desired; but if
there be, and the thing be not done, there is no reason to imagine that the
desire in that case should be accepted as if the thing were done. For instance,
If a man give alms according to his ability, and would give more if he were
able, in this case the desire is accepted for the deed. And of this case it is
and no other, that the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he
has not. That is, God interprets and accepts the charity of men according to
the largeness of their hearts, and not according to the straitness of their
fortunes: But it is a great mistake, to draw a general conclusion from this
Text, that in all cases God accepts the will for the deed. For though a man
sincerely desire and resolve to reform his life (as I doubt not many men often
do) but do it not, when there is time and opportunity for it, these desires and
resolutions are of no account with God; all this righteousness is but as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew which passes away. Men are not apt to
mistake so grossly in other matters. No man believes hunger to be meat, or
thirst to be drink; and yet there is no doubt of the truth and sincerity of
these natural desires. No man thinks that covetousness or a greedy desire to be
rich, is an estate; or that ambition or an insatiable desire of honor is
really advancement: Just so, and no otherwise, a desire to be good is
righteousness. The Apostle's caution a little before the Text may fitly be
applied to this purpose, Little children, let no man deceive you: He that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Not but that the best of
men do sometimes fall through infirmity, and are betrayed by surprise, and born
down by the violence of temptation; but if the general course of our actions be
a doing of righteousness, the grace of the Gospel, in and through the merits of
our blessed Savior, does accept of this imperfect but sincere obedience.

II. I shall endeavor to show, that by this mark every man may, with due care
and diligence, arrive at the certain knowledge of his spiritual estate and
condition. By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. By which the Apostle
means, that this is a real mark of difference betwixt good and bad men, and
that whereby they very often manifest themselves to others; especially when the
course of their lives is eminently pious and virtuous, or notoriously impious
and wicked. But because it does not so much concern us curiously to enquire
into, much less severely to censure the state of other men, I shall only
consider at present, how far by this mark and character every man may make a
certain judgment of his own good or bad condition.

1. By this character, as I have explained it, he that is a bad man may
certainly know himself to be so, if he will but consider his condition, and do
not wilfully deceive and delude himself. As for those who are vicious in the
general course of their lives, or have been guilty of the act of some heinous
and notorious sin, not yet repented of; their case is so plain, even to
themselves, that they can have no manner of doubt concerning it. Such men stand
continually convicted, and condemned by the sentence of their own minds: and
whenever they reflect upon themselves (which they do as seldom as they can)
they are a terror to themselves, and full of amazement and fearful expectation
of judgment.

And for those who are sinners of a lesser rate, and perhaps allow themselves
only in one kind of vice, they likewise have reason to conclude themselves in a
bad condition; especially if they consider that he who lives in the breach of
any one commandment of God is guilty of all, because he contemns that authority
which enacted the whole Law. And it is easy for any man to discern the habit of
any sin in himself; as when he frequently commits it, when he takes up no firm
resolutions against it, when he uses no competent care to avoid the
temptations to it, nor puts forth any vigorous endeavors to break off from it;
or however, still continues in the practice of it. For the customary practice
of any known sin, is utterly inconsistent with sincere resolutions and
endeavors against it; there being no greater evidence of the insincerity of
resolutions and endeavors in any kind, than still to go on to do contrary to
them.

2. By this character likewise, they that are sincerely good may generally be
well assured of their good condition, and that they are the children of God.
And there are but two things necessary to evidence this to them; That the
general course and tenor of their actions be agreeable to the Laws of God; and
That they be sincere and upright in those actions. And both these every man may
sufficiently know concerning himself; for if the Laws of God be plain, and lie
open to every man's understanding, then is it as easy for every man to know
when he obeys God and keeps his commandments, as when he obeys the commands of
his Father or his Prince, and when he keeps the known Laws of the Land. And no
sensible and considerate man ever had any doubt of this kind; for if a man can
know any thing, he can certainly tell when he keeps or breaks a known Law; so
that all scruples of this nature are frivolous and idle pretenses to cover men's
faults, and such as they would be ashamed to allege in any other case.

And a good man may likewise know when he obeys God sincerely. Not but that men
often deceive themselves with an opinion, or at least a groundless hope of
their own sincerity; but if they will deal fairly with themselves, and use due
care and diligence, there are very few cases (if any) wherein they may not know
their own sincerity in any act of obedience to God: For what can a man know
concerning himself, if not the reality of his own intentions? If any man should
in earnest tell me, that he doubted very much whether he had that friendship
for me which he made profession of, and that he was afraid that his affection
to me was not real and sincere, I confess I should doubt of it too; because I
should certainly conclude that no man could know that matter so well as he
himself. And there is no doubt but whoever has a hearty kindness for another,
and a sincere desire to serve and please him, knows he has it. And accordingly
good and holy men in Scripture do every where with great confidence and
assurance appeal to God, concerning the integrity and sincerity of their hearts
toward him: And I cannot call to mind so much as any one passage in
Scrippture, from whence it can be collected that any good man ever doubted of
his own sincerity: And to say the truth, it is not modesty but impudence for
any man to suspect himself of hypocrisy, good men have always abhorred the
thoughts of it. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and yet he could not bear
to have his integrity questioned. It was a brave and a generous speech of his,
Till I dye, I will not remove my integrity from me.

And yet it has so happened, that this is become a very common doubt among
religious people; and they have been so unreasonably cherished in it, as to
have it made a considerable evidence of a man's sincerity to doubt of it
himself. It is indeed said in Scripture, Jer. 17.9. That the heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? which is true
concerning our future intentions and actions; no man knowing how his mind may
change hereafter. Little did Hazael think that ever he should do those things
which the Prophet foretold him. But though this be true in it self, yet it is
not the meaning of that Text. For the Prophet in that chapter plainly makes use
of this consideration of the falsehood and deceitfulness of man's heart, as an
argument to take of the people of Israel from trusting in the arm of flesh and
in those promises which were made to them of foreign assistance from Egypt:
Because men may pretend fair, and yet deceive those that rely upon them; for
the heart of man is deceitful and desperately wicked, and none but God knows
whether men's inward intentions be answerable to their outward professions; for
he searches the heart and tries the reins. But now because God alone knows
the hearts of all men, and the sincerity of their intentions toward one
another, does it from hence follow that it is a thing either impossible or very
difficult for any man to know the sincerity of his own present intentions and
actions? To make any such conclusion were to condemn the generation of Gods
children, those holy and excellent men in Scripture, Job, and David, and
Hezekiah, and St. Paul, who do so frequently appeal to God concerning their own
integrity. And surely when the Apostle says, No man knows the things of a man,
but the spirit of a man which is in him, he plainly supposes that every man is
conscious to the motions and intentions of his own mind. I have insisted the
longer upon this, that I might from the very foundation destroy an imagination,
which is not only untrue in it self, but has likewise been a very great
hinderance to the peace and comfort of many good men.

III. Let us enquire whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding this, so
many persons are at so great uncertainty about their spiritual condition. For
the clearing of this matter, we will destinctly consider these three things.
First, The grounds of the false hopes and confidence of men really bad
concerning their good condition. Secondly, The causless doubts and jealousies
of men really good concerning their bad condition. And thirdly, The just causes
of doubting in others. As for the troubles and fears of men who are notoriously
bad and live in the practice of known vices, these do not fall under our
consideration: If they be troubled about their condition, it is no more than
what they ought to be; and if they be only doubtful of it, it is less than they
ought to be. To persons in this condition there is only counsel to be given, to
leave their sins and become better; but no comfort to be administered to them,
till first they have followed that counsel: For till they reform, if they think
themselves to be in a bad condition, they think just as they ought, and as
there is great reason; and no body should go about to persuade them otherwise.

First then, we will consider the grounds of the false hopes and confidence of
men really bad concerning their good condition. I do not now mean the worst of
men, but such as make some show and appearance of goodness. It is very
unpleasing to men to fall under the hard opinion and censure of others, but the
most grievous thing in the world for a man to be condemned by himself; and
therefore it is no wonder that men use all manner of shifts to avoid so great
an inconvenience as is the ill opinion of a man's self concerning himself and
his own condition.

Some therefore rely upon the profession of the Christian Faith and their being
baptized into it. But this is so far from being any exemption from a good life,
that it is the greatest and most solemn obligation to it. Do thou believe the
Doctrine of the Gospel? thou of all men art inexcusable if thou allowest thy
self in ungodliness and worldly lusts. Others trust to their external Devotion,
they frequent the Church and serve God constantly, they pray to him, and hear
his word, and receive the blessed Sacrament: But let us not deceive our selves,
God is not mocked. All this is so far from making amends for the impiety of our
lives, that on the contrary, the impiety of our lives spoils all the acceptance
of our devotions. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law (that is,
from obeying it) even his prayer shall be an abomination. Others depend very
much upon their repentance, especially if they set solemn times apart for it.
And there is no doubt but that a sincere repentance will put a man into a good
condition: But then it is to be considered, that no repentance is sincere but
that which produces a real change and reformation in our lives. Others
satisfy themselves with the exercise of some particular graces and virtues, as
Justice, and Liberality, and Charity. And is it not a thousand pities that thy
life is not all of a piece, and that all the other parts of it are not
answerable to these; that thou should lose the reward of so much real
goodness out of thy fondness to any one vice or lust? Have thou never heard
what the Scripture says, that he who offends in one point is a transgressour
of the whole Law? To make a man a good man all parts of goodness must concur,
but any one way of wickedness is sufficient to denominate a man bad. Lastly,
Some comfort themselves in the good opinion which perhaps others have of them.
But if we know our selves to be bad, it is not the good opinion of others
concerning us which can either alter or better our condition. They may have
reason for their charity, and yet thou none for thy confidence. Trust no body
concerning thy self rather than thy self, because no body can know thee so well
as thou may know thy self. These, and such as these, are the hopes of the
hypocrite, which Job elegantly compares to the spiders web, finely and
artificially wrought, but miserably thin and weak; so that we our selves may
see through them, and if we lay the least stress upon them they will vanish.

Secondly, We will consider in the next place the causeless doubts and
jealousies of men really good concerning their bad condition.

1. Some are afraid that they are reprobated from all eternity, and therefore
they cannot be the children of God. This is so unreasonable, that if it were
not a real cause of trouble to some persons, it did not deserve to be
considered. For no man that sincerely endeavors to please God and to keep his
commandments has from Scripture the least ground to suspect any latent or
secret decree of God against him that shall work his ruin. But whatever the
decrees of God be concerning the eternal state of men, they can certainly be no
rule either of our duty or comfort. And therefore for men to judge of their
condition by the decrees of God which are hid from us, and not by his word
which is near us and in our hearts, is as if a man wandering in the wide sea, in
a dark night when the heaven is all clouded about him, should yet resolve to
steer his course by the stars, which he cannot see; and neglect the compass,
which is at hand and would afford him a much better and more certain direction.

2. Good men are conscious to themselves of many frailties and imperfections,
and therefore they are afraid of their condition. But God considers the
infirmities of our present state, and expects no other obedience from us, in
order to our acceptance with him, but what this state of imperfection is
capable of: And provided the sincere endeavor and general course of our lives
be to please him and keep his Commandments, the terms of the Gospel are so
merciful, that our frailties shall not be imputed to us, so as to affect our
main state, and to make us cease to be the children of God.

3. They are afraid their obedience is not sincere because it proceeds many
times from fear, and not always out of pure love to God. For answer to this: It
is plain from Scripture, that God propounds to men several motives and
arguments to obedience; some proper to work upon their fear, as the threatenings
of punishment; some upon their hope, as the promises of blessing and reward;
others upon their love, as the mercies and forgiveness of God. From whence it
is evident he intended they should all work upon us. And accordingly the
Scripture gives us instances in each kind. Noah moved with fear obeyed God in
preparing an Ark: Moses had respect unto the recompense of reward: Mary
Magdalen loved much. And as it is hard to say, so it is not necessary to
determine just how much influence and no more each of these has upon us: It is
very well if men be reclaimed from their fins and made good, by the joint force
of all the considerations which God offers to us. To be sure Love is the
noblest and most generous principle of obedience, but fear commonly takes the
first and fastest hold of us, and in times of violent temptation is perhaps the
best argument to keep even the best of men within the bounds of their duty.

4. Another cause of doubting in good men is, from a sense of their imperfect
performance of the duties of Religion, and of the abatement of their affections
toward God at some times. They have many wandering thoughts in prayer and other
exercises of devotion, and they cannot for their life keep their minds
continually intent on what they are about. This we should strive against as
much as we can, and that is the utmost we can do; but to cure this wholly is
impossible, the infirmity of our nature and the frame of our minds will not
admit of it: And therefore no man ought to question his sincerity, because he
cannot do that which is impossible for men to do.

And then for the abatement of our affections to God and Religion at some
times, this naturally proceeds from the inconstancy of men's tempers, by reason
of which it is not possible that the best of men should be able always to
maintain and keep up the same degree of zeal and fervor toward God. But our
comfort is, that God does not measure men's sincerity by the Tides of their
affections, but by the constant bent of their resolutions and the general
tenor of their life and actions.

5. Another cause of these doubts is, that men expect more than ordinary and
reasonable assurance of their good condition; some particular revelation from
God and extraordinary impression upon their minds to that purpose, which they
think the Scripture means by the testimony and seal and earnest of the Spirit.
God may give this when and to whom he pleases, but I do not find that he has
any where promised it. And all that the Scripture means by those phrases of the
testimony and seal and earnest of the Spirit, is to my apprehension no more but
this, That the Holy Spirit which God bestowed upon Christians in so powerful
and sensible a manner was a seal and earnest of their resurrection to eternal
life, according to that plain Text, Romans 8.11, If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead
shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you. But
then who they are that have the Spirit of God is only to be known by the real
fruits and effects of it. If we be led by the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit,
and do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, then the Spirit of Christ dwells in
us.

As for the case of melancholy, it is not a reasonable case, and therefore does
not fall under any certain rules and directions. They who are under the power
of it, are seldom fit to take that counsel which alone is fit to be given them;
and that is, not to believe themselves concerning themselves, but to trust the
judgment of others rather than their own apprehensions. In other cases every
man knows himself best, but a melancholy man is most in the dark as to himself.
This cause of trouble and doubting is very much to be pitied but hard to be
removed, unless by physic, or by time, or by chance. One may happen to say
something that may hit the humor of a melancholy man, and satisfy him for the
present; but Reason must needs signify very little to those persons, the nature
of whose distemper it is to turn every thing that can be said for their comfort
into objections against themselves.

Thirdly, But besides those who mistake their condition, either by presuming it
to be better or fearing it to be worse than it is, there are likewise others
who upon good grounds are doubtful of their condition, and have reason to be
afraid of it: Those I mean, who have some beginnings of goodness, which yet are
very imperfect: They have good resolutions, and do many things well; but they
often fall, and are frequently pulled back by those evil inclinations and
habits which are yet in a great measure unsubdued in them. These I cannot liken
better than to the Borderers between two Countries, who live in the marches and
confines of two powerful Kingdoms, both which have a great influence upon them,
so that it is hard to say whose Subjects they are, and to which Prince they
belong: Thus it is with many in Religion, They have pious inclinations, and
have made some fair attempts toward goodness; they have begun to refrain from
sin, and to resist the occasions and temptations to it; but ever and anon they
are mastered by their old lusts, and carried off from their best resolutions;
and perhaps upon a little consideration they repent and recover themselves
again, and after a while are again entangled and overcome.

Now the case of these persons is really doubtful, both to themselves and
others. And the proper direction to be given them, in order to their peace and
settlement, is by all means to encourage them to go on and to fortify their
good resolutions; to be more vigilant and watchful over themselves, to strive
against sin and to resist it with all their might. And according to the success
of their endeavors in this conflict, the evidence of their good condition will
every day clear up and become more manifest: The more we grow in grace, the
seldomer we fall into sin, the more even and constant our obedience to God is,
the greater and fuller satisfaction we shall have of our good estate toward
God: For the path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and
more unto the perfect day: And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and
the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

I shall only make two or three Inferences from what has been discoursed upon
this Argument, and so conclude.

1. From hence we learn the great danger of sins of Omission as well as
Commission; Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. The mere neglect of
any of the great duties of Religion, of piety toward God, and of kindness and
charity to men, though we be free from the commission of great sins, is enough
to cast us out of the favor of God and to shut us for ever out of his kingdom;
I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, thirsty and ye gave me no drink, sick and
in prison and ye visited me not, therefore depart ye cursed.

2. It is evident from what has been said, That nothing can be vainer than for
men to live in any course of sin and impiety, and yet to pretend to be the
Children of God, and to hope for eternal life. The Children of God will do the
works of God, and whoever hopes to enjoy him hereafter will endeavor to be
like him here; Every man that has this hope in Him, purifies himself, even as
He is pure.

3. You see what is the great mark and character of a man's good or bad
condition; whosoever does righteousness is of God, and whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God. Here is a plain and sensible evidence by which
every man that will deal honestly with himself may certainly know his own
condition; and then according as he finds it to be, may take comfort in it, or
make have out of it. And we need not ascend into heaven nor go down into the
deep, to search out the secret counsels and decrees of God; there needs no
anxious enquiry whether we be of the number of Gods elect: If we daily mortify
our lusts, and grow in goodness, and take care to add to our faith and
knowledge, temperance and patience and charity, and all other Christian graces
and virtues, we certainly take the best course in the World to make our calling
and election sure. And without this it is impossible that we should have any
comfortable and well grounded assurance of our good condition. This one mark of
doing righteousness is that into which all other signs and characters, which
are in Scripture given of a good man, are finally resolved: And this answers
all those various phrases, which some men would make to be so many several and
distinct marks of a child of God; As whether we have the true knowledge of God
and Divine illumination, for hereby we know that we know him if we keep his
commandments: Whether we sincerely love God, for this is the love of God that
we keep his commandments: And whether God loves us, for the righteous Lord
loves righteousness, and his countenance will behold the upright: Whether we
be regenerate and born of God, for whosoever is born of God sins not:
Whether we have the Spirit of God witnessing with our Spirits that we are the
children of God, for as many as have the Spirit of God are led by the Spirit,
and by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh: Whether we belong to
Christ, and have an interest in him or not, for they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: In a word, Whether
the promise of heaven and eternal life belong to us, for without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, but if we have our fruit unto holiness, the and will be
everlasting life. So that you see at last, the Scripture brings all to this one
mark, viz. holiness and obedience to the Laws of God, or a vicious and wicked
life; In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil:
Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.

Let us then deal impartially with our selves, and bring our lives and actions
to this trial; and never be at rest till the matter be brought to some issue,
and we have made a deliberate judgment of our condition, whether we be the
children of God or not. And if upon a full and fair examination our consciences
give us this testimony, that by the grace of God we have denied ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and have lived soberly and righteously and godly in this present
world, we may take joy and comfort in it; for if our heart condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God: But if upon the search and trial of our ways
our case appear clearly to be otherwise, or if we have just cause to doubt of
it, let us not venture to continue one moment longer in so uncertain and
dangerous a condition. And if we desire to know the way of Peace, the Scripture
has set it plainly before us, Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet they
shall be white as snow: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Though our case be very
bad, yet it is not desperate; This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all men
to be embraced, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: And he
is still willing to save us, if we be but willing to leave our sins, and to
serve him in holiness and righteousness the remaining part of our lives. We may
yet be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: We
who have ventured so long upon the brink of ruin, may yet by the infinite
mercies of God, and by the power of his grace be rescued from the base and
miserable slavery of the Devil and our lusts into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God.

And thus I have endeavored, with all the plainness I could, to represent
every man to himself, and to let him clearly see what his condition is toward
God, and how the case of his soul and of his eternal happiness stands. And I do
verily believe that what I have said in this matter is the truth of God, to
which we ought all gladly to yield and render up our selves. For great is
Truth, and mighty above all things: She is faithful and impartial in her
counsels, and though she be not always welcome, yet it is always wise to hearken
to her, for in great kindness and charity she lets men know their condition and
the danger of it, that they may take care to prevent it: With her is no
accepting of persons, and in her judgment there is no unrighteousness. I will
conclude all with that excellent advice of a Heathen Philosopher, Antonin. lib.
10.
Make it no longer a matter of dispute what are the marks and signs of a good
man, but immediately set about it, and endeavor to become such an one.

FINIS.

