A SERMON PREACHED November 5. 1678. AT St. MARGARETS Westminster, Before the
Honorable House of COMMONS.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. And William Rogers, at the Maidenhead
over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1678.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, November. 5. 1678.
LUKE 9.55, 56. But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of; For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.


AMong many other Things, which may justly recommend the Christian Religion to
the approbation of mankind, the intrinsic goodness of it is most apt to make
impression upon the Minds of serious and considerate men. The Miracles of it
are the great external evidence and confirmation of its truth and Divinity; but
the morality of its Doctrines and Precepts, so agreeable to the best Reason,
and wisest apprehensions of mankind, so admirably fitted for the perfecting of
our natures, and the sweetning of the spirits and tempers of men, so friendly
to human Society, and every way so well calculated for the peace and order of
the World. These are the things which our Religion glories in as her crown and
excellency. Miracles are apt to awaken and astonish, and by a sensible and
over-powering evidence, to bear down the prejudices of infidelity; but there
are secret charms in goodness, which take fast hold of the hearts of men and do
insensibly, but effectually, command our love and esteem.

And surely nothing can be more proper to the occasion of this Day, than a
Discourse upon this Argument; which so directly tends to correct that
unchristian spirit, and mistaken zeal, which has been the cause of all our
troubles and confusions, and had so powerful an influence upon that horrid
Tragedy, which was designed, now near upon fourscore years ago, to have been
acted as upon this Day.

And that we may the better understand the reason of our Savior's reproof here
in the Text, it will be requisite to consider the occasion of this hot and
furious zeal, which appeared in some of his Disciples. And that was this, Our
Savior was going from Galilee to Jerusalem, and being to pass through a
Village of Samaria, he sent messengers before him, to prepare entertainment for
him; but the People of that Place would not receive him, because he was going
to Jerusalem: The reason whereof was, the difference of Religion, which then
was between the Jews and the Samaritans. Of which I shall give you this brief
account.

These Samaritans were originally that Colony of the Assyrians, which we find
in the Book of Kings, was, upon the Captivity of the Ten Tribes, planted in
Samaria by Salmanassar. They were Heathens, and worshipped their own Idols,
till they were so infested with Lions, that for the redress of this mischief
they desired to be instructed in the worship of the God of Israel, hoping by
this means to appease the anger of the God of the Country; and then they
worshipped the God of Israel together with their own Idols; for so it is said
in the History of the Kings, That they feared the Lord, and served their own
Gods.

After the Tribe of Judah were returned from the Captivity of Babylon, and the
Temple of Jerusalem was rebuilt, all the Jews were obliged by a solemn Covenant
to put away their Heathen Wives. It happened, that Manasses, a Jewish Priest,
had married the Daughter of Sanballat the Samaritan; and being unwilling to put
away his Wife, Sanballat excited the Samaritans to build a Temple upon Mount
Gerizim, near the City of Samaria, in opposition to the Temple at Jerusalem,
and made Manasses; his Son in Law; Priest there.

Upon the building of this new Temple, there arose a great feud between the
Jews and Samaritans, which in process of time grew to so violent a hatred, that
they would not so much as show common civility to one another. And this was the
reason why the Samaritans would not receive our Savior in his journey, because
they perceived he was going to worship at Jerusalem.

At this uncivil usage of our Savior, two of his Disciples, James and John,
presently take fire, and out of a well-meaning zeal for the honor of their
Master, and of the true God, and of Jerusalem, the true place of his worship,
they are immediately for dispatching out of the way these Enemies of God, and
Christ, and the true Religion, these Heretics and Schismatics, for so they
called one another: And to this end they desire our Savior to give them power
to call for fire from Heaven to consume them, as Elias had done in a like case,
and that too not far from Samaria; and it is not improbable that their being so
near the place where Elias had done the like before, might prompt them to this
request.

Our Savior seeing them in this heat notwithstanding all the reasons they
pretended for their passion, and for all they sheltered themselves under the
great Example of Elias, does very calmly, but seseverely reprove this temper of
theirs, You know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Grotius observes, that these two excellent Sentences are left out in a
Manuscript that is in England. I cannot tell what Manuscript he refers to, but
if it were a Copy written out in the height of Popery, no wonder if some
zealous Transcriber offended at this passage, struck it out of the Gospel,
being confident our Savior would not say any thing, that was so directly
contrary to the current Doctrine and practice of those times. But thanks be to
God, this admirable Saying is still preserved, and can never be made use of
upon a fitter occasion.

Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of: That is, Ye own your selves to be
my Disciples, but do you consider what spirit now acts and governs you? Not
that surely which my Doctrine designs to mould and fashion you into, which is
not a furious and persecuting and destructive spirit, but mild and gentle and
saving; tender of the lives and interests of men, even of those who are our
greatest Enemies: You ought to consider, That you are not now under the rough
and sour Dispensation of the Law, but the calm and peaceable Institution of the
Gospel; to which the Spirit of Elias, though he was a very good man in his
time, would be altogether unsuitable. God permitted it then, under that
imperfect way of Religion, but now under the Gospel it would be intolerable:
For that designs universal love, and peace, and good will; and now no
difference of Religion, no pretense of zeal for God and Christ can warrant and
justify this passionate and fierce, this vindictive and exterminating spirit:

For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. He
says indeed elsewhere, that he was not come to send Peace, but a Sword; which
we are not to understand of the natural tendency of his Religion, but of the
accidental event and effect of it, through the malice and perverseness of Men:
But here he speaks of the proper intention and design of his coming; He came
not to kill and destroy, but for the healing of the Nations; for the salvation
and redemption of Mankind, not only from the wrath to come, but from a great
part of the evils and miseries of this life: He came to discountenance all
fierceness and rage and cruelty in men, one toward another; to restrain and
subdue that furious and unpeaceable Spirit, which is so troublesome to the
world, and the cause of so many mischiefs and disorders in it: And to introduce
a Religion which consults not only the eternal Salvation of men's souls, but
their temporal peace and security, their comfort and happiness in this world.

The words thus explained contain this Observation, That a revengeful and cruel
and destructive Spirit, is directly contrary to the design and temper of the
Gospel, and not to be excused upon any pretense of zeal for God and Religion.

In the prosecution of this Argument, I shall confine my Discourse to these
Three heads.

First, To show the opposition of this spirit to the true Spirit and design of
the Christian Religion.

Secondly, The unjustifiableness of it upon any pretense of zeal for God and
Religion.

Thirdly, To apply this Discourse to the occasion of this Day.

First, I shall show the opposition of this spirit to the true Spirit and
design of the Christian Religion: That it is directly opposite to the main and
fundamental Precepts of the Gospel; and to the great Paterns and examples of
our Religion, our blessed Savior, and the Primitive Christians.

1. This spirit which our Savior here reproves in his Disciples, is directly
opposite to the main and fundamental Precepts of the Gospel; which command us
to love one another, and to love all men, even our very enemies; and are so far
from permitting us to persecute those who hate us, that they forbid us to hate
those who persecute us: They require us, to be merciful, as our Father which is
in Heaven is merciful; to be kind and tenderhearted, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven us: And to put on, as the elect of God, bowels
of mercy, meekness and long-suffering, and to follow peace with all men, and to
show all meekness to all men: And particularly the Pastors and Governors of the
Church are especially charged to be of this temper: The servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men; apt to teach, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth. To all which Precepts, and many
more that I might reckon up, nothing can be more plainly opposite, than
inhumane Cruelties and Persections, treacherous Conspiracies. and bloody
Massacres, a barbarous Inquisition, and a holy League to extirpate all that
differ from us. And in stead of instructing in meekness those that oppose
themselves, to convert men with fire and faggot, and to teach them, as Gideon
did the men of Succoth, with briars and thorns; and instead of waiting for
their repentance* and endeavoring to recover them out of the snare of the
Devil, to put them quick into his hands, and to dispatch them to hell as fast
as is possible. If the precepts of Christianity can be contradicted, surely it
cannot be done more grossly and palpably than by such practices.

2. This Spirit is likewise directly opposite to the great paterns and examples
of our Religion, our blessed Savior, and the Primitive Christians. It was
prophesied of our Savior, that he should be the Prince of peace; and should
make it one of his great businesses upon earth, to make peace in heaven and
earth; to reconcile men to God, and to one another; to take up all those feuds,
and to extinguish all those animosities that were in the world; to bring to
agreement and a peaceable demeanor one toward another those that were most
distant in their tempers and interests, to make the lamb and the wolf lie down
together, that there might be no more destroying nor devouring in all God's
holy mountain; that is, that that cruel and destructive spirit which prevailed
before in the world, should then be banished out of all Christian societies.

And in conformity to these predictions, when our Savior was born into the
world, the Angels sang that heavenly Anthem, Glory to God in the highest, peace
on earth, and good will among men. And when he appeared in the world, his whole
life and carriage was gentle and peaceable, full of meekness and charity. His
great business was to be beneficial to others, to seek and to save that which
was lost; he went about doing good, to the bodies, and to the souls of men: his
miracles were not destructive to mankind, but healing and charitable. He could,
if he had pleased, by his miraculous power have confounded his enemies, and
have thundered out death and destruction against the Infidel world, as his
pretended Vicar has since done against Heretics. But intending that his
Religion should be propagated in human ways, and that Men should be drawn to
the profession of it by the bands of love, and the cords of a man, by the
gentle and peaceable methods of Reason and persuasion; he gave no example of a
furious zeal and religious rage against those who despised his Doctrine. It was
propounded to men for their great advantage, and they rejected it at their
utmost peril. It seemed good to the Author of this Institution to compel no
man to it by temporal punishments. When he went about making proselytes, he
offered violence to no man, only said, If any man will be my disciple, If any
man will come after me. And when his disciples were leaving him, he does not
set up an Inquisition to torture and punish them for their defection from the
faith; only says, Will ye also go away?

And in imitation of this blessed Pattern, the Christian Church continued to
speak and act for several Ages. And this was the language of the holy Fathers,
Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio, the Christian Law does not avenge it
self by the sword. This was then the style of Councils, Nemini ad credendum vim
infer, to offer violence to no man to compel him to the faith. I proceed in
the

Second place, to show the Unjustifiableness of this spirit upon any pretense
whatsoever of zeal for God and Religion. No case can be put with Circumstances
of greater advantage, and more likely to justify this spirit and temper, than
the case here in the Text. Those against whom the disciples would have called
for fire from Heaven, were Heretics and Schismatics from the true Church;
they had affronted our Savior himself in his own person; the honor of God,
and of that Religion which he had set up in the world, and of Jerusalem which
he had appointed for the place of his worship were all concerned in this case:
so that if ever it were warrantable to put on this fierce and furious zeal,
here was a case that seemed to require it: But even in these circumstances our
Savior thinks fit to rebuke and discountenance this spirit, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of. And he gives such a Reason, as ought in all
differences of Religion, how wide soever they be, to deter men from this
temper, For the Son of man is not come to desroy men's lives, but to save them;
that is, this Spirit is utterly inconsistent with the great design of Christian
Religion, and the end of our Savior's coming into the world.

And now what has the Church of Rome to plead for her cruelty to men for the
cause of Religion, which the Disciples might not much better have pleaded for
themselves in their case? what has she to say against those who are the
objects of her cruelty and persecution, which would not have held against the
Samaritans? Does she practice these severities out of a zeal for truth, and for
the honor of God, and Christ, and the true Religion? Why upon these very
accounts it was, that the Disciples would have called for fire from Heaven to
have destroyed the Samaritans. Is the Church of Rome persuaded, that those whom
she persecutes are Heretics and Schismatics, and that no punishment can be
too great for such offenders? So the Disciples were persuaded of the
Samaritans; and upon much better grounds: Only the Disciples had some excuse in
their case, which the Church of Rome has not; and that was Ignorance: And this
apology our Savior makes for them, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of: They had been bred up in the Jewish Religion, which gave some indulgence to
this kind of temper, and they were able to cite a great Example for themselves;
besides, they were then but learners, and not thoroughly instructed in the
Christian doctrine. But in the Church of Rome, whatever the case of particular
persons may be, as to the whole Church and the Governing part of it, this
ignorance is wilful and affected, and therefore inexcusable. For the Christian
Religion, which they profess to embrace, does as plainly teach the contratrary,
as it does any other matter whatsoever: and it is not more evident in the New
Testament, that Christ died for sinners, than that Christians should not kill
one another for the misbelief of any Article of revealed Religion; much less,
for the disbelief of such Articles as are invented by men, and imposed as the
Doctrines of Christ.

You have heard what kind of Spirit it is, which our Savior here reproves in
his Disciples. It was a furious and destructive Spirit, contrary to Christian
charity and goodness. But yet this may be said in mitigation of their fault,
that they themselves offered no violence to their Enemies: They left it to God,
and, no doubt, would have been very glad that he would have manifested his
severity upon them, by sending down fire from Heaven to have consumed them.

But there is a much worse Spirit than this in the world, which is not only
contrary to Christianity, but to the common Principles of Natural Religion, and
even to Humanity it self: Which by falsehood and perfidiousnesfs, by secret
plots and conspiracies, or by open sedition and rebellion, by an Inquisition or
a Massacre; by deposing and killing Kings, by fire and sword, by the ruin of
their Country, and betraying it into the hands of Foreigners; and, in a word,
by dissolving all the bonds of humane Society, and subverting the peace and
order of the World, that is, by all the wicked ways imaginable does incite men
to promote and advance their Religion. As if all the world were made for them,
and there were not only no other Christians, but no other Men besides
themselves; as Babylon of old proudly vaunted, I am, and there is none besides
me: And as if the God, whom the Christians worship, were not the God of order,
but of Confusion; as if he whom we call the Father of mercies were delighted
with cruelty, and could not have a more pleasing sacrifice offered to him than
a Massacre, nor put a greater honor upon his Priests then to make them Judges
of an Inquisition, that is, the inventers and decreers of torments for men more
righteous and innocent then themselves.

Thus to misrepresent God and Religion, is to divest them of all their Majesty
and glory. For if that of Seneca be true, that sine bonitate nulla majestas,
without Goodness there can be no such thing as Majesty, then to separate
goodness and mercy from God, compassion and charity from Religion, is to make
the two best things in the world, God and Religion, good for nothing.

How much righter apprehensions had the Heathen of the Divine Nature, which
they looked upon as so benign and beneficial to mankind, that (as Tully
admirably says) Dii immortales ad usum hominum fabrefacti pene videantur, the
nature of the immortal Gods may almost seem to be exactly framed for the
benefit and advantage of men. And as for Religion, they always speak of it as
the great band of humane Society, and the foundation of truth, and fidelity,
and justice among men. But when Religion once comes to supplant moral
Righteousness, and to teach men the absurdest things in the world, to lie for
the truth, and to kill men for God's sake: when it serves to no other purpose,
but to be a bond of conspiracy, to inflame the tempers of men to a greater
fierceness, and to set a keener edge upon their spirits, and to make them ten
times more the children of wrath and cruelty than they were by nature, then
surely it loses its nature and ceases to be Religion: For let any man say worse
of Atheism and Infidelity, if he can. And, for God's sake, what is Religion
good for, but to reform the manners and dispositions of men, to restrain humane
nature from violence and cruelty, from falsehood and treachery, from Sedition
and Rebellion? Better it were there were no revealed Religion, and that humane
nature were left to the conduct of its own principles and inclinations, which
are much more mild and merciful, much more for the peace and happiness of
humane Society; then to be acted by a Religion that inspires men with so wild a
fury, and prompts them to commit such outrages, and is continually supplanting
Government, and undermining the welfare of mankind; in short, such a Religion
as teaches men to propagate and advance it self by means so evidently contrary
to the very nature and end of all Religion.

And this, if it be well considered, will appear to be a very convincing way of
reasoning, by showing the last result and consequence of such Principles, and
of such a Train of Propsitions, to be a most gross and palpable absurdity. For
example, We will at present admit Popery to be the true Religion, and their
Doctrines of extirpating Heretics, of the lawfulness of deposing Kings and
subverting Government, by all the cruel and wicked ways that can be thought of,
to be, as in truth they are, the Doctrines of this Religion: In this Case, I
would not trouble my self to debate particulars; but if in the gross, and upon
the whole matter it be evident, that such a Religion as this is as bad or worse
than Infidelity and no-Religion, this is conviction enough to a wise man, and
as good as a Demonstration, that this is not the true Religion, and that it
cannot be from God.

How much better Teachers of Religion were the old Heathen Philosophers? In all
whose Books and Writings there is not one Principle to be found of Treachery or
Rebellion; nothing that gives the least countenance to an Assassination or a
Massacre, to the betraying of ones Native Country, or the cutting of his
Neighbors throat for difference in opinion. I speak it with grief and shame,
because the credit of our common Christianity is somewhat concerned in it, that
Panaetius and Antipater and Diogenes the Stoic, Tully and Plutarch and Seneca
were much honester and more Christian Casuists, than the Jesuits are, or the
generality of the Casuists of any other Order, that I know of, in the Church of
Rome, I come now in the

Third and last place, to make some Application of this Discourse.

1. Let not Religion suffer for those faults and miscarriages which really
proceed from the ignorance of Religion, and from the want of it. That under
color and pretense of Religion, very bad things are done, is no argument that
Religion it self is not good: Because the best things are liable to be
perverted and abused to very ill purposes, nay the corruption of them is
commonly the worst; as, they say, the richest and noblest Wines make the
sharpest Vinegar. If the light that is in you, says our Savior, be darkness,
how great is that darkness?

2. Let us beware of that Church which countenanceth this unchristian spirit
here condemned by our Savior; and which teaches such Doctrines, and warrants
such Practices as are consonant thereto. You all know, without my saying so,
that I mean the Church of Rome; in which are taught such Doctrines as these,
That Heretics, that is all who differ from them in matters of Faith, are to be
extirpated by fire and sword; which was decreed in the third and fourth Lateran
Councils, where all Christians are strictly charged to endeavor this to the
uttermost of their power, Sicut reputari cupiunt and haberi fideles, as they
desire to be esteemed and accounted Christians. Next their Doctrines of
deposing Kings, and of absolving their subjects from obedience to them; which
were not only universally believed, but practiced by the Popes and Roman Church
for several Ages* Indeed this Doctrine has not been at all times alike frankly
and openly avowed, but it is undoubtedly theirs; and has frequently been put
in execution, though they have not thought it so convenient at all turns to
make profession of it. It is a certain kind of Engine, which is to be scru'd up
or let down, as occasion serves; and is commonly kept like Goliah's Sword in
the Sanctuary, but yet so that the High Priest can lend it out upon an
extraordinary occasion.

And for Practices* consonant to these Doctrines, I shall go no further than
the horrid and bloody Design of this Day. Such a Mystery of Iniquity, as had
been hid from ages and generations; Such a Masterpiece of Villainy, as eye had
not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever before entered into the heart of man: So
prodigiously Barbarous, both in the substance and circumstances of it, as is
not to be paralleled in all the voluminous Records of Time, from the
foundation of the World.

Of late years our Adversaries, for so they have made themselves without any
provocation of ours, have almost had the impudence to deny so plain a matter of
fact; but I wish they have not taken an effectual course, by fresh
Conspiracies, of equal or greater horror, to confirm the belief of it with a
witness. But I shall not anticipate what will be more proper for another Day,
but confine my self to the present Occasion.

I will not trouble you with the particular Narrative of this dark Conspiracy,
nor the obscure manner of its discovery, which Bellarmine himself acknowledges
not to have been without a Miracle. Let us thank God that it was so happily
discovered and disappointed, as I hope their present design will be, by the
same wonderful and merciful providence of God toward a most unworthy People.
And may the lameness and halting of Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the
Jesuits, never depart from that Order, but be a Fate continually attending all
their villainous Plots and Contrivances.

I shall only observe to you, that after the discovery of this Plot the Authors
of it were not convinced of the evil, but sorry for the miscarriage of it. Sir
Everard Digby, whose very original Papers and Letters are now in my hands,
after he was in Prison, and knew he must suffer, calls it the best Cause; and
was extremely troubled to hear it censured by Catholics and Priests, contrary
to his expectation, for a great sin: Let me tell you, says he, what a grief it
is, to hear THAT so much condemned, which I did believe would have been
otherwise thought of by Catholics. And yet he concludes that Letter with these
words, In how full joy should I dye, if I could do any thing for the Cause
which I love more than my life. And, in another Letter, he says, he could have
said something to have mitigated the odium of this business, as to that Point
of involving those of his own Religion in the common ruin, I dare not (says
he) take that course that I could to make it appear less odious, for diverse
were to have been brought out of danger, who now would rather hurt them than
otherwise. I do not think there would have been three worth the saving that
should have been lost. And as to the rest, that were to have been swallowed up
in that destruction, he seems not to have the least relenting in his mind about
them. All doubts he seems to have looked upon as temptations, and entreats his
Friends to pray for the pardoning of his not sufficient striving against
temptations since this busieness was undertook.

Good God! that any thing that is called Religion should so perfectly strip men
of all humanity, and transform the mild and gentle race of mankind into such
Wolves and Tigers: that ever a pretended zeal for Thy glory should instigate
men to dishonor Thee at such a rate. It is believed by many, and not without
cause, that the Pope and his Faction are the Antichrist. I will say no more
than I know in this matter; I am not sure that it is he that is particularly
designed in Scripture by that Name; but however that be, I challenge Antichrist
himfelf, whoever he be, and whenever he comes, to do worse and wickeder things
than these.

But I must remember my Text, and take heed of imitating that Spirit which is
there condemned, whilst I am inveighing against it. And in truth it almost
looks uncharitably to speak the truth in these matters, and barely to relate
what these men have not blushed to do. I need not, nay I cannot, aggravate
these things, they are too horrible in themselves, even when they are expressed
in the sofrest and gentlest words.

I would not be understood to charge every particular person who is, or has
been, in the Roman Communion, with the guilt of these or the like practices:
But I must charge their Doctrines and Principles with them; I must charge the
Heads of their Church, and the prevalent teaching and governing part of it, who
are usually the contrivers and abetters, the executioners and applauders of
these cursed Designs.

I do willingly acknowledge the great Piety and Charity of several persons who
have lived and dyed in that Communion, as Erasmus, Father, Paul, Thuanus, and
many others; who had in truth more goodness than the Principles of that
Religion do either incline men to, or allow of. And yet he that considers how
universally almost the Papists in Ireland were engaged in that Massacre, which
is still fresh in our memories, will find it very hard to determine how many
degrees of innocence and good nature, or of coldness and indifferency in
Religion, are necessary to overballance the fury of a blind zeal and a
misguided Conscience.

I doubt not but Papists are made like other men. Nature has not generally
given them such savage and cruel dispositions; but their Religion has made
them so. Whereas true Christianity is not only the best, but the best-natur'd
Institution in the world; and so far as any Church is departed from good
nature, and become cruel and barbarous, so far is it degenerated from
Christianity. I am loath to say it, and yet I am consident it is very true, That
many Papists would have been excellent persons, and very good men, if their
Religion had not hindered them; if the Doctrines and Principles of their Church
had not perverted and spoiled their natural dispositions.

I speak not this to exasperate You, worthy Patriots, and the great Bulwark of
our Religion, to any unreasonable or unnecessary, much less unchristian
Severities against them: No, let us not do like them; let us never do any thing
for Religion that is contrary to it: But I speak it to awaken your care thus
far, That if their Priests will always be putting these pernicious Principles
into the minds of the People, effectual Provision may be made, that it may
never be in their power again to put them in practice. We have found by
experience, that ever since the Reformation they have been continually pecking
at the foundations of our Peace and Religion: When God knows we have been so
far from thirsting after their blood, that we did not so much as desire their
disquiet, but in order to our own necessary safety, and indeed to theirs.

And God be praised for those matchless Instances which we are able to give of
the generous humanity and Christian temper of the English Protestants. After Q.
Maryes death, when the Protestant Religion was restored, Bishop Bonner,
notwithstanding all his Cruelties and Butcheries, was permitted quietly to live
and dye amongst us. And after the Treason of this Day, nay at this very time,
since the discovery of so barbarous a Design, and the highest provocation in
the world, by the treacherous murder of one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, a very good Man, and a most excellent Magistrate, who had been active in
the discovery of this Plot; I say, after all this, and notwithstanding the
continued and insupportable insolence of their carriage and behavior, even
upon this occasion, no violence, nay not so much as any incivility, that I ever
heard of, has been offered to any of them. I would to God they would but
seriously consider this one difference between our Religion and theirs, and
which of them comes nearest to the Wisdom which is from above, which is
peaceable, and gentle, and full of mercy. And I do heartily pray, and have good
hopes, that upon this occasion God will open their eyes so far, as to convince
a great many among them, that that cannot be the true Religion which inspires
men with such barbarous minds.

I have now done, and if I have been transported upon this Argument somewhat
beyond my usual temper, the Occasion of this Day, and our present circumstances
will, I hope, bear me out. I have expressed my self all along with a just
sense, and with no unjust severity, concerning these horrid Principles and
Practices; but yet with great pity and tenderness toward those miserably
seduced Souls, who have been deluded by them, and ensnared in them. And I can
truly say, as the Roman Orator did of himself upon another occasion, Me natura
misericordem, patria severum, crudelem nec patria nec natura esse voluit. My
nature enclines me to be tender and compassionate; a hearty zeal for our
Religion, and concernment for the public welfare of my Country, may perhaps
have made me a little severe; but neither my natural disposition, nor the
temper of the English Nation, nor the Genius of the Protestant, that is the
true Christian Religion, will allow me to be cruel.

For the future, Let us encourage our selves in the Lord our God; and commit
our Cause, and the keeping of our Souls to Him in well doing: And, under God,
let us leave it to the wisdom and care of His Majesty, and His two Houses of
Parliament, to make a lasting Provision for the security of our Peace and
Religion, against all the secret contrivances and open attempts of these sons
of violence. And let us remember those words of David, Psalm. 37.12, 13, 14, 15,
The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth: The
Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. The wicked have
drawn out the sword, and bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and
to slay such as be of upright conversation: Their sword shall enter into their
own heart, and their bows shall be broken.

And I hope, considering what God has heretofore done, and has now begun to
do for us, we may take encouragement to our selves, against all the Enemies of
our Religion, which are confederated against us, in the words of the Prophet,
Isa. 8.9, 10, Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, and give ear, all ye of far Countries: Gird your selves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces: Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught: Speak the word and it shall not
stand: FOR GOD IS WITH US.

And now what remains? But to make our most devout and thankful acknowledgments
to Almighty God, for the invaluable blessing of our Reformed Religion, and for
the miraculous Deliverance of this Day, and for the wonderful Discovery of the
late horrid and barbarous Conspiracy against our Prince, our Peace, and our
Religion.

To Him therefore, our most gracious and merciful God, our Shield, and our
Rock, and our mighty Deliverer: Who has brought us out of the land of Egypt,
and out of the House of bondage; and has set us free from Popish Tyranny and
Superstition, a yoke which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear.

Who has, from time to time, delivered us from the bloody and merciless
designs of wicked and unreasonable men; and has rendered all the plots and
contrivances, the mischievous counsels and devices, of these
worse-than-Heathens, of none effect.

Who, did, as upon this Day, rescue our King and our Princes, our Nobles and
the Heads of our Tribes, the Governors of our Church and the Judges of the
Land, from that fearful Destruction which was ready to have swallowed them up.

Who still brings to light the hidden things of darkness, and has hitherto
preserved our Religion and Civil interests to us, in despite of all the
malicious and restless attempts of our Adversaries.

Unto that great God, who has done so great things for us, and has saved us
by a mighty Salvation: Who has delivered us, and does deliver us, and, we
trust, will still deliver us; he glory and honor, thanksgiving and praise,
from generation to generation. And let all the People say, Amen.

FINIS.

