THE Indispensable Necessity OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE, IN ORDER
To MAN's Eternal Salvation and Ignorance therein; The Mother of Idolatry and
Superstition Asserted IN A SERMON, PREACHED by JOHN TILLOTSON D. D. and Dean of
Canterbury.

MATTHEW. xxiii.13. ^o unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

Imprimatur, C. A. Nov. 17. 1685.

LONDON, ^^inted for Will. Norris at the Maidenhead in Holbourn, 1687. Price
Stitched three pence.

MATTHEW xxiii.13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; and ye neither go in your selves, nor
suffer ye them that are entering in.
THE Scribes so often mentioned in the Gospel, were the great Doctors among the
Jews, the Teachers and Interpreters of the Law of God. And because many of them
were of the Sect of the Pharisees, which above all others pretended to ^kill
and knowledge in the Law, therefore it is our blessed Savior does so often put
the Scribes and Pha^isees together. And these were the Men of Chief Au^hority
in the Jewish Church; Who equalled their ^wn Unwritten Word and Traditions with
the Law ^f God: Nay, our Savior tells us, they made the Commandments of God of
none effect by their Traditions. They did in effect assume to themselves
infallibility; and all that opposed and contradicted them, they brand^d with
the Odious Name of Heretics. Against these ^ur Savior denounces this Woe
here in the Text, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut
up ^^e Kingdom of Heaven against Men, etc.

All the Difficulty in the Words is, what is here ^eant by shutting up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men: ^. Luke expresses it more plainly, ye have
taken away ^^e key of Knowledge, ye entered not into your selves, and ^^em that
were entering in, ye hindered. By putting these ^^o Expressions together, we
shall the more easily ^^me at the meaning of the Text. Ye have taken away (...)
key of Knowledge, and have shut up the Kingdom of ^^aven against Men. This
Metaphor of the (...) Knowledge is undoubtedly an Allusion to that known Custom
among the Jews in the admission of their Doctors. For to whomsoever they gave
Authority to interpret the Law and the Prophets, they were solemnly admitted
into that Office by delivering to them a Key and a Table Book. So that by the
key of knowledge is here meant the Interpretation and understanding of the
Scriptures; and by taking away the key of Knowledge, not only that they
arrogated to themselves alone the Understanding of the Scriptures, but likewise
that they had Conveyed away this key of Knowledge, and as it were hid it out of
the way, neither using it themselves as they ought, nor suffering Others to
make use of it.

And thus they Shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men: which is very fitly said
of those who have lock-the Door against them that were going in, and have taken
away the key. By all which it appears that the Plain meaning of our Savior in
these Metaphorical Expressions is, that the Scribes and Teachers of the Law,
under a Pretense of Interpreting the Scriptures, had perverted them and kept
the true Knowledge of them from the People: Especially those Old Prophecies
(...) the Old Testamant which concerned the Messiah. An^ by this means the
Kingdom of Heaven was shut against Men: And they not only rejected the Truth
themselves but by keeping Men in Ignorance of the true meanin^ of the
Scriptures, they hindered Many from embracin^ our Savior's Doctrine, and
entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, who were ot^erwise well enough dispose^
for it.

Having thus Explained the Words, I shall from the main Scope and Design of
them observe to you these two things.

I. The necessity of the Knowledge of the holy Scriptures in order to our
Eternal Salvation. It is called b^ our Savior the key of Knowledge, that which
lets Me^ into the Kingdom of Heaven.

II. The great and inexcusable fault of those who deprive the People of the
Knowledge of the Holy Scri^^tures. They shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Me^
and do what in them lies to hinder their Eternal Salvation; and therefore our
Savior denounces so heavy a Woe against them.

I shall speak briefly to these two Observations; and then apply them to those
who are principally concerned in them.

1. First, I observe hence the Necessity of the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures in order to our Eternal Salvation. This is by our Savior called the
key of knowledge, that which lets Men into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Knowledge is necessary to Religion: It is necessary to the being of it; and
necessary to the life and practice of it. Without Faith (says the Apostle) it
is impossible to please God: Because Faith is an act of the Understanding, and
does necessarily suppose some knowledge and apprehension of what we believe. To
all acts of Religion there is necessarily req^ired some act of the
Understanding; so that without Knowledge there can be no Devotion in the
Service of God, no Obedience to his Laws. Religion begins in the Understanding,
and from thence descends upon the heart and life, If ye know these things,
(says our Savior) happy are ye if ye do them. We must first know God before we
can worship him; and understand what is his Will, before we can do it.

This is so very evident, that one would think there needed no Discourse about
it: And yet there are some in the World that cry up Ignorance as the Mother of
Devotion. And to show that we do not wrong them in this matter, Mr. Rushworth
in his Dialogues (a Book in great vogue among the Papists here in England) does
expressly reckon up Ignorance among the Parents of Religion. And can any thing
be said more absurdly and more to the Disparagement of Religion, than to derive
the Pedigree of the most excellent thing in the World; from so obscure and
ignoble an Original; and to make that which the Scripture calls the beginning
of Wisdom, and the Excellency of Knowledge, to be the Offspring of Ignorance,
and a Child of Darkness? Ignorance indeed may be the cause of Wonder and
Admiration, and the Mother of Folly and Superstition: But surely Religion is of
a nobler Extraction* and is the Issue and Result of the best Wisdom and
Knowledge; and descends from above, from the giver of every good and perfect
Gift, even the Father of Lights.

And as Knowledge in general is necessary to Religion, so more particularly,
the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures is necessary to our Eternal Salvation.
Because these are the great and standing Revelations of God to Mankind; wherein
the Nature of God and his Will concerning our Duty, and the Terms and
Conditions of our Eternal Happiness in another World, are fully and plainly
declared to us.

The Scriptures are the Word of God; and from whence can we learn the Will of
God so well as from his own Mouth? They are the great Instruments of our
Salvation; and should not every Man be acquainted with that, which alone can
perfectly instruct him what he must believe, and what he must do that h^ may be
saved? This is the Testimony which the Scripture gives of it self, that it is
able to make Men wis^ unto Salvation; and is it not very fit that every Man
should have this Wisdom, and in order thereunto the free use of that Book from
whence this Wisdom is to be learned?

Secondly, I observe the great and inexcusable fault of those who keep Men in
Ignorance of Religion, and take away from them so excellent and necessary a
means of Divine Knowledge, as the Holy Scriptures are* This our Savior calls
taking away the Key of Knowledge, and shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against
Men* That is, doing what in them lies to render it impossible for Men to be
saved. For this he denounces a terrible woe against the Teachers of the Jewish
Church* though they did not proceed so far as to deprive Me^ of the use of the
Holy Scriptures, but only of the righ^ Knowledge and Understanding of them.
This alone i^ a horrible Impiety, to lead Men into a false sense and
interpretation of Scripture; but much greater to forbi^ them the reading of it.
This is a stop to knowledge at the very fountain head; and not only to lead Men
into Error, but to take away from them all possibility of rectifying their
mistakes. And can there be a greater Sacrilege, than to rob Men of the Word of
God, the best means in the World of acquainting them with the Will of God and
their Duty, and the way to Eternal Happiness? To keep the People in Ignorance
of that which is necessary to save them, is to judge them unworthy of Eternal
Life, and to declare it does not belong to them, and maliciously to contrive
the Eternal ruin and destruction of their Souls.

To lock up the Scriptures and the Service of God from the People in an Unknown
Tongue, what is this but in effect to forbid Men to know God, and to serve him;
to render them incapable of knowing what is the good and acceptable Will of
God; of joining in his Worship, or performing any Part of it, or receiving any
Benefit or Edification from it? And what is, if this be not, to shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men? This is so outrageous a Cruelty to the Souls of
Men, that it is not to be excused upon any Pretense whatsoever: This is to take
the surest and most effectual way in the World to destroy those for whom Christ
dyed, and directly to thwart the Great Design of God our Savior, Who would
have all Men to be Saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. Men may
miscarry with their Knowledge, but they are sure to perish for the want of it.

The best things in the World have their inconveniences attending them, and are
liable to be abused; but surely Men are not to be ruined and damned for fear of
abusing their Knowledge, or for the Prevention of any other inconvenience
whatsoever. Besides, this is to cross the very end of the Scriptures, and the
design of God in inspiring Men to write them. Can any Man think that God should
send this great Light of his Word, into the World, for the Priests to hide it
under a Bushel; and not rather that it should be set up to the greatest
advantage for the Enlightening of the World? St. Paul tells us, Romans 15.4. That
whatsoever things were written; were Written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And 2 Timothy 3.16. That
all Scripture is given by the Inspiration of God; and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. And if
the Scriptures were Written for these Ends, can any Man have the face to
pretend that they do not concern the People, as well as their Teachers. Nay St.
Paul expressly tells the Church of Rome, that they were Written for their
Learning, however it happens, that they are not now permitted to make use of
them. Are the Scriptures so useful and profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Instruction in Righteousness? And why may they not be used by the People
for those Ends for which they were given? It Is true indeed they are fit for the
mos^ Knowing and Learned, and sufficient to make the Man of God Perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to every good Wor^ (as the Apostle there tells us.) But
does this exclud^ their being profitable also to the People; who may reasonably
be presumed to stand much more in nee^ of all means and helps of Instruction
than their Teachers: And though there be many difficulties and obscurities in
the Scriptures, enough to exercise the Skill and Will of the Learned, yet are
they not therefore either useless or dangerous to the People. The Ancient
Fathers of the Church were of another mind, St. Chrysostom tells us that,
Whatever things are necessary, are manifest in the Scriptures. And St. Austin,
that all things ar^ plain in the Scripture, which concerns Faith and a good
Life and that th^se things which are necessary to the Salvation (...) Men, are
not so hard to become at, but that as to those things which the Scripture
plainly contains, it speaks without disguise like a familiar friend to the
hearts of the Learned an^ Unlearned. And upon these and such like
considerations, the Fathers did every where in their Orations an^ Homilies
charge and exhort the People to be conversant in the Holy Scriptures, to read
them daily an^ diligently, and attentively. And I challenge our A^^versaries,
to show me where any of the ancient Father^ do discourage the People from
reading the Scripture^ much less forbid them so to do. So that they who do it
now have no cloak for their Sin: And they who pretend so confidently to
Antiquity in other cases, are by the Evidence of Truth forced to acknowledge,
that it is against them in this. Though they have Ten Thousand Schoolmen on
their side, yet have they not one Father, not the least pretense of Scripture,
or rag of Antiquity to cover their nakedness in this Point.

With great reason then does our Savior denounce so heavy a Woe against such
Teachers; of old in the like case God by his Prophets severely threatens the
Priests of the Jewish Church, for not instructing the People in the Knowledge
of God, Hosea* 4.6. My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge; because thou
have rejected Knowledge, I will also reject thee; thou shall be no more a
Priest to me: Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget
thy Children. God, you see, lays the ruin of so many Souls at their Doors, and
will require their Blood at their hands. So many as perish for want of
Knowledge, and Eternally miscarry by being deprived of the necessary means of
Salvation, their Destruction shall be charged upon those who have taken away
the Key of Knowledge, and shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men.

And it is just with God to punish such Persons not only as the Occasion, but
as the Authors of this Ruin. For who can judge otherwise, but that they who
deprive Men of the necessary means to any End, do purposely design to hinder
them of attaining that End. And whatever may be pretended in this Case; to
deprive Men of the Holy Scriptures, and to keep them ignorant of the service of
God, and yet while they do so, to make a show of an earnest desire of their
Salvation, is just such a mockery, as if one of you that is a Master, should
tell his Apprentice how much you desire he should thrive in the World, and be a
Rich Man; but all the while keeps him ignorant of his Trade in order to his
being Rich; and with the strictest care imaginable, conceals from him the best
means of Learning, that whereby alone he is likely to thrive and get an Estate.
Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites.

By what has been discoursed upon this Argument, you will easily perceive
where the Application is like to fall. For the Woe denounced by our Savior
here in the Text against the Scribes and Pharisees, falls every whit as heavy
upon the Pastors and Teachers of the Roman Church. They have taken away the
Key of Knowledge with a Witness; not only depriving the People of the right
Understanding of the Scriptures, but of the very use of them: As if they were
afraid they should understand them, that they dare not suffer them so much, as
to be acquainted with them.

This Tyranny that Church has Exercised over those of her Communion for
several Hundreds of Years. It grew upon them indeed by degrees, for as by the
Inundation of Barbarous Nations upon the Roman Empire, the Romans bought their
Language by degrees, so the Governors of that Church still kept up the
Scriptures and the Service of God in the Latin Tongue, which at last was wholly
unknown to the Common People. And about the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, when by
the general Consent of all their own Historians, gross Darkness and Ignorance
covered this part of the World, the Pope and the Priests took away the Key of
Knowledge, and did (as I may so say) put it under the Door for several Ages;
till the Reformation fetched it out again, and rubbed off the Rust of it.

And I profess seriously, that hardly any thing in the World was ever to me
more astonishing, than this Uncharitable and Cruel usage of the People in the
Church of Rome. And I cannot tell which to wonder at most, the Insolence of
their Governors in imposing upon Men this senseless way of serving God, or the
patience shall I call it, or rather stupidity of the People in enduring to be
so intollerably abused. Why should reasonable Creatures be treated at this rude
and barbarous rate? As if they were Unworthy to be acquainted with the Will of
God; and as if that which every Man ought to do, were not fit for every Man to
know: As if the Common People had only Bodies to be present at the service of
God, but no Souls; or as if they were all distracted and out of their Wits, and
it were a dangerous thing to let in the Lights upon them.

But to speak more distinctly. There are two things we charge them withal, and
which they are not able to deny. Their performing the Public Service of God in
an Unknown Tongue; and depriving the People of the use of the Scriptures. And I
shall first tell you what we have to say against these things, and then
consider what they pretend for them.

1. As for their performing the service of God in a Tongue Unknown to the
People. And I begin with St. Paul, who in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
has a whole Chapter on purpose to show the unreasonableness of this thing, and
how contrary it is to the Edification of Christians. His Discourse is so plain
and so well known, that I shall not particularly insist upon it. Erasmus in his
Annotations upon this Chapter, breaks out (as well he might) into admiration at
the Church of Rome in his time. Hac in re mirum quam mutata sit Ecclesiae
consuetudo: It is Wonderful, (says he) how the Custom of the Church is altered
in this matter. St. Paul had rather speak five Words with Understanding, and so
as to teach others, than Ten Thousand in an Unknown Tongue. Why does the Church
doubt to follow so great an Authority, or rather how dares she to dissent from
it?

As for the practice of the Ancient Church, let Origin bear Witness, The
Grecians (says he) in their Prayers use the Greek, and the Romans the Latin
Tongue; and so every one according to his Language prays unto God, and
praises him as he is able.

And not only in Origen's time, but for more than Six Hundred Years, the
Service of God was always performed in a known Tongue. And this the Learned Men
of their own Church do not deny. And Cardinal Caietan (as Cassander tells us)
said it was much better this custom were restored; and being reproved for
saying so, he said, he Learned it from St. Paul. And Bellarmine himself
confesses that the Armenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, Russians, and others do
use their own Language in their Liturgies at this day.

But it is otherwise now in the Church of Rome, and has been for several Ages.
And it seems they lay great stress upon it, not only as a thing of great use,
but necessity. For Pope Gregory the Seventh, forbids the Prince of Bohemia, to
permit to the People the Celebration of Divine Offices in the Sclavonian
Tongue; and commands him to oppose them herein with all his forces. It seems he
thought it a Cause worthy the fighting for; and that it were much better the
People should be Killed, than suffered to understand their Prayers.

But let us reason this matter a little calmly with them. Is it necessary for
Men to understand any thing they do in Religion? And is not Prayer one of the
most solemn Parts of Religion: And why then should not Men understand their
P^ayers as well as any thing else they do in Religion? Is it good that People
should understand their private Prayers? that (we thank them) they allow, and
why not the public as well? Is there less of Religion in public Prayers? Is
God less honored by them? Or are we not as capable of being Edified and of
having our hearts and affections moved and incited by them? Where then lies the
Difference? The more I consider it, the more I am at a loss what tolerable
reason any Man can give why People should not understand their public
Devotions as well as their private. If Men cannot heartily and devoutly pray
alone, without understanding what they ask of God, no more (say I) can they
heartily and devoutly join in the public Prayers which are made by the Priest
without understanding what they are. If it be enough for the Priest to
understand them, why should not the Priest only be present at them? Unless the
People do not meet to worship God, but only to wait upon the Priest. But by
saying that the Priest understands 'em, it seems it is better that some body
should understand them than not; and why is not that which is good for the
Priest good for the People.

So that the true state of the Controversy is, whether it be fit that the
People should be Edified in the Service of God; and whether it be fit that the
Church should order things contrary to Edification? For it is plain that the
Service of God in an unknown Tongue, is useless and unprofitable to the People:
Nay, it is evidently no public Service of God when the Priest only understands
it. For how can they be said to be public Prayers if the People do not join in
them? and how can they join in that they do not understand? and to what purpose
are Lessons of Scripture read, if People are to learn nothing by them? and how
should they learn when they do not understand? This is as if one should pretend
to teach a Man Greek by reading him Lectures every day out of an Arabic and
Persian Book, of which he understands not one syllable.

As to their depriving the People of the use of the Holy Scriptures; our
Blessed Savior exhorts the Jews to search the Scriptures: And St. Paul
charge the Christians that the Word of God should dwell richly in them. And
the ancient Fathers of the Church do most frequently and earnestly recommend to
the People the reading and study of the Scriptures. How comes the Case now to
be so altered? Sure the Word of God is not changed, that certainly abides and
continues the same for ever.

I shall by and by examine what the Church of Rome pretends in excuse of this
Sacrilege. In the mean time, I do not see what considerable Objections can be
made against the reading of the Scriptures, which would not have held as well
against the writing and publishing them in a Language understood by the People;
as the Old Testament was by the Jews, and the Epistles of the Apostles by the
Churches to whom they were written; and the Gospel both by Jews and Greeks.
Were there no difficulties and obscurities then in the Scriptures, capable of
being wrested by the Unstable and unlearned? Were not People then liable to
Error, and was there no danger of Heresy in those Times? And yet these are
their great Objections against putting the Scriptures into the hands of the
People; which is just like their arguing against giving the Cup to the Laity
from the inconveniency of their Beards, least some of the Consecrated Wine
should be spilt upon them: As if Errors and Beards were Inconveniences lately
sprung up in the World, and which Mankind were not liable to in the first Ages
of Christianity.

But if there were the same dangers and inconveniences in all Ages, this Reason
makes against the Publishing of the Scriptures to the People at first, as much
as against permitting them the use of them now. And in truth, all these
Objections are against the Scripture it self: and that which the Church of Rome
would find fault with if they durst, is, that there should be any such Book in
the World, and that it should be in any bodies hands, learned or unlearned; for
if it be dangerous to any, none are so capable of doing mischief with it as Men
of Wit and Learning. So that at the bottom, if they would speak out, the
Quarrel is against the Scriptures themselves. This is too evident by the
Counsel given to Pope Julius the Third by the Bishops met at Bononia to consult
about the Establishment of the Roman See; where, among other things, they give
this as their last advice, and as the greatest and weightiest of all, That by
all means, as little of the Gospel as might be, especially in the vulgar
Tongue, should be read to the People, and that little which was in the Mass
ought to be sufficient; neither should it be permitted to any Mortal to read
more. For so long (say they) as Men were contented with that little, all things
went well with them, but quite otherwise since more was commonly read. And
speaking of the Scripture, they give this remarkable testimony and commendation
of it; This in short is that Book, which above all others, has raised those
Tempests and Whirlwinds which we were almost carried away with. And in truth,
if any one diligently considers it, and compares it with what is done in our
Church, he will find them very contrary to each other, and our Doctrine not
only to be very different from it, but repugnant to it. If this be the Case,
they do like the rest of the Children of this World, prudently enough in their
Generation: Can we blame them for being against the Scriptures, when the
Scriptures are acknowledged to be so clearly against them? But surely no body
that considers these things, would be of that Church, which is brought by the
undeniable evidence of the things themselves to this shameful Confession, that
several of their Doctrines and Practices are very contrary to the Word of God.

Much more might have been said against the Practice of the Church of Rome in
these two particulars, but this is sufficient.

I shall in the second place consider what is pretended for them: And indeed,
what can be pretended in justification of so contumelious an affront to
Mankind, so great a tyranny and cruelty to the Souls of Men? Has God forbidden
the People to look into the Scriptures? No, quite contrary: Was it the Practice
of the Ancient Church to lay this restraint upon Men, or to celebrate the
Service of God in an unknown Tongue? Our Adversaries themselves have not the
face to pretend this. I shall truly represent the substance of what they say in
these two points.

As to the Service of God in an unknown Tongue, they say these four things for
themselves.

First, That the People do exercise a general Devotion, and come with an
intention to serve God, and that is accepted, though they do not particularly
understand the Prayers that are made, and the Lessons that are read.

But is this all that is intended in the Service of God? does not St. Paul
expressly require more? That the Understanding of the People should be Edified
by the particular Service that is performed: And if what is done be not
particularly understood, he tells us the People are not Edified, nor can say
Amen to the Prayers and Thanksgivings that are put up to God: And that any Man
that should come in and find People serving of God in this unprofitable and
unreasonable manner, would conclude that they were mad.

And if there be any general Devotion in the People* it is because they
understand in general what they are about; and why may they not as well
understand the particular Service that is performed, that so they might
exercise a particular Devotion. So that they are devout no further than they
understand; and consequently, as to what they do not understand, had every whit
as good be absent.

Secondly, They say, the Prayers are to God, and he understands them, and that
is enough.

But what harm were it, if all they that pray understood it also: Or indeed,
how can men pray to God without understanding what they ask of him? Is not
Prayer a part of the Christian Worship? and is any Service reasonable that is
not directed by our Understandings, and accompanied with our Hearts and
Affections?

But then what say they to the Lessons and Exhortations of Scripture, which are
likewise read to the People in an unknown Tongue? Are these directed to God, or
to the People only? And are they not designed by God for their Instruction, and
read either to that purpose, or to none? And is it possible to instruct Men by
what they do not understand? This is a new and wonderful way of Teaching, by
concealing from the People the things which they should learn. Is it not all
one, as to all purposes of Edification, as if the Scriptures were not read, or
any thing else in the place of them? As they many times do their Legends, which
the wiser sort among them do not believe when they read them. For all things
are alike to them that understand none, as all things are of a color in the
dark. Ignorance knows no difference of things, it is only Knowledge that can
distinguish.

Thirdly, They say that some do, at least in some measure, understand the
particular Prayers.

If they do, that is no thanks to them: It is by accident if they are more
knowing than the rest, and ^ore than the Church either desires or intends. For,
if they desired it, they might order their Service so as every man might
understand it.

Fourthly, They say that it is convenient that God should be served and
worshipped in the same Language all the World over.

Convenient for them, for God, or for the People? Not for God surely, for he
understands all other Languages as well as Latin; and for any thing we know to
the contrary, likes them as well. And certainly it cannot be so convenient for
the People, because they generally understand no Language but their own; and it
is very inconvenient they should not understand what they do in the Service of
God. But perhaps they mean, that it is convenient for the Roman Church to have
it so; because this will look like an Argument that they are the Catholic or
Universal Church, when the Language which was originally theirs, shall be the
universal Language in which all Nations shall serve God; and by this means also
they may bring all Nations to be of their Religion, and yet make them never the
wiser: And this is a very great Convenience, because Knowledge is a troublesome
thing, and Ignorance very quier and peaceable, rendering Men fit to be governed,
and unfit to dispute.

Secondly, As to their depriving the People of the Scriptures, the sum of what
they say may be reduced to these three Heads.

First, That the Church can give men leave to read the Scriptures; but this not
without great trouble and difficulty, there must be a License for it under the
hand of the Bishop or Inquisitor, by the advice of the Priest and Confessor
concerning the fitness of the Person that desires this Privilege. And we may
be sure they will think none fit but those of whom they have the greatest
confidence and security; and whoever presumes to do it otherwise, is to bt
denied Absolution; which is as much as in them lies, to damn Men for presuming
to read the Word of God without their leave.

And whatever they may allow here in England, where they hold their People upon
more slippery Terms, yet this Privilege is very rarely granted where they are
in full possession of their Power, and have the People perfectly under their
Yoke.

Secondly, They tell us they instruct the People otherwise. This indeed were
something if they did it to purpose, but generally they do it very sparingly
and slightly. Their Sermons are commonly made up of feigned Stories and
Miracles of Saints, and exhortations to the Worship of them (and especially of
the Blessed Virgin) and of their Images and Relics. And for the Truth of this
I appeal to the innumerable Volumes of their Sermons and Postils in Print;
which I suppose are none of their worst. I am sure Erasmus says, that in his
time, in several Countries, the People did scarce once in half a Year hear a
profitable Sermon to exhort them to true Piety. Indeed they allow the People
some Catechisms and Manuals of Devotion; and yer in many of them they have the
confidence and the conscience to steal away the Second Commandment in the face
of the Eighth.

But to bring the matter to a point, if those helps of Instruction are
agreeable to the Scriptures, why are they so afraid the People should read the
Scriptures? If they are not, why do they deceive and delude them?

Thirdly, They say, That People are apt to wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction, and that the promiscuous use of them has been the great occasion
of Heresies. It cannot be denied to be the condition of the very best things in
the World, that they are liable to be abused; Health, Light, and Liberty, as
well as Knowledge: But must all those be therefore taken away? This very
Inconvenience of Peoples wresting the Scriptures to their own Ruin, St. Peter
takes notice of in his days: But he does not therefore forbid Men the reading
of them as his more prudent Successors have done since. Suppose the reading of
the Scriptures has been the occasion of Heresies, were there ever more than in
the first Ages of Christianity? And yet neither the Apostles nor their
Successors ever prescribed this Remedy. But are they in earnest? Must not Men
know the Truth for fear of falling into Error? Because Men may possibly miss
their way at Noonday, must they never travel but in the Night when they are
sure to lose it.

And when all is done, this is not true, that Heresies have sprung from this
Cause. They have generally been broached by the Learned, from whom the
Scriptures neither were nor could be concealed. And for this I appeal to the
History and Experience of all Ages. I am well assured the ancient Fathers were
of another mind. St. Chrysostom says, if Men would be Conversant in the
Scriptures, and attend to them, they would not only not fall into Errors
themselves, but rescue those that are deceived: And St. Hierome more expressly
to our purpose. Thus infinite Evils arise from the Ignorance of the Scriptures;
and that from that Cause the most part of most part of Heresies have come.

But if what they say were true, is not this to lay the blame of all the
ancient Heresies uyon the ill management of things by our Savior and his
Apostles, and the Holy Fathers of the Church for so many Ages, and their
imprudent dispensing of the Scriptures to the People. This indeed is to charge
the matter home; and yet this Consequence is unavoidable. For the Church of
Rome cannot justify the Piety and Prudence of their present Practices, without
accusing all these.

But the thing which they mainly rely upon as to both these practices in this.
That though these things were otherwise in the Apostles times, and in the
Ancient Church, yet the Church has power to alter them according to the
Exigence and Circumstances of times. I have purposely reserved this for the
last place, because it is their last refuge; and if this fail them they are
gone.

To show the Weakness of this Pretense, we will, if they please, take it for
granted, that the Governors of the Church have in no Age more Power, than the
Apostles had in theirs. Now St. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 10.8. that the Authority
which the Apostles had given them from the Lord, was only for Edification, but
not for Destruction: And the same St. Paul makes it the business of a whole
Chapter to show that the performing the Public service of God and particularly
praying in an unknown Tongue, are contrary to Edification; from which premises
the Conclusion is plain, that the Apostles themselves had no Authority to
appoint the Service of God to be performed in an unknown Tongue; and surely it
is Arrogance for the Church in any Age to pretend to greater Authority than the
Apostles had.

This is the Sum of what our Adversaries say in justification of themselves in
these Points. And there is no doubt, but that Men of Wit and Confidence will
always make a shift to say something for any thing; and some way or other
blanch over the blackest and most absurd things in the World. But I leave it to
the Judgment of Mankind, whether any thing be more unreasonable than to tell
Men in effect, that it is fit they should understand as little of Religion as
is poshble; that God has published a very dangerous Book, with which it is not
safe for the People to be familiarly acquainted; that our Blessed Savior and
his Apostles and the ancient Christian Church, for more than Six hundred Years,
were not wise Managers of Religion, nor prudent Dispensers of the Scriptures,
but like fond and foolish Fathers put a Knife and a Sword into the hands of
their Children, with which they might have easily foreseen what mischief they
would do to themselves and others. And who would not choose to be of such a
Church which is provided of such excellent and effectual means of Ignorance,
such wise and infallible Methods for the prevention of Knowledge in the People,
and such variety of close Shutters to keep out the Light.

I have chosen to insist upon this Argument, because it is so very plain, that
the most ordinary Capacity may judge of this usage and dealing with the Souls
of Men: Which is so very gross that every Man must needs be sensible of it;
because it touches Men in the common Rights of humane Nature, which belong to
them as much as the Light of Heaven, and the Air we breath in.

It requires no subtilty of Wit, no skill in Antiquity, to understand these
Controversies between us and the Church of Rome. For there are no Fathers to be
pretended on both sides in these Questions: They yield we have Antiquity on
ours: And we refer it to the common Sense of Manking, which Church, that of
Rome, or Ours, has all the Right or Reason in the World on her side in these
Debates? And, who they are that tyrannize over Christians, the Governors of
their Church or ours; Who use the People like Sons and Freemen, and who like
Slaves; Who feed the Flock of Christ committed to them, and who take the
Childrens bread from them? Who they are, that when their Children ask bread,
for Bread give them a Stone, and for an Egg a Serpent; I mean the Legends of
their Saints instead of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make Men wise
unto Salvation: And who they are that lie most justly under the suspicion of
Errors and Corruptions, they who bring their Doctrine and Practices into the
open Light, and are willing to have them tried by the true Touchstone, the Word
of God; or they who shun the Light, and decline all manner of Trial and
Examination? And who are most likely to carry on a Worldly Design, they who
drive a Trade of such mighty gain, and advantage under pretense of Religion,
and make such markets of the Ignorance and Sins of the People; or we whom
Malice it self cannot charge with serving any Worldly Design by any allowed
Doctrine or Practice of our Religion? For we make no Money of the mistakes of
the People, nor do we fill their heads with vain fears of New Places of Torment
to make them willing to empty their Purses in a vainer hope of being delivered
out of them. We do not like them pretend a mighty banck of Treasure and Merits
in the Church, which they sell to the People for ready money, giving them Bills
of Exchange from the Pope to Purgatory; When they who grant them, have no
reason to believe they will avail them, or be accepted in the other World.

For our parts we have no fear that our People should understand Religion too
well: We could wish, with Moses, that all the Lord's People were Prophets: We
should be heartily glad the People would read the Holy Scriptures more
diligently, being sufficiently assured that it is their own fault if they learn
any thing but what is good from thence: We have no Doctrines or Practices
contrary to Scripture, and consequently no occasion to keep it close from the
sight of the People, or to hide any of the Commandments of God from them: We
leave these mean Arts to those who stand in need of them.

In a word, there is nothing which God has said to Men, which we desire should
be concealed from them: Nay, we are willing the People should examine what we
teach, and bring all our Doctrines to the Law and to the Testimony; that if
they be not according to this Rule, they may neither believe them nor us. It Is
only things false and adulterate which shun the Light and fear the Touchstone.
We have that security of the Truth of our Religion, and of the agreeableness of
it to the Word of God; that honest Confidence of the Goodness of our Cause,
that we do not forbid the People to read the best Books our Adversaries can
write against it.

And now let any Impartial Man judge whether this be not a better Argument of a
good Cause, to leave Men at liberty to try the Grounds of their Religion, than
the Courses which are taken in the Church of Rome, to awe Men with an
Inquisition; and, as much as is possible, to keep the common People in
Ignorance, not only of what their late Adversaries, the Protestants, but their
chief and ancient Adversary, the Scriptures have to say against them.

A Man had need of more than common Security of the Skill and Integrity of
those to whom he perfectly resigns his Understanding; this is too great a Trust
to be reposed in humane frailty, and too strong a Temptation to others to
impose upon us; to abuse our Blindness, and to make their own ends of our
voluntary Ignorance and easy Credulity. This is such a folly as if a Rich Man
should make his Physician his Heir; which is to tempt him either to destroy him
or to let him dye, for his own Interest. So he that trusts the care of his Soul
with other Men, and at the same time by irrecoverable Deed settles his
Understanding upon them, lays too great a Temptation before them to seduce and
damn him for their own ends.

And now to reflect a little upon our selves. What cause have we to bless God
who are so happily rescued from that more than Egyptian Darkness and Bondage,
wherein this Nation was detained for several Ages; Who are delivered out of the
hands of those Cruel Taskmasters, who required Brick without Straw; that Men
should be Religious without competent Understanding, and work out their own
Salvation while they denied them the means of all others the most necessary to
it. Who are so uncharitable as to allow us no Salvation out of their Church,
and yet so unreasonable as to deny us the very best means of Salvation when we
are in it?

Our Forefathers thought it a mighty Privilege to have the Word of God
restored to them, and the public Prayers and Service of God celebrated in a
known Tongue: Let us use this inestimable Privilege with great modesty and
humility; not to the nourishing of Pride and Self-conceit, of Division and
Faction; but as the Apostle exhorts, Let the Word of God dwell richly in you,
in all Wisdom; and let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which ye are
called in one body; and be ye thankful.

It concerns us mightily (with which Admonition I conclude) both for the Honor
and Support of our Religion, to be at better Union among our selves, and not to
divide about lesser things: And so to demean our selves, as to take from our
Adversaries all those Pretenses whereby they would justify themselves, or at
least Extenuate the Guilt of that heavy Charge, which falls every whit as
justly upon them as ever it did upon the Scribes and Pharisees, of taking away
the key of Knowledge, and shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; neither
going in themselves, nor suffering those that are entering to go in.

FINIS.

