A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 26th 1674/5.

By John Tillotson, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

Published By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1675.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 26th 1674/5.
PSALM. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

THE two great causes of the ruin of men, are Infidelity and want of
consideration. Some do not believe the principles of Religion, or at least have
by arguing against them rendered them so doubtful to themselves, as to take
away the force and efficacy of them: But these are but a very small part of
mankind, in comparison of those who perish for want of considering these
things. For most men take the principles of Religion for granted, That there is
a God, and a Providence, and a State of Rewards and Punishments after this
life, and never entertained any considerable doubt in their minds to the
contrary: But for all this, they never attended to the proper and natural
consequences of these principles, nor applied them to their own case; They
never seriously considered the notorious inconsistency of their lives with this
belief, and what manner of persons they ought to be who are verily persuaded of
the truth of these things.

For no man that is convinced that there is a God, and considers the necessary
and immediate consequences of such a persuasion, can think it safe to affront
Him by a wicked life: No man that believes the infinite happiness and misery of
another world, and considers withal that one of these shall certainly be his
portion, according as he demeans himself in this present life, can think it
indifferent what course he takes. Men may thrust away these thoughts, and keep
them out of their minds for a long time; but no man that enters into the
serious consideration of these matters, can possibly think it a thing
indifferent to him whether he be happy or miserable for ever.

So that a great part of the evils of men's lives would be cured, if they would
but once lay them to heart; would they but seriously consider the consequences
of a wicked life, they would see so plain reason and so urgent a necessity for
the reforming of it, that they would not venture to continue any longer in it.
This course David took here in the Text, and he found the happy success of it;
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

In which Words there are these two things considerable.

I. The course which David here took for the reforming of his life; I thought
on my ways.

II. The success of this course. It produced actual and speedy reformation; I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; I made haste and
delayed not to keep thy commandments.

These are the two heads of my following discourse; which when I have spoken
to, I shall endeavor to persuade my self and you to take the same course which
David here did, and God grant that it may have the same effect.

I. We will consider the course which David here took for the reforming of his
life; I thought on my ways, or, as the words are rendered in our old
Translation, I called mine own ways to remembrance. And this may either
signify a general survey and examination of his life, respecting indifferently
the good or bad actions of it: Or else, which is more probable, it may
specially refer to the sins and miscarriages of his life; I thought on my ways,
that is, I called my sins to remembrance. Neither of these senses can be much
amiss in order to the effect mentioned in the Text, viz. the reformation and
amendment of our lives; and therefore neither of them can reasonably be
excluded, though I shall principally insist upon the later.

1. This thinking of our ways may signify a general survey and examination of
our lives, respecting indifferently our good and bad actions. For Way is a
Metaphorical word, denoting the course of a man's life and actions. I thought on
my ways, that is, I examined my life, and called my self to a strict account
for the actions of it; I compared them with the Law of God the rule and measure
of my duty, and considered how far I had obeyed that Law or offended against
it; how much evil I had been guilty of, and how little good I had done, in
comparison of what I might and ought to have done: That by this means I might
come to understand the true state and condition of my soul, and discerning how
many and great my faults and defects were, I might amend whatever was amiss,
and be more careful of my duty for the future.

And it must needs be a thing of excellent use, for men to set apart some
particular times for the examination of themselves, that they may know how
accounts stand between God and them. Pythagoras (or whoever was the Author of
those golden verses which pass under his name) does especially recommend this
practice to his Scholars, every night before they slept, to call themselves to
account for the actions of the day past; enquiring wherein they had
transgressed, what good they had done that day, or omitted to do. And this no
doubt is an admirable means to improve men in virtue, a most effectual way to
keep our consciences continually waking and tender, and to make us stand in awe
of our selves, and afraid to sin, when we know before hand that we must give so
severe an account to our selves of every action.

And certainly it is a great piece of wisdom to make up our accounts as
frequently as we can, that our repentance may in some measure keep pace with
the errors and failings of our lives, and that we may not be oppressed and
confounded by the insupportable weight of the sins of a whole life falling upon
us at once; and that perhaps at the very worst time, when we are sick and weak,
and have neither understanding nor leisure to recollect our selves, and to call
our sins distinctly to remembrance, much less to exercise any fit and proper
acts of repentance for them. For there is nothing to be done in Religion when
our Reason is once departed from us; then darkness has overtaken us indeed,
and the night is come when no man can work. But though we were never so
sensible, and should do all we can at that time, yet after all this, how it
will go with us God alone knows. I am sure it is too much presumption for any
man to be confident that one general and confused act of repentance will serve
his turn for the sins of his whole life. Therefore there is great reason why we
should often examine our selves, both in order to the amendment of our lives,
and the ease of our consciences when we come to dye.

2. This thinking of our ways may particularly and specially refer to the sins
and miscarriages of our lives: I thought on my ways, that is, I called my sins
to remembrance; I took a particular account of the errors of my life, and laid
them seriously to heart; I considered all the circumstances and consequences of
them, and all other things belonging to them; and reasoning the matter
thoroughly with my self, came to a peremptory and fixed resolution of breaking
off this wicked course of life, and betaking my self to the obedience of God's
Laws. And the consideration of our ways taken in this sense (which seems to be
the more probable meaning of the Words) may reasonably imply in it these
following particulars.

1. The taking of a particular account of our fins, together with the several
circumstances and aggravations of them. 2. A hearty trouble and sorrow for
them; I thought on my ways, that is, I laid them sadly to heart. 3. A serious
consideration of the evil and unreasonableness of a sinful course. 4. A due
sense of the fearful and fatal consequences of a wicked life. 5. A full
conviction of the necessity of quitting this course. 6. An apprehension of the
possibility of doing this.
1. The taking of a particular account of our sins, together with the several
circumstances and aggravations of them. And to this end, we may do well to
reflect particularly upon the several stages and periods of our lives, and to
recollect at least the principal miscarriages belonging to each of them. And
the better to enable us hereto, it will be useful to have before our eyes some
abridgement or summary of the Laws of God, containing the chief heads of duties
and sins, of virtues and vices; For this will help to bring many of our faults
and neglects to our remembrance, which otherwise perhaps would have been
forgotten by us. We should likewise consider the several relations wherein we
have stood to others, and how far we have transgressed or failed of our duty in
any of those respects.

And having thus far made up our sad account, we may in a great measure
understand the number and greatness of our sins; abating for some particulars
which are slipped out of our memory, and for sins of ignorance, and daily
infirmities, which are innumerable. By all which we may see, what vile wretches
and grievous offenders we have been: especially if we take into consideration
the several heavy circumstances of our sins, which do above measure aggravate
them; the heinousness of many of them, as to their nature, and the injurious
consequences of them to the person, or estate, or reputation of our neighbor;
their having been committed against the clear knowledge of our duty, against the
frequent checks and convictions of our consciences, telling us when we did them
that we did amiss; against so many motions and suggestions of Gods Holy Spirit,
so many admonitions and reproofs from others; and contrary to our own most
serious vows and resolutions, renewed at several times, especially upon the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament, and in times of sickness and distress: and
all this notwithstanding the plainest declarations of Gods will to the
contrary, notwithstanding the terrors of the Lord and the wrath of God revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; notwithstanding
the cruel sufferings of the Son of God for our sins, and the most merciful
offers of pardon and reconciliation in his blood: Add to this the scandal of
our wicked lives to our holy Religion, the ill example of them to the
corrupting and debauching of others, the affront of them to the Divine
Authority, and the horrible ingratitude of them to the mercy and goodness and
patience of God, to which we have such infinite obligations. Thus we should set
our sins in order before our eyes, with the several aggravations of them.

2. A hearty trouble and sorrow for sin; I thought on my ways, that is, I laid
my sins sadly to heart. And surely whenever we remember the faults and follies
of our lives, we cannot but be inwardly touched and sensibly grieved at the
thoughts of them; we cannot but hang down our heads, and smite upon our
breasts, and be in pain and heaviness at our very hearts. I know that the
tempers of men are very different, and therefore I do not say that tears are
absolutely necessary to repentance, but they do very well become it; and a
thorough sense of sin will almost melt the most hard and obdurate disposition,
and fetch water out of a very rock. To be sure, the consideration of our ways
should cause inward trouble and confusion in our minds. The least we can do
when we have done amiss, is to be sorry for it, to condemn our own folly, and
to be full of indignation and displeasure against our selves for what we have
done, and to resolve never to do the like again. And let us make sure that our
trouble and sorrow for sin have this effect, to make us leave our sins; and
then we shall need to be the less solicitous about the degrees and outward
expressions of it.

3. A serious consideration of the evil and unreasonableness of a sinful
course. That sin is the stain and blemish of our natures, the reproach of our
reason and understanding, the disease and the deformity of our souls, the great
enemy of our peace, the cause of all our fears and troubles: That whenever we
do a wicked action, we go contrary to the clearest dictates of our reason and
conscience, to our plain and true interest, and to the strongest ties and
obligations of duty and gratitude. And which renders it yet more unreasonable,
sin is a voluntary evil which men wilfully bring upon themselves. Other evils
may be forced upon us, whether we will or no; a man may be poor or sick by
misfortune, but no man is wicked and vicious but by his own choice. How do we
betray our folly and weakness, by suffering our selves to be hurried away by
every foolish lust and passion, to do things which we know to be prejudicial
and hurtful to our selves; and so base and unworthy in themselves, that we are
ashamed to do them, not only in the presence of a wise man, but even of a child
or a fool. So that if sin were followed with no other punishment, besides the
guilt of having done a shameful thing, a man would not by intemperance make
himself a fool and a beast; one would not be false and unjust, treacherous or
unthankful, if for no other reason, yet out of mere greatness and generosity of
mind, out of respect to the dignity of his nature, and out of very reverence to
his own reason and understanding. For let Witty men say what they will in
defense of their vices, there are so many natural acknowledgments of the evil
and unreasonableness of sin, that the matter is past all denial: Men are
generally galled and uneasy at the thoughts of an evil action, both before and
after they have committed it; they are ashamed to be taken in a crime, and
heartily vexed and provoked whenever they are upbraided with it; and it is very
observable, that though the greater part of the world was always bad, and vice
has ever had more servants and followers to cry it up, yet never was there any
Age so degenerate, in which Vice could get the better of Virtue in point of
general esteem and reputation: Even they whose wills have been most enslaved to
sin, could never yet so far bribe and corrupt their understandings, as to make
them give full approbation to it.

4. A due sense of the fearful and fatal consequences of a wicked life. And
these are so sad and dreadful, and the danger of them so evident, and so
perpetually threatening us, that no temptation can be sufficient to excuse a man
to himself and his own reason for venturing upon them. A principal point of
wisdom is to look to the End of things; not only to consider the present
pleasure and advantage of any thing, but also the ill consequences of it for
the future; and to balance them one against the other.

Now sin in its own nature tends to make men miserable. It certainly causes
trouble and disquiet of mind: And to a considerate man, that knows how to value
the ease and satisfaction of his own mind, there cannot be a greater argument
against sin, than to consider that the forsaking of it is the only way to find
rest to our souls.

Besides this, every vice is naturally attended with some particular mischief
and inconvenience, which makes it even in this life a punishment to it self;
and commonly, the providence of God and his just judgment upon sinners strikes
in to heighten the mischievous consequences of a sinful course. This we have
represented in the Parable of the Prodigal; his riotous course of life did
naturally and of it self bring him to want, but the providence of God likewise
concurred to render his condition more miserable, at the same time there arose
a mighty famine in the land; so that he did not only want wherewithal to
supply himself, but was cut off from all hopes of relief from the abundance and
superfluity of others. Sin brings many miseries upon us, and God many times
sends more and greater than sin brings; and the further we go on in a sinful
course, the more miseries and the greater difficulties we involve our selves in.

But all these are but light and inconsiderable, in comparison of the dreadful
miseries of another world; to the danger whereof, every man that lives a wicked
life does every moment expose himself. So that if we could conquer shame, and
had stupidity enough to bear the infamy and reproach of our vices, and the
upbraidings of our consciences for them, and the temporal mischiefs and
inconveniences of them; though for the present gratifying of our lusts we could
brook and dispense with all these, yet the consideration of the end and issue
of a sinful course, is an invincible objection against it, and never to be
answered; though the violence of our sensual appetites and inclinations should
be able to bear down all temporal considerations whatsoever, yet methinks the
interest of our everlasting happiness should lie near our hearts, the
consideration of another world should mightily amaze and startle us; the
horrors of eternal darkness, and the dismal thought of being miserable for
ever, should effectually discourage any man from a wicked life. And this danger
continually threatens the sinner, and may, if God be not merciful to him,
happen to surprise him the next moment. And can we make too much haste, to fly
from so great and apparent a danger? When will we think of saving our selves,
is not when (for ought we know) we are upon the very brink of ruin, and just
ready to drop into destruction?

5. Upon this naturally follows, a full conviction of the necessity of quitting
this wicked course. And Necessity is always a powerful and overruling
argument, and does rather compel than persuade: And after it is once evident
leaves no place for further deliberation. And the greater the necessity is, it
is still the more cogent argument. For whatever is necessary, is so in order to
some end; and the greater the end, the greater is the necessity of the means
without which that end cannot be obtained. Now the chief and last end of all
Reasonable creatures is happiness, and therefore whatever is necessary in order
to that, has the highest degree of rational and moral necessity. We are not
capable of happiness, till we have left our sins, for without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.

But though men are convinced of this necessity, yet this does not always
enforce a present change; because men hope they may continue in their sins, and
remedy all at last by repentance. But this is so great a hazard in all
respects, that there is no venturing upon it: And in matters of greatest
concernment wise men will run no hazards, if they can help it. David was so
sensible of this danger, that he would not defer his repentance and the change
of his life for one moment; I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies: I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments. This day,
this hour, for ought we know, may be the last opportunity of making our peace
with God. Therefore we should make haste out of this dangerous state, as Lot
did out of Sodom, lest fire and brimstone overtake us. He that cannot promise
himself the next moment, has a great deal of reason to seize upon the present
opportunity. While we are lingering in our sins, if God be not merciful to us,
we shall be consumed. Therefore make haste, sinner, and escape for thy life,
lest evil overtake thee.

6. Lastly, An apprehension of the possibility of making this change. God who
designed us for happiness at first, and after we had made a forfeiture of it by
sin, was pleased to restore us again to the capacity of it by the Redemption of
our blessed Lord and Savior, has made nothing necessary to our happiness that
is impossible for us to do; either of our selves, or by the assistance of that
grace which he is ready to afford us, if we heartily beg it of him. For that is
possible to us, which we may do by the assistance of another, if we may have
that assistance for asking: And God has promised to give his holy Spirit to
them that ask him. So that notwithstanding the great corruption and weakness of
our natures, since the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared, it is
not absolutely out of our power to leave our sins, and to turn to God: For that
may truly be said to be in our power, which God has promised to enable us to
do, if we be not wanting to our selves.

So that there is nothing on Gods part to hinder this change. He has solemnly
declared, that he sincerely desires it, and that he is ready to assist our good
resolutions to this purpose. And most certainly, when he tells us, that he has
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his
wickedness and live; that he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth; that he would not that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, He means plainly as he says, and does not speak to
us with any private reserve or nice distinction between his secret and revealed
will, that is, he does not decree one thing and declare the contrary. So far is
it from this, that if a sinner entertain serious thoughts of returning to God,
and do but once move toward him, how ready is he to receive him! This is, in a
very lively manner, described to us in the Parable of the Prodigal Son, who
when he was returning home, and was yet a great way off, what haste does his
Father make to meet him? he saw him, and had compassion, and ran. And if there
be no impediment on Gods part, why should there be any on ours? One would think
all the doubt and difficulty should be on the other side, Whether God would be
pleased to show mercy to such great offenders as we have been. But the business
does not stick there. And will we be miserable by our own choice, when the
grace of God has put it into our power to be happy? I have done with the first
thing, The course which David here took for the reforming of his life; I
thought on my ways. I proceed to the

II. The success of this course. It produced actual and speedy reformation. I
turned my feet unto thy testimonies; I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. And if we consider the matter thoroughly, and have but patience to
reason out the case with our selves, and to bring our thoughts and
deliberations to some issue, the conclusion must naturally be, the quitting of
that evil and dangerous course in which we have lived. For sin and
consideration cannot long dwell together. Did but men consider what sin is,
they would have so many unanswerable objections against it, such strong fears
and jealousies of the miserable issue and event of a wicked life, that they
would not dare to continue any longer in it.

I do not say, that this change is perfectly made at once. A state of sin and
holiness are not like two Ways that are just parted by a line, so as a man may
step out of the one full into the other; but they are like two Ways that lead
to two very distant places, and consequently are at a good distance from one
another, and the further any man has traveled in the one, the further he is
from the other; so that it requires time and pains to pass from the one to the
other. It sometimes so happens, that some persons are by a mighty conviction
and resolution, and by a very extraordinary and over-powering degree of Gods
grace, almost perfectly reclaimed from their sins at once, and all of a sudden
translated out of the Kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son. And
thus it was with many of the first Converts to Christianity; as their
prejudices against the Christian Religion were strong and violent, so the holy
Spirit of God was pleased to work mightily in them that believed. But in the
usual and settled methods of Gods grace, evil habits are mastered and subdued
by degrees, and with a great deal of conflict, and many times after they are
routed they rally and make head again; and it is a great while before the
contrary habits of grace and virtue are grown up to any considerable degree of
strength and maturity, and before a man come to that confirmed state of
goodness, that he may be said to have conquered and mortified his lusts. But
yet this ought not to discourage us. For so soon as we have seriously begun
this change, we are in a good way, and all our endeavors will have the
acceptance of good beginnings, and God will be ready to help us; and if we
pursue our advantages, we shall every day gain ground, and the work will grow
easier upon our hands; and we who moved at first with so much slowness and
difficulty, shall after a while be enabled to run the ways of Gods commandments
with pleasure and delight.

I have done with the two things I propounded to speak to from these words, The
course here prescribed, and the success of it. And now to persuade men to take
this Course, I shall offer two or three Arguments.

1. That Consideration is the proper act of Reasonable creatures. This argument
God himself uses, to bring men to a consideration of their evil ways, Isa. 46.
8, Remember, and show your selves men; bring it again to mind, O ye
transgressors. To consider our ways, and to call our sins to remembrance, is to
show our selves men. It Is the great fault and infelicity of a great many, that
they generally live without thinking, and are acted by their present
inclinations and appetites, without any consideration of the future
consequences of things, and without fear of any thing, but of a present and
sensible danger; like Brute creatures, who fear no evils but what are in view,
and just ready to fall upon them: Whereas to a prudent and considerate man, a
good or evil in reversion is capable of as true an estimation, proportionably
to the greatness and distance of it, as if it were really present. And what do
we think has God given us our reason and understandings for, but to foresee
evils at a distance, and to prevent them; to provide for our future security
and happiness, to look up to God our Maker, who has taught us more than the
Beasts of the earth, and made us wiser than the Fowls of heaven; but to
consider what we do, and what we ought to do, and what makes most for our true
and lasting interest, and what against it? What can a Beast do worse, than to
act without any consideration and design, than to pursue his present
inclination without any apprehension of future danger? The most dull and stupid
of all the brute creatures can hardly exercise less reason than this comes to.
So that for a man not to consider his ways, is to the very best intents and
purposes, to be without understanding, and like the beasts that perish.

2. This is the end of Gods patience and long-suffering toward us, to bring us
to consideration. The great design of Gods goodness, is to lead men to
repentance. He winks at the sins of men, that they may repent. He bears long
with us, and delays the punishment of our sins, and does not execute judgment
speedily, because he is loath to surprise men into destruction; because he would
give them the liberty of second thoughts, time to reflect upon themselves, and
to consider what they have done, and to reason themselves into repentance.
Consider this all ye that forget God, lest his patience turn into fury, and he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

3. Consideration is that which we must all come to, one time or other. Time
will come, when we shall consider and cannot help it; when we shall not be able
to divert our thoughts from those things, which we are now so loath to think
upon. Our consciences will take their opportunity, to bring our ways to
remembrance; when some great calamity or affliction is upon us. Thus it was
with the Prodigal, when he was brought to the very last extremity, and was
ready to perish for hunger, then he came to himself. When we come to dye, then
we shall think of our ways with trouble and vexation enough; And how glad would
we then be, that we had time to consider them? And perhaps while we are wishing
for more time, Eternity will swallow us up. To be sure, in the other world, a
great part of the misery of wicked men will consist in furious reflections upon
themselves, and the evil actions of their lives. It Is said of the Rich
voluptuous man in the Parable, that in hell he lift up his eyes, being in
torments; as if he had never considered and bethought himself till that time.
But alas! it will then be too late to consider: For then consideration will do
us no good; it will serve to no other purpose, but to aggravate our misery, and
to multiply our stings, and to give new life and rage to those Vultures which
will perpetually prey upon our hearts. But how much a wiser course would it be,
to consider these things in time, in order to our eternal peace and comfort; to
think of them, while we may redress them, and avoid the dismal consequences of
them, than when our case is desperate and past remedy?

And now what can I say more, to persuade every one of us to a consideration of
our own ways? We are generally apt to busy our selves in observing the errors
and miscarriages of our neighbors, and are forward to mark and censure the
faults and follies of other men; but how few descend into themselves, and turn
their eyes inward, and say, What have I done? It Is an excellent saying of
Antoninus the great Emperor and Philosopher, No man was ever unhappy, for not
prying into the actions and condition of other men; but that man is necessarily
unhappy, who does not observe himself, and consider the state of his own soul.

This is our proper work; and now is a proper season for it, when we pretend to
God and men to set apart a solemn time for the examination of our selves, and
for a serious review of our lives, in order to humiliation and repentance, to
the reforming and amendment of what is amiss. And though we would venture to
dissemble with men, yet let us not dissemble with God also: For shall not he
that pondereth the heart consider it, and he that keeps thy soul, shall not
he know it; and shall not he render to every man according to his ways?

I know it is a very unpleasant work which I am now putting you upon, and
therefore no wonder that men are generally so backward to it; because it will
of necessity give some present disturbance to their minds. They whose lives
have been very vicious, are so odious a sight, so horrid a spectacle to
themselves, that they cannot endure to reflect upon their own ways; of all
things in the world they hate Consideration, and are ready to say to it, as the
evil Spirit did in the Gospel to our Savior, What have I to do with thee? Art
thou come to torment me before the time? But let not this affright us from it;
for whatever trouble it may cause at present, it is the only way to prevent the
anguish and the torments of Eternity.

The things which I have offered to your consideration, are of huge moment and
importance. They do not concern your bodies and estates, but that which is more
truly your selves, your immortal souls, the dearest and most durable part of
your selves: and they do not concern us for a little while, but for ever. Let
me therefore bespeak your most serious regard to them, in the words of Moses to
the People of Israel, after he had set the Law of God before them, together
with the blessings promised to obedience, and the terrible curses threatened to
the transgression of it, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set your hearts to the words which I
testify to you this day, for it is not a vain thing, because it is your life.
Your life, your eternal life and happiness depends upon it.

And besides a tender regard to your selves and your own interests, which
methinks every man, out of a natural desire of being happy and dread of being
miserable, should be forward enough to consider: Be pleased likewise to lay to
heart the influence of your example upon others. I speak now to a great many
Persons, the eminence of whose rank and quality renders their examples so
powerful, as to be able almost to give authority either to Virtue or Vice.
People take their fashions from you, as to the habits of their minds as well as
their bodies. So that upon you chiefly depends the ruin or reformation of
manners, our hopes or despair of a better world. What way soever you go, you
are followed by troops. If you run any sinful or dangerous course, you cannot
perish alone in your iniquity, but thousands will fall by your side, and ten
thousands at your right hands: And on the contrary, it is very much in your
power, and I hope in your wills and designs, to be the sovereign restorers of
piety and virtue to a degenerate Age. It is our part indeed to exhort men to
their duty, but it is you that would be the powerful and effectual Preachers of
righteousness: We may endeavor to make men proselytes to virtue, but you would
infallibly draw disciples after you: We may try to persuade, but you could
certainly prevail, either to make men good, or to restrain them from being so
bad.

Therefore consider your ways, for the sake of others as well as your selves.
Consider what you have done, and then consider what is fit for you to do, and
if you do it not, what will be the end of these things. And to help you forward
in this work, it is not necessary that I should rip up the vices of the Age,
and set men's sins in order before them. It is much better, that you your selves
should call your own ways to remembrance. We have every one a faithful Monitor
and Witness in our own breasts, who, if we will but hearken to him, will deal
impartially with us, and privately tell us the errors of our lives. To this
Monitor I refer you, and to the grace of God, to make his admonitions effectual.

Let us then every one of us, in the fear of God, search and try our ways, and
turn unto the Lord. Let us take to our selves words, and say to God, with those
true Penitents in Scripture, I have sinned, what shall be done unto thee, O
thou preserver of men? Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay
my hand upon my mouth, I will abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. For
surely it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more; that which I
know not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity I will do no more. O that
there were such an heart in us! O that we were wise, that we understood this,
that we would consider our later end! And God, of his infinite mercy, inspire
into every one of our hearts this holy and happy resolution; for the sake of
our blessed Savior and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.

