A SOBER ENQUIRY About the New Oath Enjoined on NON-CONFORMISTS According to
Act of Parliament.
WHither Passion, Prejudice, Partiality, etc. must not be laid aside in this
Business?

Whither living under a Lawful Government, and expecting Protection from it, I
do not owe Allegiance to it, and must Submit, and not endeavor to alter the
Government, especially when this is made the Condition of my living under its
Protection?

Whither Considering the State of the times, and the intention of our
Governors, to secure the Peace at home against bosom Enemies, of which sort
there are too many, is it not rational to expect security from us, and that by
a lawful Oath or some other way?

Whither the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, mainly intended and understood
against the Papists, will give you sufficient security, considering the
Principles and Practices of the late times; (too too sadly yet remaining with
many) the which are signified in the Act for safety both of King and Kingdom;
and should not the new Oath respect such pernicious Principles and practices,
as at present are like (if not most warily prevented) to endanger both Church
and State, both King and Kingdom?

Whither they could not easily have ordered it, in another form, directly and
in terms reversing the Covenant; and was it not through Providence and
Prudence, ordered as it is; that sober and peaceable may be distinguished from
those that will not rest till all return to their old Confusions?

Whither the Oath, though in Expressions somewhat ambiguous, may not be well
enough understood by unbyassed persons, that will not stretch their Charity, to
suppose what their fancies will imagine of their Governors, and their
intentions in it; since, the words of the Preamble, and the Act for Safety, (to
whom this must be referred) and other known Laws, and Customs of the Land, will
give them sufficient information; and since, the sense of Governors in their
Laws, if not plain in words, is to be by private men (till a public
Authentic interpretation) understood by common usage, and comparing with
other Laws, or parts of the Law to which it belongs and may be referred See
Preamble, Act for Safety, Lord Chancellours and the Speakers Speeches. And for
the Legislative Power, see Act for Safety. For the Militia, the Acts about it.
For Church Government, see such Laws as Settle or declare all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the King, and the Exercise of it only as in Commission from his
Majesty, about Bishops and their Powers, see Laws referred to them, and
sometimes granting more, and sometimes less. Read 1. Eliz. 1.2. and 5. Eliz. 1.
32. H. 8. c. 6. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 25. H. 8. c. 19. and c. 21. and an Act of this
present Parliament repealing, 17. Car. 1. See Cooks Institutes, part. 4. and
his Reports about Ecclesiastical Matters, and Part. Cawdryes Case, etc.
, and not by our private suppositions of their Intentions not expressed in
their Laws?

Whither this Oath can be rationally supposed to Bind us up from more, then
endeavoring to overturn the foundation of the Government of Church or State, as
to the King in both, and (if you will too) Bishops in the Government of the
Church; Any thing more then these being accounted by the Laws of the Land, and
by the Practices of our Kings, Parliaments, Synods, as alterable, and has
been, and may be daily (if duly) altered? Or, if this Oath may be supposed to
bind us up from more, as to particulars and superstructures in Constitutions
and Administrations, whither then can it rationally be supsed to intend more,
to bind us up from a turbulent and irregular endeavor of altering, or (as
expressed in the Preamble and Act for safety) in a way of Schism, Sedition and
Rebellion, and whither can this Oath be justly understood to bind us up from
Peaceable and Regular endeavors of reforming what may be found amiss in Church
or State; since that the Government it self to which in the Oath I swear with,
the Fundamental and Positive Laws of the Land allow me, as a Man, an
Englishman, a Christian, a Subject; my Just, though bounded liberty in that
particular? and must not this be understood though not expressed in the Oath?
See Magn. Charta. c. vet. King Coronat. Oath. Act about Petitioning, etc.


Whither other parallel Oaths, binding to Government and Laws, be not thus by
general Reason, Consent and Custom, understood? as the Kings Coronation Oath,
with Non Mutabimus leges and Consuetud. the Oaths that Members of Parliament,
and of Convocation take; the Oaths for Judges, and other Lawyers; the Oaths in
Courts, Corporations, Universities, etc. Compared with their known and allowed
practices, in their places, changing and altering as to particulars both in
Church and State. About the Kings reserving the Foundations of
Church Government, and the Bishops under him, because of his Oath; yet allowing
great alterations in the Government, as to the Exercise and Administration for
Peace; see his Majesty's Instructions to his Commissioners, with their Paper in
Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. page 461. See also our present Sovereigns Decleration
about Ecclesiastical affairs; and for the nature of such like Oaths, see the
sense of the long Parliament, and of the Assembly in the Exhortation to the
Covenant, p. 5. and 6.


Whither are not many Scriptures themselves thus understood, with limitations
of the general Expressions, according to the nature and condition of the
Subject; and particularly, Scriptures requiring obedience to Kings, Masters,
Husbands, Parents, etc. see Romans 13.5. with Beza's note, 1 Pet. 2.13, etc. with
Bishop Ushers power of Princes, Ephesians. 6.24, etc. In all things. In every
thing, etc.


Whither this Oath in effect (though added, and in terms it differ for reasons
before expressed) require more from us then we have already sworn unto, in the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. Alleg. No violence or hurt to Kings, Person,
State, or Government, etc.

Suprem. In all Causes, and over all Persons Ecclesiastical, etc. I will assist
and defend -- all Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, etc. This not
to alter. See Stat. 1. Eliz. 1. and 5 Eliz. 1.




Whither whatever the Covenant were in it self, and its imposing, can any sworn
to it, now rationally suppose himself as bound by it to act against the
Government, or toward the alteration of Government in Church or State; since
such endeavors would be against the Laws of the Land, to which we owe
obedience; against the terms of the Covenant it self, and the Exhortation to
it, is lawfully, and in place and calling, etc. but especially against the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy, with their antecedent obligation in force before,
and consequently being renewed since the Kings return? Eccles. 8.2.

Whither not to Endeavor, be more then not to Act against the Government of
Church or State; or that not to act, be more then to be subject or submit; and
whither such subjection or submission, be not my bounden duty to my Superiors
in such like cases from the Word of God? see Romans 13.1, etc. 5. etc. and 1 Pet.
2. Eccles. 8.2. etc. Eccles. 10.8, 9, and 20. Prove. 30.31. and verse. 24, 21, 22.

Whither Apostles and primitive Christians, made not great Conscience of
submitting in such like matters, as appears by Epistles and Church History,
(see Bishop Ushers Power of Princes, and duty of Subjects) and whither
Christianity and Laws of Christ, do not bind us to the peace and good behavior
in all such matters as are not our Rights, but our Superiors, both in War and
Peace, in Church or State.

Whither, if consequences may be considered, as the taking the Oath may offend
many, and possibly (though quaere how with our duty to our Superiors it may be
supposed) it may not secure us, etc. so whither the not taking it, will not
offend our Governors? and besides, bring such a scandal upon our whole
Profession, as can never be washed away, though with our blood, which God
prevent, and teach us our duty, leaving Events to him.

Over and above; VVhither may not an honest Christian take a supposedly
captious and ensnareing Oath, when the words are fair for an equal and an
honest sense, betvveen the imposer and the taker, and wherein by honest men on
every hand it would and should be understood, especially in an Oath betvveen a
Ruler and a Subject (where no such captious supposition can be made without
sin) when the end of Government, and of the Oath it self declared, is nothing
but the peace and welfare both of Church and State. This Quere borrowed from,
and to be referred to the Papers of another.


FINIS.
Oxford Printed for R. Davis, Anno Dom. 1665.


