A MEMORIAL WHICH HIS EXCELLENCY THE Count de Thunn, Envoy Extraordinary from
His Imperial Majesty, presented to the King of Great Britain, the 3/13 of
October, touching the Raising of the Siege from before Vienna.
Entered according to Order.

SIR,
THE Underwritten Envoy extraordinary of his Imperial Majesty, having received
Orders from the Emperor his Master, to assure your Majesty of the Continuation
of his sincere and amicable friendship, and at the same time to give a Relation
of the happy deliverance of Vienna, most humbly represents, pursuant to his
Instructions, the Particulars following:

His Imperial Majesty having since the Siege of Vienna, resided at Passaw, the
better to hasten the succors of the Empire, descended the Danube, so soon as
the said Forces had joined the Army with those of the King of Poland, to Assist
in Person toward the great and memorable Action they were about to undertake:
but judging in his passage to the Bridge near Tuln, there might probably arise
some disorder or delay among so many different Nations, took a resolution to
continue at a certain place named Durensteine, till all the Forces should have
passed forwards, and every thing disposed for the attaque, thinking that the
Forest and Hill over which they were to March, would have been an Affair of
many days; but as the Enemy had wanted that Precautionary foresight to fortify
in the said Forest of Vienna, as they easily might have done, and 'twas
expected they would, the Christian Army with far less difficulty possessed
themselves of the said Forest, on the 11th of September, and became Masters,
after an Engagement bloody enough, of the Hill of Calemburgh, and thereon
planted their great Cannons, after which Success and Advantage, the King of
Poland, the two Electors of Bavaria, and Saxony, the Duke of Lorraine, together
with the rest of the General Officers, resolved unanimously to fall upon the
Enemy, notwithstanding they were Fortified with a deep Retrenchment at the Foot
of the said Hill, and defended with a great Body of their Troops, to oppose
their descent; yet after some rencounter with them, they were forced, to quit
their Post, leaving the Christian Army an open Field, which gave opportunity to
the Duke of Lorrain, to advance on the Left with the Imperial Troops and
Auxiliaries, endeavoring above all things, to afford succor for the City of
Vienna, in which he met with that good success, that part of his Infantry took
Post by six in the Evening before the Scotch gate, which yet did not hinder the
Enemy from continuing to play their Cannons against the City, with disposition
to make and Assault until they were att^qued in their Trenches, and driven
thereout. During this Transaction by the Left Wing, the King of Poland with his
Troops, and others of the Auxiliaries, assailed the Enemy on the Right, and
with extraordinary Courage withstood their first onset, and in conclusion
forced them to make a shameful disorderly flight, even to the abandoning of all
their Camp, Cannon, Munition of War, Provision, and a valuable Treasure of
Gold, insomuch that the City of Vienna was delivered from the Turkish Siege, on
Sunday the 12th of September.

His Imperial Majesty primarily Attributes this Signal Victory to the Almighty
Power, who in this Fight for the Christians, so infatuated their Enemies with a
haughty Contempt of the Christian Arms, as scornfully to expect them in the
open Country, without regarding the defenses they might otherwise have made.

The Night approaching Soldiers and ours by a continual March very much
harrassed, would not pursue the Enemy, contenting themselves with the principal
advantage they designed by raising the Siege; but knowing the customary Turkish
usuage, to rally upon their Enemy when busied in plundering, which was feared
they would now attempt, the Christians Army stood in Battalia all the Night in
the Enemies Camp, where the King of Poland found, besides the Tent, movables
and the Horse of Caera Mustapha, the prime Vizier, even to the value of a
Million of Crowns; the greatest part whereof in ready Money and Jewels; as also
every Soldier furnished with something of value, more than a Hundred pieces of
Cannon, several thousand Quintals of Powder, and sufficient Provisions for the
subsistence of the Turkish Army for three Months. After this happy Effort, his
Imperial Majesty arrived on the Fourteenth of the same Month in Vienna, where
being the next day solemnly congratulated on the part of the King of Poland,
and invited into the Camp by his Under-Chancellor, by ^^om he presented the
general Standart of the Prime Vizier; thereupon his Majesty left the City, and
met the King of Poland, who was at that time at the Head of his Troops, to
dispose them for a March, and they approached each other on Horseback,
expressing all possible demonstration of Friendship and Reciprocal love.

Afterward the Army took their way for Hungary, to pursue the Enemy, and to
besiege some important Garrison, as shall be judged most opportune, and take up
Winter Quarters for the Army, as far as possible in the Enemies Country.

The said Envoy, above the Relation that he most humbly presents to his
Majesty, signifies how the King of Poland did Communicate to his Imperial
Majesty an Original Letter, Signed and Sealed by above Twenty Hungarian Lords,
in which they Congratulate the common Enemy of Christendom, the Turk, with the
good success he had to that time obtained, wishing him also the taking of
Vienna, with a farther happy progress of his Arms; which horrid Treason, as it
can in no wise be presidented in a Christian; so no rigorous proceeding for the
future, can be attributed sufficiently enough to be rendered to such kind of
Traitors, seeing it is not a matter of Religion, which does interest them in
it, and many of the Catholic Hungarian Lords being Conspirators in this
execrable action. In fine the said Envoy, most earnestly declares, by the
express instances of the Emperor his Master, that the Turk notwithstanding the
defeat of many Thousands of his Men, and four Millions of Money loss, may be
excited to pursue a Bloody Revenge, his force being not so far abated but that
he may as yet appear very powerful.

And therefore his Imperial Majesty finds himself obliged to reiterate his
Instances with the Christian Princes, for a succor proportionable to the
danger which threatens Christendom; and that it may please your Majesty to
afford the Emperor his Master, some ready assistance toward the tranquillity
of Europe: for which the said Envoy has already made his request to your
Majesty for, and of which now he promises himself a happy success in.

Done at London. Count de Thunn.

LONDON: Printed for L. Curtis, 1683.


