The Lawfulness, AND Obligation of Oaths.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held at KINGSTON upon THAMES, July 21. 1681.

By JOHN TILLOTSON D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill: And William Rogers at the Sun, over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, 1681.

To the Right Worshipful and my Honored Friend JOSEPH REEVE Esquire High Sheriff
of the County of SURREY.
SIR,
WHen I had performed the Service which you were pleased to call me to in the
preaching of this Sermon, I had no thoughts of making it more public. And yet
in this also I was the more easily induced to comply with your desire, because
of the suitableness of the Argument to the Age in which we live: Wherein as men
have run into the wildest extremities in other things, so particularly in the
matter of Oaths; some making conscience of taking any Oath at all, and too many
none at all of breaking them.

To convince the great mistake of the one extreme, and to check the growing
evil and mischief of the other, is the chief design of this Discourse. To which
I shall be very glad if by God's blessing it may prove any wise serviceable. I
am

Sir, Your very faithful and humble Servant JOHN TILLOTSON.

The Lawfulness, AND Obligation of Oaths.
A SERMON Preached at the Assizes held at Kingston upon Thames, July 21. 1681.
Heb. vi. 16. And an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.
THE necessity of Religion to the support of humane Society in nothing appears
more evidently than in this, That the obligation of an Oath, which is so
necessary for the maintenance of peace and justice among men, depends wholly
upon the sense and belief of a Deity. For no reason can be imagined why any man
that does not believe a God, should make the least conscience of an Oath; which
is nothing else but a solemn appeal to God as a witness of the truth of what we
say. So that whoever promotes Atheism and Infidelity does the most destructive
thing imaginable to humane Society, because he takes away the reverence and
obligation of Oaths: And whenever that is generally cast off, humane Society
must disband, and all things run into disorder. The just sense whereof made
David cry out to God with so much earnestness, as if the World had been
cracking, and the frame of it ready to break in pieces, Psalm. 12. Help, Lord,
for the righteous man cease, and the faithful fail from among the children
of men: Intimating, That when Faith fails from among men, nothing but a
particular and immediate interposition of the Divine providence can preserve
the World from falling into confusion. And our Blessed Savior gives this as a
sign of the end of the World, and the approaching dissolution of all things,
when faith and truth shall hardly be found among men, Luke 18. 8. When the Son
of man comes, shall he find Faith on the earth? This state of things does
loudly call for his coming to destroy the World, which is even ready to
dissolve and fall in pieces of it self, when these Bands and Pillars of humane
Society do break and fail. And surely never in any Age was this Sign of the
coming of the Son of man more glaring and terrible than in this degenerate Age
wherein we live, when almost all sorts of men seem to have broke loose from all
obligations to faith and truth.

And therefore I do not know any Argument more proper and useful to be treated
of upon this Occasion than of the Nature and Obligation of an Oath, which is
the utmost security that one man can give to another, of the truth of what he
says; the strongest tie of fidelity, the surest ground of Judicial
proceedings, and the most firm and sacred bond that can be laid upon all that
are concerned in the administration of public Justice; upon Judge, and Jury,
and Witnesses.

And for this reason I have pitched upon these Words; In which the Apostle
declares to us the great use and necessity of Oaths among men; An Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. He had said before, that for our
greater assurance and comfort God has confirmed his promises to us by an Oath;
condescending herein to deal with us after the manner of men, who, when they
would give credit to a doubtful matter, confirm what they say by an Oath. And
generally when any doubt or controversy arises between Parties concerning a
matter of fact, one side affirming, and the other denying, an end is put to
this contest by an Oath; An Oath for confirmation being to them an end of all
strife: An Oath for confirmation, (...), for the greater assurance and
establishment of a thing: Not, that an Oath is always a certain and infallible
decision of things according to truth and right; but, that this is the utmost
credit that we can give to any thing, and the last resort of truth and
confidence among men: After this we can go no farther; for if the Religion of
an Oath will not oblige men to speak truth, nothing will. This is the utmost
security that men can give, and must therefore be the final decision of all
contests; An Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.

Now from this assertion of the Apostle concerning the great use and end of
Oaths among men, I shall take occasion,

1. To consider the nature of an Oath, and the kinds of it.

2. To show the great use and even necessity of Oaths, in many cases.

3. To vindicate the lawfulness of them, where they are necessary.

4. To show the sacred obligation of an Oath. I shall be as brief in these as
the just handling of them will bear.

1. For the nature of an Oath, and the kinds of it. An Oath is an invocation of
God, or an appeal to him as a witness of the truth of what we say. So that an
Oath is a sacred thing, as being an act of Religion and an invocation of the
Name of God: And this, whether the Name of God be expressly mentioned in it or
not. If a man only say, I swear, or I take my Oath, that a thing is, or is not,
so, or so; or that I will, or will not, do such a thing: Or if a man answer
upon his Oath, being adjured and required so to do: Or if a man swear by
Heaven, or by Earth, or by any other thing that has relation to God; in all
these cases a man does virtually call God to witness; and in so doing, he does
by consequence invoke him as a Judge and an Avenger, in case what he swears be
not true. And if this be expressed, the oath is a formal Imprecation; but
whether it be, or not, a curse upon our selves is always employed in case of
perjury.

There are two sorts of Oaths, Assertory, and Promissory. An assertory oath is
when a man affirms or denies upon oath a matter of fact, past, or present: when
he swears that a thing was, or is so, or not so. A promissory oath is a promise
confirmed by an oath, which always respects something that is future: And if
the promise be made directly and immediately to God, then it is called a Vow;
if to men, an Oath. I proceed to the

II. Thing, which is to show the great use and even necessity of Oaths, in many
cases: Which is so great, that humane Society can very hardly, if at all,
subsist long without them. Government would many times be very insecure: And
for the faithful discharge of Offices of great trust, in which the welfare of
the Public is nearly concerned, it is not possible to find any security equal
to that of an Oath; because the obligation of that reaches to the most secret
and hidden practices of men, and takes hold of them in many cases where the
penalty of no humane Law can have any awe or force upon them: And especially,
it is (as the Civil Law expresses it) maximum expediendarum litium remedium,
the best means of ending controversies: And where men's estates or lives are
concerned, no evidence but what is assured by an Oath will be thought
sufficient to decide the matter, so as to give full and general satisfaction
to mankind. For in matters of so great concernment, when men have all the
assurance that can be had, and not till then, they are contented to sit down
and rest satisfied with it. And among all Nations an Oath has always been
thought the only permptory and satisfactory way of deciding such controversies.

III. The third thing I proposed, was to vindicate the Lawfulness of Oaths,
where they are necessary. And it is a very strong inducement to believe the
lawfulness of them, that the unavoidable condition of humane affairs has made
them so necessary. The Apostle takes it for granted that an Oath is not only of
great use in humane affairs, but in many cases of great necessity, to confirm a
doubtful thing, and to put an end to controversies, which cannot otherwise be
decided to the satisfaction of the Parties contending; An oath for confirmation
is to them an end of all strife. And indeed it is hardly imaginable that God
should not have left that lawful, which is so evidently necessary to the peace
and security of Mankind.

But because there is a Sect, sprung up in our memory, which has called in
question the lawfullness of all Oaths, to the great mischief and disturbance of
humane Society, I shall endeavor to search this matter to the bottom, and to
manifest how unreasonable and groundless this Opinion is. And to this end, I
shall

First, prove the lawfulness of Oaths from the authority of this Text, and from
the reasons plainly contained, or strongly implied in it.

Secondly, I shall show the weakness and insufficiency of the grounds of the
contrary Opinion; whether from reason, or from Scripture, which last they
principally rely upon; and if it could be made out from thence would determine
the case.

1. I shall prove the lawfulness of Oaths from the authority of this Text, and
the reasons plainly contained, or strongly employed in it. Because the Apostle
does not only speak of the use of Oaths among men without any manner of censure
and reproof, but as a commendable custom and practice, and in many cases
necessary, for the confirmation of doubtful matters, and in order to the
final decision of Controversies and Differences among men. For

First. He speaks of it as the general practice of Mankind, to confirm things
by an oath in order to the ending of differences. And indeed there is nothing
that has more universally obtained in all Ages and Nations of the World: than
which there is not a more certain indication that a thing is agreeable to the
Law of Nature and the best Reason of Mankind. And that this was no degenerate
practice of Mankind, like that of Idolatry, is from hence evident; that when
God separated a People to himself, it was practiced among them, by the holy
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and was afterward not only allowed, but
in many Cases commanded by the Law of Moses; which had it been a thing evil in
it self and forbidden by the Law of Nature, would not have been done.

Secondly. Another undeniable Argument from the Text of the Lawfulness of Oaths
is, that God himself, in condescension to the Custom of men who use to confirm
and give credit to what they say by an Oath, is represented by the Apostle as
confirming his promise to us by an oath, verse. 13. When God made the promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by none greater, he swears by himself. For men
verily swear by the greater; and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of
all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: which he
certainly would not have done, had an oath been unlawful in it self. For that
had been to comply with men in an evil practice, and by his own example to give
countenance to it in the highest manner: But though God condescend to represent
himself to us after the manner of men, he never does it in any thing that is in
it is own nature evil and sinful.

Thirdly. From the great Usefullness of Oaths in humane affairs, to give
credit and confirmation to our word, and to put an end to Contestations. Now
that which serves to such excellent purposes, and is so convenient for humane
society, and for mutual security and confidence among men, ought not easily to
be presumed unlawful, till it be plainly proved to be so. And if we consider
the nature of an oath, and every thing belonging to it, there is nothing that
has the least appearance of evil in it. There is surely no evil in it, as it
is an act of religion; nor as it is an Appeal to God as a witness and avenger
in case we swear falsely; nor as it is a confirmation of a doubtful matter; nor
as it puts an end to strife and controversy. And these are all the essential
ingredients of an Oath, and the ends of it; and they are all so good, that they
rather commend it, than give the least color of ground to condemn it. I
proceed in the

2d. Place, to show the weakness and insufficiency of the grounds of the
contrary opinion; whether from Reason, or from Scripture.

First, from Reason. They say the necessity of an Oath is occasioned by the
want of truth and fidelity among men. And that every man ought to demean
himself with that faithfulness and integrity as may give credit and
confirmation to his word; and then Oaths will be needless. This pretense will
be fully answered, if we consider these two things.

1st. That in matters of great importance no other obligation, besides that of
an oath, has been thought sufficient amongst the best and wisest of men to
assert their fidelity to one another. Even the best men (to use the words of a
great Author) have not trusted the best men without it. As we see in very
remarkable instances, where Oaths have passed between those who might be
thought to have the greatest confidence in one another: As between Abraham and
his old faithful servant Eliezer, concerning the choice of a Wise for his Son:
Between Father and Son, Jacob and Joseph, concerning the burial of his Father
in the Land of Canaan: Between two of the dearest and most intimate Friends,
David and Jonathan, to assure their friendship to one another; and it had its
effect long after Jonathan's death in the saving of Mephibosheth, when reason
of State and the security of his Throne seemed to move David strongly to the
contrary; for it is expressly said 2 Samuel 21. 7. that David spared Mephibosheth,
Jonathan's Son, because of the oath of the Lord that was between them;
implying, that had it not been for his Oath, other considerations might
probably have prevailed with him to have permitted him to have been cut off
with the rest of Readiness Children.

2dly. This Reason, which is alleged against Oaths among men, is much stronger
against God's confirming his promises to us by an Oath. For he who is Truth it
self is surely of all other most to be credited upon his bare word, and his
oath needless to give confirmation to it; and yet he condescends to add his
oath to his word; and therefore that reason is evidently of no force.

Secondly, from Scripture. Our Savior seems altogether to forbid swearing in
any case, Matthew. 5. 33, 34. Ye have heard that it has been said to them of old
time, thou shall not forswear thy self: but I say unto you swear not at all;
neither by heaven, etc. But let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay;
for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. And this Law St. James
recites, chap. 5. ver. 12. as that which Christians ought to have a very
particular and principal regard to; above all things my Brethren swear not: And
he makes the breach of this Law a damning sin, least ye fall into Condemnation.
But the Authority of our Savior alone is sufficient, and therefore I shall
only consider that Text.

And, because here lies the main strength of this opinion of the unlawfulness
of Oaths, it is very fit that this Text be fully considered; and that it be
made very evident, that it was not our Savior's meaning by this prohibition
wholly to forbid the use of Oaths.

But before I enter upon this matter, I will readily grant, that there is
scarce any Error whatsoever that has a more plausible color from Scripture,
than this; which makes the case of those who are seduced into it the more
pityable: But then it ought to be considered, how much this Doctrine of the
unlawfulness of oaths reflects upon the Christian Religion; since it is so
evidently prejudicial both to humane Society in general, and particularly to
those persons that entertain it: neither of which ought rashly to be supposed
and taken for granted, concerning any Law delivered by our Savior: Because
upon these terms it will be very hard for us to vindicate the divine wisdom of
our Savior's Doctrine, and the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. Of
the inconvenience of this Doctrine to humane Society, I have spoken already.
But besides this, it is very prejudicial to them that believe it. It renders
them suspected to Government, and in many cases incapable of the common,
benefits of Justice and other privileges of humane Society, and exposes them
to great penalties, as the constitution of all Laws and Governments at present
is; and it is not easy to imagine how they should be otherwise. And which is
very considerable in this matter, it sets those who refuse Oaths upon very
unequal terms with the rest of Mankind, if where the estates and lives of men
are equally concerned, their bare testimonies shall be admitted without an
Oath, and others shall be obliged to speak upon Oath: Nothing being more
certain in experience, than that many men will lie for their interest, when
they will not be perjured; God having planted in the natural Consciences of men
a secret dread of perjury above most other sins. And this inconvenience is so
great, as to render those who refuse oaths in all cases almost intolerable to
humane Society. I speak not this either to bring them into trouble, or to
persuade them to measure truth by their interest: But on the other hand I must
needs say, that it is no Argument either of a wise or good man to take up any
opinion, especially such a one as is greatly to his prejudice upon slight
grounds. And this very consideration, that it is so much to their
inconvenience, may justly move them to be very careful in the examination of
it.

This being premised, I come now to explain this Prohibition of our Savior;
and to this purpose, I desire these three things may be well considered.

First, That several circumstances of these words of our Savior do manifestly
show that they ought to be interpreted in a limited sense, as only forbidding
swearing in common conversation; needless and heedless oaths (as one expresses
it) and in general, all voluntary swearing, unless upon some great and weighty
cause, in which the glory of God and the good of the souls of Men is concerned.
For that in such cases a voluntary oath may be lawful, I am induced to believe
from the example of St. Paul, who uses it more than once upon such occasions;
of which I shall hereafter give particular instances.

And this was the sense of Wise men among the Heathens, that men should not
swear but upon necessity and great occasion. Thus Eusebius the Philosopher in
Stobaeus, counsels men. Some (says he) advise men to be careful to swear the
truth; but I advise principally that men do not easily swear at all, that is,
not upon any slight, but only upon weighty occasions: To the same purpose
Epictetus, Shun oaths wholly, if it be possible; if not, however as much as
thou can: And so likewise Simplicius in his Comment upon him, We ought wholly
to shun swearing, except upon occasions of great necessity: And Quintilian
among the Romans, In totum jurare, nisi ubi necesse est, gravi viro parum
convenit; To swear at all, except where it is necessary, does not well suite
with a wise man.

And, that this Prohibition of our Savior's ought to be understood of oaths in
ordinary conversation, appears from the opposition which our Savior makes,
Swear not at all; but let your communication be yea, yea; That is, in your
ordinary commerce and affairs do not interpose oaths, but say and do. And this
is very much confirmed, in that our Savior does not under this general
Prohibition, instance in such oaths as are expressly by the name of God: The
reason whereof is this; The Jews thought it unlawful in ordinary communication
to swear expressly by the name of God, but lawful to swear by the Creatures, as
by Heaven and Earth, etc. So that our Savior's meaning is, as if he had said;
You think you may swear in common conversation, provided you do not swear by
the name of God; but I say unto you, let your communication be without oaths of
any kind: you shall not so much as swear by heaven or by earth, because God is
virtually invoked in every oath. And unless we suppose this to be our Savior's
meaning, I do not see what good Reason can be given why our Savior should only
forbid them to swear by the Creatures, and not much rather by the Name of God;
such oaths being surely of all others most to be avoided, as being the most
direct abuse and profanation of the Name of God.

Secondly, It is very considerable to the explaining of this Prohibition, that
there are the like general expressions in other Jewish Authors concerning this
very matter, which yet must of necessity be thus limited. Maimonides, from the
ancient Rabbis, gives this Rule, that it is best not to swear at all. And
Philo uses almost the same words. And Rabbi Jonathan comes very near our
Savior's expression, when he says, The just man will not swear at all; not so
much as by the common Names of God, nor by his Attributes, nor by his Works, as
by Heaven, or the Angels, or the Law. Now it is not imaginable, that these
learned Jews should condemn Oaths in all cases, when the Law of Moses did in
many cases expressly require them. And therefore they are to be understood of
voluntary oaths in ordinary conversation. And that the Jews meant this by not
swearing at all, seems to be very plain from a passage in Josephus, who says
that the Sect of the Essenes forbad their Disciples to swear at all; and yet he
tells us at the same time, that they who were admitted into that Sect, took an
oath to observe the Laws and Rules of it. So that they who forbad to swear at
all, allowed of Oaths imposed by the Authority of Superiors.

Thirdly, which will peremptorily decide this matter, this Prohibition of our
Savior's cannot be understood to forbid all Oaths, without a plain
contradiction to the undoubted practice of the primitive Christians, and of the
Apostles, and even of our Lord himself. Origin and Tertullian tell us, that the
Christians refused to swear by the Emperor's Genius; not because it was an
Oath, but because they thought it to be Idolatrous: But the same Tertullian
says, that the Christians were willing to swear per salutem Imperatoris, by the
health and safety of the Emperor. Athanasius, being accused to Constantius,
purged himself by oath, and desired that his Accuser might be put to his Oath,
sub attestatione veritatis, by calling the truth to witness: by which form
(says he) we Christians are wont to swear. But, which is more than this, St.
Paul, upon weighty occasions, does several times in his Epistles call God to
witness for the truth of what he says; which is the very formality of an Oath.
God is my witness, Romans 1. 9. As God is true, our word was not yea and nay, 2
Cor. 1. 18. and v. 23. I call God for a record upon my Soul. Before God I lie
not, Gal. 1. 20. God is my record, Philip. 1. 8. God is my witness, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
5. These are all unquestionable oaths; which we cannot imagine St. Paul would
have used, had they been directly contrary to our Savior's Law. And whereas
some defend this upon account of his extraordinary Inspiration, I cannot
possibly see how this mends the matter. For surely it is very inconvenient to
say that they who were to teach the Precepts of Christ to others, did
themselves break them by Inspiration.

But I go yet farther, and shall urge an example beyond all exception.

Our Savior himself (who surely would not be the first example of breaking his
own Laws) did not refuse to answer upon Oath, being called thereto at his
Trial. So we find Matthew. 26. 63. The high Priest said unto him, I adjure thee
by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God;
that is, he required him to answer this question upon Oath. For among the
Jews, the form of giving an oath to witnesses and others, was not by tendering
a formal oath to them, as the custom is among us; but by adjuring them, that
is, requiring them to answer upon oath: As is plain from Levit. 5. 1. If a man
hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness whether he has seen or known of
such a thing, if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his Iniquity. If he
have heard the voice of swearing, that is, if being adjured or demanded to
answer upon oath, concerning what he has seen or heard, he do not utter the
truth, he is perjured. Now to this adjuration of the high Priest, our Savior
answered, thou have said: which words are not an avoiding to answer (as some
have thought) but a direct answer; as if he had said, it is as thou say; it
is even so, I am the Son of God. For upon this answer the high Priest said, he
has spoken blasphemy. But, to put the matter beyond all doubt, St. Mark tells
us, Mark 14. 61. that he being asked by the high Priest, Art thou the Christ
the Son of the Blessed? He answered, I am. So that unless we will interpret our
Savior's Doctrine contrary to his own practice, we cannot understand him to
forbid all Oaths; and consequently they are not unlawful.

I have been the longer upon this, that I might give clear satisfaction in this
matter to those that are willing to receive it.

As for the Ceremonies in use among us in the taking of Oaths, it is no just
Exception against them, that they are not found in Scripture. For this was
always matter of Liberty; and several Nations have used several Rites and
Ceremonies in their Oaths. It was the custom of the Graecians, to swear laying
their hands upon the Altar, quod sanctissimum jusjurandum est habitum, (says
(...) Gellius) which was looked upon as the most sacred form of Swearing. The
Romans were wont Jovem Lapidem jurare; that is, he that swore by Jupiter held a
Flint-stone in his hand, and flung it violently from him, with these words, Si
sciens fallo ita me Jupiter bonis omnibus ejiciat ut ego hunc Lapidem; If I
knowingly falsify, God so throw me out of all my possessions as I do this stone.

In Scripture there are two Ceremonies mentioned of Swearing. One, of putting
the hand under the Thigh of him to whom the Oath was made. Thus Eliezer swore
to Abraham, Genesis 24. and Joseph to Jacob, Genesis 47. The other was by lifting up
the hand to heaven: Thus Abraham expresses the manner of an Oath, Genesis 14. 22.
I have lift up my hand to the most high God. And thus God condescending to the
manner of men, expresses himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. If I lift up my hand to
heaven, and swear. In allusion to this custom the Psalmist describes the
Perjured person, Psalm. 144. 8. Whose mouth speaks vanity; and whose right
hand is a right hand of falsehood. And there is not the least intimation in
Scripture, that either of these Ceremonies were prescribed and appointed by
God, but voluntarily instituted and taken up by men. And thus among us the
Ceremony of Swearing is by laying the hand on the holy Gospel, and kissing the
Book; which is both very solemn and significant. And this is the reason why
this solemn kind of Oath is called a corporal Oath, and was anciently so
called; because the sign or ceremony of it is performed by some part of the
Body. And this Solemnity is an aggravation of the Perjury, because it makes it
both more deliberate, and more scandalous.

I shall speak but briefly to the

IV. And last particular, viz. the sacred obligation of an Oath: because it is
a solemn appeal to God as a witness of the truth of what we say: To God, I say,
from whose piercing and all-seeing eye, from whose perfect and infinite
knowledge, nothing is or can be hid: So that there is not a thought in our
heart but he sees it, nor a word in our tongue but he discerns the truth or
falsehood of it. Whenever we swear, we appeal to his knowledge, and refer our
selves to his just judgment, who is the powerful Patron and Protector of
Right, and the Almighty Judge and Avenger of all falsehood and unrighteousness.
So that it is not possible for men to lay a more sacred and solemn obligation
upon their Consciences, than by the Religion of an Oath. Moses very well
expresses it, by binding our souls with a bond. Numb. 30. 2. If a man swear an
oath, to bind his soul with a bond; intimating that he that swears, lays the
strongest obligation upon himself, and puts his Soul in pawn for the truth of
what he says. And this obligation no man can violate, but at the utmost peril
of the judgment and vengeance of God. For every Oath implies a Curse upon our
selves, in case of Perjury, as Plutarch observes. And this was always the sense
of Mankind, concerning the obligation of Oaths. Nullum vinculum ad astringendam
fidem majores nostri jurejurando arctius esse voluerunt, says Tully; Our
forefathers had no stricter bond, whereby to oblige the faith of men to one
another, than that of an Oath. To the same purpose is that in the Comedian,
Aliud si scirem, qui firmare meam apud vos possem fidem, sanctius quam
jusjurandum, id pollicerer tibi. If I knew any thing more sacred than an Oath,
whereby to confirm to you the truth of what I say, I would make use of it.

I will crave your patience a little longer, whilst by way of inference from
this Discourse, I represent to you the great Sin of Swearing in common
conversation, upon trivial and needless occasions; and the hainousness of the
sin of Perjury.

1. First. The great sin of Swearing, upon trivial and needless occasions, in
common conversation. Because an Oath is a solemn thing, and reserved for great
occasions, to give confirmation to our word in some weighty matter, and to put
an end to controversies which cannot otherwise be peremptorily and
satisfactorily decided. And therefore to use Oaths upon light occasions, argues
great profaneness and irreverence of Almighty God. So Vlpian the great Roman
Lawyer observes, Nonnullos esse faciles ad jurandum contemptu Religionis, that
men's proneness to swearing comes from a contempt of Religion; than which
nothing disposes men more to Atheism and Infidelity. Besides that it does many
times surprise men unawares into Perjury: And how can it be otherwise, when men
use to interlard all their careless talk with Oaths, but that they must often
be perjured? And which is worse, it prepares men for deliberate perjury: For
with those who are accustomed to swear upon light occasions, an Oath will go
off with them more roundly about weightier matters. From a common custom of
swearing (says Hierocles) men easily slide into perjury: Therefore (says he)
if thou would not be perjured, do not use to swear. And this perhaps is the
meaning of St. James, when he cautions Christians so vehemently against common
swearing, (...), (for so some of the best ancient Copies read it) least ye fall
into hypocrisy, that is, least ye lie and be perjured, by using your selves to
rash and inconsiderate swearing.

And men expose themselves to this danger to no purpose; Oaths in common
discourse being so far from confirming a man's word, that with wise men they
much weaken it: For common swearing (if it have any serious meaning at all)
argues in a man a perpetual distrust of his own reputation, and is an
acknowledgment that he thinks his bare word not to be worthy of credit. And it
is so far from adorning and filling a man's discourse, that it makes it look
swollen and bloated, and more bold and blustering than becomes persons of gentle
and good breeding. Besides, that it is a great incivility, because it highly
offends and grates upon all sober and considerate persons; who cannot be
presumed with any manner of ease and patience to hear God affronted, and his
great and glorious Name so irreverently tossed upon every slight occasion.

And it is no excuse to men that many times they do it ignorantly, and not
observing and knowing what they do. For certainly it is no extenuation of a
fault, that a man has got the habit of it so perfect, that he commits it when
he does not think of it: Which consideration should make men oppose the
beginnings of this Vice, lest it grow into a habit very hard to be left. Nemo
novit, nisi qui expertus est, quam sit difficile consuetudinem jurandi
extinguere, says St. Austin; No man knows, but he that has tried, how hard it
is to get rid of this custom of Swearing: But yet it is certain men may do it,
by resolution, and great care of themselves: For he that can choose whether he
will speak or not, can choose whether he will swear or not when he speaks. Major
consuetudo majorem intentionem flagitat; the more inveterate a custom is, the
greater care should be used to break our selves of it.

In short, This practice is so contrary to so plain a Precept of our Savior,
and by the breach whereof we incurr so great a danger (as St. James assures us)
that it must be a great charity that can find out a way to reconcile a common
custom of swearing with a serious belief of the Christian Religion: Which I
would to God those who are concerned would seriously lay to heart. Especially,
since this Sin of all others has the least of Temptation to it. Profit or
Pleasure there is none in it; nor any thing in men's natural tempers to incite
them to it. For though some men pour out Oaths so freely as if they came
naturally from them, yet surely no man is born of a swearing constitution.

All that can be pretended for it, is Custom and Fashion: But, to show that
this is no Excuse, it is very observable, that it is particularly in the matter
of Oaths and Perjury that the Holy Ghost gives that caution, Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil.

And lastly, it deserves to be considered, that this sin is so much the greater
because of the frequent returns of it, in those that are accustomed to it. So
that although it were but small in it self (as it is not) yet the frequent
practice of this sin would quickly mount it up to a great score.

2. Secondly, To represent the heinousness of the sin of Perjury. But before I
aggravate this Crime, it is fit to let men know how many ways they may be
guilty of it.

1st. When a man asserts upon oath what he knows to be otherwise: Or promises
what he does not intend to perform. In both these cases the very act of
swearing is Perjury. And so likewise when a man promises upon oath to do that
which it is unlawful for him to do; because this oath is contrary to a former
obligation.

2dly. When a man is uncertain whether what he swears to be true. This likewise
is Perjury, in the act; though not of the same degree of guilt with the former,
because it is not so fully and directly against his knowledge and conscience.
For men ought to be certain of the truth of what they assert upon oath, and not
to swear at venture. And therefore no man ought positively to swear to the
truth of any thing but what he himself has seen or heard: This being the
highest assurance men are capable of in this world. In like manner, he is
guilty of perjury in the same degree, who promises upon oath what he is not
morally and reasonably certain he shall be able to perform.

3dly. They are likewise guilty of Perjury, who do not use great plainness and
simplicity in oaths; but answer aequivocally and doubtfully, or with
reservation of something in their minds, thinking thereby to salve the truth of
what they say. And we all know who they are that make use of these arts, and
maintain them to be lawful; to the infinite scandal of the Christian
Religion, and prejudice of humane Society, by doing what in them lies to
destroy all Faith and mutual Confidence among men. For what can be a greater
affront to God, than to use his Name to deceive men? And what can more directly
overthrow the great end and use of oaths, which are for confirmation, and to
put an end to strife? Whereas by these arts the thing is left in the same
uncertainty it was before, and there is no decision of it. For there is hardly
any form of words can be devised so plain, as not to be liable to Equivocation:
To be sure, a man when he swears, may always reserve something in his mind
which will quite alter the sense of what ever he can say or promise upon oath.
And this may be laid down for a certain Rule, That all departure from the
simplicity of an oath, is a degree of Perjury; and a man is never a whit the
less forsworn, because his perjury is a little finer and more artificial than
ordinary. And though men think by this device to save themselves harmless from
the guilt of so great a Sin, they do really increase it, by adding to their
iniquity the impudent folly of mocking God and deceiving themselves.

And whereas it is pleaded, in the favor of mental reservation, that the whole
Proposition, as made up of what is expressed in words and of that which is
reserved in the mind, is true; For instance, if a man being asked upon Oath
whether he be a Priest, shall answer he is not, reserving in his mind that he
is not a Priest of Bacchus, or some such thing, the whole Proposition is true,
and then they say a man may swear to that which is true, without danger of
perjury: This is of no force, because, though the whole Proposition be true, it
is deceitful, and contrary to that sincerity which ought to be in an oath: And
the end of an oath is hereby likewise defeated, which is to ascertain the truth
of what we say: But if a man reserve something in his mind which alters the
truth of what he says, the thing is still as doubtful and uncertain as it was
before. Besides, if this be a good reason; a man may swear with reservation in
all cases, because the reason equally extends to all cases; for if the truth of
the Proposition, as made up of what is expressed in words and reserved in the
mind, will excuse a man from Perjury, then no man can be perjured that swears
with reservation: But this the Casuists of the Roman Church do not allow, but
only in some particular cases, as before an incompetent Judge, or the like; for
they see well enough that if this were allowed in all cases, it would destroy
all faith among men. And therefore since the reason extends alike to all cases,
it is plain that it is to be allowed in none.

4thly. He is guilty of Perjury after the act, who having a real intention when
he swears, to perform what he promises, yet afterward neglects to do it: Not
for want of Power (for so long as that continues the obligation cease) but
for want of Will, and due regard to his oath.

Now that Perjury is a most heinous Sin, is evident, because it is contrary to
so plain and great a Law of God; one of the ten Words or Precepts of the Moral
Law, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; thou shall not
bring or apply the name of God to a falsehood: Or, as Josephus renders it, Thou
shall not adjure God to a false thing: Which our Savior renders yet more
plainly, Matthew. 5. 33. Thou shall not forswear thy self. For he seems to refer
to the third Commandment when he says, Ye have heard that it was said to them
of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, as he had done before to the
6th. and 7th. when he says, It was said to them of old time, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not commit adultery. So that the primary, if not the sole
intention of this Law, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, is to forbid the great sin of Perjury. And I do not remember that in
Scripture the phrase of taking God's name in vain, is used in any other sense.
And thus it is certainly used, Prove. 30. 9. Lest I be poor and steal, and take
the name of the Lord my God in vain: i. e. lest Poverty should tempt me to
steal, and stealth should engage me in Perjury. For among the Jews an oath was
tendered to him that was suspected of theft, as appears from Levit. 6. 2. where
it is said, If any one be guilty of theft, and lies concerning it, or swears
falsely; he shall restore all that about which he has sworn falsely. Left I
steal, and take the name of the Lord my God in vain; that is, be perjured,
being examined upon oath concerning a thing stolen. And for this reason the
thief and the perjured person are put together, Zech. 5. 4. where it is said,
that a curse shall enter into the house of the thief, and of him that swears
falsely by the name of God. From all which it is very probable, that the whole
intention of the 3d. Commandment is to forbid this great sin of Perjury. To
deterr men from which, a severe threatening is there added; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; that is, he will most
severely punish such a one. And it is very obseravble, that there is no
threatening added to any other Commandment, but to this and the second;
Intimating to us that next to Idolatry and the worship of a false God, Perjury
is one of the greatest affronts that can be offered to the divine Majesty. This
is one of those sins that cries so loud to Heaven, and quickens the pace of
God's judgments, Mal. 3. 9. I will come near to you in judgment, and be a swift
witness against the swearer. For this God threatens utter destruction to the
man and his house, Zech. 5. 4. speaking of the curse that goes over the face
of the whole earth; God (says he) will bring it forth, and it shall enter into
the house of him that swears falsely by the name of God, and shall remain in
the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the
stones thereof. It shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume
it. This sin by the secret judgment of God undermines Estates and Families, to
the utter ruin of them. And among the Heathen it was always reckoned one of
the greatest of Crimes, and which they did believe God did not only punish upon
the guilty person himself, but upon his family and posterity; and many times
upon whole Nations, as the Prophet also tells us, that because of Oaths the
Land mourns.

I need not use many words to aggravate this sin; it is certainly a Crime of
the highest nature. Deliberate Perjury being directly against a man's
knowledge, so that no man can commit it without staring his Conscience in the
face; which is one of the greatest aggravations of any Crime. And it is equally
a sin against both Tables; being the highest affront to God, and of most
injurious consequence to men. It is an horrible abuse of the name of God, an
open contempt of his Judgment, and an insolent defiance of his Vengeance: And
in respect of men, it is not only a wrong to this or that particular person who
suffers by it, but Treason against humane Society; subverting at once the
foundations of public Peace and Justice, and the private security of every
man's life and fortune. It is a defeating of the best and last way that the
wisdom of men could devise for the decision of doubtful matters. Solomon very
fully and elegantly expresses the destructive nature of this sin, Prove. 25.
18. A false witness against his neighbor, is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp
arrow: Intimating, that amongst all the instruments of ruin and mischief that
have been devised by mankind, none is of more pernicious consequence to humane
Society than Perjury, and breach of Faith. It is a pestilence that usually
walks in darkness, and a secret stab and blow against which many times there
is no possibility of defense.

And therefore it highly concerns those who upon these and the like occasions
are called upon their Oath, whether as Jurors or Witnesses, to set God before
their eyes, and to have his fear in their hearts, whenever they come to take an
oath: And to govern and discharge their consciences in this matter by known and
approved Rules, and by the Resolutions of pious and wise men; and not by the
loose Reasonings and Resolutions of Pamphlets, sent abroad to serve the turns
of unpeaceable and ill-minded men (whether Atheists, or Papists, or others) on
purpose to debauch the Consciences of men by teaching them to play fast and
loose with oaths. And it is a very sad sign of the decay of Christian Religion
amongst us, to see so many who call themselves Christians, to make so little
conscience of so great a sin, as even the Light of Nature would blush and
tremble at.

I will conclude all with those excellent Sayings of the Son of Sirach
concerning these two sins (I have been speaking of) of Profane Swearing, and
Perjury, Eccle. 23. 9, 10, etc. Accustom not thy mouth to swearing; neither
use thy self to the naming of the holy One. A man that uses much swearing
shall be filled with iniquity; and the plague shall never depart from his
house. If he shall offend, his sin shall be upon him; and if he acknowledge not
his sin, he makes a double offense. And if he swear falsely, he shall not be
innocent, but his house shall be full of calamities. And to represent to us the
dreadful nature of this sin of Perjury, There is (says he) a word that is
clothed about with death, meaning a rash and false Oath; There is a word that
is clothed about with death, God grant it be not found in the heritage of
Jacob: For all such things shall be far from the godly; and they will not
wallow in these sins. From which God preserve all good men, and make them
careful to preserve themselves; as they value the present peace of their own
consciences, and the favor of Almighty God in this World and the other, for
his Mercies sake in Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

