Timothy Touchstone's REPLY TO Sir ANONYMUS, At Mr. Christian's Lodging, at the
Sign of the Naked Devil, between HAMDEN and DANBY-Houses.
I Know you bestow the Title of Knighthood on me, in expectation it may rebound
to your self, and it is granted; but assured be, that many a better Christian --
is forced to go without it.

Sir Bartholomew, al. Anonymus, welcome from thy Roost.

Did I not think you had been employed in Bartholomew-Fair, for the setting up
of Booths, Sheds, etc. I should have justly taxed you with laziness, neglect,
or some other worse faculty; but considering that, and the putting on your
Fools Clothing for the first week, to encourage the Rabble to behold your
Antic postures, is sufficient to excuse: wherefore I shall only tell you, how
much I admire T. E. of D. should infringe so much on his wit, to commit a
matter of such apparent ponderous consequence, to thy silly Vindication; for as
your style represents you, you must certainly be a more fit person to be the
Fool of some Droll, etc. then to write Pamphlets, unless you could make your
Compound more agreeable, and keep closer to the Matter you so impertinently
pretend to Answer, which there is no Baby in the whole Fair but must needs have
writ more to the purpose, then you have done in any part of yours: And as you
say you are in love with my Style, really I should have been much more so with
yours, could you but have wrote in either of those damned serious Styles as Mr.
Papist or John Presbyter in this Age do.

But look you (said I, Sir Anon.) can reason come from that which has no sense?
or can any Puppy be so impertinent to take upon him to answer a truth in
vindication of the E. of D. who does not desire nor deserve it, and that with a
Scandalous Paper, wherein is not to be found one Syllable, which holds up to
the subject you so fain would treat on; wherefore how can you imagine any
Reader to take you for more then this Paragraph explains you to be, or some
private Sentinel, in one of the Regiments of Players, Pimps, Whores, etc. which
yours makes mention of: But really the saddest part of the Story is the sudden
transformation you make of harmless Naked Truth; what is Truth become so
terrible a scarecrow that you can term it no better then a Naked Devil? Nay,
then I find 'twas poor Innocent Truth frighted you from the due consideration
of my Paper, and has exposed you to such remarkable notches of Study, that it
will be more credible to lay down the Pen, then to persist in such practices.
Poor Anon. indeed I find thou wast put to a hard plunge, after a Months
converse with my Paper, to patch up a penny worth of News. For

1. We are to believe thee a man of an Estate.

2. Something of a Christian -- by your treating on St. Paul's Rules.

3. A well-wisher to the success of the Press, which rather then fail, you are
willing to lug your self in too.

But in Truth Anon. I am much of your mind, that you hate both Court and
Courtiers too, for it plainly appears by your Northern Brethren setting on foot
the Covenant in Scotland, and your daily rebellious Stories in Coffee-houses
(the very Cabinets of Rebellions and Factions) what you would be at, and how
discontented are the whole gang of your Rump Friends, they cannot publicly
pray for the good of a Common weal, and sow Perdition to your contentment at
your Factious Assemblies, where a poor Illiterate Coxcomb, who lurks the whole
Week besides in holes gathering of Venom, stands on the 7th. day up to the
knees laden with the ambition of Preaching Monarchy headlong down, in Diogenes
Doctrine; and this is the course you would take to lug in by head and shoulders
John Presbyter, but the better to assist it would have the helping hand of T.
E. D.

But (say I, and touch you to the quick) that will not do, nor make any thing
so plain for his Lordship, as might have done the five pair of double Barreld
Pistols, if not discovered, for in Naked Truth my former Author John the Brewer
is ready to Swear, and plainly to make out against the Stamford Evidence, and
that hireling Kirkby, all the tricks played at the Lodgings between Hamden and
Danby houses, Sir Edmundberry Godfrey having that very day on which he was
missing, at Eleven a Clock, passed through my Lady Anne Cooks Chamber, as Mr.
Christian himself allows of; and in fine, that Christian at Two of the Clock in
the Afternoon that day took Water from Whitehall Stairs with him; but as he
says, and I believe, carried him to the Naked Devil indeed to be Murdered:
Therefore do you think to make people believe Christian could be at that time
at Stamford? what a Cunning Arch Rogue is this John the Brewer, nay and very
positive too, for he knows much of the E. of D. concerns, and will perhaps
prove by sound Circumstances that Sir E.B.G. was Murdered by the hand of
Christian -- or at least by his consent.

Now Sir Anonymus, take my advice, lay down your Pen, Fish not in troubled
Waters, meddle not with Scepters or Crowns, or the weighty Government of
Nations, go not about either to introduce, or expel; pester not thy pate with
State Affairs, but take off your Protestant Mask, and in Naked Truth appear
with John Presbyters worm-eaten Face, otherwise you may be looked upon by thy
Fraternity as a Deserter, and so be thrust out to look some better way to
Heaven: deal like an honest, moral, good and loyal Subject; pray for thy King
and Country, with such a zeal as would more become thee, then the saying
(Honor the King) which is to convert the Train you now belong to: put your
helping hand to the Plough, and come about to me, then may you with honest John
the Brewer, rejoice and turn your formal tone Honor the King, to Let the King
live; for to Honor a King amongst you is accounted a terrible yoke, and to my
certain knowledge, you and all other Presbyters would use your utmost
endeavors to overthrow the same. This is the opinion of honest

T. T.


