The most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.


Several Discourses, Viz. Of the great Duties of Natural Religion. Instituted
Religion not intended to undermine Natural. Christianity not destructive; but
perfective of the Law of Moses. The Nature and Necessity of Regeneration. The
Danger of all known Sin. Knowledge and Practice necessary in Religion. The Sins
of Men not Chargeable on God.
By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The FOURTH VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. Of the great Duties of Natural Religion, with the Ways and Means of
knowing them. MICAH VI. 6, 7, 8. WHerewith shall I come before the Lord, and
bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings,
with Calves of a year old?

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?

He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

Page 1. SERMON. II. Instituted Religion not intended to undermine Natural.
MATTHEW. IX. 13. But go ye and learn what that means; I will have Mercy, and
not Sacrifice. p. 43. SERMON. III, IV. Christianity does not destroy, but perfect
the Law of Moses. MATTHEW. V. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets. I am not come to destroy; but to fulfill. p. 85, 113. SERMON. V,
VI, VII, VIII, IX. Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order
to Justification, and Salvation. GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature. p.
139, 165, 191, 217, 241. SERMON. X, XI. The Danger of all known Sin, both from
the Light of Nature, and Revelation. ROMANS I. 18, 19. For the wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, who
hold the truth in unrighteousness; because that which may be known of God is
manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. p. 267, 305. SERMON. XII.
Knowledge and Practice Necessary in Religion. JOHN XIII. 17. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them. p. 343. SERMON. XIII. Practice in Religion
necessary, in proportion to our Knowledge. LUKE XII. 47, 48. And that Servant
which knew his Lord's will, and prepar^d not himself, neither did according to
his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: But he that knew not, and did
commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom Men have
committed much, of him they will ask the more. p. 373. SERMON. XIV, XV. The Sins
of Men not chargeabl^ upon God; but upon themselves. JAMES I. 13, 14. Let no
Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempts he any Man: But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed. p. 403, 447.
SERMON I.
Of the great Duties of Natural Religion, with the Ways and Means of knowing
them.
MICAH. 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self
before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves
of a year old?

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?

He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?


IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Prophet tells the People of Israel, that
the Lord had a Controversy with them; and that he might direct them how to
take up this quarrel, he brings in one making this enquiry in the name of the
People; Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high
God? That is, by what kind of Worship or Devotion may I address my self to him
in the most acceptable manner? by what means may I hope to appease his
displeasure? To satisfy this enquiry, he first instanceth in the chief kinds
of Sacrifices and Expiations that were in use among the Jews and Heathens;
Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings? the constant Sacrifice that was
off^red to God by way of acknowledgment of his Dominion over the Creatures;
with Calves of a year old? which was the Sin-offering which the High Priest
offered for himself. Or will he rather accept of those great and costly
Sacrifices which were offered upon Solemn and Public Occasions, such as that
was which Solomon offered at the Dedication of the Temple? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? Or if
none of these will do, shall I try to atone him after the manner of the
Heathen, by the dearest thing in the World, the firstborn of my Children?
Shall I give my firstborn for my tran^gression, the fruit of my Body for the
sin of my Soul? If God was to be appeased at all, surely they thought it must
be by some of these ways, for beyond these they could imagine nothing of
greater value and efficacy.

But the Prophet tells them that they were quite out of the way, in thinking to
pacify God upon these terms, that there are other things which are much better
and more pleasing to him than any of these Sacrifices. For some of them were
expressly forbidden by God, as the offering up of our Children; and for the
rest, they were not good in themselves, but merely by virtue of their
Institution, and because they were commanded. But the things which he would
recommend to them, are such as are good in their own nature, and required of us
by God upon that account. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love merry, and to walk
humbly with thy God?

So that in these words you have,

First, An Enquiry which is the best way to appease God when he is offended;
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?

Secondly, The way that Men are apt to take in this Case; and that is by some
external piece of Religion and Devotion; such as Sacrifice was both among Jews
and Heathen. Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, etc. By which
questions the Prophet intimates that Men are very apt to pitch upon this course.

Thirdly, The course which God himself directs to, and which will effectually
pacify him. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, etc.

The First being a mere question, there needs no more to be said of it; only
that it is a question of great importance; What is the most effectual way to
appease God when we have offended him? For who can bear his indignation, and
who who can stand before him, when once he is angry? Let us consider then, in
the

Second place, the way that Men are apt to take to pacify God; and that is by
some external piece of Religion and Devotion, such as were Sacrifices among the
Jews and Heathen. Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings? This is the way
which Men are most apt to choose. The Jews, you se^, pitched upon the external
parts of their Religion, those which were most pompous and solemn, the richest
and most costly Sacrifices; so they might but keep their Sins, they were well
enough content to offer up any thing else to God; they thought nothing too good
for him, provided he would not oblige them to become better.

And thus it is among our selves, when we apprehend God is displeased with us,
and his Judgments abroad in the Earth, we are content to do any thing, but to
learn Righteousness; we are willing to submit to any kind of external Devotion
and Humiliation, to Fast, and Pray, to afflict our selves, and to cry mightily
unto God; things some of them good in themselves, but the least part of that
which God requires of us.

And as for the Church of Rome, in case of public Judgments and Calamities,
they are the inquisitive and (as they pretend) the most skilful People in the
world to pacify God; and they have a thousand solemn devices to this purpose.
I do not wrong them, by representing them enquiring after this manner. Shall I
go before a Crucifix, and bow my self to it, as to the high God? And, because
the Lord is a great King, and it is perhaps too much boldness and arrogance to
make immediate Addresses always to him; to which of the Saints or Angels shall
I go to mediate for me, and intercede on my behalf? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Pater-Nosters, or with ten thousands of Ave-Marys? Shall the
Host travel in procession, or my self und^rtake a tedious Pilgrimage? Or shall
I list my self a Soldier for the Holy War, or for the Extirpation of
Heretics? Shall I give half my Estate to a Convent for my Transgression, or
chastise and punish my Body for the Sin of my Soul? Thus Men deceive
themselves, and will submit to all the extravagant Severities, that the
Petulancy and Folly of Men can devise and impose upon them. And indeed it is
not to be imagined, when Men are once under the Power of Superstition, how
ridiculous they may be, and yet think themselves religious; how prodigiously
they may play the Fool, and yet believe they please God; what cruel and
barbarous things they may do to themselves and others, and yet be verily
persuaded they do God good Service.

And what is the Mystery of all this, but that Men are loath to do that,
without which, nothing else that we do is acceptable to God? They hate to be
reformed; and for this Reason, they will be content to do any Thing, rather
than be put to the Trouble of Mending themselves; every thing is easy in
comparison of this Task, and God may have any Terms of them, so he will let
them be quiet in their Sins, and excuse them from the real Virtues of a Good
Life. And this brings me to the

Third Thing, which I principally intended to speak to. The Course which God
himself directs to, and which will effectually pacify him. He has showed
thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? In the handling of
which, I shall,

First, Consider those several Duties which God here requires of us, and upon
the Performance of which he will be pacified toward us.

Secondly, By what Ways and Means God has discovered these Duties to us, and
the Goodness of them; He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, etc.

I. We will briefly consider the several Duties which God here requires of us,
and upon the Performance of which he will be pacified toward us; What does the
Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God?

It was usual among the Jews to reduce all the Duties of Religion to these
three Heads, Justice, Mercy, and Piety; under the first two, comprehending the
Duties which we owe to one another, and under the third the Duties which we owe
to God.

1. Justice. And I was going to tell you what it is, but I considered that
every Man knows it, as well as any Definition can explain it to him. I shall
only put you in mind of some of the principal Instances of it, and the several
Virtues comprehended under it. And,

First, Justice is concerned in the making of Laws; that they be such as are
equal and reasonable, useful and beneficial, for the Honor of God and
Religion, and for the public good of Humane Society. This is a great Trust, in
the discharge of which, if Men be biased by Favor or Interest, and drawn
aside from the Consideration and Regard of the public Good, it is a far
greater Crime, and of worse Consequence, than any private Act of Injustice
between Man and Man.

And then, Justice is also concerned in the due Execution of Laws; which are
the Guard of private Property, the Security of Public Peace, and of Religion
and Good Manners. And,

Lastly, In the Observance of Laws, and Obedience to them; which is a Debt that
every Man owes to Humane Society.

But more especially Justice is concerned in the Observance of those Laws,
whether of God or Man, which respect the Rights of Men, and their mutual
Commerce and Intercourse with one another. That we use Honesty and Integrity in
all our Dealings, in Opposition to Fraud and Deceit; Truth and Fidelity, in
Opposition to Falsehood and Breach of Trust; Equity and good Conscience, in
Opposition to all kind of Oppression and Exaction. These are the principal
Branches, and Instances of this great and comprehensive Duty of Justice; the
Violation whereof is so much the greater Sin, because this Virtue is the
firmest Bond of Humane Society, upon the Observation whereof, the Peace and
Happiness of Mankind does so much depend.

2. Mercy, which does not only signify the inward Affection of Pity and
Compassion toward those that are in Misery and Necessity, but the Effects of
it, in the actual Relief of those whose Condition calls for our Charitable Help
and Assistance; By feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked, and visiting
the Sick, and vindicating the Oppressed, and comforting the afflicted, and
ministering Ease and Relief to them if it be in our Power. And this is a very
lovely Virtue, and argues more Goodness in Men than mere Justice does. For
Justice is a strict Debt; but Mercy is Favor and Kindness. And this perhaps
may be the Reason of the different Expressions in the Text, that when God
barely commands us to do justly, he requires we should love Mercy, that is,
take a particular Pleasure and Delight in the Exercise of this Virtue, which is
so proper and agreeable to Mankind, that we commonly call it Humanity, giving
it its Name from our very Nature. In short, it is so excellent a Virtue, that I
should be very sorry that any Religion should be able to pretend to the
Practice of it more than our own.

3. Piety; To walk humbly with thy God. To walk humbly in the fear of the Lord;
so the Chaldee Paraphrase renders these Words. And this Phrase may comprehend
all those Acts of Religion which refer immediately to God; A firm Belief of his
Being and Perfections; an awful Sense of him, as the dread Sovereign and
righteous Judge of the World; a due Regard to his Service, and a reverent
Behavior of our selves toward him in all Acts of Worship and Religion, in
Opposition to Atheism and a Profane Neglect and Contempt of God and Religion;
a new and monstrous kind of Impiety! which of late Years has broke in upon us,
and got head among us, not only contrary to the Example of former Ages, but in
Despite of the very Genius and Temper of the Nation, which is naturally devout
and zealous in Religion.

Or else this Phrase of walking humbly with God, may refer more particularly to
the Posture and Condition of the People of Israel at that time, who were fallen
under the heavy Displeasure of God for their Sins. And then the Duty required
is, that being sensible how highly God has been offended by us, by the general
Corruption and Viciousness of the Age, which like a Leprosy has spread it
self almost over the whole Body of the Nation, and by that open Lewdness and
those insolent Impieties which are daily committed amongst us; I say, that
being deeply sensible of this, we do with all Humility acknowledge our Sins to
God, and repent of them, and implore his Mercy and Forgiveness, and resolve by
his grace to turn every one from the evil of our ways, and from the wickedness
that is in our hands; which God grant we may every one do This Sermon was
Preached upon occasion of a public F^^^^
this Day, according to the pious design and intention of it. And if we be
sincere in this Resolution, who can tell but God may turn and repent, and turn
away his anger from us, that we perish not. Nay, we have great reason to
believe, that he will be pacified toward us. So he has declared, Isa. 1. 16.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow; come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. But if
we continue unreformed, God will say to us, as he does there to the people of
Israel, To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? your
calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting; and when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you;
when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. To which, let me add that excellent
Saying of the Son of Syrach to this purpose, Ecclesiastic. 34. 25, 26. He that
washes himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again, what
avails his washing? So is it with a Man that fasteth for his Sins, and goes
again and does the same things. Who will hear his Prayer, or what does his
humbling profit him?

II. Let us consider by what ways and means God has made known these Duties to
us, and the goodness and the obligation of them. He has showed thee, O Man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee? I shall mention Five ways
whereby God has discovered this to us.

1. By a kind of natural Instinct.

2. By natural Reason.

3. By the general vote and consent of Mankind.

4. By external Revelation.

5. By the inward Dictates and Motions of God's Spirit upon the Minds of Men.

First, By a kind of natural Instinct, by which I mean a secret impression upon
the Minds of Men, whereby they are naturally carried to approve some things as
good and fit, and to dislike other things, as having a native evil and
deformity in them. And this I call a natural Instinct, because it does not seem
to proceed so much from the exercise of our Reason, as from a natural
propension and inclination, like those Instincts which are in Brute Creatures,
of natural affection and care toward their young ones. And that these
Inclinations are precedent to all reason and discourse about them, evidently
appears by this, that they do put forth themselves every whit as vigorously in
young persons, as in those of riper Reason; in the rude and ignorant sort of
People, as in those who are more polished and refined. For we see plainly that
the young and ignorant have as strong impressions of Piety and Devotion, as
true a sense of gratitude and justice and pity, as the wiser and more knowing
part of Mankind. A plain indication, that the Reason of Mankind is prevented by
a kind of natural instinct and anticipation concerning the good or evil, the
comeliness or deformity of these things. And though this do not equally extend
to all the instances of our Duty, yet as to the great lines and essential parts
of it, Mankind hardly need to consult any other Oracle, than the mere
propensions and inclinations of their Nature; as, whether we ought to reverence
the Divine Nature, to be grateful to those who have conferred benefits upon us,
to speak the truth, to be faithful to our promise, to restore that which is
committed to us in trust, to pity and relieve those that are in misery, and in
all things to do to others as we would have them do to us. And this will
further appear, if we consider these two things.

1. That Men are naturally innocent or guilty to themselves, according to what
they do in these things. So the Apostle tells us, Romans 2. 14, 15. When the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, and do show the effect of
the Law written in their hearts, their Consciences also bearing witness, and
their thoughts by turns (that is, according as they do well or ill) accusing or
excusing them. There is a secret comfort in innocence, and a strange pleasure
and satisfaction in being acquitted by our own Minds for what we do. But on the
contrary, when we contradict these natural Dictates, what uneasiness do we find
in our own breasts? Nay even before the Fact is committed, our Conscience is
strangely disquieted at the thoughts of it. When a Man does but design to do a
bad thing, he is guilty to himself, as if he had committed it. Of this we have
a considerable instance, in the first violence that was offered to Nature, Genesis
4. 6. The Lord said unto Cain, why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
fallen? The very thought of that Wickedness which he did but then design, did
disorder his Mind, and make a change in his very Countenance. Guilt is the
natural Concomitant of heinous Crimes, which so soon as ever a Man commits, his
Spirit receives a secret wound, which causes a great deal of smart and
anguish. For guilt is restless, an^ puts the Mind of Man into an unnatural
working and fermentation, never to be settled again but by Repentance. The
Wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest; which plainly shows that
the Mind of Man has a kind of Natural sense of Good and Evil; because when
ever we offend against Nature, our Consciences are touched to the quick, and we
receive a sting into our Soul, which shoots and pains us, when ever we reflect
upon what we have done. I appeal to that witness which every Man carries in his
breast, whether this be not true.

2. Men are naturally full of hopes and fears, according as they follow or go
against these natural Dictates. A good Conscience is apt to fill Men with
confidence and good hopes. It does not only give ease; but security to the Mind
of Man, against the dread of Invisible Powers, and the fearful apprehensions of
a future Judgment. Whereas guilt fills Men with dismal apprehensions of danger,
and continual misgivings concerning their own safety. Thus it was with Cain
after he had slain his Brother; It shall come to pass that every one that
finds me shall s^ay me. Nay, when a Man has done a secret fault, which none
can accuse him of, yet then is he haunted with the terrors of his own Mind, and
cannot be secure in his own apprehensions; which plainly shows that Men are
conscious to themselves, when they do well, and when they do amiss; and that
the same Natural Instinct which prompts Men to their Duty, fills them with good
hopes when they have done it, and with secret fears and apprehensions of danger
when they have done contrary to it.

Secondly, God shows Men what is good, by Natural Reason; and that two ways. By
the convenience of things to our Nature; and by their tendency to our Happiness
and Interest.

First, Reason shows us the convenience of things to our Nature; and whatever
is agreeable to the Primitive design and intention of Nature, that we call
good; whatever is contrary thereto, we call evil. For Example, to honor and
love God. It is natural to honor great power and perfection, and to love
goodness wherever it is. So likewise, gratitude is natural, to acknowledge
benefits received, and to be ready to requite them, and the contrary is
monstrous, and universally abhorred; and there is no greater sign that any
thing is contrary to Nature, than if it be detested by the whole kind. It is
agreeable also to Nature to be just, and to do to others, as we would have them
do to us; for this is to make our own natural inclinations and desires, the
rule of our dealing with others; and to be merciful; for no Man that has not
divested himself of humanity, can be cruel and hard-hearted to others, without
feeling a pain in himself.

Secondly, Reason shows us the Tendency of these Things to our Happiness and
Interest. And indeed the notion of good and evil does commonly refer to the
Consequences of things, and we call that good, which will bring some Benefit
and Advantage to us, and that evil which is likely to produce some Mischief and
Inconvenience; and by this rule Reason discovers to us that these Duties are
good.

To begin with Piety toward God. Nothing can more evidently tend to our
Interest, than to make him our Friend, upon whose Favor our Happiness depends.
So likewise for Gratitude; it is a Virtue, to which if Nature did not prompt
us, our Interest would direct us; for every Man is ready to place Benefits
there where he may hope for a thankful Return. Temperance does apparently
conduce to our Health, which, next to a good Conscience, is the most pleasant
and valuable thing in the World; whereas the intemperate Man is an open Enemy
to himself, and continually making Assaults upon his own Life. Mercy and Pity
are not more welcome to others, than they are delightful and beneficial to our
selves; for we do not only gratify our own Nature and Bowels, by relieving
those who are in misery, but we provoke Mankind by our Example to the like
Tenderness, and do prudently bespeak the Commiseration of others toward us,
when it shall be our Turn to stand in need of it. And if we be wise enough, our
Reason will likewise direct us to be just, as the surest Art of thriving in
this World; It gives a Man a Reputation, which is a powerful Advantage in all
the Affairs of this World; It is the shortest and easiest way of dispatching
Business, the plainest, and least entangled; and though it be not so sudden a
way of growing rich, as Fraud and Oppression; yet it is much surer and more
lasting, and not liable to those terrible Back-blows and after-reckonings, to
which Estates got by Injustice are.

And natural Reason does not only show us that these things are good, but that
the Lord requires them of us, that is, that they have the Force and Obligation
of Laws. For there needs nothing more to make any thing a Law, than a
sufficient declaration, that it is the Will of God; and this God has
sufficiently signified to Mankind by the very Frame of our Natures, and of
those principles and faculties which he has endued us withal; so that
whenever we act contrary to these, we plainly disobey the Will of him that made
us, and violate those Laws which he has Enacted in our Natures, and written
upon our Hearts.

And this is all the Law that the greatest part of Mankind were under, before
the Revelation of the Gospel. From Adam to Moses, the World was almost solely
governed by the Natural Law; which seems to be the meaning of that hard Text,
Romans 5. 13. For until the Law Sin was in the World, that is, before the Law of
Moses was given, Men were capable of offending against some other Law, for
otherwise Sin could not have been imputed to them, for Sin is not imputed wh^re
there is no Law. And then it follows; Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to
Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
Transgression; that is, during that space from Adam to Moses Men sinned against
the natural Law, and were liable to Death upon that account, though they had
not offended against an express Revelation from God, as Adam had done; for that
the Apostle seems to mean, by sinning after the Similitude of Adam 's
Transgression.

Thirdly, God has shown us what is good, by the general Vote and Consent of
Mankind. Not that all Mankind do agree concerning Virtue and Vice; but that as
to the greater Duties of Piety, Justice, Mercy, and the like, the Exceptions
are but few in comparison, and not enough to infringe a general Consent. And of
this I shall offer to you this threefold Evidence.

1. That these Virtues are generally praised and held in esteem by Mankind, and
the contrary Vices generally reproved and evil spoken of. Now to praise any
thing, is to give Testimony to the Goodness of it, and to censure any thing, is
to declare that we believe it to be evil. And if we consult the History of all
Ages, we shall find that the things which are generally praised in the Lives of
Men, and recommended to the Imitation of Posterity are Piety and Devotion,
Gratitude and Justice, Humanity and Charity; and that the contrary to these are
marked with Ignominy and Reproach; the former are commended even in Enemies,
and the latter are branded even by those who had a kindness for the Persons
that were guilty of them. So constant has Mankind always been in the
Commendation of Virtue, and in the Censure of Vice. Nay we find not only those
who are virtuous themselves, giving their Testimony and Applause to Virtue, but
even those who are vicious; not out of love to Goodness, but from the
Conviction of their own Minds, and from a secret Reverence they bear to the
common Consent and Opinion of Mankind. And this is a great Testimony, because
it is the Testimony of an Enemy extorted by the mere light and force of Truth.

And on the contrary; Nothing is more ordinary than for Vice to reprove Sin,
and to hear Men condemn the like, or the same things in others, which they
allow in themselves. And this is a clear Evidence, that Vice is generally
condemned by Mankind, that many Men condemn it in themselves; and those who are
so kind as to spare themselves, are very quicksighted to spy a Fault in any
body else, and will censure a bad Action done by another, with as much Freedom
and Impartiality, as the most virtuous Man in the World.

And to this consent of Mankind about Virtue and Vice, the Scripture frequently
appeals. As when it commands us to provide things honest in the sight of all
Men; and by well-doing to put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men;
intimating that there are some things so confessedly good, and owned to be such
by so general a Vote of Mankind, that the worst of Men have not the Face to
open their Mouths against them. And it is made the Character of a virtuous
Action, if it be lovely, and commendable, and of good report. Philip. 4 8.
Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any Virtue, if there be any praise, make account of these things; intimating to
us, that Mankind do generally concur in the Praise and Commendation of what is
virtuous.

2. Men do generally glory and stand upon their Innocence, when they do
virtuously; but are ashamed, and out of Countenance, when they do the contrary.
Now Glory and Shame are nothing else but an Appeal to the Judgment of others
concerning the good or evil of our Actions. There are indeed some such Monsters
as are impudent in their Impieties, but these are but few in comparison.
Generally Mankind is modest, the greatest part of those who do evil are apt to
blush at their own Faults, and to confess them in their Countenance, which is
an Acknowledgment that they are not only guilty to themselves that they have
done amiss, but that they are apprehensive that others think so. For Guilt is a
Passion respecting our selves, but Shame regards others. Now it is sign of
Shame, that Men love to conceal their Faults from others, and commit them
secretly, in the dark and without Witnesses, and are afraid even of a Child or
a Fool: Or if they be discovered in them, they are solicitous to excuse and
extenuate them, and ready to lay the fault upon any bodyelse, and to transfer
their Guilt, or as much of it as they can, upon others. All which are certain
Tokens, that Men are not only naturally guilty to themselves, when they commit
a Fault; but that they are sensible also what Opinions others have of these
things.

And on the contrary, Men are apt to stand upon their Justification, and to
glory when they have done well. The Conscience of a Man's own Virtue and
Integrity, lifts up his Head and gives him Confidence before others, because he
is satisfied they have a good Opinion of his Actions. What a good Face does a
Man naturally set upon a good Deed? And how does he sneak, when he has done
wickedly, being sensible that he is condemned by others, as well as by himself?
No Man is afraid of being upbraided for having dealt honestly or kindly with
others, nor does account it any Calumny or Reproach, to have it reported of
him, that he is a sober and chaste Man. No Man blusheth, when he meets a Man
with whom he has kept his Word, and discharged his Trust: but every Man is apt
to do so, when he meets one with whom he has dealt dishonestly, or who knows
some notorious Crime by him.

3. Vice is generally forbidden and punished by Humane Laws: but against the
contrary Virtues there never was any Law. Some Vices are so manifestly evil in
themselves, or so mischievous to Humane Society, that the Laws of most Nations
have taken care to discountenance them by severe Penalties. Scarce any Nation
was ever so barbarous, as not to maintain and vindicate the Honor of their
Gods and Religion by public Laws. Murder and Adultery, Rebellion and Sedition,
Perjury and breach of Trust, Fraud and Oppression, are Vices severely
prohibited by the Laws of most Nations. A clear Indication, what Opinion the
generality of Mankind, and the Wisdom of Nations have always had of these
things.

But now against the contrary Virtues there never was any Law. No Man was ever
impeached for living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. A
plain Acknowledgment, that Mankind always thought them good, and never were
sensible of the Inconvenience of them; for had they been so, they would have
provided against them by Laws. This St. Paul takes notice of as a great
Commendation of the Christian Virtues; The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Kindness, Fidelity, Meekness, Temperance;
against such there is no Law; the greatest Evidence that could be given, that
these things are unquestionably good in the Esteem of Mankind, against such
there is no Law. As if he had said, turn over the Law of Moses, search those of
Athens, and Sparta, and the twelve Tables of the Romans, and those innumerable
Laws that have been added since; and you shall not in any of them find any of
those Virtues that I have mentioned, condemned and forbidden. A clear Evidence
that Mankind never took any exception against them, but are generally agreed
about the Goodness of them.

Fourthly, God has shown us what is good by External Revelation. In former
Ages of the World, God revealed his will to particular Persons in an
extraordinary manner, and more especially to the Nation of the Jews, the rest
of the World being in a great measure left to the conduct of natural Light. But
in these later Ages he has made a public Revelation of his Will by his Son.
And this as to the matter of our Duty, is the same in Substance with the Law of
Nature; For our Savior comprehends all under these two general Heads, the love
of God, and of our Neighbor. The Apostle reduces all to three, Sobriety,
Justice, and Piety; The grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all
men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. So that if we believe
the Apostle, the Gospel teaches us the very same things which Nature dictated
to Men before; only it has made a more perfect discovery of them. So that
whatever was doubtful and obscure before, is now certain and plain; the Duties
are still the same, only it offers us more powerful Arguments, and a greater
Assistance to the performance of those Duties; so that we may now much better
say, than the Prophet could in his days, He has showed thee, O Man, what is
good; and what it is that the Lord requires of thee.

Fifthly, and lastly, God shows us what is good by the motions of his Spirit
upon the Minds of Men. This the Scripture assures us of, and good Men have
experience more especially of it; though it be hard to give an account of it,
and to say what motions are from the Spirit of God, and what from our own
Minds; for, as the wind blows where it lists, and we hear the sound of it,
but know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so are the Operations of the
Spirit of God upon the Minds of Men, secret and imperceptible.

And thus I have done with the three things I propounded to speak to. All that
now remains, is to make some Inferences from what has been said, by way of
Application.

First, Seeing God has so abundantly provided that we should know our Duty, we
are altogether inexcusable, if we do not do it. Because he has showed thee, O
Man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; therefore thou art
inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art, who live in a contradiction to this
light. God has acquainted us with our Duty, by such ways as may most
effectually both direct and engage us to the practice of it; we are prompted to
it by a kind of natural Instinct, and strong impressions upon our Minds of the
difference of good and evil; we are led to the knowledge, and urged to the
practice of it, by our Nature, and by our Reason, and by our Interest, and by
that which is commonly very prevalent among Men, the general voice and consent
of Mankind; and by the most powerful and governing passions in Humane Nature,
by hope, and by fear, and by shame; by the prospect of advantage, by the
apprehension of danger, and by the sense of honor; and to take away all
possible excuse of ignorance from us, by an express Revelation from God, the
clearest and most perfect that ever was made to the World. So that when ever we
do contrary to our Duty, in any of these great Instances, we offend against all
these, and do in the highest degree fall under the heavy Sentence of our
Savior, This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light.

Secondly, You see hence what are the great Duties of Religion, which God
mainly requires of us, and how reasonable they are; Piety toward God, and
Justice and Charity toward Men; the knowledge whereof is planted in our
Nature, and grows up with our Reason. And these are things which are
unquestionably good, and against which we can have no exception; things that
were never reproved, nor found fault with by Mankind, neither our Nature nor
our Reason rises up against them, or dictates any thing to the contrary. We
have all the Obligation, and we have all the Encouragement to them, and are
secure on all hands in the practice of them. In the doing of these things,
there is no danger to us from the Laws of Men, no fear of displeasure from God,
no offense or sting from our own Minds.

And these things which are so agreeable to our Nature, and our Reason, and our
Interest, are the great things which our Religion requires of us, more valuable
in themselves, and more acceptable to God, than whole Burnt-offerings and
Sacri^ices, more than thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil;
more than if we offered to him all the Beasts of the Forest, and the Cattle
upon a thousand Hills. We are not to neglect any Institution of God; but above
all, we are to secure the observance of those great Duties to which we are
directed by our very Nature, and tied by the surest and most sacred of all
other Laws, those which God has riveted in our Souls, and written upon our
Hearts. And that Mankind might have no pretense left to excuse them from these,
the Christian Religion has set us free from those many positive and outward
observances, that the Jewish Religion was encumbered withal; that we might be
wholly intent upon these great Duties, and mind nothing in comparison of the
real and substantial Virtues of a good Life.

Thirdly, You see, in the last place, what is the best way to appease the
displeasure of God toward a sinful Nation. God seems to have as great a
Controversy with us, as he had with the People of Israel, and his wrath is of
late years most visibly gone out against us; and proportionably to the full
measure of our Sins, it has been poured out upon us in full Vials. How have
the Judgments of God followed us? And how close have they followed one another?
What fearful Calamities have our eyes seen? enough to make the ears of every
one that hears them to tingle. What terrible and hazardous Wars have we been
engaged in? What a raging Pestilence did God send among us, that swept away
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets? What a dreadful and fatal Fire,
that was not to be checked and resisted in its course, 'till it had laid in
Ashes one of the Greatest and Richest Cities in the World? What unseasonable
weather have we had of late? as if for the Wickedness of Men upon the Earth,
the very Ordinances of Heaven were changed, and Summer, and Winter, Seedtime,
and Harvest, had forgotten their appointed Seasons. And, which is more and
sadder than all this, what dangerous attempts have been made upon our Religion,
by the restless Adversaries of it?

And now surely, after all this is come upon us for our Sins, it is time for us
to look up to him that smites us, and to think of taking up this quarrel. It Is
time to enquire as they do in the Text, Werewith shall we come before the Lord,
and bow our selves before the high God? And we are apt to take the same course
they did, to endeavor to appease God by some external Devotion. We have now
betaken our selves to Prayer and Fasting, and 'twas very fit, nay necessary we
should do so; but let us not think this is all God expects from us. These are
but the Means to a further End, to oblige us for the future to the practice of
a good Life. The outward profession of Religion is not lost amongst us, there
appears still in Men a great and commendable zeal for the Reformed Religion,
and there has been too much occasion for it; but that which God chiefly
expects from us, is Reformed Lives. Piety and Virtue are in a great measure
gone from among us, the Manners of Men are strangely corrupted, the great and
weighty things of the Law are neglected, Justice and Mercy, Temperance and
Chastity, Truth and Fidelity; so that we may take up David's Complaint, Help
Lord! for the Righteous man cease, for the faithful fa^l from among the
Children of Men.

And 'till the Nation be brought back to a sober sense of Religion, from an
airy and fantastical Piety, to real and unaffected Devotion, and from a
factious contention about things indifferent, to the serious practice of what
is necessary; from our violent heats and animosities, to a more peaceable
temper, and by a mutual condescension on all sides, to a nearer and st^onger
union among our selves; 'till we recover in some measure, our ancient Virtue
and Integrity of manners, we have reason to fear, that God will still have a
Controversy with us, notwithstanding all our noise and zeal about Religion.

This is the true, this is the only course to appease the indignation of God,
and to draw down his Favor and Blessing upon a poor distracted and gasping
Nation. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God?

I have but one word more, and that is to put you presently upon the practice
of one of these Duties that I have been persuading you to, and that is Mercy,
and Alms to the Poor. If what I have already said, have had its effect upon
you, I need not use any other Arguments; if it have not, I have hardly the
heart to use any. I shall only put you in mind again, that God values this
above all our external Devotion, he will have mercy rather than sacrifice; that
this is the way to find mercy with God, and to have our Prayers speed in
Heaven; and without this, all our Fasting and Humiliation signifies nothing.
And to this purpose I will only read to you those plain and persuasive words of
the Prophet, which do so fully declare unto us the whole Duty of this Day, and
particularly urge us to this of Charity, Isa. 58. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Is it such a
Fast that I have chosen? a day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down
his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou
call this a Fast, and an acceptable Day unto the Lord? Is not this the Fast
that I have ^hosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast
out to thy house? when thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou
hide not thy self from thine own Flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the
Morning, and thy Salvation shall spring forth speedily, and thy Righteousness
shall go before thee, and the Glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. Then
thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say,
here I am.

SERMON II.
Instituted Religion not intended to undermine Natural.
MATTHEW. IX. 13. But go ye and learn what that means; I will have Mercy, and
not Sacrifice.
ONE of the most successful Attempts that have been made upon Religion, by the
Devil and his Instruments, has been by setting the Laws of God at variance
with themselves, and by dashing the several parts of Religion, and the two
Tables of the Law against one another, to break all in pieces; and under a
pretense of advancing that part of Religion which is Instituted and Revealed,
to undermine and destroy that which is Natural, and of primary obligation.

To manifest and lay open the mischievous Consequences of this Design, I shall
at this time (by God's assistance) endeavor to make ou^ ^^ese two Things.

First, That Natural Religion is the foundation of all Instituted and Revealed
Religion.

Secondly, That no Revealed or Instituted Religion was ever designed to take
away the obligation of Natural Duties, but to confirm and establish them.

And to this purpose, I have chosen these words of our Savior for the
foundation of my following Discourse; But go ye and learn, what that means; I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. The occasion of which words was briefly
this; The Pharisees found fault with him for keeping Company, and eating with
Publicans and Sinners. He owns the thing which they objected to him, and
endeavors to vindicate himself from any crime ot fault in so doing; and that,
these two ways.

1. By telling them, that it was allowed to a Physician, and proper for his
Office and Profession, to converse with the sick, in order to their Cure and
Recovery. He may abstain, if he pleases, from the conversation of others; but
the sick have need of him, and are his proper Care, and his Business and
Employment lies among them; he said unto them, they that be whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick; I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance; they who were already good, needed not to be called upon
to amend and reform their lives; and they that were so conceited of their own
Righteousness, as the Pharisees were, and so confident that they were sound and
whole, would not admit of a Physician, and thereby rendered themselves incapable
of Cure; and therefore he did not apply himself to them; but to the Publicans
and Sinners, who were acknowledged on all hands, both by themselves and others,
to be bad Men; so that it could not be denied to be the proper work of a
Spiritual Physician to converse with such Persons.

2. By endeavoring to convince them of their Ignorance of the true nature of
Religion, and of the Rank and Order of the several Duties thereby required; but
go ye and learn what that means; I will have mercy and not Sacrifice; which
Saying is quoted by him, out of the Prophet Hosea, chap. 6. 6. I desired mercy,
and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt Offerings; which
Text our Savior cites and applies upon two several Occasions; the considering
and comparing of which, will give full Light to the true meaning of it.

The First is here in the Text, upon occasion of the Pharisees finding Fault
with him, for conversing with Publicans and Sinners; the other is, Matthew. 12.
7. where the Pharisees blaming the Disciples of our Savior for plucking the
Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, our Savior tells them, if ye had known what
this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, ye would not have comdemned
the guiltless; that is, if they had understood the true Nature of Religion, and
what Duties of it are chiefly and in the first place to be regarded, they would
not have been so forward to censure this Action of his Disciples.

So that the plain meaning of this Saying is this, that in comparing the parts
of Religion and the Obligation of Duties together, those Duties which are of
moral and natural Obligation are most valued by God, and ought to take place of
those which are positive and ritual. I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, that
is, rather than Sacrifice, according to the true meaning of this Hebrew Phrase,
which is to be understood in a comparitive Sense, as is evident from the Text
it self in Hosea, I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God
rather than burnt offerings; if they cannot be observed together, let Sacrifice
be neglected, and the work of Mercy be done.

And the Reason of this seems very plain; because showing Mercy, or doing Good
in any kind is a prime Instance of those moral Duties, which do naturally and
perpetually oblige; but Sacrifice is an instance of positive and ritual
Observances, and one of the chief of the kind; so that when moral Duties, and
ritual Observances come in Competition, and do clash with one another, the
Observation of a Rite, or positive Institution, is to give way to a moral Duty;
and it is no Sin in that case to neglect the Observation of such a Rite, yea
though it were commanded and appointed by God himself. And though this may seem
to be a breach of the letter of the Law; yet it is according to the true mind
and meaning of the Law; it being a tacit condition employed in all Laws of a
ritual and positive Nature, provided the observance of them be not to the
hindrance and prejudice of any Duty, which is of a higher and better nature; in
that case the Obligation of it does for that time give way and is suspended.

And this will appear to be the true meaning of this Rule, by comparing more
particularly the Instances to which our Savior applies it. His Disciples
passing through the Corn on the Sabbath Day, and being hungry, plucked the Ears
and did eat; this our Savior does justify to be no Breach of the Law of the
Sabbath; because in that case, and in such Circumstances, it did not oblige:
for the Disciples being called to attend upon our Savior, to be instructed by
him in the things which concerned the Kingdom of God, that is, in the Doctrine
of the Gospel, which they were to publish to the World, this Attendance hindered
them from making necessary Provisions against the Sabbath, they, in obedience
to their Master, being intent upon a better Work; but that they might not
starve, the necessities of Nature must be provided for; and therefore it was
fit, that the Law of the Sabbath, which was but positive and ritual, should
give way to an act of Mercy, and Self-preservation; If ye had known what this
means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the
guiltless.

And the reason is the same as to any instrumental part of Religion, by which I
mean any thing which may be a means to promote Piety and Goodness; as Prayer,
hearing the Word of God, keeping good Company, and avoiding bad; the Duties of
this kind, our Savior here in the Text (where he likewise applies this Rule)
compares with moral Duties. To avoid the Company of vicious and wicked Persons,
is a good means to preserve men from the contagion of their Vices, and was
always esteemed a Duty among prudent men, both Jews and Heathens, and is in no
wise disallowed by our Savior: but yet not so a Duty, as to hinder a greater
Duty, nor so strictly and perversely to be insisted upon, as if one ought not
to converse with bad Men in any Case, or upon any Account, no not for so great
and good an end as to reclaim them from their Vices. In this Case we ought to
consider, that our first and highest obligation is to moral Duties,
comprehended under the love of God and our Neighbor; among which one of the
chief is to do good to Men, and to show Mercy and Pity to those that are in
Misery; and the greatest good that one Man can do to another, is to be
instrumental to reclaim him from the Evil and Error of his Way; because this is
to save his soul from death; and we cannot imagine that God ever intended, by
any Rule of prudence, or positive Constitution of the Jewish Law, so to forbid
their accompaning with bad and scandalous Men, that it should be unlawful to
converse with them in order to their Recovery and Amendment; Go ye and learn
what that means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

And St. Paul was of the same mind in the Precepts he gives concerning avoiding
the Company of scandalous Christians, 2 These. 3. 14, 15. and if any man obey
not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no Company with him, that
he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a
brother. St. Paul qualifies his Precept, lest Christians should mistake it, and
fall into the Jewish extreme, not to converse with those whom they esteemed
scandalous and wicked upon any account whatsoever, no not in order to their
Amendment and Reformation. The Bond of Intimacy and Friendship with bad Men
ought to be broken; and yet the Bond of common Humanity may be as strong as
ever. It is one thing to discountenance bad Men, to bring them to Shame, and a
Sense of their Fault; and quite another thing to abandon them to Ruin; and even
in case of notorious Heresy, or wickedness of Life, it is one thing to cut
them off from the Society and Communion of Christians; and quite another, to
cut them off from Humane Society, to cut their Throats, and to extirpate them
out of the World.

And yet the matter was carried thus far by the furious Zeal of the Jews, when
Christianity first appeared in the World; they thought that no Mercy in such
Cases was the best Service that could be done, and the best Sacrifice that
could be offered to Almighty God; and this Pattern has been since, not only
closely followed, but outdone by the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of
Rome; as we have too much Reason to remember upon Prea^h'd Nov. 5. 88.
this day.

But to proceed in the farther explication of the Text, the meaning whereof in
short is this; that the ritual and instrumental parts of Religion, and all Laws
and Duties concerning them, are of less Value and Esteem with God, than those
which are of a moral Nature, especially the great Duties and Offices of Piety
and Humanity, of the love of God, and of our Neighbor. And if we consider the
matter well, we shall see the Reason of it to be very plain; because natural
and moral Duties are approved of God for themselves and for their own sake,
upon account of their own natural and intrinsical Goodness; but the ritual and
instrumental parts of Religion, are only pleasing to God in order to these, and
so far as they tend to beget and promote them in us; they are not naturally
good in themselves, but are instituted and appointed by God for the sake of the
other; and therefore great Reason there is that they should be subordinate, and
give way to them, when they come in competition with one another.

For this is a known Rule, which takes place in all Laws, that Laws of less
importance should give way to those that are of greater; quoties Leges ex
circumstanti^ colliduntur, ita ut utraque servari non potest, servanda est lex
potior. When ever two Laws happen to be in such circumstances as to clash with
one another, so that both of them cannot be observed, that Law which is better
and of greater consequence is to be kept. And Tully gives much the same Rule in
this matter. In comparing of Laws (says he) we are to consider which Law is
most useful, and just, and reasonable to be observed. From whence it will
follow, that when two Laws, or more, or how many soever they be, cannot be
observed, because they clash with one another; ea maxim conservanda putetur,
quae ad maximas res pertinere videatur. It is reasonable that that Law should
be observed, which is of greatest Moment and Concernment.

By what has been said, we may learn what is the meaning of this Saying, which
our Savior more than once cites out of the Prophet, I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice.

From the words thus explained, I shall take occasion to prosecute the two
Propositions which I mentioned before; namely,

First, That Natural Religion is the Foundation of Instituted and Revealed
Religion.

Secondly, That no Instituted Religion was ever designed to take away the
obligation of Natural Duties; but is intended to establish and confirm them.
And both these are sufficiently grounded in the Reason of our Savior's
Discourse from this Rule, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

I. That Natural Religion is the Foundation of Instituted and Revealed
Religion, and all Revealed Religion does suppose, and take for granted, the
clear and undoubted Principles and Precepts of Natural Religion, and builds
upon them. By Natural Religion, I mean obedience to the Natural Law, and the
performance of such duties as Natural Light, without any express and
supernatural Revelation, does dictate to Men. These lie at the bottom of all
Religion, and are the Great and Fundamental Duties which God requires of all
Mankind; as, that we should love God, and behave our selves reverently toward
him; that we should believe his Revelations; and testify our dependence upon
him, by imploring his aid and direction in all our necessities and distresses;
and acknowledge our obligations to him for all the Blessings and Benefits which
we receive; that we should moderate our Appetites, in reference to the
Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World, and use them temperately and chastely;
that we should be just and upright in all our Dealings with one another; true
to our word, and faithful to our trust; and in all our words and actions
observe that Equity toward others, which we desire they should use toward us;
that we should be kind, and charitable, merciful, and compassionate one toward
another; ready to do good to all, and apt not only to pity, but to relieve them
in their misery and necessity. These, and such like, are those which we call
Moral Duties; and they are of eternal and perpetual obligation, because they do
naturally oblige, without any particular and express Revelation from God. And
these are the Foundation of Revealed and Instituted Religion, and all Revealed
Religion does suppose them, and build upon them; for all Revelation from God,
supposes us to be Men, and alters nothing of those Duties to which we were
naturally obliged before. And this will clearly appear, if we consider these
three things;

First, That the Scripture every where speaks of these, as the main and
Fundamental Duties of the Jewis^ Religion.

Secondly, That no Instituted Service of God, no positive part of Religion, was
ever acceptable to him, when these were neglected.

Thirdly, That the great Design of the Christian Religion, was to restore and
reinforce the practice of the natural Law.

1. That the Scripture every where speaks of these as the main and Fundamental
Duties of the Jewish Religion. When our Savior was asked, which was the first
and great Commandment of the Law; he answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; and thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. One would have expected he would have
given quite another Answer, and have pitched upon some of those things which
were so much magnified among the Jews, and which they laid so much weight upon;
that he should have instanced in Sacrifice, or Circumcision, or the Law of the
Sabbath: but he overlooks all these as inconsiderable in comparision, and
instances only in those two great heads of Moral Duty, the love of God, and our
Neighbor; which are of natural and perpetual obligation, and comprehend under
them all other Moral Duties.

And these are those which our Savior calls the Law and the Prophets, and
which he says he came not to destroy, but to fulfill, Mat. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I am not come to
destroy; but to fulfill: for verily I say unto you, 'till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, 'till all be
fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. For I say unto you, that except your Righteousness shall
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

That our Savior does not here speak of the Judicial or Ceremonial Law of the
Jews, but of the Duties of the Moral Law, will, I think, be very plain, from
these following Considerations.

First, That the Judicial or Ceremonial Laws of the Jews were to pass away, and
did so, not long after; but this Law, which our Savior speaks of, was to be
perpetual and immutable; for he tells us, that Heaven and Earth should pass
away, but one jot or one title of this Law should not pass.

Secondly, The observation of the Law our Savior speaks of, consisted in such
things as the Scribes and Pharisees neglected; for he tells his Disciples, upon
this occasion, that except their righteousness did exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. But now the Scribes and Pharisees were the most accurate and punctual
People in the World, in observing the Precepts of the Judicial and Ceremonial
Law; they were so far from taking away any thing from these observances, that
they had added to them, and enlarged them, by innumerable Traditions of their
own; so exact were they, that they would pay tithe of mint, and anise, and
cummin, as our Savior observes; but then they were extremely defective in
Moral Duties; they were unnatural to their Parents, and would pretend that
their Estates were consecrated to God, that under this pretense of positive
Religion, they might excuse themselves from a Natural Duty, and let their
Parents starve for God's sake; they were Covetous, and Unjust, and devoured
Widows houses; in a word, our Savior tells us, they neglected the weightier
Matters of the Law, Mercy, Judgment, and the love of God, and keeping faith
with Men; so that it is in these things, that our Savior means, that our
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, viz.
in the practice of Moral Duties, which were neglected by them; and consequently
it is the Moral Law which our Savior came to confirm and establish.

Thirdly, If we consider the instances which our Savior gives in his following
discourse, by which we may best judge what he means. He instances in Murder,
and Adultery, and Perjury, which are undoubtedly forbidden by the natural Law;
and then he i^stances in several Permissions which were indulged to them for
the Hardness of their Hearts, but yet did entrench upon the Dictates of right
Reason, and the first and original Constitution of things; as the permission of
Divorce upon every slight occasion, and of Revenge, and Retaliation of Injuries.

Fourthly, If we consider, that by the Law and the Prophets, our Savior means
that which was principally designed and ultimately intended by them; which was
the Observation of moral Duties; which as they were written in the two Tables
by the immediate Finger of God himself, so are chiefly inculcated by the
Prophe^s. And so we find this Phrase of the Law and the Prophets, elsewhere
used by our Savior, when he mentions that great Rule of Equity, that we should
do to others as we would have them do to us. Matthew. 7. 12. Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this
is the Law and the Prophets. But how was this the Law and the Prophets, when
this Rule was never so much as mentioned in either? Our Savior means, that
this is the Foundation of all those Duties of Justice and Mercy, which are so
much inculcated in the Law and the Prophets.

So that our Savior makes the Observation of moral Duties to be the principal
Design of the Jewish Law, and as it were the Foundation of it; and therefore he
calls moral Duties, (...), the weightier matters of the Law, Matthew. 23. 23. But
ye (says he to the Scribes and Pharisees) have neglected the weightier things
of the Law, judgment, and mercy, and fidelity. The Scribes and Pharisees busied
themselves chiefly about ritual Observances; but our Savior tells them, that
those other were the most considerable and important Duties of the Law, and lay
at the bottom of the Jewish Religion. And much the same enumeration the Prophet
makes, where he compares Sacrifices and these moral Duties together, Mic. 6. 6,
7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high
God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul? He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? He had required Sacrifices, but had no regard to them in
comparison with these.

II. No Instituted Service of God, no positive part of Religion whatsoever, was
ever acceptable to God, when moral Duties were neglected; nay, so far from
being acceptable to him, that he rejects them with Disdain and Abhorrence. To
this purpose there are almost innumerable Passages in the Prophets. Isa. 1. 11.
etc. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? When ye come
to appear before me, who has required this at your hands, to tread my Courts?
Bring no more vain Oblations; incense is an Abomination to me; the new moons
and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is Iniquity,
even the solemn meeting, and when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine
eyes from you; when ye make many prayers I will not hear. What is the reason of
all this? Because they were defective in the moral Duties of Religion; so it
follows; your hands are full of Blood, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well;
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
Widow; come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; implying that till
they had respect to moral Duties, all their external Worship and Sacrifices
signified nothing. And so likewise, Isa. 66. 3. He tells them that nothing
could be more abomible than their Sacrifices, so long as they allowed
themselves in wicked Practices; He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a Man;
he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's neck; he that offers an
Oblation, as if he offered Swine's Blood; and he that burns Incense, as if he
blessed an Idol; yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their Soul
delights in their Abominations. And to mention but one Text more out of the
Old Testament, Jer. 7. 4, 5. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these. Thoroughly
amend your ways and your doings, thoroughly execute Judgment between a man and
his neighbor; oppress ^ot the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, and shed
not innocent blood. If they did not practice these Duties, and forbear those
Sins, all the reverence for the temple and the worship of God signified
nothing. You see in the Jewish Religion what it was that was acceptable to God
for it self and its own sake, viz. the practice of moral Duties; and that all
Instituted Religion, that did not promote and further these, or was destitute
of them, was abominable to God. And under the Gospel our Savior prefers a
moral Duty before any gift we can offer to God, and will have it to take place,
Mat. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest
that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the
Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and
offer thy gift.

But it should seem by this, and what ha^h been said before, that God prefers
Goodness and Righteousness to Men, before his own Worship; and obedience to the
Precepts of the Second Table, before obedience to those of the First.

But this does but seem so; all that can be collected from this passage of our
Savior, or any thing that has been already said, are only these two Things.

1. That God prefers the practice of the Moral Duties of the second Table,
before any instituted Worship, such as Sacrif^ce was; and before obedience to
the Laws of Religion, which are merely positive, though they do immediately
concern the Worship of God.

2. That if we neglect the Duties of the second Table, of Goodness and
Righteousness toward Men, God will not accept of our obedience to the Precepts
of the first, nor of any act of Religious Worship that we can perform. This our
Savior means, when he says, leave there thy gift before the Altar, first be
reconciled to thy Brother, then come and offer thy gift; intimating, that so
long as we bear a revengeful mind toward our Brethren, God will not accept of
any Gift or Sacrifice that we can offer to him; or indeed of any act of
Religious Worship that we can perform.

Thirdly, The great Design of the Christian Religion is to restore and
reinforce the practice of the natural Law, or which is all one, of Moral
Duties; and therefore our Savior begins his first Sermon, by promising
Blessedness to the practice of these Duties; of Purity, and Meekness, and
Righteousness, and Peaceableness, and Mercifulness, and Patience, and
Submission to the will of God under Persecutions and Sufferings for
Righteousness sake; and tells us (as I showed before) that he came not to
release Men from the practice of these Duties, but to oblige them thereto more
effectually; and that as these were the Law and the Prophets, that is, the main
Duties and the Foundation of the Jewish Religion, so were they much more to be
so of the Christian. This the Scriptures of the New Testament do every where
declare to be the great design of the Gospel, and the Christian Religion, to
instruct us in these Duties, and to engage us effectually to the practice of
them. In that known and excellent Text, Tit. 2. 11, 12^ The grace of God (which
is in and by the Doctrine of the Gospel) has appeared to all men, teaching us
that denying ungodliness and worldy lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and godlily in this present world. And herein St. James tell us, the true
nature, and the force and virtue of the Christian Religion does consist, Jam.
1. 27. pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit
the Fatherless and the Widows in their ^ffliction, and to keep our selves
unspotted from the World. And Chap. 3. 17. The wisdom which is from above (that
is, that Heavenly and Divine Knowledge revealed to us by the Gospel) has these
Properties, and is apt to produce these effects; it is first pure, and then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and of good fruits.

And the planting of these dispositions in us is that which the Scripture calls
the new Creature, and the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 20, etc. The Apostle speaking
there of the Vices and Lusts wherein the Gentiles lived, tells Christians that
they were otherwise instructed by the Gospel; but ye have not so learned
Christ, if so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the
truth is in Jesus, that ye put off concerning the former conversation the old
man which is cor^upt according to deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the spirit
of your mind, and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness, or, (as the words perhaps may better be
rendered) in the holiness of truth; for it immediately follows, wherefore
putting away lying, speak every man truth with his Neighbor.

And this is that which the Apostle elsewhere makes to be all in all in the
Christian Religion. In Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature, Gal. 6. 15. which the Apostle in the
Chapter before expresses thus; in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works (or is inspired) by
Charity. And yet more expressly, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the Commandments of God. By the
comparing of which Texts, it appears, that the main thing in Christianity, is
the practice of Moral Duties, and this is the new Creature, and this the proper
effect of the Christian Faith to produce these Virtues in us. And indeed, the
great Design of the Christian Religion and every thing in it, of the love of
God in giving his Son to die for us, of the pardon of our Sins, and
justification in his blood, of all the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel,
and of the assistance therein promised, is to engage, and encourage and enable
to the practice of Mora^ Duties.

And thus I have done with the first thing I proposed to speak to, namely, that
Natural Religion is the Foundation of Instituted and Revealed Religion; and all
Revealed Religion does suppose it, and builds upon it. I proceed to the

Second, Namely, That no Revealed and Instituted Religion was ever designed to
take away the obligation of Natural Duties, but was intended to confirm and
establish them. And this also will be evident, if we consider these three
Things.

1. That all Revealed Religion calls Men to the practice of Natural Duties.
Thus the Jewish Religion did. The first Laws which God gave them, and which h^
distinguished from the rest, by writing them in Tables of Stone with his own
Finger, were the Precepts of the Moral Law. And the great business of the
Prophets whom God raised up among them from time to time, was to reprove not so
much their defects in their Sacrifices, and in the Duties of Instituted
Worship, as the breach of the natural Law by their Vices and Immoralities; and
to threaten them with the Judgments of God, if they did not reform and amend
these faults.

And now under the Gospel, the preceptive part of it is almost wholly made up
of Moral Duties, namely, those which are comprehended under those two great
Commandments, of the love of God, and our Neighbor. In the Christian Religion
there is very little that is merely Positive and Instituted, besides the two
Sacraments, and praying to God in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

2. The most prefect Revelation that ever God made to Mankind (I mean that of
the Christian Religion) does furnish us with the best helps and advantages for
the performance of Moral Duties; it discovers our Duty more clearly to us; it
offers us the greatest assistance to enable us to the performance of it; it
presents us with the most powerful Motives and Arguments to engage us thereto;
so that this Revelation of the Gospel is so far from weakening the obligation of
natural Duties, that it confirms and strengthens it, and urges us more
forcibly to the practice of them.

3. The positive Rites and Institutions of Revealed Religion are so far from
entrenching upon the Laws of Nature, that they were always designed to be
subordinate and subservient to them; and when ever they come in competition, it
is the declared will of God, that positive Institutions should give way to
natural Duties; and this I have shown to be plainly the meaning of this Saying
in the Text, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. If Circumstances be such,
that one part of Religion must give place, God will have the Ritual and
Instituted part to give way to that which is Natural and Moral.

It is very frequent in Scripture, when the Duties of Natural Religion, and
Rites of Divine Institution come in competition, to slight and disparage these
in comparison of Moral Duties, and to speak of them as things which God has no
pleasure in, and which in comparison of the other he will hardly own that he
has commanded. When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at
your hands? Isa. 1. 12. Thou desire not Sacrifice, thou delightest not in
Burnt-Offerings, Psalm. 51. 16. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams,
or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? He has shown thee, O man, what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy?

But God no where makes any comparison to the disadvantage of Natural Duties;
he never derogated from them in any Case; he never said he would have such a
thing, and not mercy, or that he had rather such a Rite of Religion should be
performed, than that men should do the greatest good, and show the greatest
Charity to one another. It is no where made a question, will the Lord be
pleased that we deal justly every Man with his Neighbor, and speak the truth
one to another? that we be kind and tenderhearted, and ready to forgive? that
we be willing to distribute and give Alms to those that are in need? there is
no such question as this put in Scripture; nay it is positive in these Matters,
that with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. I instance in this Virtue more
especially of Kindness and Compassion, because it is one of the prime instances
of Moral Duties; as Sacrifice is put for all the Ritual and Instituted part of
Religion; and this disposition of Mind our Savior makes the root of all Moral
Duties; Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and the Apostle speaks of it as the
great End and Scope of the Gospel; The end of the Commandment is Charity. And
this temper and disposition of Mind he advances above Knowledge, and Faith,
and Hope; The greatest of these is Charity; and without this, he will not allow
a Man to be any thing in Christianity; this he makes our highest perfection and
attainment, and that which abides and remains in the future state; Charity
never fails.

This our Savior most effectually recommends to us, both in his Doctrine, and
by his Example; this he presses as the peculiar Law of his Religion, and the
proper Mark and Character of a Disciple. This he requires us to exercise
toward those who practice the contrary toward us; to love our Enemies, and to
do good to them that hate us. And of this, he has given us the greatest
Example that ever was; when we were Enemies to him, he loved us so as hardly
ever any Man did his Friend, so as to lay down his Life for us; and he
Instituted the Sacrament for a Memorial of his love to Mankind, and to put us
in mind how we ought to love one another.

And now the Application of what has been said upon this Argument, to the
occasion of this Day, is very obvious, and there are two very natural
Inferences from it.

First, From what has been said upon this Argument, it plainly appears what
place Natural and Moral Duties ought to have in the Christian Religion; and of
all Natural Duties, Mercy, and Goodness. This is so primary a Duty of Humane
Nature, so great and considerable a part of Religion, that all positive
Institutions must give way to it, and nothing of that kind can cancel the
obligation of it, nor justify the violation of this great and Natural Law. Our
Blessed Savior in his Religion has declared nothing to the prejudice of it;
but on the contrary, has heightened our obligation to it, as much as is
possible, by telling us that the Son of Man came not to destroy Men's lives, but
to save them.

So that they know not what manner of Spirit they are of, who will kill Men to
do God service; and to advance his Cause and Religion in the World, will break
through all obligations of Nature, and Civil Society, and disturb the Peace and
Happiness of Mankind.

Nor did our Savior by any thing in his Religion design to release Men from
the obligation of Natural and Civil Duties. He had (as one would imagine) as
much Power as the Pope; but yet he deposed none of the Princes of this World,
nor did Absolve their Subjects from their Fidelity and Obedience to them, for
their opposition to his Religion; he assumed no such Power to himself (no not
in Ordine ad Spiritualia) nor, that ever we read of, did he give it to any
other. Whence then comes his pretended Vicar to have this Authority? And yet
the horrid attempt of this Day was first designed, and afterward carried on,
in prosecution of the Popes Bull of Excommunication, and was not so much the
effect of the despair and discontent of that Party here in England, as the
Natural Consequence of their Doctrines of Extirpating Heretics, and Deposing
Kings, and Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance to them.

No Zeal for any positive Institution in Religion, can justify the Violation
of the natural Law, the Precepts whereof are of primary and indispensable
Obligation. The Pope's Supremacy is not so clear, as the Duty of Obedience to
civil Government; nor is Transubstantiation so plainly revealed in Scripture,
as it is both in Nature and Scripture, that we should do no murder. And yet how
many thousands have been put to Death, because they could not understand this
hardword, and believe this impossible thing! And yet if the supremacy of the
Pope were clearly of Divine Right, and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation as
plain as the institution of the Sacrament; yet these being but positive matters
in Religion, there would be no reason to kill men for not understanding and
believing these things; nay it would be contrary to Religion to do it; because
the Law of Mercy and Humanity, which is the Law of Nature, ought not to be
violated for the promoting of any positive institution; and God has plainly
said, that he will have mercy rather than Sacrifice; yea rather than the
Sacrifice of the Mass, if it were what they pretend it is, the offering of the
natural body and bloo^ of Christ; because it would be needless: for
Propitiation of Sin being once made by Christ's offering himself once for all
upon the Cross, there needs no more Sacrifice for Sin. Nay, I will go further
yet; I had rather never administer the Sacrament, nor ever receive it, than
take away any Man's Life about it; because the Sacrament is but a positive Rite
and Institution of the Christian Religion, and God prefers Mercy, which is a
Duty of natural Religion, before any Rite or Institution whatsoever. Besides,
that all acts of Malice and Cruelty are directly contrary to the particular
Nature and Design of this blessed Sacrament, which is to commemorate the
Sufferings of the Son of God, for our sakes, and to give us an example of the
greatest Love that ever was, and thereby to excite us to the Imitation of it.

2. What has been said gives us a right Notion and Character of that Church
and Religion, which prefers the positive Rites and Institutions of Religion,
and the observance of them, to those Duties which are of natural and Eternal
Obligation, Mercy and Goodness, Fidelity and Justice; and which for the sake of
a pretended Article of Religion, or Rite of Worship, (which if it were certain
that they were revealed, and instituted by God are yet merely positive) will
break the greatest of God's Commandments, and teach men so.

It is too plain to be denied, that the Principles and Precepts of natural
Religion were never so effectually undermined, and the Morality of the
Christian Religion never so intolerably corrupted and debauched, by any thing
that ever yet had the face of Religion in the World, as by the allowed
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, and this out of a blind and
furious Zeal for some Imaginary Doctrines and Rites of the Christian Religion,
which at the best are of mere positive Institution, and of the same rank among
Christians, that Sacrifices were in the Jewish Religion. For which we need go
no further for an instance, than in the Occasion of th^s Day's Solemnity; upon
which Day, (about fourscore years ago) there was designed a mighty Sacrifice
indeed, the greatest and richest burnt-offering that ever was pretended to be
offered up to Almighty God, by those of any Religion whatsoever; not the blood
of Bulls and Goats, but of King, and Princes, and Nobles, more in value, than
thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, than all the Beasts of
the Forest, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills.

Here was a prodigious Sacrifice indeed; but where was Mercy? the thing God
chiefly desires, and which above all other things is acceptable to him; no
Mercy, not even to those of their own Religion, whom these nice and tender
Casuists, after a solemn debate of the Case, had resolved to involve in the
same common Destruction with the rest; rather no mercy, than that this
Sacrificewhich their mad zeal had prompted them to, should be omitted.

To conclude, They that can do such inhumane things, and think them to be
Religion, do not understand the nature of it, but had need to be taught the
first Rudiments of natural Religion; that natural Duties are not to be violated
upon pretense, no, nor for the sake of positive Institutions; because natural
Religion is the Foundation of that which is instituted; and therefore to
violate any natural Duty for the sake of that which is instituted, is for
Religion to undermine and blow up it self. Let those who do such things, and
teach men so, go and learn what that means; I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice.

SERMON III.
Christianity does not destroy, but perfect the Law of Moses.
MATTHEW. V. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I
am not come to destroy; but to fulfill.
THERE is no Saying in the whole Gospel, which the Jews did so frequently
object to the Christians, as this of our Blessed Savior, as if his Words and
Actions were plainly repugnant, and contrary to one another: for when it is
evident, say they, that he took away so many Ceremonies, Purifications,
Distinctions of Meats, Sacrifices, Judicial Laws, and many other things; yet he
says, he came not to destroy the Law or the Prophets; so that it is plain, that
he did throw down the Law of Moses, and in so doing contradicted his own
Saying, that he did not intend to destroy the Law. To clear our Savior's words
of this Objection, it will be requ^site to consider the Scope and Design of his
Discourse in this Chapter, by which we shall fully understand the sense and
meaning of these Words in the Text.

Our Savior in this Sermon, (which contains the Sum and Substance of his
Religion) does earnestly recommend to his Disciples and Followers, and strictly
enjoins the perfect Practice of all Goodness and Virtue, declaring to them,
that he came to bring in and establish that Righteousness, which the Jewish
Religion indeed aimed at, but through the Weakness and Imperfection of that
Dispensation, was not able to effect and accomplish. And to take away all
suspicion of a Design, to contradict the former Revelations of God, made to the
Jews by Moses and the Prophets or to destroy their Divine Authority, by
carrying on a Design contrary to them, I say, to prevent any imagination of
this kind, he does here in the Text expressly declare the contrary; Think not,
etc. Intimating that some either did, or at least might be apt to suspect, that
his Design was to destroy the obligation of the Law, and to undermine the
Authority of Moses and the Prophets; to free them from this jealousy, he
declares plainly, that he had no such thought and intention, it was far from
him.

I am not come to destroy, (...), to abrogate or dissolve the Law, to encourage
Men to the breach and violation of it; for the word is of the same sense with
(...), at the 19. ver. whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments;
and with (...), Romans 3. 31. (...), do we then make void the Law by Faith? Which
is the same question with that of the same Apostle, Gal. 3. 21. Is the Law then
against the Promises of God? that is, are the Law and the Gospel contrary? do
they contradict one another? So that the meaning of our Savior's Declaration
is this, that he was not come to dissolve, and abrogate, and make void the Law,
or to encourage Men to the breach of it; that the Precepts of his Religion were
in no wise contrary to those of the Law and the Prophets, did not thwart and
oppose them, or any ways contradict the main design and intention of the Law
and the Prophets, that is, of the Jewish Religion; for so the Law and the
Prophets do frequently signify, Mat. 7. 12. therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and
the Prophets; that is, this is the main scope and intention of what your
Religion, contained in the Law and the Prophets, teaches, concerning your Duty
to one another. So likewise, Mat. 22. 40. On these two Commandments hang all
the Law and the Prophets; that is, this is the sum of all the Duties of
Religion; to these two Laws, all that the Jewish Religion teaches, may be
referred. I am not come to destroy; but to fulfill; to carry on the same Design
which was intended by the Jewish Religion, and to perfect and accomplish it; to
supply all the defects and weaknesses and imperfections of that dispensation;
this is the plain meaning of this caution and declaration of our Saviors;
Think not, etc.

For the clearing of this Matter, viz. That the Design of our Savior's
Doctrine and Religion, is not contrary to those former Revelations, which God
made to the Jews by Moses and the Prophets; this will evidently appear, whether
we consider the Prophesies and Predictions of the Old Testament, or the Laws
and Precepts therein contained.

First, The Prophesies and Predictions of the Old Testament; our Savior came
not to contradict and overthrow these; but to fulfill them. The chief
Predictions of the Law and the Prophets were concerning the Messiah, and his
Spiritual Kingdom. In the Law it was foretold, that God would raise to them a
Prophet like unto Moses, whom they ought to hear and obey; and to him all the
Prophets of the Old Testament gave witness, foretelling the time of his coming,
his extraction, the manner and circumstances of his Birth, the Purity and
Efficacy of his Doctrine, the Actions and Miracles of his Life, his Passion,
Death, and Burial, with the particular Circumstances of them, his Resurrection
from the Dead, and his Ascension into Heaven, and Exaltation at the right hand
of God; so that this part of the Law and Prophets he did accomplish and fulfill
in a most eminent and remarkable manner; all things that the Prophets had
foretold concerning the Messiah, were punctually made good in the Person, and
Actions, and Sufferings of our Savior.

Secondly, As to the Laws and Precepts of the Jewish Religion, the Doctrine and
the Laws of Christianity did not clash with them, nor properly abrogate them,
and make them void, especially as to the Moral Precepts, which were the very
Life and Spirit, the ultimate Scope and Design of that Religion; nay, so far
was it from doing so, that the main and proper intention of Christianity, was
to clear and establish that, which was the main design of the Law and Prophets,
to perfect the Law in this part, and to raise and advance Morality to its
highest pitch, to supply all the defects and imperfections of the Jewish
Religion, and to make Men much better than that weak and imperfect Institution
was able to do. This was the great Design of Christianity, and it is very
probable that our Savior had a principal, if not a sole respect to the
Precepts of the Moral Law, when he here says, that he came not to destroy the
Law and the Prophets; but to perfect and fulfill them; as I shall have occasion
by and by to show more at large.

But that we may give a full Answer to the Objection of the Jews against this
Saying of our Savior's, I shall show that he did not come to thwart and
contradict, and properly to abrogate and make void the Jewish Law, in any part
of it, neither the Civil and Judicial, nor the Ritual and Ceremonial, much less
the Moral and Natural Precepts of it. This is more than I think to be
absolutely necessary, to reconcile this Saying of our Savior with the rest of
his Doctrine and Actions; for though he had properly abrogated the Ceremonial
Law, and in no sense fulfilled it; yet, notwithstanding this, it may be true,
that he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets; that is, to destroy the
obligation of Moral Duties, which he speaks of in this Chapter, and elsewhere
declares to be the ultimate scope, the sum and substance of the Law and the
Prophets. For if the Ceremonial Law was not designed by God to be perpetual,
but to give way to a more perfect dispensation; then our Savior did no way
thwart and contradict the Law and the Prophets, by abrogating the Ceremonial
Law, at that time, when God designed that a period should be put to it. But yet
for the fuller satisfaction to this Objection, I shall show that our Savior
did not properly abrogate any part of the Jewish Law, no not the Ritual and
Ceremonial part of it; but did fulfill it.

First, not their Civil and Judicial Laws. These, in the original intention of
them, were not Laws designed for Mankind, but suited and fitted to the
disposition and temper, the Condition and Circumstances of a particular People
and Nation; to these our Savior taught obedience, and paid it himself, and
never did any thing contrary to them, nor in the least weaken the obligation of
them; but they continued in full force, 'till that Nation and Commonwealth was
dissolved. So that these Laws were no way impeached or abrogated by the
Christian Religion; but they fell, for want of a subject to exercise their
power upon, and because the People that were to be governed by them were
destroyed or dissipated! and though they neither are, nor ever were obligatory to
other Nations, as given by Moses, and as they were the peculiar Laws of a
particular Nation; yet the Natural Reason and Equity of them, so far as it
concerned Mankind, is duly considered and regarded by us, and many of these
Laws are adopted into the Laws of most Christian Nations. It is plain then,
that this part of the Jewish Law received no prejudice by Christianity, but
continued in full force, so long as that Nation and Commonwealth lasted, which
was to be governed by it.

Secondly, As to the Ritual and Ceremonial part of the Jewish Law, which
consisted in Circumcision, and Purifications, and Sacrifices, in distinction of
Meats, and Times, and innumerable other Rites and Observances; this was not
properly abrogated and made void by the coming of Christ, but fulfilled and
made good by him. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, were the Types and
Shadows of those future good things which were promised under the Gospel, a
kind of rude draught of a better and more perfect Institution, which was
designed, and at last fin^sht and perfected by the Christian Religion. This
account the Apostle gives of the legal Rites and Observances, Col. 2. 16, 17.
Let nb ma^^ judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of
the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come, b^t
the body is of Christ; that is, he is the substance and reality of all those
things, which were sh^dowed and figured by those legal observances, And so the
Apostle to the Heb. calls the Priests and Sacrifices of the Law, the Examples
and shadows of Heavenly things, Chap. 8. 5. and so Chap. 10. 1. the Law having
a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, that is,
being but an obscure Type, and not a perfect Representation of the Blessings
and Benefits of the Gospel, which we now have in truth and reality. Now reason
will tell us, that the Laws concerning these Types and Shadows, were only to
continue 'till the Substance of the things signified by them should come, and
that they would be of no longer use, when that more perfect Institution, which
was figured by them, should take place, and then they would expire, and become
void of themselves, because the reason and use of them ceasing, they must
necessarily fall.

But they did not expire immediately upon the coming of Christ, and therefore
he himself submitted to these Laws, so long as they continued in force; he was
Circumcised, and presented in the Temple, and performed all other Rites
required by the Law, that first Covenant to which these Laws and Ordinances
belonged, continuing in force, 'till the ratification of the second Covenant by
the death of Christ, and then these Laws expired, or rather were fulfilled, and
had their accomplishment in the Sacrifice of Christ, which made all the
Sacrifices and other Rites of the Jewish Religion needless, and of no use for
the future; Christ having by this one Sacrifice of himself, perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, as the same Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 14. So that
Christ did not properly abrogate and repeal those Ritual and Ceremonial Laws;
but they having continued as long as they were designed to do, and there was
any use of them, they abated and ceased of themselves.

And that the death of Christ was the time of their expiration, because then
the new Covenant took place, St. Paul expressly tells us, Ephesians. 2. 15. having
abolisht or voided in his flesh the law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances; and this v. 16. he is said to have done by his Cross; and more
plainly, Col. 2. 14. blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances, which was
against us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.

So that you see that even the Ceremonial Law was not so properly abrogated by
the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, but rather had its accomplishment, and
attained its end in the Sacrifice of Christ, which by the Eternal efficacy of
it to the expiation of Sin, and the purifying of our Consciences, has made all
the Sacrifices and Washings, and other Rites of the Ceremonial Law, for ever
needless and superfluous.

Thirdly, But especially as to the Moral Law, and those Precepts which are of
Natural and Perpetual obligation, our Savior did not come either to dissolve,
or to lessen and slacken the obligation of them.

And of this I told you our Savior does principally, if not solely speak here
in the Text, as will appear to any one that shall attentively consider the
scope of his Discourse. In the beginning of his Sermon, he promises Blessing
to those, and those only who were endowed with those Virtues which are required
by the Precepts of the Moral Law, or comprehended in them; and then he tells
them, that Christians must be very eminent and conspicuous for the practice of
them, v. 16. Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven; and then he cautions them
not to entertain any such imagination, as if he intended to dissolve the
obligation of the Law, and to free Men from the practice of Moral Duties, which
probably some might have suggested against him; think not that I am come to
destroy the Law and the Prophets; as if he had said, you cannot entertain any
such conceit, if you consider that the Precepts which I inculcate upon you, and
those Virtues, the practice whereof I recommend to you, are the same which are
contained in the Law and the Prophets. So that I am so far from crossing the
main design of the Law and the Prophets, and taking away the obligation of
Moral Duties enjoined by the Jewish Religion, that I come purposely to carry on
the same Design to further perfection, to give a more perfect and clear Law,
and to give a greater enforcement and encouragement to the practice of Moral
Duties; these were always the sum and substance of Religion, the ultimate
design of the Law and the Prophets, and therefore I am so far from discharging
Men from the obligation of the Moral Precepts of the Law, that I come to bind
them more strongly upon you. And verily I say unto you, that is, I solemnly
declare, that whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is,
he shall in no wise enter therein. You think the Scribes and Pharisees very
Pious and Excellent Men, and to have attained to a high pitch of Righteousness;
but I say unto you, that except your Righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And then he instanceth in several Precepts of the Moral Law,
which in the letter of them, especially as they were interpreted by the
Teachers of the Law among the Jews, were very much short of that Righteousness
and Perfection which he now requires of his Disciples and Followers. So that
his whole Discourse is about Precepts and Obligations of the Moral Law, and not
a word concerning the Ritual and Ceremonial Law; which makes me very prone to
think, that our Savior's meaning in the Text is this, that his Religion was so
far from thwarting and opposing that which was the main design of the Law and
the Prophets, that is, of the Jewish Religion, that the principal intention of
Christianity was to advance the practice of goodness and virtue, by
strengthening the obligation of Moral Duties, and giving us a more perfect Law
and Rule of Life, and offering better Arguments, and greater Encouragements to
the obedience of this Law. Therefore for the fuller explication and
illustration of this Matter, I shall endeavor to clear these three Points.

First, That the Main and Ultimate Design of the Law and the Prophets, was to
engage Men to the practice of Moral Duties, that is, of real and substantial
goodness.

Secondly, That the Law of Moses, or the dispensation of the Jewish Religion,
was comparatively very weak, and insufficient to this purpose.

Thirdly, That the Christian Religion has supplied all the defects, and
weaknesses and imperfections of that dispensation; these three Particulars will
fully clear our Savior's meaning in this Text.

First, That the Main and Ultimate Design of the Law and the Prophets, was to
engage Men to the practice of Moral Duties; that is, of real and substantial
Goodness, consisting in those Virtues which our Savior mentions at the
beginning of this Sermon; Humility, and Meekness, and Mercy, and Righteousness,
and Purity, and Peaceableness. This our Savior more than once tells us was the
sum and substance, the main scope and design of the whole Doctrine of the Law
and the Prophets. Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye even so unto them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets. And Mat. 22. 40. That the love of God and our Neighbor, those two
great Commands, to which all Moral Duties are reduced, are the two great hinges
of the Jewish Religion, on these two hang all the Law and the Prophets. St.
Paul calls Love, the fulfilling of the whole Law, Romans 13. 10. St. James, the
Perf^ct and the Royal Law, as that which has a Sovereign influence upon all
parts of Religion. And therefore the Apostle Romans 3. 21. tells us, that this
more perfect Righteousness which was brought in by the Gospel, or the Christian
Religion, is witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. And indeed the Prophets
every where do slight and undervalue the Ritual and Ceremonial part of
Religion, in comparison of the practice of Moral Duties. Isa. 1. 11. To what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? bring no more vain
oblations, your New Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates. But what
then are the things that are acceptable to God? He tells us at the 16 th ver.
wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the Oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. And by the Prophet Jeremiah God
tells that People, that the business of Sacrifices was not the thing primarily
designed by God, but obedience to the Moral Law; the Ritual Law came in upon
occasion, for the prevention of Idolatry, and by way of condescension to the
temper of that People; and thus Maimonides and the Learned Jews understand
these words, Jer. 7. 22, 23. I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them
in the day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning
Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices; but this thing commanded I them, saying, obey
my voice, and walk in all the ways that I have commanded, and I will be your
God, and ye shall be my People. So likewise in the Prophet Hosea, God plainly
prefers the Moral before the Ritual part of Religion, as that which was
principally designed and intended by him, Hos. 6. 6. I desired Mercy, and not
Sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than Burnt-Offerings; but most plainly
and expressly, Mich. 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? Shall I come
before him with Burnt-offerings? Wi^ the Lord be pleased with thousands of
Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? He has showed thee, O Man, what is
good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do ^ustly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? These it seems were the great things
which God stood upon and required of Men even under that imperfect
dispensation; and these are the very things which the Christian Religion does
so strictly enjoin and command; so that this Righteousness which the Gospel
requires, was witnessed to by the Law and the Prophets. I proceed to the

Second Point, That the Law of Moses, or the dispensation of the Jewish
Religion, was comparatively very weak, and insufficient to make Men truly good,
and for the promoting of real and inward righteousness; it gave Laws indeed to
this purpose, but those not so clear and perfect, or at least not so clearly
understood, as they are now under the Gospel; and it made no express promises
of inward Grace, and assistance, to quicken and strengthen us in the doing of
our Duty; it made no explicit promises of any blessing and reward to the doing
of our duty beyond this Life; so that the best and most powerful Arguments and
Encouragements to Obedience, were either wholly wanting, or very obscurely
revealed under this dispensation.

And this insufficiency of the Jewish dispensation, both to our justification
and sanctification, to the reconciling of us to God, and the making of us
really good, the Apostle frequently inculcates in the New Testament; St. Paul,
Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, Men and Brethren, that through
this Man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that
believe are justified, from all those things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses; and Romans 8. 3. What the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh; that is, by reason of the carnality of that
dispensation, consisting in the purification of the body. Gal. 3. 21. he calls
it a Law unfit to give Life; If there had been a Law which could have given
Life, verily Righteousness had been by the Law. And the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Chapter 8. 6, 7, 8, etc. finds fault with the dispensation of the Law, for the
lowness and meanness of its Promises, being only of Temporal good things; and
for want of conferring an inward and a powerful Principle to enable Men to
obedience; but now has he obtained (speaking of Christ) a more excellent
Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was
established upon better Promises; for if that first Covenant had been
faultless, then should no place have been sought for a second; and this second
and better Covenant, he tells us, was foretold by the Prophets of the Old
Testament; for finding fault with them, he says, behold the days come says
the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the
House of Judah; not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers.
For this is the Covenant which I will make with the House of Israel after those
days, says the Lord. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in
their hearts. And Chap. 10. 1, 4. he shows the inefficacy of their Sacrifices
for the real expiation of Sin, the Law having but a shadow of good things to
come, and not the lively representation of the things themselves, can never
with those Sacrifices which they offered year by year continually, make the
comers thereunto perfect; for it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and of
Goats should take away sins.

I should now have proceeded to the Third Particular; namely, that the
Christian Religion has supplied all the defects and weakness and imperfection
of the Jewish dispensation; but that I shall not now enter upon, but make one
plain inference from the substance of what I have already discoursed upon this
Argument.

If our Savior came not to dissolve and loosen the obligation of Moral Duties,
but to confirm and establish it, and to enforce and bind the practice of these
Duties more strongly upon us, then they do widely and wilfully mistake the
design of Christianity, who teach that it discharges Men from the obligation
of the Moral Law, which is the Fundamental and avowed Principle of the
Antinomian Doctrine, but directly contrary to this Declaration of our Savior
in the Text, that he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to
perfect and fulfill them; (for to take away the obligation of a Law, is plainly
to destroy and make it void;) and contrary to the Apostle's solemn resolution
of this matter, Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? That
is, does the Gospel destroy and take away the obligation of the Law? God
forbid, yea we establish the Law; the Christian Religion is so far from
designing or doing any such thing, that it gives new strength and force to it.

But surely they that teach this Doctrine, did never duly consider that
terrible threatening of our Savior after the Text, which seems to be so
directly levelled at them; whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven; for how can Men more effectually teach the violation, not
only of the least, but of the greatest of Gods Commandments, than by declaring
that the Gospel has set Men free from the obligation of the Moral Law? which
is in effect to say, that Christians may act contrary to all the Duties of
Morality, that is, do the most impious things in the World, without any offense
against God, and notwithstanding this, continue to be his Children, and highly
in the favor of God.

And all the security they have against this impious Consequence, is that weak
and slender pretense, that gratitude and love to God, will preserve them from
making this ill use of the grace of the Gospel, and oblige them to abstain from
Sin, and to endeavor to please God as much as any Law could do. But then they
do not consider the nonsense of this; for there can be no such thing as Sin, if
the obligation of the Law be taken away; for where there is no Law, there can
be no Transgression, as the Apostle, and common Reason likewise tells us; so
that the Law being removed and taken away, all Actions become indifferent, and
one thing is not more a sin or offense against God than another. And what then
is it they mean that gratitude will oblige Men to, or preserve them from? When
there can be no such thing as sin or duty, as pleasing or offending God, if
there be no Law to oblige us to the one, or restrain us from the other.

And what is, if this be not, to turn the grace of God into wantonness, and to
make Christian Liberty a Cloak for all sorts of Sins? A Man cannot do a greater
despite to the Christian Religion, nor take a more effectual course to bring it
into contempt, and to make it to be hissed out of the World, than to represent
it as a lewd and licentious Doctrine, which gives Men a perfect discharge from
all the Duties of Morality, and obliges them only to believe confidently, that
Christ has purchased for them a liberty to do what they will, and that upon
these terms, and no other, they are secure of the favor of God in this World,
and Eternal Salvation in the other. This is the sum and the plain result of the
Antinomian Doctrine, the most pernicious Heresy, and most directly destructive
of the great End and Design of Christianity, that ever yet was broached in the
World. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, that ye put off concerning your
former conversation, the old Man, which is corrupt according to deceitful
Lusts, and that ye be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new
Man, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness.

SERMON IV.
Christianity does not destroy, but perfect the Law of Moses.
MATTHEW. V. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets.
I am not come to destroy; but to fulfill.
I Have considered this Saying of our Savior's with respect to the Moral Law,
and those Precepts which are of Natural and Perpetual force, and that our
Savior did not come either to dissolve or loosen the obligation of them; for
the illustration of which, I propounded to clear these three Points.

First, That the main and ultimate design of the Law and the Prophets, was to
engage Men to the practice of Moral Duties, that is, of real and substantial
goodness.

Secondly, That the Law of Moses, or the dispensation of the Jewish Religion,
was comparatively very weak, and insufficient to make Men truly good, and
ineffectual to promote inward and real Righteousness. These two points I have
spoken to. I shall now proceed to the

Third, Namely, that the Christian Religion does supply all the defects and
weaknesses and imperfections of the Jewish dispensation.

The Jewish Religion had very considerable advantages above the mere light of
Nature, which was all that the Heathen World had to conduct them toward
Eternal Happiness; the Jews had the knowledge of the one true God, and very
signal and particular Testimonies of the Divine Providence, which did naturally
tend to beget in them good hopes of a future Life, and the rewards of another
World; they had the Natural Law revealed, and the main Precepts of it written
with God's own hand, and by Moses delivered to them; by which means they had a
more certain and distinct knowledge of their duty; they had Prophets frequently
sent to them, to admonish them of their Duty, and to exhort them to Repentance,
and to warn them of approaching judgments. They had good encouragement given to
hope for the pardon of Sin, by God's appointment of several ways of expiation;
which, how unlikely soever they were to be available to the effectual expiation
of Sin, yet they did signify that the Divine Nature was placable, and did seem
to figure some more effectual way, designed by God for that purpose, that
should be exhibited in due time. And finally they had most express promises and
threatenings of Temporal Blessings and judgments, to encourage them in their
obedience, and to deter them from the transgression of God's Laws. These
Advantages the Jews plainly had above the rest of the World, God did not deal
so with other Nations, neither had the Heathen such a knowledge of God's Laws.

But notwithstanding this, the Jewish Religion was very short and defective,
very weak and infectual to the great end of Righteousness and true Holiness,
and to raise Men to that perfection of goodness, of which Humane Nature through
the grace of God is capable; and therefore there wanted a more perfect
Institution, to supply the defects and weakness and imperfection even of that
Divine Revelation which God had made to the Jews, and really to effect and
accomplish that which the Jewish Religion attempted and aimed at, and was but,
as I may say, rudely begun under that imperfect Institution. And this the
Gospel, or the Christian Religion revealed by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
has fully effected, as will evidently appear by a particular Survey and
Consideration of the main defects of the Jewish Religion, which I shall show to
be all perfectly made up by the revelation of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of
Christianity, in these following Particulars.

First, it was a great defect of the Jewish Religion, that a considerable part
of it was merely external, concerning the purification of the Body and the
Flesh, and only figurative of that inward Purity and real Righteousness, which
renders Men truly good, and like to God; for which reason the Jewish
Institution is by the Apostle to the Hebrews called the Law of a Carnal
Commandment, Heb. 7. 16; and Chapter 9. 10, is said to consist only (that is
chiefly) in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances
imposed on them until the time of Reformation; that is, 'till the Messiah
should come, and give such Laws as should really tend to reform the Hearts and
Lives of Men; and therefore these Laws and Ordinances are called poor pitiful
Elements, and the Rudiments of the World, fitted rather for Children in
understanding and goodness, than to bring Men to any maturity and perfection in
goodness. All their Rites of purification did only sanctify to the purifying
of the Flesh; but did not purge the Conscience from dead works, as the Apostle
to the Hebrews speaks, Chapter 9. 13, 14. they could not make those that performed
and observed them perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, v. 9. that is,
these Laws had no effect upon the minds of Men, to make them really better, to
cure them of their Moral Defects and Impurities, their Sins and Vices.

But the Christian Institution does perfectly supply this defect, by taking us
off from those Carnal and External Observances, and principally requiring that
we worship God in spirit and in truth; by giving us such Laws as wholly tend to
advance real and substantial goodness, purity and holiness of heart and life,
such as mainly tend to reform the Minds and Manners of Men, and to make us like
to that Holy and perfect Being whom we worship: and besides an external humble
and reverent demeanor of our selves in the worship of God, (to which Natural
Religion does likewise direct;) Christianity has only Instituted two solemn
External Rites, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper; whereby we solemnly oblige
our selves to the practice of all virtue and goodness, I say only these two,
that by the multitude of external Observances, Christians might not be taken
off from the minding of the real and substantial Duties of Religion.

And therefore the Church of Rome have extremely abated and weakened the force
of Christianity upon the Hearts and Lives of Men, by amusing them with External
Rites, which they have multiplied to that excessive degree, as to make the Yoke
of Christ really heavier than that of Moses, and the Christian Religion, a more
external and carnal Commandment than that of the Law, and by this means have
diverted and taken off the Minds of Men from the main design of Christianity,
insomuch that they are so employed and taken up with Matters of external
Ceremony, that they have no leisure to think of being good Men, and to mind the
great and substantial Duties and Virtues of the Christian Life; so that they
have spoiled the Christian Religion of one of its chief Excellencies and
Perfections, I mean the simplicity of its Worship, which they have now
encumbred with so many foolish and frivolous Rites and Observances, as do not
only render it more burthensom, but less apt to make men inwardly and
substantially good, than even Judaism itself. This is so true and so visible,
that the wiser and better sort of them have complained of it for several Ages,
and still do, as much as they dare for fear of the Inquisition, or some other
censure.

Secondly, Another defect of the Law of Moses was, that it did not give
encouragement enough to Repentance, by declaring and assuring to us any certain
way and method for the expiation and forgiveness of Sin. This the Rites of all
Religion aimed at, and pretended to; but were very ineffectual to that end. The
Heathen Sacrifices, and all the cruel and barbarous Rites belonging to them,
did all pretend to be so many ways of appeasing the offended Deity, and of
making atonement and expiation for Sin; and the Sacrifices of the Jews were
Instituted by God himself, to make an external and legal expiation, and to be
Types and Shadows of a better and more perfect Sacrifice, which should really
expiate Sin; but even this was very darkly and imperfectly discovered to them;
besides, that the expiations of the Law did only extend to the least sorts of
Sins, those of ignorance and inadvertency, but not at all to presumptuous Sins,
and such as were committed with a high hand, not to wilful and deliberate
Sins, except in some very few and rare Cases particularly mentioned in the Law;
so that though a great part of the Religious Rites both of the Pagan and Jewish
Religion, aimed at the expiation of Sin, yet were they really ineffectual to
that end; and upon the whole matter, Mankind, though they conceived good hope of
God's mercy and forgiveness in case of Repentance (Who can tell if God will
turn and repent, and turn away from his anger?) yet they were unacquainted with
any certain and effectual means to that purpose.

It remains then, that this great blessing of the Forgiveness of Sins, was
never sufficiently declared and assured to Mankind, but through Jesus Christ in
the Gospel. So St. Paul expressly asserts, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you
therefore, Men and Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. The Gospel has
provided an expiation for all Sins in general, and that by a Sacrifice of
inestimable value, the blood of the Son of God. And this is a mighty
encouragement to Repentance, and one most effectual means to reclaim Men from
their Sins, to be assured that they are indemnified for what is past. And this
the Apostle means, when he says, Gal. 3. 13. that Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; that is, whereas the Law left
Sinners, as to those Sins which stood most in need of pardon, under a Curse,
having provided no expiation for them, Christ has redeemed them from that
Curse, by making a general expiation for Sin; and in this sense it is that the
Author to the Hebrews says, Chapter 9. 15. that Christ died for the redemption of
the transgressions that were under the first Covenant; that is, for those Sins
for which the Covenant of the Law had provided no way of forgiveness; and
therefore St. John says emphatically, 1 John 1. 7. that the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all Sin.

Thirdly, The Law did not afford sufficiently plain and certain Rules and
Directions for a good Life. As the corruption and degeneracy of Mankind grew
worse, so the light of Nature waxed dimmer and dimmer, and the Rule of Good and
Evil was more doubtful and uncertain, and that in very considerable instances
of our Duty. The Law of Moses was peculiar to the Jews; and even to them, who
only had the benefit and advantage of it, it did not give clear and perfect
light and direction as to Moral Duties, and those things which are of an
Eternal and Immutable Reason and Goodness. And therefore our Savior in this
Sermon explains it to a greater perfection than it was understood to have among
the Jews, or the letter of it seemed to intend, and has not only forbidden
several things permitted by that Law, as Divorce, and Retaliation of Injuries;
but has heightened our Duty in several instances of it, requiring us to love
our Enemies, and to forgive the greatest injuries and provocations, though never
so often repeated, and not only not to revenge them, but to requite them with
good turns, which were not understood by Mankind to be Laws before, but yet
when duly considered, are very agreeable to right Reason, and the sense of the
wisest and b^st Men. So that the Christian Religion ^ath not only fixed and
determined our Duty, and brought it to a greater certainty, but has raised it
to a greater perfection, and rendered it every way fit to bring the Minds of
Men to a more Divine temper, and a more reasonable and perfect way of serving
God, than ever the World was instructed in before.

Fourthly, The Promises and Threatenings of the Law were only of temporal good
and evil things, which are, in comparison of the endless Rewards and
Punishments of another World, but very languid and faint Motives to obedience.
Not but that the Jews under the Law, had such apprehensions of their own
Immortality, and of a future state of Happiness and Misery after this Life, as
Natural Light suggested to them; which was in most but a wavering and uncertain
persuasion, and consequently of small efficacy to engage Men to their Duty; but
the Law of Moses added little or nothing to the clearness of those Natural
Notions concerning a future state, and the strengthening of this persuasion in
the Minds of Men; it did rather suppose it, than give any new force and life to
it. And for this Reason more particularly the Apostle tells us that the Law was
but weak to make Men good; because it did not work strongly enough upon the
hopes and fears of Men, by the weight of its Promises, and the terror of its
Threatenings; and that for this weakness and imperfection of it, it was removed,
and a more powerful and awakening dispensation brought in in the place of it;
Heb. 7. 18, 19. For there is verily a disannulling of the Commandment that was
before (that is of the Jewish Law) for the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof; for the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope
did; that is, the Covenant of the Gospel, which promises Eternal Life. And Chapter
8. 6. for this Reason more especially the Apostle says, that Christ had
obtained a more excellent Ministry, being the Mediator of a better Covenant,
which was established upon better Promises. And Romans 1. 16, 18. St. Paul tell
us, that for this Reason the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, because
therein the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men. The clear Revelation of a Future Judgment, was that
which made the Gospel so proper and so powerful an Instrument for the Salvation
of Men. The great impiety of Mankind, and their impenitency in it, was not so
much to be wondered at before, while the World was in a great measure ignorant
of the infinite danger of a wicked Life; and therefore God is said in some sort
to overlook it; but now he commands all Men every where to repent, because he
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness by that
Man, whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead, Acts 17. 30, 31. The clear discovery and
perfect assurance of a future Judgment, calls loudly upon all Men to leave
their Sins, and turn to God.

Fifthly, The Covenant of the Law had no spiritual Promises contained in it, of
the grace and assistance of God's Holy Spirit, for the mortifying of Sin, and
enabling Men to their Duty, and supporting them under Sufferings: but the
Gospel is full of clear and express Promises to this purpose. Our Savior has
assured us, that God will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.
13. and this the Apostle tells us is actually conferred upon all true
Christians, those who do sincerely embrace and believe the Gospel, Romans 8. 9.
If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Hence the Gospel
is called by the same Apostle the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, v.
2d of that Chap. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of Sin and Death; and in the next words he tells us, that
herein manifestly appeared the weakness of the Law, that it left Men destitute
of this mighty help and advantage (at least as to any special promise of it)
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and by making him a Sacrifice for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; that is,
that that Righteousness which the Law aimed at and signified, but was too weak
to effect, might be really accomplished in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; that is, who are acted and assisted by a higher and better
Principle than Men either have in Nature, or the carnal dispesnation of the Law
did endow Men withal. And because of this great defect, the Law is said to be
a state of Bondage and Servitude; and on the contrary, the Gospel, by Reason of
this mighty advantage, is called a state of Adoption and Liberty, ver. 15. for
ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
we cry Abba Father; and 2 Cor. 3. 17. where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
Liberty. And to this very thing St. Paul appeals, as that whereby Men might
judge whether the Law or the Gospel were the more excellent and powerful
Dispensation, Gal. 3. 2. This only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit
by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? As if he had said, let
this one thing determine that whole Matter; were ye made Pertakers of this
great Privilege and Blessing of the Spirit, while ye were of the Jewish
Religion, or since ye became Christians? And ver. 14. he calls it the blessing
of Abraham; that is, the blessing promised to all Nations by Abraham's Seed,
namely, the M^ssias; that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ^ that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
Faith.

And then for the supporting us under afflictions, the Gospel promise^h an
extraordinary assistance of God^s holy Spirit to us, 1 Pet. 4. 14. if ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of
God res^eth upon you.

But were the^e no good Men under the dispensation of the Law? Yes certainly
there were, and they were so by the grace and assistance of God's Holy Spirit:
but ^hen this was an effect of the Divine goodness; but not of any special
Promise, contained in that Covenant, of Divine grace and assistance to be
conferred on all those that were admitted into it. But thus it is in the New
Covenant of the Gospel; and therefore the Law is called a dead letter, the
oldness of the letter, and the ministration of the letter, in opposition to the
Gosp^l, which is called the Ministration of the Spirit. And this the Apostle
lays special weight upon, as a main difference between these two Covenants,
that the first gave an external Law, but the new Covenant offers inward grace
and assistance to enable Men to Obedience, and has an inward and powerful
efficacy upon the Minds of Men, accompanying the Ministration of it, Heb. 8. 7,
8, 9, 10. For if that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place
have been sought for the second. For finding fault with them, he says, behold
the days come, says the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the house
of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according to the Covenant which I
made with their Fathers, etc. For this is the Covenant which I will make with
the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into
their minds, and write them in their hearts.

And of this inward Grace and assistance we are further secured, by the
powerful and prevalent and perpetual intercession of our High Priest for
Sinners, at the right hand of God; not like the intercession of the Priests
under the Law, who being Sinners themselves, were less fit to intercede for
others; but we have an High Priest that is holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from Sinners, who by the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot
to God, to purchase for us those Blessings which he intercedes for. The Priests
under the Law were Intercessors upon Earth; but Christ is entered into Heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. The Priests
under the Law were removed from this Office by Death; but Christ, because he
continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, and is an everlasting
Advocate and Intercessor for us, in the virtue of his most meritorious
Sacrifice continually presented to his Father, where he is always at the right
hand of God, to present our Prayers to him, and to obtain pardon of our Sins,
and grace to help in time of need, and by his intercession in Heaven, to
procure all those Blessings to be actually con^er'd upon us, which he purchased
for us by his blood upon Earth; wherefore he is able to save to the utmost all
those that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them, as the same Apostle speaks, Heb. 7. 25.

And thus I have as briefly as well I could showed, how the Christian Religion
does supply all the weaknesses and defects and imperfections of the Jewish
Religion, and consequently, does in no wise contradict or interfeer with the
great Design of the Law and the Prophets, but has perfected and made up
whatever was weak or wanting in that Institution to make Men truly good, or, as
the Expression is in the Prophet Daniel, to bring in everlasting Righteousness;
that is, to clear and confirm those Laws of Holiness and Righteousness, which
are of indispensible and eternal obligation.

And if this be the great Design of our Savior's coming, and the Christian
Doctrine be every way fitted to advance Righteousness and true Holiness, and to
make us as excellently good as this imperfect state of Mortality will admit,
since it has many advantages incomparably beyond any Religion or Institution
that ever was in the World, both in respect of the perfection of its Laws, and
the force of its Motives and Arguments to Repentance, and a Holy Life, and in
respect of the Encouragements which it gives, and the Examples which it sets
before us, and the powerful assistance which it offers to us, to enable us to
clean^e our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect
holiness in the fear of God; What a shame is this to us, who are under the
power of this excellent Institution, if the temper of our Minds, and the tenor
of our Conversation be not in some measure answerable to the Gospel of Christ!
The greater helps and advantages we have of being good, the greater things may
justly be expected from us; for to whomsoever much is given, of him much shall
be required.

Christianity is the fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law, by walking not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, by mortifying the deeds of the Flesh,
and by bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Fidelity, Meekness, and Temperance. The
Righteousness of Faith does not consist in a barren and ineffectual belief of
the Gospel, in a mere embracing of the Promises of it, and relying upon Christ
for Salvation, in a Faith without works, which is dead; but in a Faith which
works by Love, in becoming new Creatures, and in keeping the Commandments of
God. The Righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise. This is his Commandment,
that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another, as he gave us Commandment, 1 John 3. 23. and this Commandment have we
from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother also, 1 John 4. 21. That we
approve the things that are excellent, being filled with the fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and the praise of God,
Phil. 1. 10, 11. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, mind these things, Chapter 4. 8.

And then considering what abundant provision the Gospel has made for our
attainment of Everlasting Salvation, we are altogether without excuse, if we
perish. Since God has raised up so mighty a Salvation for us; how shall we
escape? If we die in our Sins, it is not because God would not forgive them,
but because we would not Repent and be Saved; the fault is all our own, and we
owe it wholly to our selves, if we be lost and undone for ever. If when Life
and Death, Heaven and Hell, are so plainly set before us, Eternal Misery and
Perdition fall to our Lot and Portion, it is not because we were not warned of
our Danger, or because Happiness and the things of our Peace were hid from our
eyes, but because we have made Death and Destruction our obstinate and final
Choice.

But, Beloved, I hope better things of you, and things which accompany
Salvation, though I thus speak. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ; and if we be careful to perform the Conditions which the
Gospel requires on our part, we shall not fail to be made Partakers of that
Eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, has promised to us, for his Mercy's
sake in Jesus Christ.

SERMON V.
Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order to Justification,
and Salvation.
GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumciston avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature.
THERE are two Epistles of St. Paul, namely, that to the Romans, and this to
the Galatians, which are principally and particularly designed to confute a
false persuasion, which had prevailed amongst many Christians, especially those
who were Converted from Judaism; that it was not enough for Men to embrace and
confess the Christian Religion, unless they kept the Law of Moses, or at least
submitted to that great Precept of Circumcision; the neglect whereof among all
the affirmative Precepts of the Law, was only threatened with excision, or being
cut off from among the People. And of the prevalency of this Error, and the
great disturbance which it made in the Christian Church, we have a particular
account, Acts 15. where a General Council of the Apostles is called, and a
Letter written in their Names to all the Christian Churches, to rectify their
apprehensions in this matter, ver. 24. of that Chap. For as much as we have
heard, that certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words,
subverting your Souls, saying ye must be Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom
we gave no such Commandment, etc.

And upon this occasion likewise it was, that St. Paul wrote this Epistle to
the Galatians, as likewise that to the Romans; in the former of which, after he
had at large confuted this Error, (which he calls the preaching of another
Gospel, than what the Apostles had preached, and the Christians first received)
In the beginning of the 5 th Chapt. he Exhorts them to assert the Liberty,
which Christ had purchased for them, from the obligation of the Law of Moses,
ver. 1, 2. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Not that
hereby he condemns Circumcision, as a thing evil in it self; for God never
Instituted or Commanded any thing that was so; but he opposes the opinion of
the necessity of it to our Justification and Salvation, when the Gospel had so
plainly taken away the obligation and use of it; and consequently to affirm
still the necessity of it, was really to renounce Christianity. For if Judaism
was still the way to Salvation, Christianity was to no purpose; and if
Christianity be now the way, then the obligation to the Jewish Religion was
ceased. To avoid the force of this Reasoning, it was not enough for the false
Apostles to say (as it seems they did) that Christians were not obliged
universally to the whole Law of Moses, but principally to the Law of
Circumcision; because Circumcision being the sign and badge of that Covenant,
whoever took that upon him, did thereby own his obligation to the whole Law,
ver. 3^. 4. For I testify again to every Man that is Circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole Law; Christ is become of no effect to you, whosoever of
you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace; that is, whoever of you
expect and profess to be justified by the Law of Moses, ye take away the
necessity and use of the Christian Religion; and are fallen from grace,: that
is, do in effect renounce the Gospel; for we, through the Spirit, wait for the
hope of Righteousness by Faith, ver* 5* we by the Spirit, in opposition to
Circumcision, which was in the Flesh* do expect to be justified by the belief
of the Gospel. For in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, ver. 6. that is, now under the dispensation of the Gospel
by Christ Jesus, it signifies nothing to a Man's Justification or Salvation,
whether he be Circumcised, or not Circumcised, whether he be a Jew or a
Gentile. All that the Gospel requires as necessary to these purposes, is, that
we perform the Conditions of the Gospel, that so we may be capable of being
made Partakers of the blessings of it.

Now as the great blessing and benefit of the Gospel is variously expressed, as
by the forgiveness of our sins, by our acceptance with God, or (which
comp^ehends both,) by our Justification, sometimes by Adoption, and our being^
made the Sons and Children of God, sometimes by Redemption, and (which is the
consummation of all,) by Salvation and Eternal Life; I say, as the ble^sing and
benefit of the Gospel, is in Scripture expressed to us by these several terms,
which do in effect, all signify the same thing! so our Duty, and the Condition
the Gospel requires on our part, is likewise as variously expressed, sometimes,
and that very frequently, by the word Faith, as being the great Source and
Principle of all Religious Acts and Performances; but then this Faith must not
be a bare assent and persuasion of the Truth of the Gospel, but such an
effectual belief, as expresses it self in suitable acts of Obedience and
Holiness, such as the Apostle here calls (...) a Faith whick works by Love, a
Faith that is inspired and acted, or rather consummate and made perfect by
Charity, (for so the word does often signify,) and then this Phrase will be
just of the same importance with that of St. James, Chap. 2. 22. by Works is
Faith made perfect. Sometimes, and that also very frequently, the Condition of
the Gospel is expressed by words which import and signify the change of our
State, as by Repentance, Conversion, Regeneration, Renovation, Sanctification,
the New Creature, and the New Man, which expressions are all so well known,
that I need not referr to particular Texts; sometimes the condition of the
Gospel is expressed by the visible and sensible effects of this inward change in
our outward Li^e and Actions; as namely by Obedience, and keeping the
Commandments of God. So Heb. 5. 9. Christ is said to be the Author of Eternal
Salvation to them that obey him; where Obedience is plainly put for the whole
condition of the Gospel, the performance whereof entitles us to Eternal Life
and Happiness.

Now that by these various expressions, one and the same thing is certainly
intended and meant, viz. The Condition of the Gospel; that which is required on
our part, in order to our full and perfect justification and acceptance with
God, is evident beyond all denial; by comparing the three different ways
whereby St. Paul does express the same proposition for sense and substance; in
which he tells us, what it is that will avail to our Justification under the
Gospel, that is according to the terms of the Christian Religion; that it is
neither here nor there, that it signifies nothing whether a Man be Circumcised
or not, but that we be so qualified as the Gospel requires, that the Conditions
upon which the Blessings of the Gospel are promised be found in us. And there
are three Texts wherein the same thing is plainly intended, in three very
different expressions. Gal. 5. 6. In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision: but Faith, which is consummate, or made perfect
by Charity. Gal. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision: but a new Creature. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing: but the keeping of the Commandments of
God. It is evident, that in these three Texts the Apostle designs to say the
same thing, and consequently that Faith which is made perfect by Charity, and
the new Creature, and keeping of the Commandments of God, are the same in sense
and substance, viz. the Condition of our Justification and acceptance with God
under the Covenant of the Gospel, or in the Christian Religion.

I shall at present, by God's assistance, handle the second of these Texts. In
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision: but a
new Creature. And here the Condition of the Gospel is expressed to us, by the
change of our State, which in Scripture is called our Regeneration, or becoming
new Creatures, and new Men. Circumcision was but an outward sign and mark upon
the Body, and the Flesh, though it did indeed prefigure and typifie the inward
Circumcision of the heart, the giving of Men new Hearts, and new Spirits, under
the more perfect dispensation of the Gospel? but now in Christ Jesus, that is,
in the Christian Religion, the presence or the want of this outward mark will
avail nothing to our justification; but that which was signified by it, the
renovation of our Hearts and Spirits, our becoming new Creatures, is now the
Condition of our justification and acceptance with God.

The false Apostles indeed did lay great stress upon the business of
Circumcision, not so much out of zeal to the Law of Moses, as to avoid
Persecution, ver. 12. They constrain you to be Circumcised, only left they
should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ. For at that time, though the
Christians were Persecuted, yet the Jews by the Roman Edicts had the free
exercise of their Religion, and therefore they gloried in this external mark of
Circumcision, because it exempted them from suffering; but St. Paul gloried in
his sufferings for Christ, and the marks of that upon his Body, ver. 14. God
forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; and v.
17. I bear in my Body the marks of the Lord Jesus. He tells them, what
necessities soever they might pretend of Circumcision, either for their
Justification, or Salvation, the true ground of all was to save themselves from
Temporal Sufferings; and that in the Christian Religion it signified nothing to
recommend them to the favor of God, whether they were Circumcised or not;
nothing would be available to this purpose, but the renovation and change of
their Hearts and Lives. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision: but a new Creature, (...), a new Creation, to
intimate the greatness of the Change, which Christianity, thoroughly
entertained, made in Men.

Having thus cleared the occasion and mea^ing of these words, I come now to
consider the Particulars contained in them, namely, these two things.

First, That the Gospel has taken away the Obligation of the Law of Moses; in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision.

Secondly, That according to the terms of the Christian Religion, nothing will
avail to our justification and acceptance with God, but the real renovation of
our Hearts and Lives; neither Circumcision, nor uncircision: but a new Creature.

1. That the Gospel has taken away the obligation of the Law of Moses. In
Christ Jesus, that is, now under the dispensation of the Gospel, neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision. There was never any
general Obligation upon Mankind to this Rite of Circumcision, but only upon the
Seed of Abraham; but yet upon the preaching of the Gospel, many of the Jewish
Christians would have brought the Gentiles under this yoke; pretending that
Christianity was but a superstructure upon the Law of Moses, which together
with the Gospel, was to be the Religion of the whole World; and there was some
color for this, because our Savior himself submitted to this Rite, and was
Circumcised; which the Apostle takes notice of in the 4 th Chap. of this Epist.
ver 4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
Woman, made under the Law, that is, Circumcised. And it is true indeed, that our
blessed Savior was Circumcised, but not to signify to us the perpetuity of
Circumcision, and the continuance of it under the Christian Religion, but for a
quite different end; as a testimony of his Obedience to that Law, which though
afterward it was to expire, yet was to be obeyed whilst it was in force, by
all that were born under it; he was made under the Law, and it became him, who
came to teach Mankind Obedience to the Laws of God, to fulfill all
Righteousness himself. And therefore the Apostle in this Epistle, where he
takes notice of this, that Christ was made under the Law, gives this Reason of
it, that he might be the ^itter to free those who were under it, from the
servitude of it; he was made under the Law, that he might redeem them that were
under the Law; and that those who were in the condition of Servants before,
might be set at liberty, and receive the adoption of Sons.

But how did his being made under the Law, qualify him to redeem those who
were under the Law? Thus; By submitting to it himself, he showed that he owned
the Authority of it, and that he had no malice or enmity against it; or as he
himself expresses it, that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.
And being fulfilled, and having served the time and end for which God intended
it, it expired of it self; like a Law which is not made for perpetuity, but
limited to a certain period. And our Blessed Savior, who came with greater
Authority than Moses, and gave greater Testimony of his Divine Authority, had
sufficient power to declare the expiration of it; and by Commissioning his
Disciples before and after his death to Preach the Gospel to the whole World,
he put an end to that particular Law and Dispensation, which only concerned the
Jewish Nation, by giving a general Law to all Mankind.

So that from the Death of our Savior, and his Ascension into Heaven, upon
which followed the general publication of the Gospel, the Law of Moses ceased,
and according to our Savior's express appointment, Proselytes were to be
admitted into the Christian Church only by Baptism, and not by Circumcision.
And ^f Circumcision, which was the sign of that Covenant, was laid aside, then
the whole Obligation of that Law and Covenant which God had made with the Jews,
was also ceased. It was once indeed the mark of God's chosen and peculiar
People; but now that God has revealed himself to the whole World by his Son,
and offers Salvation to all Mankind, Gentiles as well as Jews, the wall of
separation is broken down, and Circumcision, which was the mark of distinction
between Jews and Gentiles, is taken away; and therefore he is said to have made
peace by his Cross, and to have blotted out, and taken away the handwriting of
Ordinances, nailing it to his Cross; that is, from the time of his Death to
have taken away the obligation of the Law of Moses, though it was a good while
after, before the Jews were wholly weaned from the veneration and use of it.

Nay, it was some time before the Apostles were clearly convinced, that the
Gospel was to be preached to the Gentiles; this being one of those Truths,
which our Savior promised after his departure, his Spirit should lead them
into the perfect knowledge of; and then they were fully instructed, that the
Law of Moses was expired, and that it was no longer necessary to the Salvation
of Men, that they should be Circumcised, and keep that Law. And though it was
once enjoined by God himself to the Jews, and their Obedience to it was
necessary to their acceptance with God, yet now by Christ Jesus, God had
offered Salvation to Men upon other Terms; and whether they were Circumcised,
or not, was of no moment to their Justification or Salvation one way or other;
but provided they performed the Condition of this New Covenant of the Gospel,
they were all alike capable of the Divine Favor and Acceptance.

But I proceed to that, which I mainly intended to prosecute from these words;
and that is the

Second Particular in the Text, namely, that according to the terms of the
Gospel, and the Christian Religion, nothing will avail to our justification and
acceptance with God, but the real renovation of our Hearts and Lives; neither
Circumcision, nor uncircumcision: but a new Creature. For the full explication
of this, I shall do these three Things.

First, Show what is implied in this Phrase of a new Creature.

Secondly, That this is the great Condition of our justification and acceptance
with God, and that it is the same in substance with Faith perfected by Charity,
and with keeping the Commandments of God.

Thirdly, That it is very reasonable it should be so.

1. What is implied in this Phrase of a new Creature. It is plain at first
sight, that it is a Metaphorical expression of that great and thorough change
which is made in Men by the Gospel, or the Christian Religion. The Scripture
sets forth to us this Change by great variety of expressions, by Conversion,
and turning from our Iniquities unto God; by Repentance, (which signifies a
change of our Mind and Resolution, and is in Scripture called Repentance from
dead works, and Repentance unto Life;) by Regeneration, or being born again; by
Resurrection from the Dead, and rising to newness of Life; by Sanctification,
and being washed and cleans'd from all filthiness and impurity, (which three
last Metaphors are implied in Baptism, which is called Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5.
According to his Mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing
of the ^oly Ghost; and our being born again of Water and the Holy Ghost, John
3. 3. Except a Man be born again, etc. and ver. 5. except a Man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and the
purifying of our Consciences, Heb. 10. 22. having our Hearts sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure water; and the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism does now save us; not the
putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God; and finally, our being Baptized into the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, Romans 6. 3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into
Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his death; therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of Life.) And
lastly, this Change is set forth to us by Renovation, and our being made New
Creatures, and new Men, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, that
is, professes himself a Christian, he is a new Creature; old things are past
away, behold all things are become new. And so likewise, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
this great Change is expressed by putting off concerning the former Conversation,
the old Man, which is corrupt according to the lusts of deceit, and being
renewed in the spirit of our Minds, and putting on that new Man, which after
God is Created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. The Expression is very
emphatical, renewed in the spirit of our Minds, that is, in our very Minds and
Spirits, to signify to us that it is a most inward and thorough Change,
reaching to the very center of our Souls and Spirits. And, Colos. 3. 9, 10,
11th verses, it is represented much after the same manner, Seeing ye have put
off the old Man with his deeds, and have put on the new Man, which is renewed
in knowledge after the Image of him that Created him, where there is neither
Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, S^ythian, bond nor
free; but Christ is all and in all. Which is the same with what the Apostle
says here in the Text, that in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision: but a new Creature; that is, these external Marks
and Differences signify nothing: but this inward Change, the new Creature,
Christ formed in us, this in the Christian Religion is all in all.

But that we may the more clearly understand the just importance of this
Metaphor of a new Creature, or a new Creation, I shall,

First, Consider what it does certainly signify, by comparing this
Metaphorical Phrase with other plain Texts of Scripture.

And Secondly, That it does not import what some would extend it to, so as to
found Doctrines of great Consequence upon the single strength of this, and the
like Metaphors in Scripture, without any manner of countenance from plain Texts.

First, I shall consider what this Metaphor does certainly import, so as to be
undeniably evident from other more clear and full Texts of Sripture, namely,
these two Things.

1. The greatness of this Change.

2. That it is effected and wrought by a Divine Power.

1. The greatness of this Change; it is called (...), a new Creation; as if the
Christian Doctrine, firmly entertained and believed, did as it were mould and
fashion Men over again, transforming them into a quite other sort of Persons
than what they were before, and made such a change in them, as the Creating
Power of God did, in bringing this Beautiful and orderly frame of things out of
their dark and rude Chaos. Thus the Apostle represents it, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, (alluding to the first Creation)
has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. We are translated from one extreme to another,
Acts 26. 18. When our Lord sends Paul to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, he
tells him what a change it would make in them, by opening their eyes, and
turning them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. And
St. Peter expresses the change which Christianity makes in Men, by their being
called out of darkness into a mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And so St. Paul.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.

And indeed, wherever the Doctrine of Christ has its full effect, and perfect
work, it makes a mighty change both in their inward Principles, and outward
Practice; it darts a new light into their Minds, so that they see things
otherwise than they did before, and form a different judgment of things from
what they did before; it endues them with a new Principle, and new Resolutions,
gives them another Spirit, and another Temper, a quite different sense and gust
of things from what they formerly had. And this inward change of their Minds
necessarily produces a proportionable change in their Lives and Conversations,
so that the Man steers quite another course, acts after another rate, and
drives on quite other designs from what he did before.

And this is remarkably seen in those who are reclaimed from Impiety and
Profaneness to Religion, and from a vicious to a virtuous course of Life. The
Change is great and real in all; but not so sensible and visible in some, as
others: in those who are made good by the insensible steps of a pious and
virtuous Education; as in those who are translated out of a quite contrary
state, and t^rn'd from the power of Satan unto God, and translated out of the
Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ; which was the case of the
Heathen World, in their first Conversion to Christianity.

Secondly, This Change is effected and wrought by a Divine Power, of the same
kind with that, which Created the World, and raised up Christ Jesus from the
Dead; two great and glorious Instances of the Divine Power; and to these the
Scripture frequently alludes, when it speaks of this New Creation. God, who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts. Like
as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also are
raised to newness of life, says St. Paul, Romans 6. 4. And to the same purpose
the same Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. And that ye may know what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the
operation of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead. So that our Renovation, and being made new Creatures, is an
instance of the same glorious Power, which exerted it self in the first
Creation of things, and in the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ from the
Dead; but not altogether after the same manner, as I shall show under the next
Head.

I should now in the second place proceed to show, that this Metaphor of a new
Creation does not import what some Men would extend it to, so as to found
Doctrines of great consequence upon the single strength of this and other like
Metaphors of Scripture, without any manner of countenance and confirmation from
plain Texts. But this I reserve to another Discourse.

SERMON VI.
Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order to Justification
and Salvation.
GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature.
IN these words are contained these two Things.

First, That the Gospel has taken away the obligation of the Law, having taken
away the sign of that Covenant, which was Circumcision.

Secondly, That according to the terms of the Gospel, and the Christian
Religion, nothing will avail to our justification and acceptance with God, but
the real renovation of our Hearts and Lives. For the full explication of this,
I propounded to do these three Things.

I. To show what is implied in this Phrase of a new Creature.

II. That this is the great Condition of our justification and acceptance with
God, and that it is the same in sense and substance with those other
expressions, in the two parallel Texts of Faith perfected by Charity, and
keeping the Commandments of God.

III. That it is very reasonable that this should be the Condition of our
justification, and acceptance to the favor of God.

I began with the first of these, viz. To show what is implied in this Phrase
of a New Creature; as to which I showed,

First, What this Metaphor does certainly import, so as to be undeniably
evident from other more clear and full Texts of Scripture; namely, the
greatness of this Change; and that it is effected by a Divine Power. I now
proceed;

Secondly, To show that it does not import what some would extend it to, and
that so as to found Doctrines of great Consequence upon the mere and single
strength of this and other like Metaphors of Scripture, without any manner of
countenance and confirmation from plain Texts; such Doctrines as these three.

1. That as the Creation was by an irresistible act of the Divine Power, so is
this new Creation, or Conversion of a Sinner.

2. That as Creatures were merely passive in their being made, and contributed
nothing at all to it; no more do we to our Conversion and Regeneration.

3. That as the Creation of the several Ranks and Kinds of Creatures was in an
instant, and effected by the powerful word of God, only saying, let such and
such things be, and immediately they were; so this new Creation, or the work of
Regeneration is in an ins^ant, and admits of no degrees.

Concerning these three Doctrines of great Mom^nt and Consequence in Divinity,
I shall show, with all the clearness and b^evity I can, that they are built
sol^ly upon Metaphors of Scriptu^e, ^or^^^'d and strained too far, without any
real ground and foundation from Scripture or Reason, nay, contrary to the tenor
of the one, and the dictates of the other; nay indeed contrary to the general
experience of the operation of God's Grace upon the Minds of Men in their
Conversion.

First, It is pretended, that as the Creation was by an irresistible act of the
Divine Power, so is the new Creation, or the Conversion of a Sinner; and this
is solely argued from the Metaphorical expressions of Scripture concerning
Conversion; such as being called out of darkness into light, alluding to that
powerful word of God, which in the first Creation commanded the light to shine
out of darkness; being quickened and raised to a new Life; and from this
Metaphor here in the Text, of a new Creation.

But surely it is a dangerous thing in Divinity, to build Doctrines upon
Metaphors, especially if we strain them to all the similitudes which a quick
and lively imagination can find out; whereas some one obvious thing is commonly
intended in the Metaphor, and the meaning is absolved and acquitted in that,
and it is folly to pursue it into all those similitudes, which a good fancy may
suggest. When our Savior says, that he will come as a Thief in the night, it
is plain what he means; that the Day of Judgment will surprise the careless
World, when they least look for it, that he will come at an hour when they are
not aware; and though he resemble his coming to that of a Thief in the night, yet
here is nothing of Robbery in the case. So here when the change which
Christianity makes in Men, is called a new Creation, this only imports the
greatness of the Change, which by the power of God's grace is made upon the
hearts and lives of Men; and the Metaphor is sufficiently absolved in this
plain sense and meaning of it, agreeable to the literal expressions of
Scripture concerning this thing, and there is no need that this Change should
in all other respects answer the work of Creation; and consequently there is no
necessity that it should be effected in an irresistible manner, or that we
should be altogether passive in this Change, and that we should no ways concur
to it by any act of our own, or that this work should be done in an instant,
and admit of no steps and degrees.

It is not necessary that this Change should be effected in an irresistible
manner. God may do so, when he pleases, without any injury to his Creatures;
for it is certainly no wrong to any Man to be made good and happy against his
will; and I do not deny, but that God sometimes does so. The Call of the
Disciples to follow Christ seems to have been a very sudden and forcible
impression upon their Minds, without any appearing reason for it; for it is not
reasonable for any Man to leave his Calling, and follow every one that bids him
do so. The Conversion of Saul from a Persecutor of Christianity, to a Zealous
Preacher of it, was certainly effected, if not in an irresistible, yet in a
very forcible and violent manner. The Conversion of three thousand at one
Sermon, when the Holy Ghost descended in a visible manner upon the Apostles,
was certainly the effect of a mighty and over-powering degree of God's grace.
And the like may be said of the sudden Conversion of so many Persons from
Heathenism, and great wickedness and impiety of Life, to the sincere profession
of Christianity, by the preaching of the Apostles afterward.

But that this is not of absolute necessity, nor the ordinary method of God's
grace, to work upon the minds of Men in so over-powering, much less in an
irresistible manner, is as plain as any thing of that Nature can be, both from
Experience, and the Reason of the thing, and the constant tenor of the
Scripture. We find that many (perhaps the greatest part) of those that are good
are made so by the insensible steps and degrees of a Religious Education, and
having been never vicious, can give no great account of any sensible Change,
only that when they came to years of understanding, they considered things
more, and the Principles that were instilled into them in their younger years,
did put forth themselves more vigorously at that time, as Seeds sprout out of
the ground, after they have a good while been buried, and lain hid in the Earth.

And it is contrary to Reason, to make an irresistible act of Divine Power
necessary to our Repentance, and Conversion; because this necessarily involves
in it two things which seem very unreasonable.

First, That no Man Repents upon Consideration and Choice, but upon mere force
and violent necessity, which quite takes away the Virtue of Repentance,
whatever virtue there may be in the consequent acts of a Regenerate State.

Secondly, It implies that the Conversion and Repentance of those, upon whom
God does not work irresistibly is impossible, which is the utmost can be said
to excuse the impenitency of Men, by taking it off from their own choice, and
laying it upon the impossibility of the thing, and an utter disability in them
to choose and do otherwise.

And it is likewise contrary to the constant tenor of the Bible, which
supposes that Men do very frequently resist the Grace and Holy Spirit of God.
It is said of the Pharisees by our Savior, Luke 7. 30. that they rejected the
Counsel of God against themselves; that is, the merciful Design of God for
their Salvation. And of the Jews, Acts 7. 51. that they always resisted the
Holy Ghost. So that some operations of God's grace and Holy Spirit are
resistible, and such, as if Men did not resist them, would be effectual to
bring them to Faith and Repentance; else why are the Pharisees said to reject
the counsel of God against themselves, that is, to their own ruin; implying,
that if they had not rejected it, they might have been saved; and if they had,
it had been without irresistible Grace; for that which was offered to them, was
actually resisted by them. Other Texts plainly show, that the Reason of Men's
impenitency and unbelief is not any thing wanting on God's part, but on theirs;
as those known Texts, wherein our Savior laments the Case of Jerusalem,
because they obstinately brought destruction upon themselves. Luke 19. 42. If
thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace;
intimating that they might have known them, so as to have prevented that
desolation which was coming upon them, and was a forerunner of their Eternal
Ruin; but now they are hid from thine eyes; intimating, that then God gave
them up to their own blindness and obstinacy, but the time was, when they might
have known the things of their peace; which cannot be upon the supposition of
the necessity of an irresistible act of God's Grace to their Conversion, and
Repentance; because then without that they could not have Repented, and if that
had been afforded to them, they had infallibly Repented. So likewise in that
other Text, Matthew. 23. 37. Oh! Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee, even as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and you
would not. And in John 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life.
He would have gathered them, and they would not; he would have given them Life,
but they would not come to him. Are these serious and compassionate
expostulations and declarations of our Savior's gracious intention toward
them, any ways consistent with an impossibility of their Repentance? which yet
must be said, if irresistible grace be necessary thereto; for then Repentance
is impossible without it, and that it was not afforded to them is plain,
because they did not Repent. The same may be said of that solemn declaration of
God, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and ^ive. Can it be
said that God has no pleasure in the death of Sinners, and yet be true, that
he denis to the greatest part of them, that grace which is necessary to their
Repentance? Upon this Supposition, how can it be true, that if the mighty works
that were done in Chorazin, and Bethsaida, had been done in Tire and Sidon,
they would have Repented, Matthew. 11. 21. since irresistible grace did not
accompany those Miracles? For if it had, Chorazin and Bethsaida had Repented,
and without it Tire and Sidon could not Repent.

The same difficulty is in those Texts, wherein God is represented as expecting
the Repentance and Conversion of Sinners; and our Savior wondering at their
unbelief and hardness of heart, and upbraiding them with it, Isa. 5. 4. What
could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore
when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?
Mark 6. 6. it is said our Savior marvell'd at the unbelief of the Jews. And
Chap. 16. 14. that he upbraided his Disciples with their unbelief, and hardness
of heart. But why should the Repentance of Sinners be expected, or their
unbelief marvell'd at, or indeed be upbraided to them, by him who knew it
impossible to them, without an irresistible power and grace, which he knew
likewise was not afforded to them? Neither God nor Men have reason to wonder
that any Man does not do that, which at the same time they certainly know he
cannot do.

The bottom of all that is said to avoid this pressing difficulty, is this;
that this impotency and disability of Sinners is their Sin, and therefore
cannot be pleaded in their excuse, for their impenitency; but God may still
justly require that of them, which they had once a natural power to do, but
wilfully forfeited and lost it; they had this power in Adam, and forfeited it
by his disobedience. To show how slight this evasion is, I need not run into
that Argument, how far we are guilty of the Sin of our first Parents. That by
that first transgression and disobedience all Mankind suffers, and our Natures
are extremely corrupted and depraved, cannot be denied: but the corruption of
our Natures is a thing very different from Personal guilt, strictly and
properly so called. I will take the business much shorter, and granting that
Mankind had in Adam a Natural power to have continued obedient to the Laws of
God, yet since by one Man Sin entered into the World, and all are now Sinners,
here is an obligation to Repentance, as well as to Obedience, and Men shall be
Condemned for their Impenitency. I ask now, whether in Adam we had a power to
Repent? It Is certain Adam had not this power, and therefore I cannot see how we
could lose it, and forfeit it in him. Adam indeed had a Natural Power not to
have sinned, and so not to have needed Repentance; but no power to Repent in
the state of Innocence, because in that state Repentance was impossible,
because there could be no occasion for it: he had it not after his fall,
because by that he forfeited all his power to that which is spiritually good.
It Is said indeed he had it in Innocence, but forfeited it by his Fall; so that
he had it, when there was no occasion or possibility of the exercise of it, and
lost it when there was occasion for it: or if he did not lose it by his Fall,
we have it still, and then there is no need of any supernatural, much less
irresistible grace to Repentance; so that our impotency, as to the particular
Duty of Repentance, cannot be charged upon us as our fault, not so much as upon
the account of Original Sin.

But the want of this Power is the consequent and just punishment of our first
Transgression. Be it so; but if this impotency still remain in all those to
whom God does not afford his irresistible grace, how comes th grace offered in
the Gospel to aggravate the impenitency of Men, and increase their
Condemnation? For if it be no Remedy against this impotency, how comes it to
inflame the guilt of Impenitency? Or how is it Grace to offer Mercy to those
upon their Repentance, who are out of a possibility of Repenting; and yet to
punish them more severely for their impenitency after this offer made to them,
which they cannot accept without that grace which God is resolved not to afford
them? If this be the Case, the greatest favor had been to have had no such
offer made to them, and it had been happier for Mankind, that the grace of God
had not appeared to all Men, but only to those who shall irresistibly be made
partakers of the benefit of it.

Secondly, Another Doctrine grounded upon this Metaphor of a new Creation, is,
that we are merely passive in the work of Conversion, and Regeneration, and
contribute nothing to it; that God does all, and we do nothing at all; and this
follows from the former, especially if we allow the Metaphor as far as it will
carry us. For as the first Creation of things was by an irresistible act of
Divine Power, so the things that were made, were only passive in their
Creation; and as they could make no resistance, so neither could they
contribute any thing ^o their being what they are. And this Doctrine is not
only argued from the Metaphor of a new Creation, but from several other
Metaphors used in Scripture to describe our Natural State; as namely, darkness,
blindness, and our being dead in trespasses and sins; from whence it is
inferred, that we contribute no more to our Renovation, than darkness does to
the introduction of light, than a blind Man can do to the recovery of his
sight, or a dead Man to his own Resurrection; but are wholly passive in this
work. And to countenance this Notion, they make great advantage of the
Character which is given in Scripture of the most degenerate Heathen, taking it
for granted, that their Condition is the true standard of a Natural and
unregenerate State; and to this purpose they insist particularly upon that
description of the gentile Idolaters, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness of their hearts; who being past feeling, have
given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Which is indeed a description of Men in their Natural State, but
not of all, but of such as by the worst sort of vicious practices of the
grossest Idolatry, and most abominable lewdness, were degerated to the utmost,
so that their Condition seemed desperate, without a miraculous and an
extraordinary grace of God, which was probably afforded to many of these. In
like manner they argue the common Condition of Mankind, from the description
which is given of the wickedness of Men, before God brought the Flood upon
them, G^n. 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
This they make the Character of all Men in their Natural State, whereas this is
a description of an extraordinary degeneracy of Men, signifying that the world
was then extremely bad, and depraved to the highest degree; for God gives this
as a Reason why he was resolved to drown the World, and to destroy Man from the
face of the Earth, because their wickedness was grown to so great an height.
But if this were a description of the Natural State of Mankind, this could be
no particular Reason for bringing a Flood upon the World at that time, there
being the same Reason for it for fifteen hundred years before, and ever will be
the same Reason to the end of the World, that is, that Men are naturally
corrupt and depraved. Surely they consider the Scripture very superficially,
that interpret it at this rate.

It Is too true, that the Nature of Man is sadly corrupted and depraved; but not
so bad as by vicious practices and habits it may be made; all Men are not
equally at the same distance from the grace of God; some are nearer to the
Kingdom of God than others, and less force and violence will serve to rescue
them from the power of Satan, and to transplant them into the Kingdom of
Christ. The prevalency and dominion of sin makes an unregenerate state, as the
prevalency of Grace puts a Man into a Regenerate state. An unregenerate Man is
not necessarily as bad as is poss^ble, no more than it is necessary to a
regenerate state, that a Man be per^ectly good; so that it is a great mistake
to argue the common Condition of all Mankind, from the descriptions that are
given in the Scripture of the worst of Men; and therefore if it were granted
that irresistible grace were necessary for the Conversion of such, it will not
follow that the same is necessary to all.

All unregenerate Men are not equally devoid of a sense of God, and Spiritual
things, they have many Convictions of what they ought to be and do, and under
those Convictions are very capable of persuasion, which dead Men are not. The
grace of God is necessary to the Conversion of a Sinner, but it is not
necessary that he should be only passive in this work. Experience tells us the
contrary, that we can do something, that we can cooperate with the grace of
God; and the Scripture tells us the same, and makes it an argument and
encouragement to us to work out our own Salvation, because God works in us both
to will and to do of his own goodness. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Besides that, it is the
greatest and justest discouragement in the world to all endeavors of
Repentance and Reformation, to tell Men that they can do nothing in it. He that
is sure of this, that he can do nothing in this work, is a Fool if he make any
attempt to become better, because he struggles with an impossibility, and if
the work will be done at all, it will be done without him, and he neither can,
nor ought to have any hand in it. But will any Metaphor bear Men out against so
palpable an absurdity as this?

And yet after all, there is no force in these Metaphors, to prove what they
aim at by them. For if to be dead in sin signifies an utter impotency to
goodness, then to be dead to sin must on the contrary signify an impossibility
of sinning; for just as the unregenerate Man is dead in sin, so he that is
regegenerate is said in Scripture to be dead to sin: But yet the best of
regenerate Men, notwithstanding they are dead to sin, and alive to God, do
offend in many things, and too frequently fall into sin. Why then should the
Metaphor be so strong on the one side, that a Man who is said to be dead in
sin, should not be able so much as to cooperate with the grace of God in the
work of Repentance and Conversion?

In s^ort, if this be true, that Men in an unregenerate and unconverted state
are perfectly dead, and have no more sense of Spiritual Things, than a dead Man
has of Natural Objects, then all Precepts and Exhortations to Repentance, and
all Promises and Threatenings to argue and persuade Men thereto are vain, and to
no purpose; and it would be every whit as proper and reasonable for us to
preach in the Churchyard, over the graves of dead Men, as in the Church to the
unregenerate; because they can no more act and move toward their own recovery
out of a state of Sin and Death, than the dead Bodies can rise out of their
graves.

But it is said, that the end of Exhortations and Promises is not to declare to
Men their Power, but their Duty. But if they be insensible, it is to as little
purpose to declare to them their Duty, as their Power. Besides, it will be an
hard thing to convince Men that any thing is their Duty, which at the same time
we declare to them to be out of their Power.

But this is Pelagianism, to say that of our selves we can Repent and turn to
God. and who says we can of our selves do this besides the Pelagians? We affirm
the necessity of God's grace hereto, and withal, the necessity of our
cooperating with the grace of God. We say that without the powerful excitation
and aid of God's grace, no Man can Repent, and turn to God; but we say
likewise, that God cannot be properly said to aid and assist those, who do
nothing themselves.

But Men can do more than they do, and therefore are justly Condemned. Not in
the work of Conversion sure; if they can do nothing at all. But they can do
more by way of preparation toward it. Suppose they do all they can toward it,
will this save them, or will God upon this irresistibly work their Conversion?
No, they say, notwithstanding any preparatory work that we can do, Conversion
may not follow; how then does this mend the matter?

But still they say the fault is in Men's want of will, and not of power; You
will not come unto me, that ye might have life. But can they will to come? No,
that they cannot neither. Why then it is still want of power that hinders them.
The offer of Life is a very gracious offer to them that are guilty, and liable
to death, as we all are; but not if the Condition be utterly impossible to us,
though the impossibility springs from our own fault, as I will plainly show by a
fair instance. A Prince offers a Pardon to a Traitor fast locked in Chains, if
he will come to him and submit himself; but if he be still detained in Chains,
and the Prince do not some way or other help him to his Liberty, it is so far
from being a favor to offer him a Pardon upon these terms, that it is a cruel
derision of his misery, to say to him you will not come to me that you may be
pardoned; and this notwithstanding that his being cast into Chains, was the
effect of his own Crime and Fault; the application is obvious. I should now
proceed to answer an Objection or two, and then to give a clear state of this
Matter, so as is most agreeable to Scripture, and the Attributes and
Perfections of God; but this I shall reserve for another Discourse.

SERMON VII.
Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order to Justification
and Salvation.
GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature.
THE Point which I am upon from these words is, that according to the terms of
the Gospel, nothing will avail to our Justification, but the real renovation of
our Hearts and Lives.

For the full explication of this, I propounded to show,

First, What is implied in this expression of the new Creature.

Secondly, That this is the great Condition of our justification and acceptance
with God.

Thirdly, That it is highly Reasonable that this should be the Condition of our
Justification.

In speaking to the first of these, I have showed, 1 st. What this Metaphor
does certainly import; and 2 dly, That it does not import what some would
extend it to, whereon to found such Doctrines as these.

First, That as the Creation was an irresistible act of the Divine Power, so is
this new Creation, or the Conversion of a Sinner.

Secondly, As Creatures were merely passive in their being made, and
contributed nothing at all to it, no more do we in our Conversion, and
Regeneration.

Thirdly, That as the Creation of the several Kinds and Ranks of Creatures was
effected in an instant, by the powerful Word of God, saying, let such and such
things be, and immediately they were; so this new Creation is in an instant,
and admits of no degrees.

The first of these I have considered, and entered upon the second; namely,
that as the Creatures were merely passive in their being made, and contributed
nothing at all thereto, no more do we in our Conversion and Regeneration.

This I told you does plainly make void all the Precepts and Exhortations, and
all the Promises and Threatenings of Scripture, to argue and persuade Men to
Repentance.

That which remains to be done upon this Argument, is,

First, To answer an Objection or two, which are commonly urged by the
Assertors of this Doctrine, that we are merely passive in the work of
Conversion.

Secondly, To give a clear state of this Matter, so as is most agreeable to
Scripture, and the Attributes and Perfections of God. For the

First. The Objections are these three.

1. That if we be not merely passive in the work of Regeneration and
Conversion, we ascribe the whole glory of this work to our selves, and not to
God.

Or, 2 dly, We do however extenuate or lessen the grace of God, if there be any
active Concurrence and Endeavors of our own toward this Change.

3 dly, They ask St. Paul's question, Who makes thee to differ? and think it
impossible to be answered, if the efficacy of God's grace to depend upon our
concurrence and compliance with it. These are all the Material Objections I
know; to every one of which I hope to give a very clear and sufficient Answer.

1. Objection. If we be not merely passive in the Work of Regeneration and
Conversion, we ascribe the whole glory of this work to our selves, and not to
God. But that I certainly know this Objection is commonly made, and have seen
it in very Considerable Authors, I could not believe that Men of so good sense
could make it. For this is to say, that if we do any thing in this work, though
we acknowledge that what we do in it, we do by the assistance of God's grace,
we ascribe it wholly to our selves, and rob God altogether of the glory of his
grace; or in plainer terms, it is to say, that though we say God does never so
much, and we but very little in this work, yet if we do not say that God does
all, and we nothing at all, we take the whole work to our selves, and say God
does nothing at all; which let any one that considers what we ^ay judge,
whether we say so or no.

The Scripture, which never robs God of the glory of his grace, does I Am sure
ascribe our Conversion and Repentance, our Regeneration and Sanctification to
several Causes; To the Holy Spirit of God, to his Ministers, to his Word, and
to our selves. To the Holy Spirit of God, as the principal Author, and
Efficient. Hence we are said to be born of the Spirit, to be sanctified by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost. To the Ministers of God, as the Instruments of our
Conversion. Hence they are said to turn Men to Righteousness, to Convert a
Sinner from the evil of his ways, to save Souls from death, to save themselves,
and them that hear them; to be our Spiritual Fathers, and to beget us in
Christ. To the word of God, as the subordinate Means and Instruments of our
Conversion. Hence we are said to be begotten by the word of truth, to be
sanctified by the truth. And lastly, to our selves, as concurring some way or
other to this work. Hence we are said to believe and repent, to turn from our
evil ways, and to turn to the Lord, to cleanse and purify our selves. Hence
likewise are those frequent Commands in Scripture, to amend our ways and
doings, to wash our hearts from wickedness, to repent and turn our selves, and
to make our selves new Hearts, and new Spirits. So that all these Causes, the
Spirit of God, his Ministers, his Word, and we our selves, do all some way or
other concur and contribute to this Effect. God indeed is the Principal, and
has so great an hand in this Work from beginning to end, that all the rest are
nothing in Comparison, and we do well to ascribe to him the whole glory of it,
that no Flesh may glory in his sight: But nevertheless in strictness of speech
sufficiently warranted by Scripture, the Ministers of God, and the Word of God,
and we our selves do all cooperate some way or other to our Conversion, and
Regeneration; and by ascribing to any of these such parts as they truly have in
this work, God is not robbed of any part of the glory of his grace, much less
of the whole. Much less is it the ascribing it all to our selves, whom we
affirm to have the least part in it, not worthy to be mentioned, in Comparison
of the riches of God's grace toward us. And yet unless we do something, what
can be the meaning of making our selves new hearts and new spirits? Is it only
that we should be passive to the irresistible operation's of God's grace? that
is, that we should not hinder, what we can neither hinder nor promote; that we
should so demean our selves, as of necessity we must whether we will or no. So
then to make our selves new hearts and new spirits, is to do nothing at all
toward the hinderance or furtherance of this work; and if this be the meaning
of it, it is a Precept and E^hortation just as fit for Stones, as for Men; that
is, very improper for either.

2. Objection. But however, we do extenuate and lessen the grace of God, if
there be any active concurrence and endeavors on our part toward this Change.
For answer to this, three things deserve to be considered.

First, It is very well worthy our Consideration, that they who make this
Objection, have the confidence to pretend that they do not d^minish the grace
of God, by confining it to a very small part of Mankind in Comparison; nay,
they will needs face us down, that by this very thing they do very much exalt
and magnify it, and that the grace of God is so much the greater, by how much
the fewer they are that are partakers of it. But I hope they only mean that the
grace is greater to themselves; (in which conceit there is commonly as much of
envy as gratitude) but surely they cannot mean that the grace which is limited
to a few, is greater in it self, and upon the whole matter, than that which is
extended to a great many; it being a downright Contradiction, to say that the
grace of God is magnified by being confined. For at this rate of Reasoning, the
lesser it is, the greater it must be, and by undeniable consequence would be
greatest of all, if it were none at all. So that it seems the grace of God may
be extenuated in favor of our selves; but when we do so, we must say we
magnify it.

Secondly, But to come close to the Objection; though it be true, that if God's
grace in our Conversion do not do all, it does not do so much as if it did all;
yet this is really no injury or dishonor to the grace of God; and though in some
sense it does extenuate it, it does not in truth and reality take off from the
glory of it. In my Opinion, the grace and favor of a Prince is not the less in
offering a Pardon to a Traitor, who puts forth his hand and gladly receives it,
than if he forced it upon him whether he would or no. I am sure it is in the
first Case much fitter to give it, and he on whom it is conferred much better
qualified to receive it. It Is no disparagement to a Prince's Favor, that it is
bestowed on one who is in some measure qualified to receive it. But be it more
or less in one Case than the other, this is certain, that in both Cases the Man
ows his Life to the great grace and goodness of his Prince; and I cannot see
how it lessens the grace, that the miserable Object of it, the guilty and
condemned Person, was either by his humble submission, or thankful acceptance
of it, in some degree better qualified to receive such a Favor, than an
obstinate Refuser of it.

Thirdly, Which is the Principal Consideration of all, we must take great heed,
that while we endeavor to make God to do all in the Conversion of Sinners, we
do not by this means charge upon him the ruin and destruction of impenitent
Sinners, which I doubt we should do, if we make the Reason of their impenitency
and ruin their utter impotency and disability to Repent; and we certainly make
this the Reason of their impenitency and ruin if there be no other difference
but this between penitent and impenitent Sinners, namely, that in the one God
works Repentance by an irresistible act of his Power, so that he cannot but
Repent, and denis this grace to the other, without which he cannot possibly
Repent. But the Scripture charge the destruction of Men upon themselves, and
lays their impenitency at their own door. Oh Israel! thou have destroyed thy
self; but in me is thy help, Hosea 13. 9. But where is the help, when the grace
absolutely necessary to Repentance is denied? And how is their destruction of
themselves, if it is unavoidable, let them do what they can? Isa. 5. 3, 4. God
appeals to his People Israel, that nothing was wanting on his part, that was
fit and necessary to be done, that they might bring forth the fruits of
Repentance, and better Obedience. And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men
of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me and my Vineyard; what could have been
done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore when I looked
that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Is it true
that God has done all that was necessary to have brought them to Repentance?
Then if irresistible grace be necessary, he afforded them that; but that was
not afforded them, because then they must unavoidably have Repented, and there
had been no cause for this Complaint: If he did not afford it, but only the
outward means of Repentance without the inward grace (as some say;) then it is
easy to judge why they did not Repent; Because they could not; and there seems
to be no Cause either of Wonder, or Complaint. Besides that it will be hard to
justify that Saying, What could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have
not done in it? when it is acknowledged by the assertors of this Doctrine, that
the main thing was not done, and that without which all the rest signified
nothing, leaving them under the same impossibility of Repentance, as if nothing
at all had been done to them.

But now upon our supposition, that sufficient grace was afforded to them,
which they wilfully neglected to make use of, the Reason and Equity of this
Complaint is evident, and God is acquitted, as having done what was needful on
his part, and the Sinner justly Condemned, for not concurring with the grace of
God as he might have done; which shows that we are not merely passive in this
work, but something is expected from us, after God has done his part, which if
we neglect to do, our destruction is of our selves. Whereas the contrary
supposition, upon pretense of glorifying God's grace, by making him to do all
in the Conversion of Sinners, indangers the honor of his Justice, by laying
the impenitency of Sinners, and their ruin consequent upon it, at his door;
which is to advance one Attribute of God upon the ruin of another; whereas it
is a Fundamental Principle of Religion, to take care to reconcile the
Attributes and Perfections of God to one another; for that is not a Divine
Perfection, which contradicts any other Perfection.

The 3 d Objection is grounded upon that question of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who
makes thee to differ? which they think impossible to be answered, if the
efficacy of God's grace depend upon our concurrence and compliance with it.
For, say they, when God offers his grace to two persons for their Repentance,
if the true Reason why the one Repents, and the other remains impenitent, be
this, that the one complieth with this grace of God, and yields to it, the
other resists and stands out against it; then it is not the grace of God which
makes the difference, for that is equal to both, but something in themselves,
and so it is not God that makes them to differ, but they themselves.

But this question is impertinent to this Case. The Apostle speaks it
concerning Spiritual Gifts, upon account of which, they factiously admired some
of the Apostles above others, and concerning them the question is very proper,
who makes thee to differ? Miraculous gifts were so ordered by God, that Men
were merely passive in the receiving of them, and contributed nothing to the
obtaining of them; and therefore if one had greater gifts than another, it was
merely the pleasure of God that made the difference. But the Case is not the
same in the graces of God's Spirit, toward the obtaining and improving
whereof, we our selves may contribute something; our Savior having assured us,
that to him that has, shall be given. And here the question is not proper, nor
is it true that the grace of God makes all the difference. It is indeed the
Foundation of all the good that is in us: but our different Improvement makes
different seize in grace and goodness. Among those to whom the Talents
were entrusted, what made the difference between the Man who wrapped his Talent
in the Napkin, and buried it, and those who gained double by theirs, but that
the one improved the grace conferred on him, the other neglected it, and this
without any manner of reflection upon, or diminution of the grace of God, or
any danger from St. Paul's question, who makes thee to differ? Put the Case a
Pardon is offered to two Malefactors, the one accepts, the other refuses it;
their own choice makes the difference between them; but he that is saved is
nevertheless beholden to the King's Pardon for his Life, and it were a
senseless ingratitude in him, because he accepts the Pardon, when the other
refuses it, to say that he did not owe his Life to the grace and favor of his
Prince, but might thank himself for it; whereas that he was in a capacity to
accept a Pardon, was wholly due to the clemency of his Prince, who offered it
to him when he no wise deserved it. In this Case the thing plainly appears as
it is, by which every Man may see, that it is against common sense to pretend
that the grace of God is destroyed, if there be any compliance on our part with
it; that it is no grace, if it be not forced upon us, and we be not merely
passive in the reception of it. I proceed in the

Second place, to give a clear state of this Matter, so as is most agreeable to
the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, and the essential Attributes and
Perfections of God. In order to which, I will give you a short view of the
several Opinions concerning this Matter. And there are two extreme, and two
middle Opinions, concerning the operation of God's grace in the Conversion of a
Sinner.

The First of the extreme Opinions is that which all this while I have been
arguing against, namely, that all that are Conv^^ted and Regenerated, are
wrought upon in an irresistible manner, and are merely passive in it; and that
those who are not thus wrought upon, their Repentance and Conversion is
impossible. What the inconveniences of this Opinion are, I have showed at
large.

The other extreme Opinion is, that none are thus wrought upon, because it
would be a violence and injury to Man's Natural Liberty; but that sufficient
grace is offered to all, one time or other, who live under the Gospel, which
they may comply with or resist; and consequently if they be not brought to
Repentance, their impenitency and ruin is the effect of their own choice, and
God is free from the blood of all Men. But this Opinion, though infinitely more
reasonable than the other, seems not to have any necessary Foundation either in
Scripture or Reason. There are some instances in Scripture of the Conversion of
Men after a very violent, if not an irresistible manner, which seems to be
attributed to a particular predestination of God; as that of St. Paul, who says
of himself, Gal. 1. 15. that he was separated from his Mother's Womb to that
work to which he was called; and the manner of his Conversion was answerable to
such a predestination; and there is nothing in Reason against this, since it is
no injury to any Man to be made good and happy against his will.

The two middle Opinions are these.

First, That irresistible Grace is afforded to all the Elect, and sufficient
Grace to all others who live under the Gospel (for of those only we speak, the
Case of others being peculiar, and belonging to the extraordinary Mercy of God)
but then they say, that none of those to whom this sufficient Grace is
afforded, shall effectually comply with it, and be saved. This Opinion seems
more moderate, and has this advantage in it, that it acquits the Justice of
God in the Condemnation of those, who having sufficient Grace afforded to them,
did yet notwithstanding continue impenitent; but yet it has two great
inconveniences in it.

First, That this Supposition is to no purpose, as to any real effect for the
Salvation of Men, because not one person more is saved, notwithstanding this
Universal sufficient Grace, which they say is afforded to all; for they take it
for granted it is never effectual, and then it seems very unreasonable to
suppose, that a Means sufficient to its End should Universally prove
ineffectual; nay, on the contrary, it is next to a Demonstration against the
sufficiency of a Means, if perpetually and in all instances it fails of its
End. This would tempt any Man to think, that surely there is some defect in it,
or something that hinders the efficacy of it; if being perpetually and
generally afforded, it does perpetually and universally miscarry, without so
much as one instance among so many millions to the contrary. So that this
Opinion seems rather to be contrived for a color and shelter against some
absurdity, which Men know not how to avoid otherwise, than to s^rve any good
purpose, or to be embraced for the truth and probability of it.

The other middle Opinion is, That some are Converted in an irresistible
manner, when God pleases, and whom he designs to be extraordinary Examples and
Instruments for the good of others, and that sufficient Grace is afforded to
others, which is effectual to the Salvation of many, and rejected by a great
many. And this avoids all the inconveniency of the other Opinion, and is
evidently most agreeable both to the tenor of Scripture, and to the best
notions which Men have concerning the Attributes and Perfections of God, and
gives greatest encouragement to the endeavors of Men. It agrees very well with
the solemn declarations of Scripture, that God is not wanting on his part, to
afford Men sufficient Means to bring them to Repentance; that he desires not
the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and
live; That he would have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth; That he would not that any should perish, but that all should come
to Repentance; That Men's destruction is of themselves. And this makes all the
Exhortations and Motives of Scripture to Repentance to be of some force and
significancy, and gives encouragement to the Resolutions and Endeavors of Men
to become better. This clearly acquits the Justice of God in the Condemnation
of impenitent Sinners, and sixeth the Reason of their ruin upon their own
choice. This perfectly reconciles the operation and assistance of God's grace
in our Conversion and Regeneration, in our Sanctification and Perseverance in a
good Course, with the concurrence of our own Endeavors, and makes those plain
Texts of Scripture have some sense and significancy in them; Work out your own
Salvation; Repent and turn your selves from all your evil ways; Make ye new
Hearts and new Spirits. These are more than a thousand Metaphors to convince a
Man, that we may and ought to do something toward our Repentance and
Conversion. And if any Man be sure that we neither do nor can do any thing in
this Work, then I am sure that these Texts signify nothing. Finally, these
Texts which speak most clearly of the necessity of the Divine Grace and
As^^stance, to our doing of any thing that is spiritually good, do suppose
something to be done on our part. That of our Savior, without me you can do
nothing, implies that with his Grace and Assistance we can. That of St. Paul, I
am able to do all things through Christ strengthening me, implies, that what we
do by the strength of Christ is truly our own act; I am able to do all things.
And this does not in the least prejudice nor obscure the glory of God's grace.
St. Paul it seems knew very well how to reconcile these two, and to give the
grace of God its due, without rejecting all concurrence of our own industry and
endeavor, 1 Corin. 15. 10. But by the grace of God I am what I am; and his
Grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain; not because it was
irresistible, and he merely passive in the reception of it; but because he did
concur and cooperate with it. So he tells us, his Grace that was bestowed
upon me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me. So that our Concurrence and
Endeavor in the doing of any thing that is good, does not derogate from the
grace of God, provided that we ascribe the good which we do to the assistance
of Divine Grace, to which it is incomparably more due, than to our own activity
and endeavor. And so St. Paul does, I labored abundantly; yet not I, but the
grace of God, which was with me.

So that the glory of God's grace may be advanced to its due pitch, without
asserting that we are merely passive to the Operations of it. God's grace may
be abundantly bestowed upon us, and yet we may labor abundantly; God may work
in us to will and to do, and yet we may work out our own Salvation. I have done
with the Second Doctrine grounded upon this Metaphor of a New Creature.

SERMON VIII.
Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order to Justification
and Salvation.
GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature.
IN Discoursing on these Words, that which I was last upon was to show, that
this Metaphor of a New Creature does not import what some would extend it to,
and that so as to found Doctrines of great Consequence upon the single strength
of this, and other like Metaphors, viz. such Doctrines as these three.

First, That as the Creation was by an irresistible act of the Divine Power, so
is this new Creation, or the Conversion of a Sinner.

Secondly, That as Creatures were merely passive in their being made, and
contributed nothing at all thereto, no more do we to our Conversion and
Regeneration.

Thirdly, That as the Creation was in an instant, only by the powerful Word of
God, so this new Creation is in an instant, and admits of no degrees. The two
first of these I have spoken to, and showed, that as they had no necessary
Foundation in this and the like Metaphors of Scripture, so they are contrary to
Reason and Experience, and the plain and constant tenor of Scripture, which is
the Rule and Measure of Christ's Doctrine. I proceed now to consider the

Third Doctrine, which is grounded upon this Metaphor, namely, That as the
Creation of the several Ranks and Orders of Creatures was in an instant, and
effected by the powerful Word of God, saying let such and such things be, and
immediately they were; so this new Creation is in an instant, and admits of no
steps and degrees. And this Doctrine is nothing else but a farther pursuit of
the Metaphor; and admitting the two former Doctrines to be true, and well
grounded upon this Metaphor, this third Doctrine follows well enough from them;
for it is agreeable enough, that that which is effected by an irresistible act
of Omnipotence, without any concurrence or operation on our part, should be
done in an instant, and all at once. Not that this is necessary, but that it is
reasonable; for why should Omnipotence use delays, and take time, and proceed
by degrees in the doing of that, which with the same ease it can do at once,
and in an instant? especially considering how well this suits with the other
Metaphors of Scripture, as well as with this of a new Creation, viz. the
Metaphor of Regeneration, and Resurrection. A Child is born at once, and the
Dead shall be raised in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.

But notwithstanding all this plausible appearance and Conspiracy of Metaphors,
I shall show that this Doctrine of the Conversion and Regeneration of a Sinner
being effected in an instant, and all at once, is not well grounded either upon
Scripture, or Experience. Not but that God can do so if he pleases, and works
this Change in some much sooner and quicker than in others; but there is
nothing either in Scripture or Experience to persuade us that this is the
usual, much less the constant and unalterable Method of God's grace in the
Conversion of a Sinner, to bring it about in an instant, without any sensible
steps and degrees.

But for the full clearing of this Matter, I shall proceed by these steps.

First, I shall show upon what mistaken Grounds and Principles this Doctrine
relies, besides the Metaphors already mentioned, which I have shown to be of no
force to prove the thing.

Secondly, I shall plainly show what Regeneration is; by which it will appear,
that it is not necessarily effected in an instant, and at once, but admits of
degrees.

Thirdly, That it is evidently so in experience of the ordinary Methods of
God's grace, both in those who are Regenerated by a Pious and Religious
Education, and in those who are reclaimed from a vicious Course of Life.

Fourthly, That all this is very consonant and agreeable to what the Scripture
plainly and constantly declares concerning it.

First, I shall discover several Mistakes upon which this Doctrine is grounded,
besides the Metaphors already mentioned, and which I have shown to be of no
force to prove the thing, viz. That Regeneration is in an instant, and admits
of no degrees. As,

1. That Regeneration and Sanctification are not only different Expressions,
but do signify two things really different. But this is a gross mistake; for
Regeneration and Sanctification are but different expressions of the self self
same thing; for Regeneration is a Metaphor which the Scripture uses to express
our translation and change from one state to another, from a state of Sin and
Wickedness, to a state of Grace and Holiness, as if we were born over again,
and were the Children of another Father, and from being the Children of the
Devil, did become the Children of God; and Sanctification is our being made
Holy, our being purified and cleansed from Sin and impurity. And hence it is
that Regeneration and Sanctification are attributed to the same Causes,
Principal, and Instrumental, to the Spirit of God, and to the word of God; we
are said to be born again of the Spirit, and to be sanctified by the Holy
Ghost; to be begotten of the word of truth, and to be sanctified by the truth,
which is the word of God. So that the Scripture speaks of them as the same
thing; and they must needs be so, for if Sanctification be the making of us
Holy, and Regeneration make us Holy; then Regeneration is Sanctification.

2. It is said, that Regeneration only signifies our first entrance into this
state, and Sanctification our progress and continuance in it. But this likewise
is a great Mistake. For though it be true, that Regeneration does signify our
first entrance into this state, yet it is not true, that it only signifies
that; for it is used likewise in Scripture to signify our continuance in that
state; for Christians are said to be the Children of God, and consequently in a
regenerate state, not only in the instant of this Change, but during their
continuance in it. Besides that our first Change is as well called our
Sanctification, as our Progress and Continuance in a state of Holiness. So that
neither in this is there any difference between Regeneration, and
Sanctification. They do both of them signify both our first entrance into an
Holy state, and our continuance and progress in it' though Regeneration do more
frequently denote the making of this Change, and our first entrance into it.

3. It is said that one of the main Differences between Regeneration and
Sanctification is this, that Regeneration is incapable of degrees, and all that
are Regenerate are equally so, and one Regenerate Person is not more or less
Regenerate than another; whereas Sanctification is a gradual progress from one
degree of Holiness to another, and of them that are truly Sanctified and Holy,
one may be more Sanctified and more Holy than another. But this likewise is a
mere fancy and imagination, without any real ground. For as an unregenerate
state does plainly admit of degrees, so likewise does the regenerate, and for
the same Reason. That an unregenerate state admits of degrees, is evident, in
that some unregenerate Persons are more wicked than others, and thereby more
the Children of wrath, and the Devil, than others, which are the Scripture
expressions concerning the degrees of Men's Wickedness and Impi^ty. In like
manner, they that are more Holy, and more like God, are more the Children of
God; and to be more a Child of God, is surely to be more regenerate, that is,
more renewed after the Image of God, which consists in Righteousness, and true
Holiness. So that it is a mere precarious assertion, and evidently false to
affirm, that Regeneration does not admit of degrees, and that one is not more
Regenerate than another.

4 thly, and lastly, They ground this Conceit upon the Doctrine of the Schools,
which teach, that in Regeneration and Conversion all the habits of grace are
infused, simul and semel, together, and at once. I confess I have no regard,
much less a veneration for the Doctrine of the Schools, where it differs from
that of the Holy Scriptures, which says not one word of infused habits, which
yet are much talked of in Divinity; and to speak the truth, these words serve
only to obscure the thing. For to say that in Conversion the habits of all
graces and virtues are infused together and at once, is to say, that in an
instant Men that were vicious before in several kinds, are by an Omnipotent act
of God's grace, and by a new Principle infused into them, endued with the
habits of the contra^y Graces and Virtues, and are as Chaste, and Temperate, and
Just, and Meek, and Humble, as if by the frequent practice of these Virtues
they had become so. That this may be, and sometimes is, I am so far from
denying, that I believe it to be so. Some Men, by an extraordinary power of
God's grace upon their hearts, are suddenly changed, and strangely reclaimed
from a very Wicked and Vicious, to a very Religious and Virtuous Course of
Life, and that which others attain to by slower degrees, and great conflicts
with themselves, before they can gain the upper hand of their Lusts, these
arrive at all on the sudden, by a mighty Resolution wrought in them by the
power of God's grace, and as it were a new bias and inclination put^ upon
their Souls, equal to an habit gained by long use and custom. This God
sometimes does, and when he does this, it may in some sense be called the
infusion of the habits of Grace and Virtue together and at once; because the
Man is hereby endowed with a Principle of equal force and power with habits
that are acquired by long use and practice. A strong and vigorous Faith is the
principle and root of all Graces and Virtues, and may have such a powerful
influence upon the Resolutions of our Minds, and the government of our Actions,
that from this Principle all Graces and Virtues may spring and grow up by
degrees into habits; but then this Principle is not formally but virtually, in
the power and efficacy of it; the infusion of the habits of every Grace and
Virtue; and even in those Persons in whom this Change is so suddenly, and as it
were at once, I doubt not but that the habits of several Graces and Virtues are
afterward attained by the frequent practice of them, in the virtue of this
powerful Principle of the Faith of the Gospel, as I shall show in the progress
of this Discourse. And this I doubt not was very frequent and visible in many
of the first Converts to Christianity; especially of those, who from the
abominable Idolatry and Impiety of Heathenism were gained to the Christian
Religion. The Spirit of God did then work very Miraculously, as well in the
Cures of Spiritual as of Bodily Diseases. But then to make this the Rule and
Standard of God's ordinary Proceedings in the Conversion and Regeneration of
Men, is equally unreasonable, as still to expect Miracles for the Cure of
Diseases; and it is certain in experience, that this is not God's ordinary
Method in the Conversion of Sinners, as I shall fully show by and by.

Secondly, I shall show what Regeneration is, by which it will plainly appear,
that there is no necessity that it should be effected in an instant, and at
once, but that it will admit of degrees. I do not deny that it may be in an
instant, and at once. The Power of God is able to do this, and sometimes does
it very thoroughly, and very suddenly. But the question is, whether there be a
necessity it should be so, and always be so. Now Regeneration is the change of
a Man's state, from a state of Sin, to a state of Holiness; which because it is
an entrance upon a new kind or course of Life, it is fitly resembled to
Regeneration, or a new Birth; to a new Creation, the Man being as it were quite
charged, or made over again, so as not to be, as to the main purpose and design
of his life, the same Man he was before. This is a plain sensible account of
the thing, which every one may easily understand. Now there is nothing in
Reason, why a Man may not gradually be changed, and arrive at this state by
degrees; as well as after this change is made, and he arrived at this state of
a Regenerate Man, he may by degrees grow and improve in it. But the latter no
Man doubts of, but that a Man that is in a state of grace, may grow and improve
in grace; and there is as little Reason to question why a Man may not come to
this state by degrees, as well as leap into it at once.

All the difficulty I know of in this Matter, is a mere nicety, that there is
an instant in which every thing begins, and therefore Regeneration is in an
instant; so that the instant before the Man arrived at this state, it could not
be said that he was Regenerate, and the instant after he is in this state, it
cannot be denied that he is so. But this is idle subtilety, just as if a Man
should prove that an House was built in an instant, because it could not be
said to be built, 'till the instant it was finished; though for all this, nothing
is more certain than that it was built by degrees. Or, suppose the time of
arriving at Man's estate be at one and twenty, does it from hence follow, that
a Man does not grow to be a Man by degrees, but is made a Man in an instant;
because just before one and twenty he was not at Man's estate, and just then he
was? Not but that God, if he please, can make a Man in an instant, as he did
Adam; but it is not necessary from this Example, that all Men should be made
so, much less does it follow from this vain subtilety. This is just the Case.
All the while the Man is tending toward a Regenerate state, and is struggling
with his Lusts, 'till by the power of God's Grace, and his own Resolution he
get the Victory; all the while he is under the sense and conviction of his
sinful and miserable state, and sorrowing for the folly of his past Life, and
coming to an effectual Purpose and Resolution of changing his Course; and it
may be several times thrown back by the temptations of the Devil, and the power
of evil habits, and the weakness and instability of his own purpose; 'till at
last, by the grace of God following and assisting him, he comes to a firm
Resolution of a better Life, which Resolution governs him for the future; I say
all this while, which in some Persons is longer, in others shorter, according
to the power of evil habits, and the different degrees of God's grace afforded
to Men; all this time the Work of Regeneration is going on, and though a Man
cannot be said to be in a Regenerate state, 'till that very instant that the
Principle of Grace and his good Resolution have got the upper hand of his
Lusts, yet it is certain for all this, that the Work of Regeneration was not
effected in an instant. This is plainly and truly the Case, as I shall show in
the

Third Particular I propounded, namely, that it is evident from experience of
the ordinary Methods of God's grace, both in those who are Regenerated by a
Pious and Religious Education, and those who are reclaimed from a vicious
Course of Life.

The first sort, namely those who are brought to goodness by a Religious and
Virtuous Education; these (at least, so far as my Observation reaches) make up
a very considerable part of the number of the Regenerate, that is, of good Men.
And though it be certain, considering the Universal Corruption and degeneracy of
Humane Nature, that there is a real Change made in them, by the operation of
God's grace upon their Minds, yet it is as certain in experience, that this
Change is made in very many, by very silent and insensible degrees, 'till at
length the seeds of Religion, which were planted in them by a good Education,
do visibly prevail over all the evil inclinations of corrupt Nature, so as to
sway and govern the Actions of their Lives; and when the Principles of grace
and goodness do apparently prevail, we may conclude them to be in a Regenerate
s^ate, though perhaps very few of these can give any account of the particular
time and occasion of this Change. For things may be seen in their Effect, which
were never very sensible in their Cause. And it is very Reasonable, that such
Persons who never lived in any evil course, should escape those Pangs and
Terrors which unavoidably happen unto others, from a course of actual Sin, and
the guilt of a wicked Life; and if there be any such Persons as I have
described, who are in this gradual and insensible manner Regenerated, and made
good, this is a Demonstration, that there is no necessity that this Change
should be in an instant, it being so frequently found to be otherwise in
Experience.

And as for others, who are visibly reclaimed from a notorious wicked Course,
in these we likewise frequently see this Change gradually made, by strong
impressions made upon their Minds, most frequently by the Word of God,
sometimes by his Providence, whereby they are convin^'d of the evil and danger
of their Course, and awakened to Consideration, and melted into Sorrow and
Repentance, and perhaps exercised with great terrors of Conscience, 'till at
length by the grace of God, they come to a fixed Purpose and Resolution of
forsaking their Sins, and turning to God; and after many struglings and
conflicts with their Lusts, and the strong bias of evil habits, this
Resolution assisted by the grace of God, does effectually prevail, and make a
real change both in the Temper of their Minds, and the Course of their Lives;
and when this is done, and not before, they are said to be Regenerate. But all
the while this was a doing, the new Man was forming, and the work of
Regeneration was going on; and it was perhaps a very considerable time from the
first beginning of it, 'till it came to a fixed and settled state. And this I
doubt not in experience of most Persons who are reclaimed from a vicious course
of Life, is found to be the usual and ordinary Method of God's grace in their
Conversion. And if so, it is in vain to pretend that a thing is done in an
instant, which by so manifold experience is found to take up a great deal of
time, and to be effected by degrees.

And whereas some Men are pleased to call all this the Preparatory work to
Regeneration, but not the Regeneration it self, this is an idle contention
about words. For if these Preparations be a degree of goodness, and a gradual
tendency toward it, then the work is begun by them, and during the continuance
of them, is all the while a doing, and though it be hard to fix the point or
instant when a Man just arrives at this state, and not before, yet it is very
sensible when a Man is in it, and this Change when it is really made, will soon
discover it self by plain and sensible effects.

Fourthly, and Lastly, all this is very agreeable to the plain and constant
tenor of Scripture. Isa. 1. 16. where the Prophet exhorts to this Change, he
speaks of it as a gradual thing, Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well; that is,
break off evil and vicious habits, and gain the contrary habits of virtue and
goodness by the exercise of it. The Scripture speaks of some, as farther from a
state of grace than others, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil; plainly declaring the great difficulty, equal almost to a natural
impossibility, of reclaiming those to goodness, who have been long habituated
to an evil course. And the Scripture speaks of some as nearer to a state of
grace than others. Our Savior tells the young Man in the Gospel, who said he
had kept the Commands of God from his youth; that he was not far from the
Kingdom of God. But now if by an irresistible act of God's power, this Change
be made in an instant, and cannot otherwise be made, how is one Man nearer to a
state of Grace, or farther from it than another? If all that are made good,
must be made so in an instant or not at all, then no Man is nearer being made
good than another; for if he were nearer to it, he might sooner be made so; but
that cannot be, if all must be made good in an instant, for sooner than that no
Man can be made so. If the similitude of our being dead in sins and trespasses
be strictly taken, no Man is nearer a Resurrection to a new Life than another;
as he that died but a week ago, is as far from being raised to life again, as
he that died a thousand years ago; the Resurrection of both requires an
Omnipotent act, and to that both are equally easy.

The two Parables of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 31, 33. are by many Interpreters
understood of the gradual operation of grace upon the hearts of Men. That
wherein the Kingdom of Heaven is likened to a grain of Mustardseed, which being
sown, was the least of all seeds, but by degrees grew up to be the greatest of
herbs; and to leaven, which a Woman took and hid in three measures of meal,
'till the whole was leavened; intimating the progress of God's grace, which by
degrees diffuseth it self over the whole temper of a Man's Mind, into all the
actions of his Life. To be sure the Parable of the seed which fell upon good
ground, does represent the efficacy of the word of God, accompanied by his
grace upon the Minds of Men, and that is said to spring up and increase, and to
bring forth fruit with patience; which surely does express to us the gradual
operation of God's word and grace iu the Renovation and Change of a Man's Heart
and Life.

The New Testament indeed speaks of the sudden Change of many upon the first
preaching of the Gospel, which I have told you before is not a standard of the
ordinary Method of God's grace, the not considering of which, has been a great
Cause of all the Mistakes in this Matter. It Is true, those which were thus
Converted to the belief of the Gospel, their Faith was a virtual Principle of
all grace and virtue, though not formally the habit of every particular grace.
St. Paul himself, who was a prime instance of this kind, speaks as if he
acquired the grace of Contentment by great Consideration, and diligent Care of
himself in several Conditions; not as if the habit of this grace had been
infused into him at once, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have learned in whatsoever state I
am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; every where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. And thus I have done with the
first thing I propounded to Consider, namely, the true and just Importance of
this Metaphor of the new Creation. The two Particulars which remain, I shall by
God's assistance finish in my next Discourse.

SERMON IX.
Of the Nature of Regeneration, and its Necessity, in order to Justification
and Salvation.
GALAT. VI. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature.
THE Observation I am still upon from these Words is this, viz. That in the
Christian Religion nothing will avail to our Justification, but the Renovation
of our Hearts and Lives, expressed here by a New Creature. In treating of which,
I proposed the doing of three things.

First, To show the ^rue import of this Metaphor of a new Creature.

Secondly, To show that this is the great Condition of o^^ Justification; And,

Thirdly, That it is highly Reasonable that it should be so.

In treating of the first of these Particulars, I have considered some
Doctrines as founded upon this Metaphor, which I have shown at large, not only
to have no Foundation in Scripture, or Reason, or Experience; but also to be
very unreasonable in themselves, and contrary to the plain and constant tenor
of Scripture, and to the ordinary Method of God's grace in the Regeneration of
Men, whether by a Religious and Virtuous Education, or in those who are
reclaimed from a notorious wicked Course of Life. And that I have so long
insisted upon this Argument, and handled it in a more contentious way than is
usual with me, did not proceed from any love to Controversy, which I am less
fond of every day than other; but from a great desire to put an end to these
Controversies, and quarrellings in the dark, by bringing them to a clear state
and plain issue, and likewise to undeceive good Men concerning some current
Notions and Doctrines, which I do really believe to be dishonorable to God,
and contrary to the plain declarations of Scripture, and a cause of great
perplexity and discomfort to the Minds of Men, and a real discouragement to the
Resolutions and Endeavors of becoming better. Upon which Considerations I was
strongly urgent to search these Doctrines to the bottom, and to contribute what
in me lay, to the rescuing of good Men from the disquiet and entanglement of
them.

I will conclude this Matter with a few Cautions not unworthy to be remembered
by us; That we would be careful so to ascribe all Good to God; that we be sure
we ascribe nothing to him that is Evil, or any ways unworthy of him; That we do
not make him the sole Author of our Salvation, in such a way, as will
unavoidably charge upon him the final impenitency and ruin of a great part of
Mankind; That we do not so magnify the grace of God, as to make his Precepts
and Exhortations s^gnifie nothing, Such as these, Make ye new He^^ts, and new
Spirits; strive to enter in at the strait gate; Where, if by the strait gate be
meant the difficulty of our first entrance upon a Religious Course, that is, of
our Conversion and Regeneration, I cannot imagine how it is possible to
reconcile our being merely passive in this work, and doing nothing at all in
it, with our Savior's Precept of striving to enter in at the strait gate;
unless to be very active, and to be merely passive about the same thing be all
one, and an earnest contention and endeavor be the same thing with doing
nothing. Again, that we do not make the utmost degeneracy and depravation which
Men ever arrived at by the greatest abuse of themselves, and the most vile and
wicked practices, the standard of an unregenerate state, and of the common
Condition of all Men by Nature. And lastly, that we do not make some particular
instances in Scripture, of the strange and sudden Conversion of some Persons
(as namely, of St. Paul and the Jailer in the Acts) the common rule and measure
of every Man's Conversion; so that unless a Man be as it were struck down by a
Light and Power from Heaven, and taken with a fit of trembling, and frighted
almost out of his wits, or find in himself something equal to this, he can have
no assurance of his Conversion; whereas a much surer Judgment may be made of
the sincerity of a Man's Conversion, by the real Effects of this Change, than
by the Manner of it. This our Savior has taught us, by that apt resemblance
of the operation of God's Spirit to the blowing of the wind, of the Original
Cause whereof, and of the reason of its ceasing or continuance, and why it
blows stronger or gentler, this way or that way, we are altogether ignorant;
but that it is, we are sensible from the sound of it, John 3. 8. The wind
blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound of it, but can not tell
whence it comes, nor whither it goes: So is every one that is born of the
Spirit. The effects of God's Holy Spirit in the Regeneration of Men are
sensible, though the manner and degrees of his operation upon the Souls of Men
are so various, that we can give no account of them; by which, one would think
our Savior had sufficiently cautioned us, not to reduce the Operations of
God's grace and Holy Spirit in the Regeneration of Men, to any certain Rule or
Standard, but chiefly to regard the sensible effects of this secret work upon
the Hearts and Lives of Men.

And after all, it is in vain to contend by any Arguments against clear and
certain experience. If we plainly see that many are insensibly changed, and
made good by pious Education, in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, and
that some who have long lived in a profane neglect and contempt of Religion,
are by the secret power of God's word and Holy Spirit, upon calm consideration,
without any great terrors and amazement, visibly changed and brought to a
better Mind and Course; it is in vain in these Cases to pretend that this
Change is not real, because the Manner of it is not answerable to some
Instances which are Recorded in Scripture, or which we have observed in our
Experience, and because these Persons cannot give such an account of the time
and manner of their Conversion, as is agreeable to these instances; which is
just as if I should meet a Man beyond Sea, whom I had known in England, and
would not believe that he had crossed the Seas, because he said he had a smooth
and easy passage, and was wa^ted over by a gentle Wind, and could tell no
Stories of Storms and Tempests.

And thus I have fully and faithfully endeavored to open to you the just
importance of this Phrase or Expression in the Text, of the new Creature, or
the new Creation. I proceed to the

Second Particular I propounded, namely, that the real Renovation of our Hearts
and Lives is, according to the terms of the Gospel, and the Christian Religion,
the great Condition of our justification and acceptance with God, and that this
is the same in sense and substance with those Phrases in the parallel Texts to
this, of Faith perfected by Charity, and of keeping the Commandments of God.

That according to the terms of the Gospel, the great Condition of our
justification and acceptance with God, is the real Renovation of our Hearts and
Lives, is plain, not only from this Text, which affirms, that in the Christian
Religion nothing will avail us but the new Creature; but likewise from many
other clear Texts of Scripture; and this, whether by Justification be meant our
first Justification upon our Faith and Repentance, or our continuance in this
state, or our final Justification by our solemn Acquital and Absolution at the
Great Day, which in Scripture is called Salvation, and Eternal Life.

That this is the Condition of our first Justification, that is, of the
Forgiveness of our Sins, and our being received into the grace and favor of
God, is plain from all those Texts, where this Change is expressed by our
Repentance and Conversion, by our Regeneration and Renovation, by our
Purification and Sanctification, or by any other terms of the like importance.
For under every one of these Notions, this Change is made the Condition of the
forgiveness of our Sins, and acceptance to the favor of God.

Under the Notion of Repentance and Conversion, Acts 2. 38. Repent and be
Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins. Acts 3. 19. Repent, and be Converted, that your sins may be blotted out.
Upon the same account, a penitent acknowledgement of our Sins, which is an
essential part of Repentance, is made a Condition of the forgiveness of them, 1
John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Under the notion of
Regeneration and Renovation, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, that is,
become a true Christian, which is all one with being in a justified state; he
is a new Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are became new.
Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. where the Apostle declares at large, what Change is
required to put us into a justified state, and to entitle us to the inheritance
of Eternal Life. For we our selves were also sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God
our Savior toward Man appeared, not by works of Righteousness which we have
done, that is, not for any precedent Righteousness of ours, for we were great
Sinners, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his
Grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of Eternal Life. So that
the Change of our former Temper, and Conversion, and Regeneration, and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, is antecedently necessary to our Justification,
that is, to the pardon of our Sins, and our restitution to the favor of God,
and the hope of Eternal Life. So likewise under the notion of Purification and
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. where the Apostle enumerates several Sins
and Vices, which will certainly exclude Men from the Favor and Kingdom of God,
from which we must be cleansed, before we can be justified or saved. Know ye
not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived;
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 2 Cor.
6. 17, 18. where the Apostle likewise makes our purification a Condition of our
being received into the favor of God, and reckoned into the number of his
Children. Touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. And that by not touching the unclean thing, is here certainly meant
our Sanctification and Purification from Sin, is evident from what immediately
follows in the beginning of the next Chapter; Having therefore these promises,
Dearly Beloved! let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; that is, having this
Encouragement, that upon this Condition we shall be received to the favor of
God, let us purify our selves, that we may be capable of this great Blessing.

And our continuance in this state of grace and favor with God, depends upon
our perseverance in Holiness; for if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him.

And Lastly, this is also the Condition of our final Justification, and
Absolution by the Sentence of the great Day, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in
heart; for they shall see God. Joh. 3. 3. Except a Man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. Heb. 12. 14. Follow Holiness, without which, no Man
shall see the Lord. 1 John 3. 3. The Apostle there speaking of the blessed
sight and enjoyment of God, tells us what we must do, if ever we hope to be
Partakers of it; Every Man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even
as he is pure.

And this Condition here mentioned in the Text, of our being New Creatures, is
the same in sense and substance with those Expressions which we find in the two
parallel Texts to this, where Faith which is perfected by Charity, and keeping
the Commandments of God, are made the Condition of our justification and
acceptance with God. Gal. 5. 6. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but Faith, which is consummate, or made perfect
by Charity; and 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is
nothing; but the keeping of the Commandments of God. It is evident that the
Design and Meaning of these three Texts is the same, and therefore these three
Expressions of the new Creature, and of Faith perfected by Charity, and of
keeping the Commandments of God, do certainly signify the same thing. That the
New Creature signifies ^he change of our state, from a state of Disobedience
and Sin, to a state of Obedience and Holiness of Life, I have shown at large;
and the Apostle explaining this New Creation, most expressly tells us, Ephesians. 2.
10 We are his wormanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
^ath before ordained, that we should walk in them; and Colos. 3. 10, 12, 13,
14. where the Apostle tells them, that they ought to give testimony of their
Renovation, and having put on the new Man, by all the fruits of Obedience and
Goodness; Ye have put on the new Man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created him. Put on therefore as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
longsuff^ring, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; and above all
these things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfection. And the Apostle
St. Peter tells us, that our Regeneration, which he calls Sanctification of the
Spirit, is unto obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 2. So that our Renovation consists in
the Principle and Practice of Obedience, and a good Life; And what is this but
Faith perfected by Charity? And Charity the Apostle tells us is the fulfilling
of the Law; and what is the fulfilling of the Law, but keeping the Commandments
of God? And keeping the Commandments of God, or at least a sincere Resolution
of Obedience, when there is not time and opportunity for the trial of it, is in
Scripture as expressly made a Condition both of our present and final
justification and acceptance with God, as Faith is, and in truth is the same
with a living and operative Faith, and a Faith that is consummate, and made
perfect by Charity. Acts 10. 34, 35. Of a truth I perceive (says St. Peter)
that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears him,
and works Righteousness, is accepted with him; which speech does as plainly,
as words can do any thing, declare to us, upon what terms all Mankind, of what
Condition or Nation soever, may find acceptance with God. Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. Who will render to every Man according to his deeds, to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal
Life: but to them who are contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul
of Man that does Evil; of the Jews first, and also of the Gentiles: but Glory,
Honor, and Peace to every Man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile. As to our acceptance with God, and the Rewards of another World,
it matters not whether Jew or Gentile, Circumcised, or Uncircumcised; that
which makes the difference, is obeying the Truth, or obeying Unrighteousness,
working Good, or doing Evil; these are the things which will avail to our
Justification, or Condemnation at the Great Day. To the same purpose is that
Saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 5. 9. That Christ is the Author of
Eternal Salvation to them that obey him.

I will conclude this Matter with two Remarkable Sayings, the one toward the
beginning, the other toward the and of the Bible, to satisfy us that this is
the tenor of the Holy Scriptures, and the constant Doctrine of it from the
beginning to the end. Genesis 4. 7. It is God's Speech to Cain, If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? And Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates into the City.

And thus I have done with the Second thing I propounded, which was to show,
that according to the terms of the Gospel, and the Christian Religion, the real
Renovation of our Hearts and Lives is the great Condition of our justification
and acceptance with God, and that this in sense and substance is the same with
Faith made perfect by Charity, and keeping the Commandments of God.

The Third and last Particular remains to be spoken to, namely, That it is
highly reasonable that this should be the Condition of our Justification, and
acceptance to the favor of God; and that upon these two accounts.

First, For the honor of God's Holiness.

Secondly, In order to the qualifying of us for the favor of God, and the
enjoyment of him; for the pardon of our Sins, and the Reward of Eternal Life.

First, For the honor of God's Holiness. For should God have received Men to
his favor, and rewarded them with Eternal Glory and Happiness, for the mere
belief of the Gospel, or a confident persuasion that Christ would save them
without any change of their Hearts and Lives, without Repentance from dead
works, and fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment of Life; he had not given
sufficient testimony to the World of his Love to Holiness and Righteousness,
and of his hatred of Sin and Iniquity. The Apostle tells us, that God in the
justifification of a Sinner declares his Righteousness; but should he justify
Men upon other terms, this would not declare his Righteousness and love of
Holiness, but rather an indifferency, whether Men were good and Righteous or
not. For a bare assent to the truth of the Gospel, without the fruits of
Holiness and Obedience, is not a living, but a dead Faith, and so far from
being acceptable to God, that it is an affront to him; and a confident reliance
upon Christ for Salvation, while we continue in our Sins, is not a justifying
Faith, but a bold and impudent presumption upon the Mercy of God, and the
Merits of our Savior; who indeed justifies the ungodly, that is, those that
have been so, but not those that continue so. And if God should pardon Sinners,
and reward them with Eternal Life, upon any other terms than upon our becoming
New Creatures, than upon such a Faith as is made perfect by Charity, that is,
by keeping the Commands of God; this would be so far from declaring his
Righteousness, and being a testimony of his hatred and displeasure against Sin,
that it would give the greatest countenance and encouragement to it imaginable.

Secondly, It is likewise very Reasonable, that such a Faith, that makes us New
Creatures, and is perfected by Charity, and keeping the Commandments of God,
should be the Condition of Justification, in order to the qualifying of us for
the Pardon of our Sins, and the Reward of Eternal Life; that is, for the favor
of God, and for the enjoyment of him. To forgive Men upon other terms, were to
give countenance and encouragement to perpetual Rebellion and Disobedience.
That Man is not fit to be forgiven, who is so far from being sorry for his
fault, that he goes on to offend; he is utterly incapable of Mercy, who is not
sensible that he has done amiss, and resolved to amend. No Prince ever thought
a Rebellious Subject capable of Pardon upon lower terms than these. It is in
the nature of the thing unfit that an obstinate Offender should have any Mercy
or Favor shown to him.

And as without Repentance and Resolution of better Obedience, we are unfit for
Forgiveness, so much more for a Reward; as we cannot expect God's Favor, so we
are incapable of the enjoyment of him without Holiness. Holiness is the Image
of God, and makes us like to him; and 'till we be like him, we cannot see him,
we can have no enjoyment of him. All delightful Communion and agreeable Society
is founded in a similitude of Disposition and Manners, and therefore so long as
we are unlike to God in the temper and disposition of our Minds, and in the
Actions and Course of our Lives, neither can God take pleasure in us, nor we in
him, but there will be a perpetual jarring and discord between him and us; and
though we were in Heaven, and seated in the place of the Blessed, yet we should
not, nay we could not be Happy; because we should want the necessary Materials
and Ingredients of Happiness. For it is with the Soul in this respect, as it is
with the Body; though all things be easy without us; and no Cruelty be exercised
upon us, to give torment and vexation to us, yet if we be inwardly Diseased, we
may have pain and anguish enough, we may be as it were upon the rack, and feel
as great torment from the inward disorder of our humors, as if we were
tortured from without. So it is with the Soul, Sin and Vice are internal
Diseases, which do naturally create trouble and discontent, and nothing but
diversion, and the variety of Objects and Pleasures which entertain Men in this
World, hinders a wicked Man from being out of his wits, whenever he reflects
upon himself; for all the irregular Appetites and Passions, Lust, and Malice,
and Revenge, are so many Furies within us, and though there were no Devil to
torment us, yet the disorder of our own Minds, and the horrors of a guilty
Conscience would be a Hell to us, and make us extremely miserable in the very
Regions of Happiness. So that it is necessary that our Faith should be made
perfect by Charity, and that we should become new Creatures; not only from the
arbitrary constitution and appointment of God, but from the Nature and Reason
of the thing; because nothing but this can dispose us for that Blessedness,
which God has promised to us, and prepared for us. Faith considered abstractly
from the Fruits of Holiness and Obedience, of Goodness and Charity, will bring
no Man into the favor of God. All the excellency of Faith is, that it is the
Principle of a good Life, and furnishes us with the best Motives and Arguments
thereto, the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel; and therefore in Heaven,
when we come to sight and enjoyment, Faith and Hope shall cease, but Charity
never fails; for if it should, Heaven would cease to be Heaven to us, because
it is the very frame and temper of Happiness; and if this disposition be not
wrought in us in this World, we shall be altogether incapable of the felicity
of the other.

You see then what it is that must recommend us to the favor of God; the real
Renovation of our Hearts and Lives, after the Image of him that Created us.
This must be repaired in us, before ever we can hope to be restored to the
grace and favor of God, or to be capable of the Reward of Eternal Life. And
what could God have done more Reasonable, than to make these very things the
terms of our Salvation, which are the necessary Causes and Means of it? How
could he have dealt more mercifully and kindly with us, than to appoint that to
be the Condition of our Happiness, which is the only qualification that can
make us capable of it?

I will conclude all with that excellent passage in the Wisdom of Solomon,
Chap. 6. 17, 18. The very true beginning of Wisdom is the desire of discipline,
and the care of discipline is love, and love is the keeping of her laws, and
taking heed to her laws is the assurance of incorruption. The Sum of what I
have said upon this Argument amounts to this, that upon the terms of the Gospel
we can have no hope of the forgiveness of our Sins, and Eternal Salvation,
unless our Nature be renewed, and the Image of God, which is defaced by Sin, be
repaired in us, and we be Created in Christ unto good works; That no Faith will
avail to our Justification and acceptance with God, but that which is made
perfect by Charity, that is, by fulfilling of the Law, and keeping the
Commandments of God; by sincere Obedience and Holiness of Life, which
notwithstanding the inavoidable imperfection of it in this state, will
nevertheless be accepted with God, through the Merits of our Blessed Savior,
who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own blood. To whom be
Glory for ever.

Amen.
SERMON X.
The Danger of all known Sin, both from the Light of Nature, and Revelation.
ROMANS I. 18, 19. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them.
IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle declares that he was
particularly designed and appointed by God to preach the Gospel to the World,
and that he was not ashamed of his Ministry, notwithstanding all the Reproach
and Persecution it was attended withal, and notwithstanding the slight and
undervaluing Opinion which the World had of the Doctrine which he preached, it
being to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; for though
this might reflect some disparagement upon it in the esteem of sensual and
carnal Men, yet to those who weighed things impartially, and considered the
Excellent End and Design of the Christian Doctrine, and the force and efficacy
of it to that end, it would appear to be an Instrument admirably fitted by the
Wisdom of God, for the Reformation and Salvation of Mankind.

And therefore he tells us, ver. 16. that how much soever it was despised by
that ignorant and inconsiderate Age, he was not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ; because it is the power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek; that is, the Doctrine of
the Gospel sincerely believed and embraced, is a most proper and powerful
means, designed by God for the Salvation of Mankind; not only of the Jews, but
also of the Gentiles.

The Revelations which God had formerly made, were chiefly restrained to the
Jewish Nation; but this great and last Revelation of the Gospel, was equally
Calculated for the benefit and advantage of all Mankind. The Gospel indeed was
first preached to the Jews, and from thence published to the whole World; and
as this Doctrine was designed for the general benefit of Mankind, so it was
very likely to be effectual to that end, being an Instrument equally fitted for
the Salvation of the whole World, Gentiles as well as Jews; it is the power of
God to Salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek.

And to show the efficacy of it, he instanceth in two things, which render it
so powerful and effectual a Means for the Salvation of Mankind.

First, Because therein the grace and mercy of God in the Justification of a
Sinner, and declaring him Righteous, is so clearly revealed, ver. 17. For
therein is the Righteousness of God revealed, from Faith to Faith, as it is
written, The Just shall live by Faith. This is very obscurely expressed, but the
meaning of this Text will be very much cleared, by comparing it with another in
the 3 d Chapter of this Epistle, ver. 20, 21, 22, etc. where the Apostle speaks
more fully and expressly of the way of our Justification by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, that is, by the belief of the Gospel. He asse^ts at the 20 th verse,
that by the ^^eds of the Law there shall no Flesh be ^^stified in the sight of
God. To this ^ay of Justification by the deeds of the ^^w^ he opposes the
Righteousness of ^od, by the faith of Jesus Christ, to all, and upon all them
that believe, which is the Gospel way of Justification, ver. 21, 22. But now
the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the
Law and the Prophets, even the Righteousness of God, which is by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. The Righteousness of
God without the Law is manifested; that is, the way which God has taken to
justify Sinners, and declare them Righteous, without the deeds of the Law,
that is, without observing the Law of Moses, is manifested, that is, is clearly
revealed in the Gospel, (which is the same with what the Apostle had said
before, that the Righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel) being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, that is, the Righteousness of God, or
the Justification of Sinners by Jesus Christ, is clearly revealed in the
Gospel, being also in a more obscure manner attested or foretold in the Old
Testament, which he calls the Law and the Prophets; and this fully explains
that difficult Phrase of the Righteousness of God being revealed by the Gospel
from faith to faith; that is, by a gradual Revelation, being more obscurely
foretold in the Old Testament, and clearly discovered in the New; so that these
two passages are equivalent; In the Gospel, the Righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith; and The Righteousness of God without the works of
the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. There is
the first and more imperfect Revelation of it, but the clear Revelation of it
is in the Gospel; this the Apostle calls a Revelation from faith to faith, that
is, from a more imperfect and obscure, to a more express and clear discovery
and belief of it. And then the Citation which follows is very pertinent, as it
is written, The Just shall live by Faith; for this Citation out of the Old
Testament plainly shows, that the way of Justification by Faith was there
mentioned; or, as our Apostle expresses it, was witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets; and consequently that this was a gradual discovery, which he calls a
Revelation from faith to faith. The Just shall live by Faith; that is, good Men
shall be saved by their Faith, shall be justified and esteemed Righteous in the
sight of God, and finally saved by their Faith. And so the Apostle in the 5 th
Chapt. of this Epistle, ver. 18. calls our Justification by the faith of the
Gospel, the justification of Life, in opposition to Condemnation and Death,
which very well explains that Saying of the Prophet, the Just shall live by
Faith. I have been the longer upon this, that I might give some light to a very
difficult and obscure Text.

Secondly, The other Instance whereby the Apostle proves the Gospel to be so
powerful a means for the recovery and Salvation of Men is, that therein also
the severity of God against impenitent Sinners, as well as his grace and mercy
in the justification of the penitent, is clearly revealed, ver. 18. For the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; because that
which may be known of God is manifested in them, for God has showed it unto
them. The first, viz. the grace of God in our Justification and the Remission
of Sins past, is a most proper and powerful Argument to encourage us to
Obedience for the future, nothing being more likely to reclaim Men to their
Duty, than the assurance of indemnity for past Crimes; and the other is one of
the most effectual Considerations in the World to deter Men from Sin, that the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, etc.

From which words I shall observe these Six Things.

First, The infinite danger that a wicked and sinful Course does plainly expose
Men to. The wrath of God is here said to be revealed against the impiety and
unrighteousness of Men.

Secondly, The clear and undoubted Revelation which the Gospel has made of
this danger. The wrath of God against the Sins of Men, is said to be revealed
from Heaven.

Thirdly, That every wicked and vicious practice does expose Men to this great
danger. The wrath of God is said to be revealed against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of Men.

Fourthly, That it is a very great aggravation of Sin, for Men to offend
against the light of their own Minds. The Apostle here aggravates the impiety
and wickedness of the Heathen World, that they did not live up to the knowledge
which they had of God, but contradicted it in their lives, which he calls
holding the truth in unrighteousness.

Fifthly, The Natural knowledge which Men have of God, if they live wickedly,
is a clear evidence of their holding the truth in unrighteousness. The Apostle
therefore charge them with holding the truth in unrighteousness, because that
which may be known of God, is manifested in them, God having showed it to them.

Sixthly, and Lastly, that the clear Revelation of the wrath of God in the
Gospel, against the impiety and wickedness of Men, renders it a very powerful
and likely means for the Recovery and Salvation of Men. For the Apostle proves
the Gospel of Christ to be the power of God to Salvation, because therein the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; that is, against
all impenitent Sinners.

I shall at the present, by God's assistance, speak to the three first of these
Particulars.

First, The infinite danger that a wicked and sinful Course does plainly expose
Men to. If there be a God that made the World, and governs it, and takes care
of Mankind, and has given them Laws and Rules to live by, he cannot but be
greatly displeased at the violation and transgression of them; and certainly
the displeasure of God is the most dreadful thing in the World, and the effects
of it the most insupportable. The greatest fear is from the greatest danger,
and the greatest danger is from the greatest power offended and enraged; and
this is a Consideration exceeding full of terror, that by a sinful Course we
expose our selves to the utmost displeasure of the great and terrible God; for
who knows the power of his wrath? and who may stand before him when once he is
angry? According to thy fear, so is thy wrath (says the Psalmist.) There is no
passion in the Mind of Man that is more boundless and infinite than our fear,
it is apt to make wild and frightful representations of Evils, and to imagine
them many times greater than really they are; but in this Case our imagination
must fall short of the truth and terror of the thing; for the wrath of God
does far exceed the utmost jealousy and suspicion of the most fearful and
guilty Conscience, and the greatest Sinner under his greatest anguish and
despair, cannot apprehend or fear it more than there is Reason for; according
to thy fear, so is thy wrath.

If it were only the wrath and displeasure of Men that the Sinner were exposed
to, there might be reason enough for fear, because they have many times power
enough to crush an O^fender, and cruelty enough to fret every vein of his Body,
and to torment him in every part: but the wrath and vengeance of Men bears no
Comparison with the wrath of God^ Their passions are many times strong and
blustering; but their arm is but short, and their power small, they have not an
arm like God, nor can they thunder with a voice like him. They may design
considerable harm and mischief to us; but it is not always in the power of
their hand to wreak their Malice upon us, and to execute all the mischief which
their enraged Minds may prompt them to; the very utmost they can design, is to
torment our Bodies, and to take away our Lives, and when they have designed
this, they may die first, and return to their dust, and then their thoughts
perish with them, and all their malicious Designs are at an end; they are
always under the Power and Government of a Superior Being, and can go no
further than he gives them leave. However if they do their worst, and shoot all
their Arrows at us, we cannot stand at the Mark long, their wrath will soon
make an end of us, and set us free from all their Cruelty and Oppression; they
can but kill the Body, and after that they have no more that they can do; their
most refined Malice cannot reach our Spirits, no Weapon that can be formed by
the utmost art of Man can pierce and wound our Souls; they can drive us out of
this World, but they cannot pursue us into the other; so that at the worst the
Grave will be a Sanctuary to us, and Death a safe Retreat from all their Rage
and Fury.

But the wrath of God is not confined by any of these limits. Once has God
spoken (says David by an Elegant Hebrew Phrase to express the certainty of the
thing) once has God spoken, and twice I have heard this, that power belongs to
God, Psalm. 62. 11. He has a Mighty Arm, and when he pleases to stretch it
out, none may stay it, nor say unto him what do thou; he has power enough to
make good all his threatenings; whatever he says, he is able to effect, and
whatever he purposes he can bring to pass; for his Counsel shall stand, and he
will accomplish all his pleasure; he need but speak the word, and it is done;
for we can neither resist his Power, nor fly from it; if we fly to the utmost
parts of the Earth, his hand can reach us, for in his hand are all the corners
of the Earth; if we take refuge in the Grave (and we cannot do that without his
leave) thither his wrath can follow us, and there it will overtake us; for his
power is not confined to this World, nor limited to our Bodies; after he has
killed, he can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.

And this is that wrath of God which is revealed from Heaven, and which the
Apostle chiefly intends, viz. the Misery and Punishment of another World, this
God has threatened Sinners withal; to express which to us, as fully as words
can do, he heaps up in the next Chapter so many weighty and terrible words,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of Man that does
evil; in opposition to that great and glorious Reward of immortality and
eternal life, which is promised to a patient continuance in well-doing.

So that the wrath of God which is here denounced against the impiety and
unrighteousness of Men, comprehends all the Evils and Miseries of this and the
other World, which every Sinner is in danger of whilst he continues impenitent;
for as according to the tenor of the Gospel, Godliness has the promise of
this Life, and of that which is to come, so impenitency in Sin exposes Men to
the Evils of both Worlds, to the Judgments of the Life that now is, and to the
endless and intolerable torments of that which is to come. And what can be more
dreadful than the displeasure of an Almighty and Eternal Being? who can punish
to the utmost, and who lives for ever, to execute his wrath and vengeance upon
Sinners; so that well might the Apostle say, it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.

Consider this all ye that forget God, that neglect him, and live in continual
disobedience to his Holy and Righteous Laws; much more those who despise and
affront him, and live in a perpetual defiance of him. Will ye provoke the Lord
to jealousy? are ye stronger than ^e? Think of it seriously, and forget him if
you can, despise him if you dare; consider this, lest he take you into
consideration, and rouse like a Lion out of sleep, and tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver. This is the first Observation, the infinite danger
that a wicked and sinful Course does expose Men to, the wrath of God, which
does not only signify more than all the Evils that we know, but than all those
which the wildest fears and suspicions of our Minds can imagine.

Secondly, The next thing observable, is the clear and undoubted Revelation
which the Gospel has made of this danger, the wrath of God is revealed, etc.
By which the Apostle intimates to us, that this was but obscurely known to the
World before, at least in Comparison of that clear discovery which the Gospel
has now made of it; so that I may allude to that expression in Job, which he
applies to Death and the Grave, that Hell is naked before us, and destruction
has no covering.

Not but that Mankind had always apprehensions and jealousies of the danger of
a wicked Life, and Sinners were always afraid of the vengeance of God pursuing
their evil Deeds, not only in this Life, but after it too; and though they had
turned the Punishments of another World into ridiculous Fables, yet the wiser
sort of Mankind could not get it out of their Minds, that there was something
real under them; and that Ixion's Wheel, which by a perpetual motion carried
him about, and Sisyphus his Stone, which he was perpetually rolling up the
Hill, and when he had got it near the top tumbled down, and still created him a
new labor; and Tantalus his continual hunger and thirst, aggravated by a
perpetual nearness of enjoyment, and a perpetual disappointment; and Prometheus
his being chained to a Rock, with an Eagle or Vulture perpetually preying upon
his Liver, which grew as fast as it was gnawed; I say even the wiser among the
Heathens looked upon these as fantastical Representations of something that was
Real, viz. the grievous and endless Punishment of Sinners, the not to be
endured, and yet perpetually renewed Torments of another World; for in the
midst of all the ignorance and degeneracy of the Heathen World, Men's
Consciences did accuse them when they did amiss, and they had secret fears and
misgivings of some mighty danger hanging over them, from the displeasure of a
superior Being, and the apprehension of some great mischiefs likely to follow
their wicked actions, which some time or other would overtake them; which
because they did not always in this World, they dreaded them in the next. And
this was the foundation of all those Superstitions, whereby the Ancient Pagans
endeavored so carefully to appease their offended Deities, and to avert the
Calamities which they feared they would send down upon them. But all this while
they had no certain assurance by any clear and express Revelation from God to
that purpose, but only the jealousies and suspicions of their own Minds,
naturally consequent upon those Notions which Men generally had of God, but so
obscured and depraved by the Lusts and Vices of Men, and by the gross and false
conceptions which they had of God, that they only served to make them
superstitious, but were not clear and strong enough to make them wisely and
seriously Religious. And to speak the truth, the more knowing and inquisitive
part of the Heathen World had brought all these things into great doubt and
uncertainty, by the nicety and subtilty of Disputes about them; so that it was
no great wonder, that these Principles had no greater effect upon the Lives of
Men, when their apprehensions of them were so dark and doubtful.

But the Gospel has made a most clear and certain Revelation of these things
to Mankind. It was written before upon Men's Hearts as the great Sanction of
the Law of Nature, but the impressions of this were in a great measure blurred
and worn out, so that it had no great power and efficacy upon the Minds and
Manners of Men: but now it is clearly discovered to us, the wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven, which expression may well imply in it these three things.

First, The Clearness of the Discovery; the wrath of God is said to be revealed.

Secondly, The extraordinary Manner of it; it is said to be revealed from
Heaven.

Thirdly, The Certainty of it; not being the result of subtle and doubtful
Reasonings, but having a Divine Testimony and Confirmation given to it, which
is the proper meaning of being revealed from Heaven.

First, It imports the Clearness of the Discovery. The Punishment of Sinners in
another World is not so obscure a Matter as it was before, it is now expressly
declared in the Gospel, together with the particular Circumstances of it,
namely, that there is another Life after this, wherein Men shall receive the
just recompense of Reward for all the actions done by them in this Life; that
there is a particular time appointed, wherein God will call all the World to a
solemn account, and those who are in their graves shall by a powerful voice be
raised to Life, and those who shall then be found alive shall be suddenly
changed; when our Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal and only begotten Son of God,
who once came in great humility to save us, shall come again in Power, and
great Glory, attended with his Mighty Angels, and all Nations shall be gathered
before him, and all Mankind shall be separated into two Companies, the
Righteous and the Wicked, who after a full Hearing, and fair Trial, shall be
sentenced according to their Actions, the one to Eternal Life and Happiness,
the other to Everlasting Misery and Torment.

So that the Gospel has not only declared the thing to us, that there shall be
a future Judgment; but for our farther assurance and satisfaction in this
Matter, and that these things might make a deep impression, and strike a great
awe upon our Minds, God has been pleased to reveal it to us with a great many
particular Circumstances, such as are very worthy of God, and apt to fill the
Minds of Men with dread and astonishment, as often as they think of them.

For the Circumstances of this Judgment revealed to us in the Gospel, are very
solemn and awful, not such as the wild fancies and imaginations of Men would
have been apt to have dressed it up withal, such as are the Fictions of the
Heathen Poets, and the extravagancies of Mahomet; which though they be terrible
enough, yet they are withal ridiculous; but such as are every way becoming the
Majesty of the great God, and the Solemnity of that great Day, and such as do
not in the least ^avour of the vanity and lightness of humane imagination.

For what more fair and equal, than that Men should be tried by a Man like
themselves, one of the same Rank and Condition, that had experience of the
Infirmities and Temptations of Humane Nature. So our Lord tells us, that the
Father has committed all judgment to the Son, because he is the Son of Man,
and therefore cannot be excepted against, as not being a fit and equal Judge.
And this St. Paul offers as a clear proof of the equitable proceedings of that
Day; God (says he) has appointed a Day, in which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained.

And then what more congruous, than that the Son of God, who had taken so much
pains for the Salvation of Men, and came into the World for that purpose, and
had used all imaginable means for the Reformation of Mankind, I say what more
congruous, than that this very Person should be honored by God to sit in
Judgment upon the World, and to Condemn those, who after all the means that had
been tried for their Recovery, would not Repent and be Saved. And what more
proper, than that Men, who are to be judged for things done in the Body, should
be judged in the Body, and consequently that the Resurrection of the Dead
should precede the general Judgment.

And what more Magnificent and suitable to this glorious Solemnity, than the
awful Circumstances which the Scripture mentions of the appearance of this
great Judge; that he shall descend from Heaven in great Majesty and Glory,
attended with his mighty Angels, and that every eye shall see him; that upon
his appearance, the frame of Nature shall be in an agony, and the whole World
in Flame and Confusion; that those great and Glorious Bodies of Light shall be
obscured, and by degrees extinguished; the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon
turned into Blood, and all the Powers of Heaven shaken; yea, the Heavens
themselves shall pass away with a great noise^ and the Elements dissolve with
^ervent heat; the Earth also, and all the Works that are therein shall be burnt
up. I appeal to any Man, whether this be not a Representation of things very
proper and suitable to that Great Day^ wherein he who made the World shall come
to Judge it? and whether the wit of Man ever devised any thing so awful, and so
agreeable to the Majesty of God, and the solemn Judgment of the whole World?
The description which Virgil makes of the Judgment of another World, of the
Elisian Fields, and the Infernal Regions, how infinitely do they fall short of
the Majesty of the Holy Scripture, and the description there made of Heaven and
Hell, and of the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord! so that in Comparison they
are Childish and trifling; and yet perhaps he had the most regular and most
governed imagination of any Man that ever lived, and observed the g^eatest
decorum in his Characters and Descriptions. But who can declare the great
things of God, but he to whom God shall reveal them!

Secondly, This Expression of the ^^ath of God being Revealed from Heaven, does
not only imply the clear discovery of the thing, but likewise something
extraordinary in the manner of the Discovery. It is not only a Natural
impression upon the Minds of Men, that God will severely punish ^inners; but he
has taken care that Mankind should be instructed in this Matter in a very
particular and extraordinary manner. He has not left it to the Reason of Men
to Collect it from the Consideration of his Attributes and Perfections, his
Holiness and Justice, and from the Consideration of the promiscuous
administration of his Providence toward good and bad Men in this World; but he
has been pleased to send an extraordina^y Person from Heaven, on purpose to
declare this thing plainly to the World, the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven; that is, God sent his own Son from Heaven, on purpose to declare his
wrath against all obstinate and impenitent Sinners, that he might effectually
awaken the drouzie World to Repentance; he has sent an extraordinary
Ambassador into the World, to give warning to all those who continue in their
Sins, of the Judgment of the great Day, and to summon them before his dreadful
Tribunal. So the Apostle tells the Athenians, Acts 17. 30, 31. Now he
commands all Men ^very where to Repent; because he has appointed a Day in
which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised
him from the Dead.

Thirdly, This Expression implies likewise the certainty of this Discovery. If
the wrath of God had only been declared in the Discourses of Wise Men, though
grounded upon very probable Reason, yet it might have been brought into doubt
by the contrary Reasonings of Subtle and Disputing Men: but to put the Matter
out of all question, we have a Divine Testimony for it, and God has confirmed
it from Heaven, by Signs, and Wonders, and Miracles, especially by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead; for by this he has given assurance
unto all Men, that it is he who is ordained of God to judge the quick and dead.

Thus you see in what respect the wrath of God is said to be revealed from
Heaven, in that the Gospel has made a more clear, and particular, and certain
discovery of the Judgment of the great Day, than ever was made to the World
before. I proceed to the

Third Observation, which I shall speak but briefly to; namely, that every
Wicked and Vicious Practice does expose Men to this dreadful danger. The
Apostle instanceth in the two chief Heads to which the Sins of Men may be
reduced, Impiety toward God, and Unrighteousness toward Men^ and therefore he
is to be understood to denounce the wrath of God against every particular kind
of Sin, comprehended under these general Heads; so that no Man that allows
himself in any impiety and wickedness of Life, can hope to escape the wrath of
God. Therefore it concerns us to be entirely Religious, and to have respect to
all God's Commandments, and to take heed that we do not allow our selves in the
practice of any kind of Sin whatsoever; because the living in any one known
Sin, is enough to expose us to the dreadful wrath of God. Though a Man be Just
and Righteous in his Dealing^ with Men, yet if he neglect the Worship and
Service of God, this will certainly bring him under Condemnation: and on the
other hand, though a Man may serve God never so diligently and devoutly, yet if
he be defective in Righteousness toward Men, if he deal falsely and fraudulently
with his Neighbor, he shall not escape the wrath of God; though a Man pretend to
never so much Piety and Devotion, yet if he be unrighteous, he shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; if any Man overreach and defraud his Brother in any
matter, the Lord is the avenger of such, says St. Paul, 1 These. 4. 6.

So that here is a very powerful Argument to take Men off from all Sin, and to
engage them to a constant and careful discharge of their whole Duty toward God
and Men, and to Reform whatever is amiss either in the frame and temper of
their Minds, or in the Actions and Course of their Lives; because any kind of
wickedness, any one sort of vicious Course, lays Men open to the vengeance of
God, and the punishments of another World; the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men; there is no
exception in the Case, we must forsake all Sin, subdue every Lust, be holy in
all manner of Conversation, otherwise we can have no reasonable hopes of
escaping the wrath of God, and the damnation of Hell. But I proceed to the

Fourth Observation; namely, that it is a very great aggravation of Sin, for
Men to offend against the light of their own Minds. The Apostle here aggravates
the wickedness of the Heathen World, that they did not live up to that
Knowledge which they had of God, but contradicted it in their Lives, holding
the truth of God in unrighteousness. And that he speaks here of the Heathen, is
plain from his following Discourse, and the Character he gives of those Persons
of whom he was speaking, who hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; because
that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has shown it unto
them; and this he proves, because those who were destitute of Divine
Revelation, were not without all knowledge of God, being led by the sight of
this visible World, to the knowledge of an invisible Being and Power that was
the Author of it, ver. 20, 21. For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things which
are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse;
because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. (Haec est summa
delicti, nolle agnoscere, quem ignorare non possis, says Tertullian to the
Heathen; This is the height of thy fault, not to acknowledge him, whom thou
can not but know, not to own him, of whom thou can not be ignorant if thou
would;) neither were thankful; they did not pay those acknowledgments to him
which of right were due to the Author of their Being, and of all good things;
but became vain in their imaginations; (...), they were fooled with their own
Reasonings. This he speaks of the Philosophers, who in those great Arguments of
the B^ing and Providence of God, the Immo^allity of the Soul, and the Rewards
of another World, had lost the truth by too much subtlety about it, and had
disputed themselves into doubt and uncertainty about those things which were
naturally known; for nimium alter^ando veritas amittitur; Truth is many times
^lost by too much Contention and Dispute about it; and by too eager a pursuit
of it, Men many times outrun it, and leave it behind; ver. 22. and professing
themselves to be Wise, they became Fools. Men never play the fools more, than
by endeavoring to be over subtle and wise; ver. 23. and changed the glory of
the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to
Birds, four footed Beasts, and creeping things; here he speaks of the
sottishness of their Idolatry, whereby they provoked God to give them up to all
manner of lewdness and impurity; ver. 24. wherefore God also gave them up unto
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts; and again, ver. 26. for
this Cause God gave them up to vile affections; and then he innumerates the
abominable Lusts and Vices they were guilty of, notwithstanding their Natural
acknowledgment of the Divine Justice, ver. 32. who knowing the judgment of God,
that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. By all which it appears that he speaks
of the Heathen, who offended against the Natural Light of their own Minds, and
therefore were without excuse. Quam sib^ veniam sperare possun^ impie^atis
suae, qui non agnoscunt cultum ejus, quem prorsus ignorari ab hominibus fas non
est? says Lactantius, How can they hope for pardon of their impiety, who deny
to worship that God, of whom it is not possible Mankind should be wholly
ignorant?

So that this is To hold the truth in unrighteousness, injuriously to suppress
it, and to hinder the power and efficacy of it upon our Minds and Actions; for
so the word (...) sometimes signifies, as well as to hold fast; and this every
Man does, who acts contrary to what he believes and knows; he offers violence
to the ligh^ of his own Mind, and does injury to the truth, and keeps that a
Prisoner, which would set him free; ye shall know the truth (says our Lord) and
the truth shall make you free.

And this is one of the highest aggravations of the Sins of Men, to offend
against Knowledge, and that light which God has set up in every Man's Mind. If
Men wander and stumble in the dark, it is not to be wondered at, many times it
is unavoidable, and no care can prevent it: but in the light it is expected Men
should look before them, and discern their way. That Natural Light which the
Heathens had, though it was but comparatively dim and imperfect, yet the Apostle
takes notice of it as a great aggravation of their Idolatrous and Abominable
Practices. Those natural Notions which all Men have of God, if they had in any
measure attended to them, and governed themselves by them, might have been
sufficient to have preserved them from dishonouring the Deity, by worshipping
Creatures instead of God; the common light of Nature was enough to have
discovered to them the evil of those lewd and unnatural practices, which many
of them were guilty of: but they detained and suppressed the truth most
injuriously, and would not suffer it to have its natural and proper influence
upon them; and this is that which left them without excuse, that from the light
of Nature they had knowledge enough to have done better, and to have preserved
them from those great Crimes which were so common among them.

And if this was so great an aggravation of the impiety and wickedness of the
Heathen, and left them without excuse; what Apology can be made for the impiety
and unrighteousness of Christians, who have so strong and clear a light to
discover to them their duty, and the danger of neglecting it, to whom the wrath
of God is plainly revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men? The Truths of the Gospel are so very clear and
powerful, and such an improvement of Natural light, that Men must use great
force and violence to suppress them, and to hinder the efficacy of them upon
their lives. And this is a certain Rule, by how much the greater our Knowledge,
by so much the less is our Excuse, and so much the greater Punishment is due to
our faults. So our Lord has told us, Luke 12. 47. That Servant which knew his
Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes. And John 9. 41. If ye were blind (says our Savior
to the Jews) ye should have no sin. So much ignorance as there is of our Duty,
so much abatement of the wilfulness of our faults: but if we sin wilfully,
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of Judgment and fiery indignation,
says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. 26, 27. If we sin wilfully after we
have received the knowledge of the truth; implying, that Men cannot pretend
ignorance for their faults, after so clear a revelation of the will of God, as
is made to Mankind by the Gospel.

And upon this Consideration it is, that our Savior does so aggravate the
impenitency and unbelief of the Jews, because it was in opposition to all the
advantages of Knowledge, which can be imagined to be afforded to Mankind, John
15. 22, 23, 24. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin;
that is, in Comparison their Sin had been much more excusable; but now they
have no cloak for their sin. He that hates me, hates my Father also. If I had
not done among them the works which none other Man did, they had not had sin;
but now have they both seen, and hated both me, and my Father. How is that? Our
Savior means, that they had now sinned against all the advantages of knowing
the will of God, that Mankind could possibly have; at once opposing Natural
Light, which was the dispensation of the Father; and the clearest revelation of
God's will, in the Dispensation of the Gospel by his Son; Now have they both
seen and hated both Me and my Father.

The two remaining Observations I shall reserve to another Opportunity.

SERMON XI.
The Danger of all known Sin, both from the Light of Nature, and Revelation.
ROMANS I. 18, 19. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed
it unto them.
I Have handled Four of the Observations which I raised from these Words, and
shall now proceed to the other Two that remain.

Fifth Observation, That the Natural Knowledge which Men have of God, if they
live contrary to it, is a sufficient evidence of their holding the tr^th of God
i^ un^^ghteousness. For the ^eason why the Apostle charge them with this, is,
Because that which may be known of God is manifest, in that God has showed it
unto them.

There is a Natural Knowledge of God, and of the Duty we owe to him, which the
Apostle calls (...), that of God which is obvious to be known by the light of
Nature, and is as much as is absolutely necessary for us to know. There is
something of God that is incomprehensible, and beyond the reach of our
Understandings; but his Being and Essential Perfections may be known, which he
calls his Eternal Power and Godhead; th^se he tells us are clearly seen, being
understood by the things which are made; that is, the Creation of the World is
a plain demonstration to Men, of the Being and Power of God; and if so, then
God is naturally ^nown to Men; the contrary whereof Socinus positively
maintains, though therein he be forsaken by most of his Followers; an Opinion, in
my Judgment, very unworthy of one, who, not without Reason, was esteemed so
great a Master of Reason; and (though I believe he did not see it) undermining
the strongest and surest Foundation of all Religion, which, when the Natural
Notions of God are once taken away, will certainly want its best support.
Besides that by denying any Natural Knowledge of God, and his Essential
Perfections, he freely gives away one of the most plausible grounds of opposing
the Doctrine of the Trinity. But because this is a Matter of great Consequence,
and he was a great Man, and is not to be confuted by contempt, but by better
Reason, if it can be found; I will Consider his Reasons for this Opinion, and
return a particular Answer to them.

First, He says that if the Knowledge of God were Natural, it would not be of
Faith; but the Apostle says, that we must believe that he is. The force of
which Argument, if it have any, lies in this, that the Object of Faith is
Divine Revelation, and therefore we cannot be said to believe what we Naturally
know. The Schoolmen indeed say so; but the Scripture uses the word Faith more
largely, for a rela persuasion of any thing, whether grounded upon Sense, or
Reason, or Divine Revelation. And our Savior's Speech to Thomas, Because thou
have seen, thou have believed, does sufficiently intimate, that a Man may
believe what he sees; and if so, what should hinder, but that a Man may be said
to believe what he Naturally knows; that is, be really persuaded that there is
a God from Natural Light?

Secondly, His next Argument is, because the same Apostle concludes Enoch to
have believed God, because he pleased God, and without Faith it is impossible
to please him. From whence he says it is certain that Men may be without this
Belief, which if it be Natural they cannot. Indeed if the Apostle had said,
that whoever believes a God, must of necessity obey and please him, then the
Inference had been good, that all Men do not Naturally believe a God, because
it is certain they do not please him: but it is not good the other way, no more
than if a Man should argue thus, that because whoever acts reasonably, must be
endowed with Reason, therefore Men are not Naturally endowed with Reason. For
as Men may Naturally be endowed with Reason, and yet not always make use of it;
so Men may Naturally know and believe a God, and yet not be careful to please
him.

His Third Argument is, that the Scripture says that there are some that do not
believe a God, for which he cites that of David, The Fool has said in his
heart there is no God; which certainly proves, that bad Men live so, as if they
believed there were no God; nay, it may farther import, that they endeavor as
much as they can, to stifle and extinguish the belief of a God in their Minds,
and would gladly persuade themselves there is no God, because it is convenient
for them there should be none; and whether David meant so or not, it is very
probable that some may arrive to that height of Impiety, as for a time at
least, and in some moods, to disbelieve a God, and to be very confident of the
Arguments on that side. But what then? Is the Knowledge and Belief of a God
therefore not Natural to Mankind? Nature it self, as constant and uniform as it
is, admits of some Irregularities and Exceptions, in Effects that are merely
Natural, much more in those which have something in them that is voluntary, and
depends upon the good or bad use of our Reason and Understanding; and there is
no arguing from what is Monstrous, against what is Natural. It is Natural for
Men to have five Fingers upon a Hand, and yet some are born otherwise: but in
voluntary Agents, that which is Natural may be perverted, and in a great
measure extinguished in some particular instances; so that there is no force at
all in this Objection.

His Fourth and last Argument is, that there have not only been particular
Persons, but whole Nations who have had no sense, nor so much as suspicion of a
Deity. This I confess were of great force, if it were true; and for the proof
of this, he produces the instance of Brasil in America. But I utterly deny the
matter of fact and History, and challenge any Man to bring good testimony, not
only of any Nation, but of any City in the World, that ever were professed
Atheists. I know this was affirmed of some part of Brasil, by some of the first
Discoverers, who yet at the same time owned, that these very People did most
expressly believe the immortality of the Soul, and the Rewards and Punishments
of another Life; Opinions which no Man can well reconcile with the denial and
disbelief of a Deity. But to put an end to this Argument, later and more
perfect discoveries have found this not to be true, and do assure us upon
better acquaintance with those barbarous People, that they are deeply possessed
with the belief of One supreme God, who made and governs the World.

Having thus given a particular Answer to Socinus his Arguments against the
Natural knowledge of a God, I will now briefly offer some Arguments for it. And
to prove that the knowledge and belief of a God is natural to Mankind, my

First Argument shall be from the Universal Consent in this matter, of all
Nations in all Ages. And this is an Argument of great force, there being no
better way to prove any thing to be natural to any kind of Being, than if it be
generally found in the whole Kind. Omnium consensus naturae vox est, the
Consent of all is the voice of Nature, says Tully. And indeed by what other
Argument can we prove that Reason, and Speech, and an Inclination to Society
are Natural to Men; but that these belong to the whole Kind?

Secondly, Unless the Knowledge of God and his Essential Perfections be
Natural, I do not see what sufficient and certain foundation there can be of
Revealed Religion. For unless we naturally know God to be a Being of all
perfection, and consequently that whatever he says is true, I cannot see what
Divine Revelation can signify. For God's revealing or declaring such a thing
to us, is no necessary Argument that it is so, unless antecedently to this
Revelation, we be possessed firmly with this Principle, that whatever God says is
true. And whatever is known antecedently to Revelation, must be known by
Natural Light, and by Reasonings and Deductions from Natural Principles. I
might further add to this Argument, that the only standard and measure to judge
of Divine Revelations, and to distinguish between what are true, and what are
counterfeit, are the Natural Notions which Men have of God, and of his
Essential Perfections.

Thirdly, If the Notion of a God be not Natural, I do not see how Men can have
any Natural Notion of the difference of Moral Good and Evil, Just, and Unjust.
For if I do not naturally know there is a God, how can I naturally know that
there is any Law obliging to the one, and forbidding the other? all Law and
Obligation to Obedience, necessarily supposing the Authority of a Superior
Being. But the Apostle expressly asserts, that the Gentiles who were destitute
of a Revealed Law, were a Law unto themselves; but there cannot be a Natural
Law obliging Mankind, unless God be Naturally known to them.

And this Socinus himself in his Discourse upon this very Argument is forced to
acknowledge. In all Men (says he) there is Naturally a difference of Just, and
Unjust, or at least there is planted in all Men an acknowledgment that Just
ought to be preferred before Unjust, and that which is honest, before the
contrary; and this is nothing else but the Word of God wit^in a Man, which
whosoever obeys, in so doing obeys God, though otherwise he neither know nor
think there is a God; and there is no doubt but he that thus obeys God, is
accepted of him. So that here is an acknowledgement of a Natural Obligation to
a Law, without any Natural Knowledge of a Superior Authority; which I think
cannot be; and which is worse, that a Man may obey God acceptably, without
knowing and believing there is a God; which direc^ly thwarts the ground of his
first Argument, from those words of the Apostle, Without Faith it is impossible
to please God; for he that comes to God, that is, he that will be Religious
and please God, must believe that he is; so hard is it for any Man to
contradict Nature, without contradicting himself.

Fourthly, My last Argument I ground upon the words of the Apostle in my Text,
That which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has showed it
unto them. Is manifest in them, (...) among them, God has sufficiently
manifested it to Mankind. And which way has God done this? by Revelation? or
by the Natural Light of Reason? He tells us at the 20 th ver. For the invisible
things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen; that is, God,
who in himself is invisible, ever since he has Created the World, has given a
visible Demonstration of himself, that is, of his Eternal Power and Godhead,
being understood by the things which are made. The plain sense of the whole is,
that this wise and wonderful frame of the World, which cannot Reasonably be
ascribed to any other Cause but God, is a sensible Demonstration to all
Mankind, of an Eternal and Powerful Being that was the Author and Framer of it.
The only Question now is, Whether this Text speak of the Knowledge of God by
particular Revelation, or by Natural Light and Reason, from the contemplation
of the Works of God? Socinus having no other way to avoid the force of this
Text, will needs understand it of the Knowledge of God by the Revelation of the
Gospel. His words are these; The Apostle therefore says in this place, that the
Eternal Godhead of God, that is, that which God would always have us to do (for
the Godhead is sometimes taken in this sense) and his Eternal Power, that is,
his Promise which never fails, (in which sense he said a little before that the
Gospel is the Power of God) these I say, which were never seen by Men, that is,
were never known to them since the Creation of the World, are known by his
Works; that is, by the wonderful Operation of God, and Divine Men, especially
of Christ and his Apostles. These are his very words, and now I refer it to any
indifferent Judgment, whether this be not a very forced and constrained
Interpretation of this Text; and whether that which I have before given, be not
infinitely more free and natural, and every way more agreeable to the obvious
sense of the words, and the scope of the Apostle's Argument. For he plainly
speaks of the Heathen, and proves them to be inexcusable, because they held the
truth in unrighteousness, and having a Natural Knowledge of God, from the
contemplation of his Works, and the things which are made, they did not
glorify him as God. And therefore I shall not trouble my self to give any
other Answer to it; for by the absurd violence of it in every part, it confutes
it self more effectually than any Discourse about it can do.

I have been the larger upon this, because it is a Matter of so great
Consequence, and lies at the bottom of all Religion. For the Natural Knowledge
which Men have of God, is, when all is done, the surest and fastest hold that
Religion has on Humane Nature. Besides, how should God judge that part of the
World who are wholly destitute of Divine Revelation, if they had no Natural
Knowledge of him, and consequently could not be under the direction and
government of any Law? For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression;
and where Men are guilty o^ the breach of no Law, they cannot be Judged and
Condemned for it; for the Judgment of God is according to truth.

And now this being established, that Men have a Natural Knowledge of God; if
they contradict it by their Life and Practice, they are guilty of detaining the
truth of God in unrighteousness. For by this Argument the Apostle proves the
Heathen to be guilty of holding the truth in unrighteousness, because
notwithstanding the Natural Knowledge which they had of God by the things which
were made, they lived in the practice of gross Idolatry, and the most
abominable Sins and Vices.

And this concerns us much more, who have the glorious Light of the Gospel
added to the Light of Nature. For if they who offended against the Light of
Nature, were liable to the judgment of God, of how much sorer Punishment shall
we be thought worthy, if we neglect those infinite advantages which the
Revelation of the Gospel has superadded to Natural Light? He has now set our
Duty in the clearest and strongest Light that ever was afforded to Mankind, so
that if we will not now Believe and Repent, there is no Remedy for us, but we
must die in our sins; if we sin wilfully, after so much knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin; but a fearful looking for of Judgment,
and fiery indignation to consume us.

The Sum of what has been said on this Argument, is briefly this; that Men
have a Natural Knowledge of God, and of those great Duties which result from
the Knowledge of him; so that whatever Men say and pretend, as to the main
things of Religion, the Worship of God, and Justice and Righteousness toward
Men, setting aside Divine Revelation, we are all Naturally convinced of our
Duty, and of what we ought to do, and those who live in a bad Course, need only
be put in mind of what they naturally know, better than any body else can tell
them, that they are in a bad Course; so that I may appeal to all wicked Men
from themselves, rash, and heated, and intoxicated with Pleasure and Vanity,
transported and hurried away by Lust and Passion; to themselves serious and
composed, and in a cool and considerate temper. And can any sober Man forbear
to follow the Convictions of his own Mind, and to resolve to do what he
inwardly consents to as best? Let us but be true to our selves, and obey the
Dictates of our own Minds, and give leave to our own Consciences to Counsel us,
and tell us what we ought to do, and we shall be a Law to our selves. I proceed
to the

Sixth and last Observation, namely, that the clear Revelation of the wrath of
God in the Gospel, against the impiety and unrighteousness of Men, is one
principal thing, which renders it so very powerful and likely a means for the
Salvation of Mankind. For the Apostle instanceth in two things, which give the
Gospel so great an advantage to this purpose, the Mercy of God to Penitent
Sinners, and his Severity toward the Impenitent; both which are so fully and
clearly revealed in the Gospel. The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, to
every one that believes, beca^se therein the Righteousness of God is revealed;
that is, his great Grace and Mercy in the Justification and Pardon of Sinners
by Jesus Christ, which I have already shown to be meant by the Righteousness of
God, by comparing this with the Explication which is given of the Righteousness
of God, Chap. 3. ver. 22.

The other Reason which he gives of the Gospel's being the power of God to
Salvation, is the plain declaration of the Severity of God toward Impenitent
Sinners, Because therein also the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men. The force of which Argument will
appear, if we consider these following Particulars.

First, That the Declarations of the Gospel in this Matter are so plain and
express.

Secondly, That they are very dreadful, and terrible.

Thirdly, That there is no safety or hope of impunity for Men that go on and
continue in their Sins.

Fourthly, That this Argument will take hold of the most desperate and
pro^ligate Sinners, and still retain its force upon the Minds of Men, when all
other Considerations fail, and are of little or no efficacy. And,

Fifthly, That no Religion in the World can urge this Argument with that force
and advantage that Christianity does.

First, That the declarations of the Gospel in this Matter, are most plain and
express; and that not only against Sin and Wickedness in general, but against
particular Sins and Vices; so that no Man that lives in any Evil and Vicious
Course, can be ignorant of his danger. Our Lord has told us in general, what
shall be the Doom of the Workers of Iniquity, yea, though they may have owned
him, and made profession of his Name, Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord,
Lord, etc. then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye
that work Iniquity. Math. 13. 49, 50. So shall it be at the end of the World,
the Angels shall come forth and sever the Wicked from among the Just, and shall
cast them into the furnace of fire, there shall be wailing, and gnashing of
teeth, Math. 25. 46. The Wicked shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, but
the Righteous into Life Eternal. Joh. 5. 28, 29. The hour is coming, in which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they
that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnatiom. Romans 2. 6. St. Paul tells us that
there is a Day of wrath, and of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of
God, who will render to every Man according to his deeds; to them who obey not
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of Man that does evil. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. That the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power. Nothing can be
more plain and express than these general declarations of the wrath of God
against Sinners; that there is a Day of Judgment appointed, and a Judge
constituted to take cognizance of the Actions of Men, to pass a severe
Sentence, and to inflict a terrible Punishment upon the workers of Iniquity.

More particularly our Lord and his Apostles have denounced the wrath of God
against particular Sin^ and Vices. In several places of the New Testament,
there are Catalogues given of particular Sins, the practice whereof will
certainly shut Men out of the Kingdom of Heaven, and expose them to the wrath
and vengeance of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. So likewise, Gal. 5. 19, 20,
21. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife,
Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such
like, of which I tell you before, as I have likewise told you in times past,
that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Col. 3. 5,
6. Morti^ie therefore your Members upon Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry,
for which things sake the wrath of God comes on the Children of disobedience.
Rev. 21. 8. The fearful and unbelieving, (that is, those who rejected the
Christian Religion, notwithstanding the clear Evidence that was offered for it,
and those who out of fear should Apostatize from it,) The fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, (that is, those who were guilty of unnatural
Lusts, not fit to be named) and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sor^erers, and
Idolaters, and all Liars (that is, all sorts of false and deceitful and
perfidious Persons) shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.

And not only these gross and notorious Sins, which are such plain violations
of the Law and Light of Nature; but those wherein Mankind have been apt to take
more liberty, as if they were not sufficiently convinced of the evil of them;
as the resisting of Civil Authority, which the Apostle tells us, they that are
guilty of, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. Profane Swearing
in common Conversation, which St. James tells us brings Men under the danger of
damnation, Chapter 5. 12. Above all things, my Brethren, swear not, lest ye fall
under Condemnation. Nay, our Savior has told us plainly, that not only for
wicked actions, but for every evil and sinful word, Men are obnoxious to the
Judgment of God. So our Lord assures us, Mat. 12. 36, 37. I say unto you, that
every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the
Day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. He had spoken before of that great and unpardonable
Sin of Blaspheming the Holy Ghost; and because this might be thought great
severity for evil words, he declares the Reason more fully, because words show
the Mind and Temper of the Man, ver. 34. For out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks. The Character of the Man is shown by his words, says
Menander. Profert enim mores plerumque oration (says Quintilian) and animi
secreta detegit; A Man's Speech discovers his Manners, and the secrets of his
heart; ut vivit etiam quemque dicere, Men commonly speak as they live; and
therefore our Savior adds, A good Man out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things; and an evil Man out of the evil treasure of his
heart brings forth evil things: but I say unto you, that every idle word,
(...), by which I do not think our Savior means, that Men shall be called to a
solemn account at the Day of Judgment, for every trifling and impertinent and
unprofitable word, but every wicked and sinful word of any kind; as if he had
said, do you think this severe to ma^e words an unpardonable fault? I say unto
you, that Men shall not only be condemned for their mali^ious and blasphemous
speeches against the Holy Ghost; but they shall likewise give a strict account
for all other wicked and sinful speeches in any kind, though much inferior to
this. And this is not only most agreeable to the scope of our Savior, but is
confirmed by some Greek Copies, in which it is (...), every wicked word which
Men shall speak, they shall be accountable for it at the Day of Judgment. But
this by the by.

Our Savior likewise tells us, that Men shall not only be proceeded against
for Sins of Commission, but for the bare Omission and Neglect of their Duty,
especially in Works of Mercy and Charity; for not feeding the hungry, and the
like, as we see Mat. 25. and that for the omission of these, he will pass that
terrible Sentence, Depart ye Cursed, etc. So that it nearly concerns us to be
careful of our whole Life, of all our Words and Actions, since the Gospel has
so plainly and expressly declared, that for all these things God will bring us
into Judgment. And if the threatenings of the Gospel be true, What manner of
Persons ought we to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness?

Secondly, As the threatenings of the Gospel are very plain and express, so are
they likewise very dreadful and terrible. I want words to express the least
part of the terror of them; and yet the expressions of Scripture concerning
the misery and punishment of Sinners in another World, are such as may justly
raise amazement and horror in those that hear them. Sometimes it is expressed by
a departing from God, and a perpetual banishment from his presence, who is the
Fountain of all Comfort, and Joy, and Happiness; sometimes by the loss of our
Souls, or our selves. What shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? Or, (as it is in another Evangelist) to lose himself? Not
that our Being shall be destroyed; that would be a happy loss indeed, to him
that is Sentenced to be for ever miserable; but the Man shall still remain, and
his Body and Soul continue to be the Foundation of his misery, and a Scene of
perpetual woe and discontent, which our Savior calls the destroying of Body
and Soul in Hell, or going into everlasting punishment, where there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. Could I represent to you the horror of that dismal Prison, into which
Wicked and Impure Souls are to be thrust, and the misery they must there
endure, without the least spark of Comfort, or glimering of Hope, how they wail
and groan under the intolerable wrath of God, the insolent scorn and cruelty of
Devils, the severe lashes and stings, the raging anguish and horrible despair
of their own minds, without intermission, without pity, and without hope of
ever seeing an end of that misery, which yet is unsupportable for one moment;
could I represent these things to you according to the terror of them, what
effect must they have upon us? and with what patience could any Man bear to
think of plunging himself into this misery? and by his own wilful fault and
folly to endanger his coming into this place and state of torments? Especially
if we consider in the

Third place, that the Gospel has likewise declared, that there is no avoiding
of this misery, no hopes of impunity, if Men go on and continue in their Sins.
The terms of the Gospel in this are peremptory, that except we Repent, we shall
perish; that without holiness, no Man shall see the Lord, that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And this is a very pressing
Consideration, and brings the Matter to a short and plain issue. Either we must
leave our Sins, or die in them; either we must Repent of them, or be Judged for
them; either we must ^orsake our Sins, and break off that wicked Course which
we have lived in, or we must quit all hopes of Heaven and Happiness, nay we
cannot escape the damnation of Hell. The clear revelation of a future Judgment
is so pressing an Argument to Repentance, as no Man can in Reason resist, that
has not a mind to be miserable. Now (says St. Paul to the Athenians) he
straightly charge all Men every where to Repent, because he has appointed a
Day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness.

Men may cheat themselves, or suffer themselves to be deluded by others, about
several means and devices of reconciling a wicked Life, with the hopes of
Heaven and Eternal Salvation; as by mingling some pangs of sorrow for Sin, and
some hot Fits of Devotion, with a sinful Life; which is only the interruption
of a wicked Course, without Reformation and amendment of Life: but let no Man
deceive you with vain words; for our Blessed Savior has provided no other
ways to save Men, but upon the terms of Repentance, and Obedience.

Fourthly, This Argument takes hold of the most desperate and profligate
Sinners, and still retains its force upon the Minds of Men, when almost all
other Considerations fail, and have lost their efficacy upon us. Many Men are
gone so far in an Evil Course, that neither shame of their Vices, nor the love
of God and Virtue, nor the hopes of Heaven are of any force with them, to
reclaim them and bring them to a better Mind: but there is one handle yet left,
whereby to lay hold of them, and that is their Fear. This is a Passion that
lies deep in our Nature, being founded in self-preservation, and sticks so
close to us, that we cannot quit our selves of it, nor shake it off. (...) may
put off ingenuity, and (...) all Obligations of gratitude, Men may harden their
Foreheads, and Conquer all sense of shame: but they can never perfectly sti^le
and subdue their Fears, they can hardly so extinguish the fear of Hell, but
that some sparks of that Fire will ever and anon be flying about in their
Consciences, especially when they are made sober, and brought to themselves by
affliction, and by the present apprehensions of Death, have a nearer sight of
another World. And if it was so hard for the Heathen to Conquer these
apprehensions, how much harder must it be to Christians, who have so much
greater assurance of these things, and to whom the wrath of God is so clearly
revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men.

Fifthly, No Religion in the World ever urged this Argument upon Men, with that
force and advantage which Christianity does. The Philosophy of the Heathen gave
Men no steady assurance of the thing; the most knowing Persons among them were
not agreed about a Future State; the greatest part of them spoke but doubtfully
concerning another Life. And besides the natural jealousies and suspicions of
Mankind concerning these things, they had only some fair probabilities of
Reason, and the Authority of their Poets, who talked they knew not what about
the Elizian Fields, and the Infernal Regions, and the three Judges of Hell; so
that the Wisest among them, had hardly assurance enough in themselves of the
truth of the thing, to press it upon others with any great confidence, and
therefore it was not likely to have any great efficacy upon the generality of
Mankind.

As for the Jewish Religion, though that supposed and took for granted the
Rewards of another World, as a Principle of Natural Religion; yet in the Law of
Moses there was no particular and express Revelation of the Life of the World
to come; and what was deduced from it, was by remote and obscure Consequence.
Temporal Promises and Threatenings it had many and clear, and their Eyes were so
dazzled with these, that it is probable that the generality of them did but
little consider a Future State, 'till they fell into great temporal Calamities
under the Grecian and Roman Empires, whereby they were almost necessarily
awakened to the Consideration and hopes of a better Life, to relieve them under
their present Evils and Sufferings; and yet even in that time they were divided
into two great Factions about this Matter, the one affirming, and the other as
considently denying any Life after this. But the Gospel has brought Life and
Immortality ^o light, and we are assured from Heaven of the truth and reality
of another State, and a Future Judgment. The Son of God was sent into the World
to preach this Doctrine, and rose again from the Dead, and was taken up into
Heaven, for a visible demonstration to all Mankind of another Life after this,
and consequently of a Future Judgment, which no Man ever doubted of, that did
firmly believe a Future State.

The Sum of all that I have said is this; the Gospel has plainly declared to
us, that the only way to Salvation is by forsaking our Sins, and living a Holy
and Virtuous Life; and the most effectual Argument in the World to persuade Men
to this, is the consideration of the infinite danger that a sinful Course
exposes Men to, since the wrath of God continually hangs over Sinners, and if
they continue in their Sins, will certainly fall upon them, and overwhelm them
with Misery; and he that is not moved by this Argument, is lost to all intents
and purposes.

All that now remains, is to urge this Argument upon Men, and from the serious
Consideration of it, to persuade them to Repent, and reform their wicked Lives.
And was there ever Age wherein this was more needful? when Iniquity does not
only abound, but even rage among us; when Infidelity and Profaneness, and all
manner of Lewdness and Vice appears so boldly and openly, and Men commit the
greatest Abominations without blushing at them; when Vice has got such head,
that it can hardly bear to be ^keckt and controlled, and when, as the Roman
Historian complains of his times, Ad ea tempora, quibus nec vitia nostra nec
remedia pati possumus, perventum est; things are come to that pass, that we can
neither bear ou^ Vices, no^ the Remedies of them. Our Vices are grown to a
prodigious and intolerable height, and yet Men hardly have the patience to hear
of them; and surely a Disease is then dangerous indeed, when it cannot bear the
severity that is necessary to a Cure. But yet, notwithstanding this, we who are
the Messengers of God to Men, to warn them of their sin and danger, must not
keep silence, and spare to tell them both of their sins, and of the Judgment of
God which hangs over them; that God will visit for these things, and that his
Soul will be avenged on such a Nation as this. At least we may have leave to
warn others, who are not yet run to the same excess of riot, to save themselves
from this untoward generation. God's Judgments are abroad in the Earth, and
call aloud upon us, to learn Righteousness.

But this is but a small Consideration, in Comparison of the Judgment of
another World, which we who call our selves Christians, do profess to believe,
as one of the Chief Articles of our Faith. The Consideration of this should
check and cool us in the heat of all our sinful Pleasures; and that bitter
Irony of Solomon should cut us to the heart; Rejoice O young Man in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know, that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment. Think often and seriously on that time,
wherein the wrath of God, which is now revealed against sin, shall be executed
upon Sinners; and if we believe this, we are strangely stupid and obstinate, if
we be not moved by it. The assurance of this made St Paul extremely importunate
in exhorting Men to avoid so great a danger. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the Body, according to what he has done, whether it be good, or
evil. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men. And if this
ought to move us to take so great a care of others, much more of our selves.
The Judgment to come is a very amazing Consideration, it is a fearful thing to
hear of it, but it will be much more terrible to see it, especially to those
whose guilt must needs make them so heartily concerned in the dismal
Consequences of it; and yet as sure as I stand, and you sit here, this great
and terrible Day of the Lord will come, and who may abide his coming! What will
we do, when that Day shall surprise us careless and unprepared! what
unspeakable horror and amazement will then take hold of us! when lifting up our
eyes to Heaven, we shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of it, with
Power, and great Glory; when that powerful voice which shall pierce the ears of
the Dead shall ring through the World, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment;
when the mighty Trumpet shall sound, and wake the Sleepers of a thousand years,
and summon the dispersed parts of the Bodies of all Men that ever lived, to
rally together and take their place; and the Souls and Bodies of Men which have
been so long strangers to one another, shall meet and be united again, to
receive the doom due to their deeds; what fear shall then surprise Sinners, and
how will they tremble at the presence of the great Judge, and for the glory of
his Majesty! How will their Consciences fly in their faces, and their own
hearts condemn them, for their wicked and ungodly Lives, and even prevent that
Sentence which yet shall certainly be past and executed upon them. But I will
proceed no further in this Argument, which has so much of terror in it.

I will conclude my Sermon, as Solomon does his Ecclesia^tes, Chapter 12. 13, 14.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole of Man; for God shall bring every work into
Judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. To
which I will only add that serious and merciful Admonition of a greater than
Solomon, I mean the great Judge of the whole World, our blessed Lord and
Savior, Luke 21. 34, 35, 36. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this
life, and so that day come upon you at unawares; for as a snare shall it come
upon all them that dwell on the face of the whole Earth. Watch ye therefore,
and pray always, that ye may be accouuted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man; To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, etc.

SERMON XII.
Knowledge and Practice Necessary in Religion.
JOHN XIII. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
TWO Things make up Religion, the Knowledge, and the Practice of it; and the
First is wholly in order to the Second; and God has not revealed to us the
Knowledge of Himself and his Will, merely for the improvement of our
Understanding, but for the bettering of our Hearts and Lives; not to entertain
our Minds with the speculations of Religion and Virtue, but to form and govern
our Actions. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

In which words, our blessed Savior does from a particular instance take
occasion to settle a general Conclusion, namely, that Religion does mainly
consist in Practice, and that the knowledge of his Doctrine, without the real
effects of it upon our Lives, will bring no Man to Heaven. In the beginning of
this Chapter, our great Lord and Master, to testify his Love to his Disciples,
and to give them a lively Instance and Example of that great Virtue of
Humility, is pleased to condescend to a very low and mean Office, such as was
used to be performed by Servants to their Masters, and not by the Master to his
Servants; namely, to wash their feet; and when he had done this, he asks them
if they did understand the meaning of this strange Action. Know ye what I have
done unto you? ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am; if I
then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another feet; for I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I have
done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Servant is not greater than
the Lord, neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him; if ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them. As if he had said, This which I have
now done, is easy to be understood, and so likewise are all those other
Christian Graces and Virtues, which I have heretofore by my Doctrine and
Example recommended to you; but it is not enough to know these things, but ye
must likewise do them. The End and the Life of all our Knowledge in Religion,
is to put in practice what we know. It is necessary indeed that we should know
our Duty, but Knowledge alone will never bring us to that Happiness, which
Religion designs to make us partakers of, if our Knowledge have not its due and
proper influence upon our Lives. Nay, so far will our Knowledge be from making
us Happy, if it be separated from the Virtues of a good Life, that it will
prove one of the heaviest aggravations of our misery; and it is as if he had
said, if ye know these things, woe be unto you, if ye do them not.

From these words then, I shall observe these three things, which I shall speak
but briefly to.

First, That the Knowledge of God's Will, and our Duty, is necessary to the
practice of it; If ye know these things, which supposes that we must know our
Duty, before we can do it.

Secondly, That the Knowledge of our Duty, and the Practice of it, may be, and
too often are separated. This likewise the Text supposes, that Men may know
their Duty, and yet not do it, and that this is very frequent, which is the
Reason why our Savior gives this Caution.

Thirdly, That the Practice of Religion, and the doing of what we know to be
our Duty, is the only way to Happiness; If ye know these things, happy ^re ye
if ye do them. I begin with the

First of these, namely, That the Knowledge of God's Will and our Duty, is
necessary in order to the Practice of it. The truth of this Proposition is so
clear and evident at first view, that nothing can obscure it, and bring it in
question, but to endeavor to prove it; and therefore instead of spending time
in that, I shall take occasion from it, justly to reprove that preposterous
Course which is taken, and openly avowed and justified by some, as the safest
and best way to make Men Religious, and to bring them to Happiness; namely, by
taking away from them the Means of Knowledge; as if the best way to bring Men
to do the Will of God, were to keep them from knowing it. For what else can be
the meaning of that Maxim so current in the Church of Rome, that Ignorance is
the Mother of Devotion? or of that strange and injurious practice of theirs, of
Locking up from the People that great Storehouse and Treasury of Divine
Knowledge, the Holy Scriptures, in an unknown Tongue.

I know very well, that in justification of this hard usage of their People, it
is pretended that Knowledge is apt to puff Men up, to make them Proud and
Contentious, Refractory and Disobedient, and Heretical, and what not? and
particularly, that the free and familiar use of the Holy Scriptures permitted
to the People, has ministered occasion to the People, of falling into great and
dangerous Errors, and of making great disturbance and divisions among
Christians. For answer to this pretense, I desire these four or five things may
be Considered.

First, That unless this be the Natural and Necessary effect of Knowledge in
Religion, and of the free use of the Holy Scriptures, there is no force in this
Reason; and if this be the proper and natural effect of this Knowledge, then
this Reason will reach a great way farther, than those who make use of it are
willing it should.

Secondly, That this is not the natural and necessary effect of Knowledge in
Religion, but only accidental, and proceeding from Men's abuse of it; for which
the thing it self is not to be taken away.

Thirdly, That the proper and natural Effects and Consequences of Ignorance,
are equally pernicious, and much more certain and unavoidable, than those which
are accidentally occasioned by Knowledge.

Fourthly, That if this Reason be good, it is much stronger for withholding the
Scriptures from the Priests and the Learned, than from the People.

Fifthly, That this danger was as great, and as well known in the Apostles
times, and yet they took a quite contrary Course.

First, I desire it may be considered, that unless this be the natural and
necessary effect of Knowledge in Religion, and of the free use of the Holy
Scriptures, there is no force in this Reason; for that which is necessary, or
highly useful, ought not to be taken away, because it is liable to be
perverted, and abused to ill purposes. If it ought, then not only Knowledge in
Religion, but all other Knowledge ought to be restrained and suppressed; for all
Knowledge is apt to puff up, and liable to be abused to many ill purposes. At
this rate, Light, and Liberty, and Reason, yea and Life it self, ought all to
be taken away, because they are all greatly abused by many Men, to some ill
purposes or other; so that unless these ill effects do naturally and
necessarily spring from Knowledge in Religion, the Objection from them is of no
force; and if they do necessarily flow from it, then this Reason will reach a
great way further than those that make use of it are willing it should; for if
this be true, that the Knowledge of Religion, as it is Revealed in the Holy
Scriptures, is of its own Nature so pernicious, as to make Men proud and
Contentious, and Heretical, and Disobedient to Authority, then the blame of all
this would fall upon our blessed Savior, for revealing so pernicious a
Doctrine, and upon his Apostles, for publishing this Doctrine in a known Tongue
to all Mankind, and thereby laying the Foundation of perpetual Schisms and
Heresies in the Church.

Secondly^ But this is not the natural and necessary effect of Knowledge in
Religion, but only accidental, and proceeding from Men's abuse of it, for which
the thing it self ought not to be taken away. And thus much certainly they will
grant, because it cannot with any face be denied; and if so, then the Means of
Knowledge are not to be denied, but only Men are to be cautioned not to prevert
and abuse them. And if any Man abuse the Holy Scriptures to the Patronizing of
Error or Heresy, or to any other bad purpose, he does it at his peril, and
must give an account to God for it, but ought not to be deprived of the means
of Knowledge, for fear he should make an ill use of them. We must not hinder
Men from being Christians, to preserve them from being Heretics; and put out
Men's Eyes, for fear they should some time or other take upon them to dispute
their way with their Guides.

I remember that St. Paul, 1 Cor. 8. 1. takes notice of this accidental
inconvenience of Knowledge, that it puffs up, and that this Pride occasioned
great Contentions and Divisions among them: but the Remedy which he prescribes
against this mischief of Knowledge, is not to withold from Men the Means of
it, and to Celebrate the Service of God, the Prayers of the Church, and the
Reading of the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue, but quite contrary, Chap. 14.
of that Epistle, he strictly enjoins that the Service of God in the Church be
so performed, as may be for the edification of the People, which he says cannot
be, if it be Celebrated in an unknown Tongue; and the Remedy he prescribes
against the accidental mischief and inconvenience of Knowledge, is not
Ignorance; but Charity, to govern their Knowledge, and to help them to make a
right use of it; ver. 20. of that Chapt. after he had declared that the Service
of God ought to be performed in a known Tongue, he immediately adds, Brethren
be not Children in understanding; howbe-it in malice be ye Children, but in
understanding be ye Men. He commends Knowledge, he encourages it, he requires
it of all Christians; so far is he from checking the pursuit of it, and
depriving the People of the Means of it. And indeed there is nothing in the
Christian Religion, but what is fit for every Man to know, because there is
nothing in it, but what is designed to promote Holiness, and a good Life; and
if Men make any other use of their Knowledge, it is their own fault, for it
certainly tends to make Men good; and being so useful and necessary to so good
a purpose, Men ought not to be debarred of it.

Thirdly, Let it be Considered, that the proper and natural Effects and
Consequences of ignorance are equally pernicious, and much more certain and
unavoidable, than those which are accidentally occasioned by Knowledge; for so
far as a Man is ignorant of his Duty, it is impossible he should do it. He that
has the Knowledge of Religion, may be a bad Christian, but he that is
destitute of it, can be none at all. Or if ignorance do beget and promote some
kind of Devotion in Men, it is such a Devotion as is not properly Religion, but
Superstition; the ignorant Man may be zealously superstitious, but without some
measure of Knowledge, no Man can be truly Religious. That the Soul be without
Knowledge it is not good, says Solomon, Prove. 19. 2. because good practices
depends upon our Knowledge, and must be directed by it; when as a Man that is
trained up only to the outward performance of some things in Religion, as to
the saying over so many Prayers in an unknown Tongue, this Man cannot be truly
Religious, because nothing is Religious, that is not a Reasonable Service; and
no Service can be Reasonable, that is not directed by our Understandings.
Indeed, if the end of Prayer were only to give God to understand what we want,
it were all one what Language we Prayed in, and whether we understood what we
asked of him or not: but so long as the end of Prayer is to testify the sense
of our own wants, and of our dependence upon God for the supply of them, it is
impossible that any Man should in any tolerable propriety of Speech be said to
Pray, who does not understand what he asks; and the saying over so many Pater
Nosters by one that does not understand the meaning of them, is no more a
Prayer, than the repeating over so many Verses in Virgil. And if this were good
Reasoning, that Men must not be permitted to know so much as they can in
Religion, for fear they should grow troublesome with their Knowledge, then
certainly the best way in the World to maintain Peace in the Christian Church,
would be to let the People know nothing at all in Religion; and the best way to
secure the ignorance of the People would be to keep the Priests as ignorant as
the People, and then to be sure they could teach them nothing: but then the
mischief would be, that out of a fondness to maintain Peace in the Christian
Church, there would be no Church, nor no Christianity; which would be the same
wise Contrivance, as if a Prince should destroy his Subjects, to keep his
Kingdom quiet.

Fourthly, Let us likewise Consider, that if this Reason be good, it is much
stronger for withholding the Scriptures from the Priests, and the Learned, than
from the People; because the danger of starting Errors and Heresies, and
Countenancing them from Scripture, and managing them plausibly and with
advantage, is much more to be feared from the Learned, than from the Common
People; and the Experience of all Ages has shown, that the great Broachers and
Abettors of Heresy in the Christian Church, have been Men of Learning and Wit;
and most of the famous Heresies, that are Recorded in Ecclesiastical History,
have their Names from some Learned Man or other; so that it is a great mistake
to think that the way to prevent Error and Heresy in the Church, is to take
the Bible out of the hands of the People, so long as the free use of it is
permitted to Men of Learning and Skill, in whose hands the danger of perverting
it is much greater. The Ancient Fathers, I am sure, do frequently prescribe to
the People the constant and careful reading of the Holy Scriptures, as the
surest Antidote against the Poison of dangerous Errors, and damnable Heresies;
and if there be so much danger of seduction into Error from the Oracles of
Truth, by what other or better Means can we hope to be sec^red against this
danger? If the word of God be so cross and improper a Means to this End, one
would think that the teachings of Men should be much less effectual; so that
Men must either be left in their ignorance, or they must be permitted to learn
from the word of truth; and whatever force this Reason of the danger of Heresy
has in it, to deprive the Common People of the use of the Scriptures, I am
sure it is much stronger to wrest them out of the hands of the Priests and the
Learned, because they are much more capable of perverting them to so bad a
purpose.

Fifthly, and lastly, this danger was as great and visible in the Age of the
Apostles, as it is now; and yet they took a quite contrary Course; there were
Heresies then, as well as now, and either the Scriptures were not thought by
being in the hands of the People to be the Cause of them, or they did not think
the taking of them out of their hands a proper Remedy. The Apostles in all
their Epistles, do earnestly Exhort the People to grow in Knowledge, and
commend them for searching the Scriptures, and charge them that the word of God
should dwell richly in them. And St. Peter takes particular notice of some Men
wresting some difficult passages in St. Paul's Epistles, as likewise in the
other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. where speaking of St
Paul's Epistles, he says there are some things hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction. Here the Danger Objected is taken notice
of; but the Remedy prescribed by St. Peter, is not to take ^^om the People the
use of the Scrip^ures, and to keep them in ignorance; ^ut after he had
cautioned against the like weakness and errors, he exhorts them to grow in
Knowledge, ver. 17, 18. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things
before (that is, seeing ye are so plainly told and warned of this danger)
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, (that is of the Christian Religion;) believing, it seems,
that the more knowledge they had in Religion, the less they would be in danger
of falling into damnable Errors. I proceed to the

Second Observation, viz. That the Knowledge of our Duty, and the Practice of
it, may and often are separated. This likewise is supposed in the Text, that
Men may, and often do know the Will of God, and their Duty, and yet fail in the
Practice of it. Our Savior elsewhere supposes, that many know their Master's
Will, who do not do it; and he compares those that hear his Sayings, and do
them not, to a foolish Man that built his house upon the sand. And St. James
speaks of some, who are hearers of the word only, but not doers of it, and for
that Reason fall short of Happiness. And this is no wonder, because the
attaining to that knowledge of Religion which is necessary to Salvation is no
difficult task. A great part of it is written in our hearts, and we cannot be
ignorant of it if we would; as that there is a God, and a Providence, and
another State after this Life, wherein we shall be Rewarded, or Punished,
according as we have lived here in this World; that God is to be Worshipped, to
be Prayed to for what we want, and to be Praised for what we enjoy. Thus far
Nature instructs Men in Religion, and in the great Duties of Morality, as
Justice, and Temperance, and the like. And as for Revealed Religion, as that
Jesus Christ the Son of God came in our Nature to save us, by revealing our
Duty more clearly and fully to us, by giving us a more perfect Example of
Holiness and Obedience in his own Life and Conversation, and by dying for our
Sins, and rising again for our Justification; these are things which Men may
easily understand; and yet for all that, they are difficulty brought to the
Practice of Religion.

I shall instance in three sorts of Persons, in whom the knowledge of Religion
is more remarkably separated from the Practice of it; and for distinction sake,
I may call them by these three Names; the Spe^ulative, the Formal, and the
Hypocritical Christian. The first of these makes Religion only a Science, the
second takes it up for a Fashion, the third makes some Worldly advantage of it,
and serves some secular Interest and Design by it. All these are upon several
accounts concerned to understand something of Religion; but yet will not be
brought to the Practice of it.

The first of these whom I call the Specul^tive Christian, is he who makes
Religion only a Science, and studies it as a piece of Learning, and part of
that general knowledge in which he affects the reputation of being a Master; he
has no design to practice it, but he is loath to be ignorant of it, because the
knowledge of it is a good Ornament of Conversation, and will serve for
Discourse and Entertainment among those who are disposed to be grave and
serious; and because he does not intend to practice it, he passes over those
things which are plain and easy to be understood, and applies himself chiefly
to the Consideration of those things which are more abstruse, and will afford
Matter of Controversy and subtle Dispute, as the Doctrine of the Trinity,
Predestination, Free Will, and the like. Of this temper seem many of the
Schoolmen of old to have been, who made it their great study and business to
puzzle Religion, and to make every thing in it intricate, by starting infinite
questions and difficulties about the plainest truths; and of the same rank
usually are the Heads and Leaders of Parties and Factions in Religion, who by
needless Controversies, and endless Disputes about some thing or other,
commonly of no great moment in Religion, hinder themselves and others from
minding the Practice of the great and substantial Duties of a good Life.

Secondly, There is the Formal Ch^istian, who takes up Religion for a Fashion.
He is born and bred in a Nation where Christianity is professed, and
Countenanced, and therefore thinks it convenient for him to know something of
it. Of this sort there are, I fear, a great many, who read the Scriptures
sometimes as others do, to know the History of it; and go to Church, and hear
the Gospel preached, and by this means come in some measure to understand the
History of our Savior, and the Christian Doctrine; but do not at all bend
themselves to comply with the great End and Design of it; they do not heartily
endeavor to form and fashion their Lives according to the Laws and Precepts of
it; they think they are very good Christians, if they can give an account of
the Articles of their Faith, profess their Belief in God and Christ, and
declare that they hope to be Saved by him, though they take no care to keep his
Commandments. These are they of whom our Savior speaks, Luke 6. 46. who call
him, Lord, Lord; but do not the things which he said.

Thirdly, Hypocritical Christians, who make an interest of Religion, and serve
some worldly design by it. These are concerned to understand Religion more than
ordinary, that they may counterfeit it handsomely, and may not be at a loss when
they have occasion to put on the garb of it. And this is one part of the
Character which the Apostle gives of those Persons, who he foretells would
appear in the last days, 2 Timothy 3. 2. he says they should be Lovers of their
own selves, Covetous, Heady, High-Minded, Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers
of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power of it.

Now these Men do not love Religion, but they have occasion to make use of it;
and therefore they will have no more of it than will just serve their Purpose
and Design. And indeed he that has any other Design in Religion than to please
God, and save his Soul, needs no more than so much knowledge of it, as will
serve him to act a part in it upon occasion. I come to the

Third and last Observation, viz. That the Practice of Religion, and the doing
of what we know to be our Duty, is the only way to Happiness; If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them; not if ye know these things happy are ye;
but if ye know and do them. Now to convince Men of so important a Truth, I
shall endeavor to make out these two things.

First, That the Gospel makes the Practice of Religion a necessary Condition of
our Happiness.

Secondly, That the Nature and Reason of the thing makes it a necessary
Qualification for it.

First, The Gospel makes the Practice of Religion a necessary Condition of our
Happiness. Our Savior in his first Sermon, where he repeats the Promise of
Blessedness so often, he makes no promise of it to the mere knowledge of
Religion, but to the Habit and Practice of Christian Graces and Virtues, of
Meekness, and Humility, and Mercifuln^s^, and Righteousness, and Peaceableness,
and P^r^ty, and Patience under Suff^rings and Persecutions for Righteousness
sake. And Matthew. 7. 2. our Savior does most fully declare, that the happines^
which he promises, did not belong to those who made profession of his Name, and
were so well acquainted with his Doctrine, as to be able to instruct others, if
themselves in the mean time did not practice it; Not every one that ^aith unto
me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and
done many wondrous works; and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. Though they profess to know him, yet
because their Lives were not answerable to the Knowledge which they had of him,
and his Doctrine, he declares that he will not know them, but bid them depart
from him. And then he goes on to show, that though a Man attend to the Doctrine
of Christ, and gain the knowledge of it; yet if it do not descend into his
Life, and govern his Actions, all that Man's hopes of Heaven are fond and
groundless; and only that Man's hopes of Heaven are well grounded, who knows
the Doctrine of Christ, and does it, Ver. 24. whosoever hears these Sayings
of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a Wise Man, who built his house
upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a roc^; and
every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
liken'd to a foolish Man, who built his house upon the sand, and the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell, and great was the fall of it. Though a Man had a knowledge of
Religion as great and perfect as that which Solomon had of Natural Things,
large as the sand upon the sea shore; yet all th^s Knowledge separated from
Practice, would be like the sand also in another respect, a weak Foundation for
any Man to build his hopes ^f Happiness upon.

To the same purpose St. Paul speaks, Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers of the Law
are just before God; but the d^ers of the Law shall be justified. So likewise
St. James, Chap. 1. 22. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves; and ver. 25. Whose looks into the perfect Law of
Libert (that is the Law or Doctrine of the Gospel,) and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this Man shall be blessed
in his deed; and therefore he adds, that the truth and reality of Religion is
to be measured by the effects of it, in the government of our words, and
ordering of our Lives, Ver. 26. If any Man among you seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this Man's Religion is
vain. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father is this; to visit
the Fatherless and Widow in their aff^iction, and to keep himself unspotted
from the World. Men talk of Religion, and keep a great stir about it; but
nothing will pass for true Religion before God, but the Virtuous and Charitable
Actions of a good Life; and God will accept no Man to Eternal Life upon any
other Condition. So the Apostle tells us most expressly, Heb. 12. 14. Follow
peace with all Men, and holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord.

Secondly, As God has made the Practice of Religion a necessary Condition of
our Happiness, so the very Nature and Reason of the thing makes it a necessary
Qualification for it. It is necessary that we become like to God, in order to
the enjoyment of him; and nothing makes us like to God, but the Practice of
Holiness and Goodness. Knowledge indeed is a Divine Perfection; but that alone,
as it does not render a Man like God, so neither does it dispose him for the
enjoyment of him. If a Man had the understanding of an Angel, he might for all
that be a Devil; he that commits sin is of the Devil, and whatever Knowledge
such a Man may have, he is of a devilish temper and disposition: but every one
that does righteousness is born of God. By this we are like God, and only by
our likeness to him, do we become capable of the ^ight and enjoyment of him;
therefore every Man that hopes to be Happy by the blessed ^ight of God in the
next Life, must endeavor after Holiness in this Life. So the same Apostle
tells us, 1 John 3. 3. Every Man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as he is pure. A wicked temper and disposition of Mind is, in the very
Nature of the thing, utterly inconsistent with all reasonable hopes of Heaven.

Thus I have shown that the Practice of Religion, and the doing of what we know
to be our Duty, is the only way to Happiness.

And now the proper Inference from all this is, to put Men upon the careful
Practice of Religion. Let no Man content himself with the Knowledge of his
Duty, unless he do it; and to this purpose I shall briefly urge these three
Considerations.

First, This is the great End of all our Knowledge in Religion, to practice
what we know. The knowledge of God and of our Duty has so essential a respect
to Practice, that the Scripture will hardly allow it to be properly called
Knowledge, unless it have an influence upon our Lives. 1 John 2. 3, 4. Hereby
we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandment^. He that says I know
him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the truth is not in him.

Secondly, Practice is the best way to increase and perfect our Knowledge.
Knowledge directs us in our Practice, but Practice confirms and increases our
Knowledge, John 7. 17. If any Man will do the will of God, he shall know of the
Doctrine. The best way to know God, is to be like him our selves, and to have
the lively image of his Perfections imprinted upon our Souls; and the best way
to understand the Christian Religion, is seriously to set about the Practice of
it; this will give a Man a better Notion of Christianity, than any Speculation
can.

Thirdly, without the Practice of Religion, our Knowledge will be so far from
being any furtherance and advantage to our Happiness, that it will be one of
the unhappiest aggravations of our misery. He that is ignorant of his Duty,
has some excuse to pretend for himself: but he that understands the Christian
Religion, and does not live according to it, has no cloak for his sin. The
defects of our Knowledge, unless they be gross and wilful, will find an easy
Pardon with God: but the faults of our Lives shall be severely punished, when we
knew our Duty and would not do it. I will conclude with that of our Savior,
Luke 12. 47, 48. That Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes;
for unto whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required. When we come
into the other World, no Consideration will sting us more, and add more to the
rage of our Torments than this, that we did wickedly, when we understood to
have done better; and chose to make our selves Miserable, when we knew so well
the way to have been Happy.

SERMON XIII.
Practice in Religion necessary in proportion to our Knowledge.
LUKE XII. 47, 48. And that Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared
not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes: But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall
be beaten with few stripes; for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required; and to whom Men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more.
IN prosecution of the Argument which I handled in my last Discourse, namely,
that the Knowledge of our Duty, without the Practice of it, will not bring us
to Happiness, I shall proceed to show, that if our Practice be not answerable
to our Knowledge, this will be a great aggravation both of our Sin and
Punishment.

And to this purpose, I have pitched upon these words of our Lord, which are
the application of two Parables, which he had delivered before, to stir up Men
to a diligent and careful Practice of their Duty, that so they may be in a
continual readiness and preparation for the coming of their Lord. The first
Parable is more general, and concerns all Men, who are represented as so many
Servants in a great Family, from which the Lord is absent, and they being
uncertain of the time of his return, should always be in a condition and
posture to receive him. Upon the hearing of this Parable, Peter enquires of our
Savior, whether he intended this only for his Disciples, or for all? To which
Question our Savior returns an Answer in another Parable, which more
particularly concerned them; who because they were to be the Chief Rulers and
Governors of his Church, are represented by the Stewards of a great Family,
Ver. 42. Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make
Ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? If
he discharge his Duty, blessed is he; but if he shall take occasion in his
Lord's absence, to domineer over his fellow Servants, and riotously to waste
his Lords goods, his Lord, when he comes, will punish him after a more severe
and exemplary manner.

And then follows the application of the whole, in the words of the Text, And
that Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. As if he had said,
and well may such a Servant deserve so severe a Punishment, who having such a
trust committed to him, and knowing his Lord's will so much better, yet does
contrary to it; upon which our Savior takes occasion to compare the Fault and
Punishment of those who have greater advantages and opportuniti^s of knowing
their Duty, with those wh^ are ignorant of it; That Servant which knew his
Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to it, shall be
beaten with many stripes: but he that knew not, but did commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. And then he adds the Reason and the
Equity of this proceeding, For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required; and to whom Men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more.

The Words in general do allude to that Law of the Jews, mentioned Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
where the Judge is required to se^ the Malefactor punished according to his
Fault, by a certain number of Stripes; in relation to which known Law among the
Jews, our Savior here says, that those who knew their Lord's will, and did it
not, should be beaten with many stripes: but those who knew it not, should be
beaten with few stripes. So that there are two Observations lie plainly before
us in the words.

First, That the greater Advantages and Opportunities and Man has of knowing
his Duty, if he do it not, the greater will be his Condemnation; The Servant
which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to
it, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Secondly, That ignorance is a great excuse of Men's faults, and will lessen
their Punishment; But he that knew not, but did commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.

I shall begin with the latter of these first, because it will make way for the
other; Viz. That ignorance is a great excuse of Men's faults, and will lessen
their Punishment; He that knew not, but did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes.

For the clearing of this, it will be requisite to consider what ignorance it
is which our Savior here speaks of; and this is necessary to be enquired into,
because it is certain that there is some sort of ignorance which does wholly
excuse and clear from all manner of guilt; and there is another sort, which
does either not at all, or very little extenuate the faults of Men, so that it
must be a third sort, different from both these, which our Savior here means.

First, There is an ignorance which does wholly excuse and clear from all
manner of guilt, and that is an absolute and invincible ignorance, when a
Person is wholly ignorant of the thing, which if he knew, he should be bound to
do, but neither can nor could have helped it, that he is ignorant of it; that
is, he either had not the Capacity, or wanted the Means and Opportunity of
knowing it. In this Case a Person is in no fault, if he did not do what he
never knew, nor could know to be his Duty. For God measures the faults of Men
by their Wills, and if there be no defect there, there can be no guilt; for no
Man is guilty, but he that is conscious to himself that he would not do what he
knew he ought to do, or would do what he knew he ought not to do. Now if a Man
be simply and invincibly ignorant of his Duty, his neglect of it is altogether
involuntary; for the Will has nothing to do, where the Understanding does not
first direct. And this is the Case of Children who are not yet come to the use
of Reason; for though they may do that which is materially a fault, yet it is
none in them, because by reason of their incapacity, they are at present
invincibly ignorant of what they ought to do. And this is the Case likewise of
Idiots, who are under a natural incapacity of Knowledge, and so far as they are
so, nothing that they do is imputed to them as a fault. The same may be said of
distracted Persons, who are deprived either wholly, or at some times, of the
use of their Understandings; so far, and so long as they are thus deprived,
they are free from all guilt; and to Persons who have the free and perfect use
of their Reason, no neglect of any Duty is imputed, of which they are
absolutely and invincibly ignorant. For instance, it is a Duty incumbent upon
all Mankind, to believe in the Son of God, where he is sufficiently manifested
and revealed to them; but those who never heard of him, nor had any opportunity
of coming to the Knowledge of him, shall not be Condemned for this infidelity,
because it is impossible they should believe on him, of whom they never heard;
they may indeed be Condemned upon other accounts, for ^inning against the light
of Nature, and for not obeying the Law which was written in their hearts; for
what the Apostle says of the Revelation of the Law, is as true of any other
Revelation of God, As many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish
without Law; and as many as have sinned under the Law, shall be judged by the
Law, Romans 2. 12. In like manner, those who have ^inned without the Gospel,
(that is, who never had the knowledge of it) shall not be Condemned for any
offense against that Revelation which was never made to them, but for their
violation of the Law of Nature; only they that have sinned under the Gospel,
shall be judged by it.

Secondly, there is likewise another sort of ignorance, which either does not
at all, or very little extenuate the faults of Men, when Men are not only
ignorant, but choose to be so; that is, when they wilfully neglect those Means
and Opportunities of knowledge which are afforded to them; such as Job speaks
of, Job 21. 14. Who say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. And this sort of ignorance many among the Jews were
guilty of, when our Savior came and preached to them, but they would not be
instructed by him; The light came among them, but they loved darkness rather
than light, as he himself says of them; and as he says elsewhere of the
Pharisees, They rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, they wilfully
shut their eyes against that light which offered it self to them; They would
not see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor understand with their
hearts, that they might be converted, and healed. Now an ignorance in this
degree wilful, can hardly be imagined to carry any excuse at all in it. He that
knew not his Lord's Will, because he would not know it, because he wilfully
rejected the Means of coming to the knowledge of it, deserves to be beaten with
as many stripes, as if he had known it; because he might have known it, and
would not. He that will not take notice of the King's Proclamation, or will
stop his ears when it is read, and afterward offends against it, does equally
deserve punishment with those who have read it, and heard it; and disobeyed it,
because he was as grossly faulty in not knowing it; and there is no reason that
any Man's gross fault should be his excuse.

So that it is neither of these sorts of ignorance that our Savior means,
neither absolute and invincible ignorance, nor that which is grossly wilful and
affected; for the first, Men deserve not to be beaten at all, because they
cannot help it; for the latter they deserve not to be excused, because they
might have helped their ignorance, and would not.

But our Savior here speaks of such an ignorance as does in a good degree
extenuate the fault, and yet not wholly excuse it; for he says of them, that
they knew not their Lord's will, and yet that this ignorance did not wholly
excuse them from blame, nor exempt them from punishment, but they should be
beaten with few stripes. In the

Third place then, there is an ignorance which is in some degree faulty, and
yet does in a great measure excuse the faults which proceed from it; and this
is when Men are not absolutely ignorant of their Duty, but only in comparison
of others, who have a far more clear and distinct Knowledge of it; and though
they do not grossly and wilfully neglect the Means of further Knowledge, yet
perhaps they do not make the best use they might of the opportunities they have
of knowing their Duty better; and therefore in comparison of others, who have
far better Means and Advantages of knowing their Lord's Will, they may be said
not to know it, though they are not simply ignorant of it, but only have a more
obscure and uncertain knowledge of it. Now this ignorance does in a great
measure excuse such Persons, and extenuate their Crimes, in comparison of those
who had a clearer and more perfect knowledge of their Master's Will; and yet it
does not free them from all guilt; because they did not live up to that degree
of knowledge which they had; and perhaps if they had used more care and
industry, they might have known their Lord's Will better. And this was the Case
of the Heathen, who in comparison of those who enjoyed the light of the Gospel,
might be said not to have known their Lord's Will, though as to many parts of
their Duty, they had some directions from Natural Light, and their Consciences
did urge them to many things by the obscure apprehensions and hopes of a Future
Reward, and the fear of a Future Punishment. But this was but a very obscure
and uncertain knowledge, in comparison of the clear Light of the Gospel, which
has discovered to us our Duty so plainly by the Laws and Precepts of it, and
has presented us with such powerful Motives and Arguments to Obedience in the
Promises and Threatenings of it. And this likewise is the Case of many
Christians, who either through the natural slowness of their Understandings, or
by the neglect of their Parents and Teachers, or other Circumstances of their
Education, have had far less Means and Advantages of Knowledge than others. God
does not expect so much from those, as from others, to whom he has given
greater Capacity, and Advantages of Knowledge; and when our Lord shall come to
call his Servants to an account, they shall be beaten with fewer stripes than
others; they shall not wholly escape, because they were not wholly ignorant;
but by how much they had less Knowledge than others, by so much their
Punishment shall be lighter.

And there is all the Equity in the World it should be so, that Men should be
accountable according to what they have received, and that to whom less is
given, less should be required at their hands. The Scripture has told us, that
God will judge the World in Righteousness; now Justice does require, that in
taxing the Punishment of Offenders, every thing should be considered, that may
be a just excuse and extenuation of their Crimes, and that accordingly their
Punishment should be abated. Now the greatest extenuation of any fault is
ignorance, which when it proceeds from no fault of ours, no fault can proceed
from it; so that so far as any Man is innocently ignorant of his Duty, so far
he is excusable for the neglect of it; for every degree of ignorance takes off
so much from the perverseness of the will; and nihil ardet in inferno, nisi
propria voluntas, Nothing is punished in Hell, but what is voluntary, and
proceeds from our Wills.

I do not intend this Discourse for any commendation of Ignorance, or
encouragement to it. For Knowledge has many advantages above it, and is much
more desirable, if we use it well; and if we do not, it is our own fault; if we
be not wanting to our selves, we may be much happier by our Knowledge, than any
Man can be by his Ignorance; for though Ignorance may plead an excuse, yet it can
hope for no Reward; and it is always better to need no excuse, than to have the
best in the world ready at hand to plead for our selves. Besides, that we may
do well to consider, that ignorance is no where an excuse where it is cherisht;
so that it would be the vainest thing in the world for any Man to foster it, in
hopes thereby to excuse himself; for where it is wilful and chosen, it is a
fault, and (as I said before) it is the most unreasonable thing in the World,
that any Man's fault should prove his excuse. So that this can be no
encouragement to ignorance, to say that it extenuates the faults of Men; for it
does not extenuate them, whenever it is wilful and affected; and when ever it
is designed and chosen, it is wilful; and then no Man can reasonably design to
continue ignorant, that he may have an excuse for his faults, because then the
ignorance is wilful, and whenever it is so, it cease to be an excuse.

I the rather speak this, because Ignorance has had the good fortune to meet
with great Patrons in the World, and to be extolled, though not upon this account,
yet upon another, for which there is less pretense of Reason; as if it were the
Mother of Devotion. Of Superstition I grant it is, and of this we see plentiful
proof, among those who are so careful to preserve and cherish it: but that true
Piety and Devotion should spring from it, is as unlikely, as that Darkness
should produce Light. I do hope indeed, and Charitably believe, that the
ignorance in which some are detained by their Teachers and Governors, will be
a real excuse, to as many of them as are otherwise honest and sincere; but I
doubt not, but the errors and faults which proceed from this ignorance, will
lie heavy upon those who keep them in it. I proceed to the

Second Observation, That the greater Advantages and Opportunities any Man has
of knowing the will of God, and his Duty, the greater will be his Condemnation
if he do not do it. The Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to it, shall be beaten with many stripes. Which
knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself; The preparation of our Mind to
do the Will of God, whenever there is occasion and opportunity for it, is
accepted with him; a Will rightly disposed to obey God, though it be not brought
in to act, for want of opportunity, does not lose its Reward: but when,
notwithstanding we know our Lord's Will, there are neither of these, neither
the act, nor the preparation and resolution of doing it, what punishment may we
not expect?

The Just God, in punishing the sins of Men, proportions the punishment to the
Crime, and where the Crime is greater, the punishment rises; as amongst the
Jews, where the Crime was small, the Malefactor was sentenced to a few stripes;
where it was great, he was beaten with many. Thus our Savior represents the
great Judge of the World dealing with Sinners; according as their Sins are
aggravated, he will add to their punishment. Now after all the aggravations of
sin, there is none that does more intrinsically heighten the malignity of it,
than when it is committed against the clear knowledge of our Duty, and that
upon these three accounts.

First, Because the Knowledge of God's Will is so great an advantage to the
doing of it.

Secondly, Because it is a great obligation upon us to the doing of it.

Thirdly, Because the neglect of our Duty in this case, cannot be without a
great deal of wilfulness and contempt. I shall speak briefly to these three.

First, Because the knowledge of God's Will is so great an advantage to the
doing of it; and every advantage of doing our Duty, is a certain aggravation of
our neglect of it. And this is the Reason which our Savior adds here in the
Text, For to whomsoever much is given, of them much will be required; and to
whom Men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. It was, no doubt,
a great discouragement and disadvantage to the Heathen, that they were so
doubtful concerning the will of God, and in many cases left to the uncertainty
of their own Reason, by what way and means they might best apply themselves to
the pleasing of him; and this discouraged several of the wisest of them from
all serious endeavors in Religion, thinking it as good to do nothing, as to be
mistaken about it. Others that were more naturally Devout, and could not
satisfy their Consciences without some expressions of Religion, fell into
various superstitions, and were ready to embrace any way of Worship which
Custom prescribed, or the fancies of Men could suggest to them; and hence
sprang all the stupid and barbarous Idolatries of the Heathen. For ignorance
growing upon the World, that natural propention which was in the Minds of Men
to Religion, and the Worship of a Deity, for want of certain direction, expressed
it self in those foolish and abominable Idolatries, which were practiced among
the Heathen.

And is it not then a mighty advantage to us, that we have the clear and
certain direction of Divine Revelation? We have the Will of God plainly
discovered to us, and all the parts of our Duty clearly defined and determined,
so that no Man that is in any measure free from interest and prejudice, can
easily mistake in any great and material part of his Duty. We have the Nature
of God plainly revealed to us, and such a Character of him given, as is most
suitable to our natural Conceptions of a Deity, as render him both awful and
amiable; for the Scripture represents him to us as Great and Good, Powerful and
Merciful, a perfect hater of Sin, and a great lover of Mankind; and we have the
Law and manner of his Worship (so far as was needful) and the Rules of a good
Life clearly expressed and laid down; and as a powerful Motive and Argument to
the obedience of those Laws, a plain discovery made to us of the endless
Rewards and Punishments of another World. And is not this a mighty advantage to
the doing of God's Will, to have it so plainly declared to us, and so
powerfully enforced upon us? So that our Duty lies plainly before us, we see
what we have to do, and the danger of neglecting it; so that considering the
advantage we have of doing God's Will, by our clear knowledge of it, we are
altogether inexcusable if we do it not.

Secondly, The knowledge of our Lord's Will is likewise a great obligation upon
us to the doing of it. For what ought in reason to oblige us more to do any
thing, than to be fully assured that it is the Will of God, and that it is the
Law of the great Sovereign of the World, who is able to save, or to destroy?
that it is the pleasure of him that made us, and who has declared that he
designs to make us happy, by our obedience to his Laws? So that if we know
these things to be the Will of God, we have the greatest obligation to do them,
whether we consider the Authority of God, or our own interest; and if we
neglect them, we have nothing to say in our own excuse. We knew the Law, and
the advantage of keeping it, and the penalty of breaking it, and if after this
we will transgress, there is no Apology to be made for us. They have something
to plead for themselves, who can say, that though they had some apprehension of
some parts of their Duty, and their Minds were apt to dictate to them that they
ought to do some things, yet the different apprehensions of Mankind about
several of these things, and the doubts and uncertainties of their own Minds
concerning them, made them easy to be carried off from their Duty, by the
vicious inclinations of their own Nature, and the tyranny of Custom and
Example, and the pleasant temptations of flesh and blood; but had they had a
clear and undoubted Revelation from God, and had certainly known these things
to be his Will, this would have conquered and born down all Objections and
Temptations to the contrary; or if it had not, would have stopped their mouths,
and taken away all excuse from them. There is some color in this plea, that in
many cases they did not know certainly what the Will of God was: but for us who
own a clear Revelation from God, and profess to believe it, what can we say for
our selves, to mitigate the severity of God toward us; why he should not pour
forth all his wrath, and execute upon us the fierceness of his anger?

Thirdly, The neglect of God's will when we know it, cannot be without a great
deal of wilfulness and contempt. If we know it, and do it not, the fault is
solely in our wills, and the more wilful any sin is, the more hainously wicked
is it. There can hardly be a greater aggravation of a Crime, than if it proceed
from mere obstinacy and perverseness; and if we know it to be our Lord's Will,
and do it not, we are guilty of the highest contempt of the greatest Authority
in the World. And do we think this to be but a small aggravation, to affront
the great Sovereign and Judge of the World? not only to break his Laws; but to
trample upon them and despise them, when we know whose Laws they are? Will we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? We believe that it is
God who said, Thou shall not commit Adultery; thou shall not Steal; thou shall
not bear false witness against thy Neighbor; thou shall not hate, or oppress,
or defraud thy Brother in any thing; but thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self; and will we notwithstanding venture to break these Laws, knowing whose
Authority they are stamped withal? After this contempt of him, what favor can
we hope for from him? what can we say for our selves, why any one of those many
stripes which are threatened should be abated to us? Ignosci aliquatenus
ignorantiae potest; contemptus veniam non habet; Something may be pardoned to
ignorance; but contempt can expect no forgiveness. He that strikes his Prince,
not knowing him to be so, has something to say for himself, that though he did a
disloyal act, yet it did not proceed from a disloyal Mind: but he that first
acknowledges him for his Prince, and then affronts him, deserves to be
prosecuted with the utmost severity, because he did it wilfully, and in mere
contempt. The knowledge of our Duty, and that it is the will of God which we go
against, takes away all possible excuse from us; for nothing can be said, why
we should offend him, who has both Authority to command us, and Power to
destroy us.

And thus I have, as briefly as I could, represented to you the true ground and
reason of the aggravation of those Sins, which are committed against the clear
knowledge of God's Will, and our Duty; because this knowledge is so great an
advantage to the doing of our Duty; so great an obligation upon us to it; and
because the neglect of our Lord's Will in this case, cannot be without great
wilfulness, and a downright contempt of his Authority.

And shall I now need to tell you, how much it concerns every one of us, to
live up to that knowledge which we have of our Lord's Will, and to prepare our
selves to do according to it; to be always in a readiness and disposition to do
what we know to be his Will, and actually to do it, when there is occasion, and
opportunity? And it concerns us the more, because we, in this Age and Nation,
have so many advantages, above a great part of the World, of coming to the
knowledge of our Duty. We enjoy the clearest and most perfect Revelation which
God ever made of his Will to Mankind, and have the light of Divine Truth
plentifully shed amongst us, by the free use of the holy Scriptures, which is
not a sealed Book to us, but lies open to be read, and studied by us; this
Spiritual Food is rained down like Manna round about our Tents, and every one
may gather so much as is sufficient; we are not stinted, nor have the word of
God given out to us in broken pieces, or mixed and adulterated, here a Lesson of
Scripture, and there a Legend; but whole and entire, sincere and incorrupt.

God has not left us, as he did the Heathen for many Ages, to the imperfect
and uncertain direction of Natural Light; nor has he revealed his Will to us,
as he did to the Jews, in dark Types and Shadows: but has made a clear
discovery of his Mind and Will to us. The Dispensation which we are under, has
no vail upon it, the Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines; we are
of the Day, and of the Light, and therefore it may justly be expected that we
should put off the Works of Darkness, and walk as Children of the Light. Every
degree of knowledge which we have, is an aggravation of the Sins committed
against it, and when our Lord comes to pass Sentence upon us, will add to the
number of our stripes. Nay, if God should inflict no positive torment upon
Sinners; yet their own Minds would deal most severely with them upon this
account, and nothing will gall their Consciences more, than to remember against
what Light they did offend. For herein lies the very nature and sting of all
guilt, to be conscious to our selves, that we knew what we ought to have done,
and did it not. The Vices and Corruptions which reigned in the World before,
will be pardonable, in comparison of ours. The times of that ignorance God
winked at: but now he commands all Men every where to Repent. Mankind had some
excuse for their Errors before, and God was pleased in a great measure to
overlook them: but if we continue still in our sins, we have no cloak for them.
All the degrees of Light which we enjoy, are so many Talents committed to us by
our Lord, for the improving whereof, he will call us to a strict account; for
unto whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required; and to whom he
has committed much, of him he will ask the more. And nothing is more
reasonable, than that Men should account for all the advantages and
opportunities they have had of knowing the Will of God; and that as their
knowledge was increased, so their sorrow and punishment should proportionably
rise, if they sin against it. The ignorance of a great part of the World is
deservedly pitied and lamented by us; but the Condemnation of none is so sad,
as of those, who having the knowledge of God's Will, neglect to do it; how much
better had it been for them not to have kuown the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them! If we had been born, and brought up in ignorance of the true God and his
Will, we had had no sin, in comparison of what now we have: but now that we
see, our sin remains. This will aggravate our Condemnation beyond measure, that
we had the knowledge of Salvation so clearly revealed to us. Our Duty lies
plainly before us, we know what we ought to do, and what manner of Persons we
ought to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness. We believe the coming of
our Lord to Judgment, and we know not how soon He may be revealed from Heaven
with his Mighty Angels, not only to take vengeance on them that know not God,
but on them that have known him, and yet obey not the Gospel of his Son. And if
all this will not move us to prepare our selves to do our Lord's Will, we
deserve to have our stripes multiplied. No Condemnation can be too heavy for
those who offend against the clear knowledge of God's Will, and their Duty.

Let us then be persuaded to set upon the practice of what we know; let the
light which is in our Understandings, descend upon our Hearts and Lives; let us
not dare to continue any longer in the practice of any known Sin, nor in the
neglect of any thing which we are convinced is our Duty, and if our hearts
condemn us not, neither for the neglect of the means of Knowledge, nor for
rebelling against the Light of God's Truth shining in our Minds, and glaring
upon our Consciences, then have we confidence toward God: but if our hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things.

SERMON XIV.
The Sins of Men not chargeable upon God; but upon themselves.
JAMES I. 13, 14. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for
God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man: But every Man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
NEXT to the Bel^ef of a God, and his Providence, there is nothing more
Fundamentally necessary to the practice of a good Life, than the belief of
these two Principles, That God is not the Author of Sin, and That every Man's
Sin lies at his own door and he has reason to blame himself for all the evil
that he does.

First, That God is not the Author of Sin, that he is no way accessory to our
faults, either by tempting or forcing us to the Commission of them. For if he
were, they would neither properly be Sins, nor could they be justly punished.
They would not properly be Sins, for Sin is a contradiction to the Will of God;
but supposing Men to be either tempted or necessitated thereto, that which we
call Sin, would either be a mere passive Obedience to the Will of God, or an
active Compliance with it, but neither way a contradiction to it. Nor could
these actions be justly punished; for all punishment supposes a fault, and a
fault supposes liberty and freedom from force and necessity; so that no Man
can be justly punished for that which he cannot help, and no Man can help that,
which he is necessitated and compelled to. And though there were no force in the
case, but only temptation, yet it would be unreasonable for the same person to
tempt and punish. For as nothing is more contrary to the holiness of God, than
to tempt Men to Sin; so nothing can be more against justice and goodness, than
first to draw Men into a fault, and then to chastize them for it. So that this
is a Principle which lies at the bottom of all Religion, That God is not the
Author of the Sins of Men. And then,

Secondly, That every Man's fault lies at his own door, and he has reason
enough to blame himself for all the evil that he does. And this is that which
makes Men properly guilty, that when they have done amiss, they are conscious
to themselves it was their own act, and they might have done otherwise; and
guilt is that which makes Men liable to punishment; and fear of punishment is
the great restraint from Sin, and one of the principal Arguments for Virtue and
Obedience.

And both these Principles our Apostle St. James does here fully assert in the
words which I have read unto you. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
Man: But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and
enticed.

In which words, these two things are plainly contained.

First, That God does not tempt any Man to Sin. Let no Man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any Man.

Secondly, That every Man's fault lies at his own door, and he is his own
greatest tempter. But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
Lust, and enticed.

I. That God does not tempt any Man to Sin. Let no Man say when he is tempted,
I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any Man. In which words, there are three things to be considered.

First, The Proposition which the Apostle here rejects, and that is, That God
tempts Men. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God.

Secondly, The manner in which he rejects it. Let no Man say so. By which
manner of speaking, the Apostle insinuates these two Things. 1. That Men are
apt to lay their faults upon God: For when he says, Let no Man say so, he
intimates, that Men are apt to say so, and it is very probable that some did
say so; and, 2 dly. That it is not only a fault, but an impious assertion to
say that God tempts Men. He speaks of it as a thing to be rejected with
detestation. Let no Man say; that is, far be it from us to affirm a thing so
impious and dishonorable to God.

Thirdly, The Reason and Argument that he brings against it, For God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man.

First, the Proposition which the Apostle here rejects, and that is, That God
tempts Men: Let no Man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. Now that
we may the more distinctly understand the meaning of the Proposition, which the
Apostle here rejects, it will be very requisite to consider what Temptation is,
and the several sorts and kinds of it. To Tempt a Man, is in general, nothing
else but to make trial of him in any kind what he will do. In Scripture
Temptation is commonly confined to the trial of a Man's good or bad, of his
virtuous or vicious inclinations. But then it is such a trial as endangers a
Man's virtue, and if he be not well resolved, is likely to overcome it, and to
make him fall into Sin. So that temptation does always imply something of
danger the worst way. And Men are thus tempted, either from themselves, or by
others; by others chiefly these two ways.

First, By direct and downright persuasions to Sin.

Secondly, By being brought into such Circumstances as will greatly endanger
their falling into it, though none solicit and persuade them to it.

First, By direct and downright persuasions to Sin. Thus the Devil tempted our
First Parents, by representing things so to them, as might on the one hand
incite them to Sin, and on the other hand, weaken and loosen that, which was
the great curb and restraint from it. On the one hand, he represents to them
the advantages they should have by breaking God's Command. God does know that
in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil. On the other hand, he represents the danger of
offending not to be so great and certain as they imagined. The Serpent said
unto the Woman, ye shall not surely dye. And the Devil had so good success in
this way of tempting the first Adam, as to encourage him to set upon the
second, our Blessed Savior, in the same manner; for he would have persuaded
him to fall down and worship him, by offering him all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the glory of them. And thus bad Men many times tempt others, and
endeavor to draw them into the same wicked Courses with themselves. Solomon
represents to us the manner and the danger of it, Prove. 1. 10, 11, 13, 14. My
Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not; if they say, come with us, let
us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause; we
shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil. Cast in
thy lot amongst us, let us all have one purse. This is the first way of
temptation.

And to be sure God tempts no Man this way. He offers no Arguments to Man to
persuade him to Sin; he no where proposes either Reward or Impunity to
Sinners: but on the contrary, gives all imaginable encouragement to Obedience,
and threatens the transgression of his Law with most dreadful Punishments.

Secondly, Men are likewise tempted, by being brought into such Circumstances,
as will greatly endanger their falling into Sin, though none persuade them to it;
and this happens two ways; when Men are remarkably beset with the allurements
of the World, or assaulted with the Evils and Calamities of it; for either of
these Conditions are great temptations to Men, and make powerful assaults upon
them, especially when they fall upon those who are ill disposed before, or are
but of a weak Virtue and Resolution.

The allurements of the World are strong temptations; Riches, and Honors, and
Pleasures, they are the Occasions and Incentives to many Lusts. Honor and
Greatness, Power and Authority over other^, especially when Men are suddenly
lifted up, and from a low Condition, are apt to transport Men to Pride and
Insolency toward others. Power is a strong Liquor which does easily intoxicate
weak Minds, and make them apt to say and do undecent things. Man that is in
Honor and understands not, is like the Beasts that perish; Intimating that Men
who are exalted to an high Condition, are very apt to forget themselves, and to
play the Fools and Beasts. It requires great Consideration, and a well-poised
Mind, not to be lifted up with one's Condition. Weak heads are apt to turn and
grow dizzy, when they look down from a great height.

And so likewise Ease and Prosperity are a very slippery Condition to most Men,
and without great care, do endanger the falling into great Sins. So Solomon
observes, Prove. 1. 32. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and
the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. For this Reason Agur makes his
Prayer to God, that he would give him neither Poverty nor Riches, but keep him
in a mean Condition, because of the danger of both extremes, Prove. 30. 8, 9.
Give me not Riches, lest I be full, and deny thee. Both the eager desire, and
the possession and enjoyment of Riches do frequently prove fatal to Men. So our
Savior tells us elsewhere very Emphatically, Mat. 19. 23, 24. Verily I say
unto you, that a Rich Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And
again I say unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God. St. Paul likewise
very fully declares unto us the great danger of this Condition, 1 Timothy 6. 9,
10. But they that will be Rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown Men in destruction and perdition;
for the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.

But the greatest Bait of all to Flesh and Blood, is sensual Pleasures; the
very presence and opportunity of these, are apt to kindle the Desires, and to
inflame the Lusts of Men, especially where these temptations meet with suitable
tempers, where every spark that falls catches.

And on the other hand, the Evils and Calamities of this World, especially if
they threaten or fall upon Men in any degree of extremity, are strong
temptations to Human Nature. Poverty and Want, Pain and Suffering, and the fear
of any great Evil, especially of Death, these are great straits to Humane
Nature, and apt to tempt Men to great Sins, to impatience and discontent, to
unjust and dishonest shifts, to the forsaking of God, and Apostasy from his
Truth and Religion. Agur was sensible of the dangerous temptation of Poverty,
and therefore he prays against that, as well as against Riches; Give me not
Poverty, lest being Poor I steal, and take the name of the Lord my God in vain;
that is, lest I be tempted to Theft, and Perjury. The Devil, whose Trade it is
to tempt Men to Sin, knew very well the force of these sorts of Temptations,
when he desired God first to touch Job in his Estate, and to see what effect
that would have, Job 1. 11. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he
has, and he will curse thee to thy face. And when he found himself deceived in
this, surely he thought, that were he but afflicted with great bodily pains,
that would put him out of all patience, and flesh and blood would not be able
to withstand this Temptation, Chap. 2. ver. 5. But put forth thine hand now,
and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And this
was the great Temptation that the Primitive Christians were assaulted withal;
they were tempted to forsake Christ and his Religion, by a most violent
Persecution, by the spoiling of their goods, by Imprisonment, and Torture, and
Death. And this is that kind of Temptation which the Apostle particularly
speaks of before the Text, Blessed is the Man that endures temptation; for
when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him; and then it follows, Let no Man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God. And thus I have given an account of the several
sorts of temptations comprehended under this second Head, namely, when Men are
tempted by being brought into such Circumstances as do greatly endanger their
falling into Sin, by the Allurements of this World, and by the Evils and
Calamities of it.

Now the Question is, how far God has an hand in these kind of temptations,
that so we may know how to limit this Proposition, which the Apostle here
rejects, that Men are tempted of God. Let no Man say, when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God.

That the Providence of God does order, or at least permit Men to be brought
into these Circumstances I have spoken of, which are such dangerous temptations
to Sin, no Man can doubt, that believes his Providence to be concerned in the
affairs of the World. All the difficulty is, how far the Apostle does here
intend to exempt God from an hand in these temptations. Now for the clearer
understanding of this, it will be requisite to consider the several Ends and
Reasons, which those who tempt others may have in tempting them; and all
temptation is for one of these three Ends or Reasons; either for the trial and
improvement of Men's Virtues; or by way of Judgment and Punishment for some
former great Sins and Provocations; or with a direct purpose and design to
seduce Men to Sin; these I think are the chief Ends and Reasons that can be
imagined, of exercising Men with dangerous temptations.

First, For the exercise and improvement of Men's Graces and Virtues. And this
is the End which God always aims at, in bringing good Men, or permitting them
to be brought into dangerous temptations. And therefore St. James speaks of it
as a matter of joy, when good Men are exercised with afflictions; not because
afflictions are desirable for themselves, but because of the happy consequences
of them, Ver. 2, 3. of this Chap. My Brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall
into diverse temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your faith works
patience. And to the same purpose St. Paul, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. We glory in
tribulation, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience; (...), Patience tries a Man, and this trial works hope, and hope
makes not ashamed. These are happy effects and consequences of affliction and
suffering, when they improve the Virtues of Men, and increase their Graces, and
thereby make way for the increase of their Glory. Upon this account, St. James
pronounces those Blessed, who are thus tempted. Blessed is the Man that
endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

And this certainly is no disparagement to the Providence of God, to permit Men
to be thus tempted, when he permits it for no other end, but to make them
better Men, and thereby to prepare them for a greater Reward: And so the
Apostle assures us, Romans 8. 17, 18. If so be we suffer with him, we shall also
be glorified with him; for I reckon that the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. And
ver. 28. For we know that all things shall work together for good to them that
love God. And this happy end and issue of temptations to good Men the
Providence of God secures to them (if they be not wanting to themselves) one of
these two ways, either by proportioning the temptation to their strength; or if
it exceed that, by ministering new strength and support to them, by the secret
and extraordinary aids of his Holy Spirit.

First, By proportioning the temptation to their strength; ordering things so
by his secret and wise Providence, that they shall not be assaulted by any
temptation, which is beyond their strength to resist and overcome. And herein
the security of good Men does ordinarily consist; and the very best of us,
those who have the firmest and most resolute virtue were in infinite danger, if
the Providence of God did not take this care of us. For a temptation may set
upon the best Men with so much violence, or surprise them at such an advantage,
as no ordinary degree of grace and virtue is able to withstand: But where Men
are sincerely good, and honestly resolved, the Providence of God does ward off
these fierce blows, and put by these violent thrusts, and by a secret disposal
of things, keep them from being assaulted by these irresistible kinds of
temptations.

The Consideration whereof, as it is a great encouragement to Men to be
sincerely good, so likewise a great Argument for a continual dependence upon
the Providence of God, and to take us off from confidence in our selves, and
our own strength. And this use the Apostle makes of it, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, (that is confident that nothing
shall be able to shake him, or throw him down) take heed lest he fall; there
has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to Men; (...), but what is
humane; nothing but what an humane strength, assisted by an ordinary grace of
God, may be able to resist and Conquer. But there are greater and more violent
temptations than these, which you have not yet been tried with; and when those
happen, we must have recourse to God for an extraordinary assistance. And this
is the

Second way I mentioned, whereby the Providence of God does secure good Men in
case of extraordinary temptations, which no humane strength can probably
resist. And this the same Apostle assures us of in the very next words, God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it. That is, in case of great and violent temptations (such as the
Christians in the height of their Persecutions were exposed to) God will
secretly minister strength and support equal to the force and power of the
temptation. And this God did in an extraordinary manner to the Christian
Martyrs, and that to such a degree, as made them joyfully to embrace their
Sufferings, and with the greatest cheerfulness in the world to endure those
torments, which no humane patience was able to bear. And where God does thus
secure Men against temptations, or support them under them, it is no reflection
at all upon the goodness or justice of his Providence, to permit them to be
thus tempted.

Secondly, God permits others to be thus tempted, by way of Judgment and
Punishment for some former great Sins and Provocations which they have been
guilty of. And thus many times God punishes great and notorious Offenders, by
permitting them to fall into great temptations, which meeting with a vicious
disposition, are likely to be too hard for them, especially considering how by
a long habit of wickedness, and wilful commission of great and notorious Sins,
they have made themselves an easy prey to every temptation, and have driven
the Spirit of God from them, and deprived themselves of those aids and
restraints of his Grace, which he ordinarily affords, not only to good Men, but
likewise to those who are not very bad. And thus God is said to have hardened
Pharaoh by those Plagues and Judgments which he sent upon him and his Kingdom.
But if we carefully read the Story, it is said that he first hardened himself,
and then that God hardened him; that is, he being hardened under the first
Judgments of God, God sent more, which meeting with his obstinacy, had this
unnatural effect upon him, to harden him yet more; not that God did infuse any
wickedness or obstinacy into him, but by his just Judgments sent more Plagues
upon him, which hardened him yet more, and which were likely to have that
effect upon him, considering the ill temper of the Man. And it was just by way
of punishment that they should. And so likewise, Joshua 11. 19, 20. it is said
that the Cities of the Canaanites did not make peace with Joshua, because it
was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in
Battle, that he might destroy them utterly; that is, for their former
iniquities, the measure whereof was now full, the Providence of God did justly
bring them into, and leave them under those Circumstances, which made them
obstinate against all terms of Peace, and this proved fatal to them.

And in the like sense we are to understand several other expressions in
Scripture, which likewise might seem very harsh. As Isaiah 6. 10. Make the
heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
hearts, and convert and be healed; all which expressions signify no more, but
that God, for the former provocations and impenitency of that People, did leave
them to their own hardness and blindness, so that they did not desire to
understand and make use of the means of their recovery. So likewise, Romans 1.
24. God is said to have given up the idolatrous Heathen to uncleanness, to vile
and unnatural lusts; and Ver. 28. to a reprobate and injudicious Mind; that is,
as a punishment of their Idolatry, he left them to the power of those
temptations, which betrayed them to the vilest lusts. And to mention but one
Text more, 2 These. 2. 11. the Apostle threatens those that rejected the truth,
that for this cause God would send them strong delusions, (the efficacy of
error) that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness; that is, as a just
punishment for their renouncing the truth, God gave them over to the power of
delusion; their error had its full scope at them, to tempt them with all its
colors and pretenses.

But it is observable, that, in all these places which I have mentioned, God is
said to give Men up to the power of temptation, as a punishment of some former
great Crimes and Provocations. And it is not unjust with God thus to deal with
Men, to leave them to the power of temptation, when they had first wilfully
forsaken him; and in this case God does not tempt Men to Sin, but leaves them
to themselves, to be tempted by their own hearts lusts; and if they yield and
are Conquered, it is their own fault, because they have neglected God's grace,
whereby they might have been able to have resisted those temptations; and have
forced his holy Spirit to withdraw himself from them, and to leave them open
and naked to those assaults of temptation, against which they might otherwise
have been sufficiently armed.

Thirdly, The last end of temptation which I mentioned, is to try Men, with a
direct purpose and intention to seduce Men to Sin. Thus wicked Men tempt
others, and thus the Devil tempts Men. Thus he tempted our first Parents, and
seduced them from their Obedience and Allegiance to God. Thus he tempted Job,
by bringing him into those Circumstances, which were very likely to have forced
him into impatience, and discontent. And thus he tempted our blessed Savior;
but found nothing in him to work upon, or to give him any advantage over him.
And thus he daily tempts Men, by laying all sorts of baits and snares before
them, going about continually, seeking whom he may seduce and destroy; and as
far as God permits him, and his Power reaches, he suits his temptations as
near as he can to the humors and appetites and inclinations of Men, contriving
them into such circumstances, as that he may ply his temptations upon them to
the greatest advantage; propounding such Objects to them, as may most probably
draw forth the corruptions of Men, and kindle their irregular desires, and
inflame their lusts, and tempt their evil inclinations that way, which they are
most strongly bent. He tempts the Covetous Man with Gain, the Ambitious Man
with Preferment, the Voluptuous Man with Carnal and Sensual Pleasures; and
where none of these baits will take, he stirs up his Instruments to persecute
those, who are steadfast and confirmed in Resolutions of Piety and Virtue, to
try if he can work upon their Fear, and shake their Constancy and Fidelity to
God and Goodness that way; and all this he does with a direct design and
earnest desire to seduce Men from their Duty, and to betray them to Sin.

But thus God tempts no Man, and in this sense it is that the Apostle means,
that no Man when he is tempted, is tempted of God. God has no design to seduce
any Man to Sin. He often proves the obedience of Men, and suffers them to fall
into diverse temptations, for the trial of their faith, and exercise of their
obedience, and other Virtues; and he permits bad Men to be assaulted with great
temptations, and as a punishment of their former obstinacy and impiety,
withdraws the aids and assistances of his grace from them, and leaves them to
their own weakness and folly; but not so as to take away all restraint of his
grace even from bad Men, unless it be upon very high provocation, and a long
and obstinate continuance in Sin: But God never tempts any Man, with any
intention to seduce him to Sin, and with a desire he should do wickedly. This
is the proper work of the Devil and his Instruments; in this sense it is far
from God to tempt any Man; and whenever in the ordinary course, and by the
common permission of his Providence, Men fall into temptation, the utmost that
God does, is to leave them to themselves; and he does not do this neither, but
to those who have highly provoked him to depart from them; that is, to those
who have justly deserved to be so dealt withal.

And thus I have considered the Proposition which the Apostle here rejects,
namely, that God tempts Men, and have shown as clearly as I can, how it is to
be limited and understood. I now proceed to the second thing which I propounded
to consider, viz. The manner in which the Apostle rejects this Proposition, Let
no Man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. By which manner of
speaking, he insinuates two Things.

First, That Men are apt to lay their faults upon God. For when he says, let no
Man say so, he intimates that Men were apt to say thus; and it is probable some
did say so, to excuse themselves for their deserting their Religion upon the
temptation of Persecution and Suffering. It Is not unlikely, that Men might lay
the fault upon God's Providence, which exposed them to these difficult trials,
and thereby tempted them to forsake their Religion.

But however this be, we find it very natural to Men, to transfer their faults
upon others. Men are naturally sensible when they offend, and do contrary to
their Duty; and the guilt of Sin is an heavy burden, of which Men would be
glad to ease themselves as much as they can; and they think it is a mitigation
and excuse of their faults, if they did not proceed only from themselves, but
from the violence and compulsion, the temptation and instigation of others. But
especially Men are very glad to lay their faults upon God, because he is a full
and sufficient excuse, nothing being to be blamed that comes from him. Thus
Adam did, upon the commission of the very first Sin that Mankind was guilty of.
When God charged him for breaking of his Law, by eating of the fruit of the
forbidden Tree, he endeavors to excuse himself, by laying the fault obliquely
upon God; The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree,
and I did eat. The Woman whom thou gave to be with me; he does what he can to
derive the fault upon God. And though this be very unreasonable, yet it seems it
is very natural. Men would fain have the pleasure of committing Sin, but then
they would be glad to remove as much of the trouble and guilt of it from
themselves as they can.

Secondly, This manner of Speech, which the Apostle here uses, does insinuate
further to us, that it is not only a false, but an impious assertion, to say
that God tempts Men to Sin. He speaks of it, not only as a thing unfit to be
said, but fit to be rejected with the greatest indignation; let no Man say,
that is, far be it from us to affirm any thing so impious and so dishonorable
to God. For nothing can be more contrary to the holy and righteous nature of
God, and to those plain declarations which he has made of himself, than to
seduce Men to wickedness; and therefore no Man, that has any regard to the
honor of God, can entertain the least suspicion of his having any hand in the
Sins of Men, or give heed to any Principles or Doctrines, from whence so odious
and abominable a Consequence may be drawn. I proceed to the

Third Thing I propounded to consider, viz. The Reason or Argument which the
Apostle brings against this impious suggestion; That God cannot be tempted with
evil, and therefore no Man can imagine that he should tempt any Man to it; Let
no Man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any Man. And in speaking to this, I shall

First Consider the strength and force of this Argument; And

Secondly, The Nature and Kind of it.

First, The strength and force of this Argument, God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempts he any Man; (...), he is untemptable by evil; he cannot
be drawn to any thing that is bad himself, and therefore it cannot be imagined
he should have any inclination or design to seduce others. And this will appear
to be a strong and forcible Argument, if we consider,

First, The Proposition upon which it is grounded, that God cannot be tempted
by evil.

Secondly, The Consequence that clearly follows from it; and that is, that
because God cannot be tempted by evil, therefore he cannot tempt any Man to it.

First, We will consider the Proposition upon which this Argument is built, and
that is, that God cannot be tempted by evil. He is out of the reach of any
temptation to evil. Whoever is tempted to any thing, is either tempted by his
own inclination, or by the allurement of the Object, or by some external Motive
and Consideration: but none of all these can be imagined to have any place in
God, to tempt him to evil.

For, First, he has no temptation to it from his own inclination. The holy and
pure Nature of God is at the greatest distance from ^vil, and at the greatest
contrariety to it. He is so far from having any inclination to ^vil, that it is
the only thing in the World to which he has an irreconcilable Antipathy. This
the Scripture frequently declares to us, and that in a very emphatical manner.
Psalm. 5. 4. He is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
evil dwell with him. The words are a Diminution, and less is said, than is
intended by them; the meaning is, that God is so far from taking pleasure in
Sin, that he has a perfect hatred and abhorrence of it. Hab. 2. 13. Thou art
of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look upon iniquity. As when
Men hate a thing to the highest degree, they turn away their eyes, and cannot
endure to look upon it. Light and Darkness are not more opposite to one
another, than the Holy Nature of God is to Sin. What fellowship has Light with
Darkness, or God with Belial?

Secondly, There is no allurement in the Object, to stir up any inclination in
him toward it. Sin in its very nature is imperfection, and irregularity,
crookedness, and deformity; so that unless there be an inclination to it
beforehand, there is nothing in it to move any ones liking or desire toward
it; it has no attractives or enticements in it, but to a corrupt and
ill-disposed Mind.

Thirdly, Neither are there external Motives and Considerations, that can be
imagined to tempt God to it. All Arguments that have any temptation, are either
founded in hope or fear; either in the hope of gaining some benefit or
advantage, or in the fear of falling into some mischief or inconvenience. Now
the Divine Nature being perfectly happy, and perfectly secured in its own
happiness, is out of the reach of any of these temptations. Men are many times
tempted to evil very strongly by these Considerations; they want many things to
make them happy, and they fear many things which may make them miserable; and
the hopes of the one, and the fears of the other, are apt to work very
powerfully upon them, to seduce them from their Duty, and to draw them to Sin:
but the Divine Nature is firm against all these attempts, by its own fullness
and security. So that you se^ now the Proposition, upon which the Apostle
grounds his Argument, is evidentally true, and beyond all exception, that God
cannot be tempted with evil. Let us then in the

Second place, consider the Consequence that clearly follows from it; That
because God cannot be tempted with evil, therefore he cannot tempt any Man to
it. For why should he desire to draw Men into that, which he himself abhors,
and which is so contrary to his own nature and disposition? When Men tempt one
another to Sin, they do it to make others like themselves; and when the Devil
tempts Men to Sin, it is either out of direct malice to God, or out of envy to
Men. But none of these Considerations can have any place in God, or be any
Motive to him to tempt Men to Sin.

Bad Men tempt others to Sin, to make them like themselves, and that with one
of these two Designs; either for the comfort or pleasure of Company, or for the
countenance of it, that there may be some kind of Apology and Excuse for them.

For the Comfort and Pleasure of Company. Man does not love to be alone; and
for this Reason bad Men endeavor to make others like themselves, that agreeing
with them in the same disposition and manners, they may be fit Company for
them. For no Man takes pleasure in the Society and Conversation of those, who
are of contrary Tempers and Inclinations to them, because they are continually
warring and clashing with one another. And for this Reason bad Men hate and
persecute those that are good. Let us lie in wait (say they) for the Righteous,
because he is not for our turn, and he is contrary to our doings; he is
grievous unto us even to behold; for his life is not like other Men's, and his
ways are of another fashion; as it is expressed in the Wisdom of Solomon. So that
wicked Men tempt others to Sin, that they may have the pleasure and contentment
of their Society. But now for this Reason God cannot be imagined to tempt Men
to Sin; because that would be the way to make them unlike himself, and such as
his Soul could take no pleasure in.

Another Design that bad Men have in seducing others to Sin, is thereby to give
countenance to their bad actions, and to be some kind of Excuse and Apology for
them. Among Men, the multitude of Offenders does sometimes procure impunity,
but it always gives countenance to Vice; and Men are apt to allege it in their
excuse, that they are not alone guilty of such a fault, that they did not do it
without Company and Example; which is the Reason of that Law, Exodus 23. 2. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil; implying, that Men are very apt to
take encouragement to any thing that is bad, from Company and Example. But
neither has this Reason any place in God, who being far from doing evil
himself, can have no Reason to tempt others to do so, by way of excuse, and
vindication of himself.

And when the Devil tempts Men to Sin, it is either out of direct malice to
God, or out of envy to Men. Out of malice to God, to spoil his Workmanship, and
to pervert that which came innocent and upright out of his hands; to rob God of
his Subjects, and to debauch them from their Duty and Allegiance to him; to
strengthen the Rebellion which he has raised against God, and to make him as
many Enemies as he can. But for this End God cannot tempt any Man; for this
would be to procure dishonor to himself, and to deface the work of his own
hands.

Another Reason why the Devil tempts Men, is Envy. When he was fallen from God,
and Happiness, and by his own Rebellion had made himself miserable, he was
discontented to see the happy Condition of Man, and it grieved him at his very
heart; and this moved him to tempt Man to Sin, that he might involve him in the
same misery into which he had plunged himself. It is a pleasure to Envy to
over-turn the happiness of others, and to lay them level with themselves. But
the Divine Nature is full of goodness, and delights in the happiness of all his
Creatures. His own incomparable felicity has placed him as much above any
temptation to envying others, as above any occasion of being contemned by them.
He grudges no Man's happiness, and therefore cannot tempt Men to Sin, out of a
desire to see them miserable. So that none of those Considerations which move
the Devil to tempt Men to Sin, and Evil Men to tempt one another to do
wickedly, can be imagined to have any place in God.

And thus you see the force of the Apostle's Argument, that because God cannot
be tempted to evil, therefore he can tempt no Man. None tempt others to be bad,
but those who are first so themsemselves. I shall now in the

Second place, Consider the Nature and Kind of the Argument, which the Apostle
here uses, Let no Man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man. He does not reject
this impious Proposition barely upon his own Authority; but he argues against
it from the Nature and Perfection of God; and therein appeals to the common
Notions of Mankind concerning God. We might very well have rested in his
Authority, being an Apostle Commissioned by our Savior, and extraordinarily
assisted and witnessed to, by the Miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, wherewith
he was endowed. But he condescends to give a Reason of what he says, and
appeals to the common Principles of Mankind. For all Men will readily agree to
this, that God has all imaginable perfection: but it is a plain imperfection
to be liable to be tempted to Evil, and therefore God cannot be tempted to
Evil. And if so, it is as impossible that he should tempt others to it; for
none can have either an inclination or interest to seduce others to Evil, but
those who have been first seduced to it themselves.

Now in this Method of Arguing, the Apostle teaches us one of the surest ways
of Reasoning in Religion; namely, from the Natural Notions which Men have of
God. So that all Doctrines plainly contrary to those Natural Notions which Men
have of God, are to be rejected, what Authority soever they pretend to;
whatever plainly derogates from the goodness or justice of God, or any other of
his Perfections, is certainly false, what Authority soever it may claim from
the Judgment of Learned and Pious Men; yea though it pretend to be countenanced
from the Texts and Expressions of Holy Scripture. Because nothing can be
entertained as a Divine Revelation, which plainly contradicts the common
Natural Notions which Mankind have of God. For all Reasoning about Divine
Revelation, and whether that which pretends to be so, be really so or not, is
to be governed by those Natural Notions. And if any thing that pretends to be a
Revelation from God, should teach Men that there is no God, or that he is not
Wi^e, and Good, and Just, and Powerful; this is Reason enough to reject it, how
confident soever the pretense be, that it is a Divine Revelation.

And if any thing be, upon good grounds in Reason, received for a Divine
Revelation, (as the Holy Scriptures are amongst Christians) no Man ought to be
regarded, who from thence pretends to maintain any Doctrine contrary to the
Natural Notions, which Men have of God; such as clearly contradict his
Holiness, or Goodness, or Justice, or do by plain and undeniable Consequence
make God the Author of Sin, or the like; because the very attempt to prove any
such thing out of Scripture, does strike at the Divine Authority of those
Books. For if they be from God, it is certain they can contain no such thing.
So that no Man ought to suffer himself to be seduced into any such Opinions,
upon pretense that there are expressions in Scripture, which seem to
countenance them. For if they really did so, the Consequence would not be the
confirming of such Opinions; but the weakening of the Authority of the Scripture
it self. For just so many Arguments as any Man can draw from Scripture for any
such Opinion, so many Weapons he puts into the han^s of Atheists against the
Scripture it self.

I do not speak this, as if I thought there were any ground from Scripture for
any such Doctrine, I am very certain there is not. And if there be any
par^^cular expressions, which to prejudiced Men may seem to import any such
thing, every Man ought to govern himself in the interpretation of such
passages, by what is clear and plain, and agreeable to the main Scope and
Tenor of the Bible, and to those Natural Notions which Men have of God, and of
his Perfections. For when all is done, this is one of the surest ways of
Reasoning in Religion; and whoever guides himself, and steers by this Compass,
can never err much: but whoever suffers himself to be led away by the
appearance of some more obscure Phrases in the expressions of Scripture, and
the glosses of Men upon them, without regard to this Rule, may run into the
greatest Delusions, may wander Eternally, and lose himself in one Mistake after
another, and shall never find his way out of this endless Labyrinth, but by
this Clue.

If St. James had not been an Apostle, the Argument which he uses would have
convinced any reasonable Man, that God tempts no Man to Sin, because he cannot
be tempted with Evil himself, and therefore it is unreasonable to imagine he
should tempt any Man. For he argues from such a Principle, as all Mankind will,
at first hearing, assent to.

And thus I have done with the first Thing asserted by the Apostle here in the
Text; That God tempts no Man to Sin. Let no Man say, when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any Man.
Before I proceed to the second Assertion, That every Man is his own greatest
Tempter, I should draw some useful Inferences from what has been already
delivered: but I reserve both the one and the other to the next Opportunity.

SERMON XV.
The Sins of Men not chargeable upon God: but upon themselves.
JAMES I. 13, 14. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for
God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man: But every Man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
WHEN I made entrance upon these Words, I told you, that next to the Belief of
a God and a Providence, nothing is more fundamentally necessary to the Practice
of a good Life, than the Belief of these two Principles; That God is not the
Author of the Sins of Men; and That every Man's fault lies at his own door. And
both these Principles St. James does clearly and fully assert in these Words.

First, God tempts no Man to Sin. Secondly, Every Man is his own greates^
Tempter.
The first of these I have largely spoken to in my former Discourse; and from
what I then said, I shall only draw a few useful Inferences, before I proceed
to the second; Viz. These which follow.

First, Let us beware of all such Doctrines, as do any ways tend to make God
the Author of Sin; either by laying a Necessity upon Men of Sinning, or by
laying secret Designs to tempt and seduce Men to Sin. Nothing can be farther
from the Nature of God, than to do any such thing, and nothing can be more
dishonorable to him, than to imagine any such thing of him; he is of purer
eyes than to behold evil; and can we think, that he who cannot endure to see
it, should have any hand in it? We find that the Holy Men in Scripture are very
careful to remove all thought and suspicion of this from God. Elihu, Job 36. 3.
before he would argue about God's Providence with Job, he resolves in the first
place, to attribute nothing to God, that is unworthy of him. I will (says he)
ascribe righteousness to my Maker. So likewise St. Paul, Romans 7. 7. What shall
we say then? Is the Law Sin? God forbid. Is the Law Sin? That is, has God
given Men a Law to this end, that he might draw them into Sin? far be it from
him. Gal. 2. 17. Is Christ the minister of Sin? God ^orbid.

You see then how tender good Men have always been of ascribing any thing to
God, that might seem to render him the Author of Sin. So that we have reason to
take heed of all Doctrines that are of this tendency; such as are the Doctrines
of an absolute and irrespective decree to damn the greatest part of Mankind;
and in order to that, and as a Means to it, efficaciously to permit Men to Sin.
For if these things be true, that God has absolutely decre^d to damn the
greatest part of Men, and to make good this decree, he permits them to Sin, not
by a bare permission of leaving them to themselves, but by such a permission as
shall be efficacious; that is, he will so permit them to Sin, as they cannot
avo^d it; then those who are under this decree of God, are under a necessity of
Sinning; which necessity, since it does not proceed from themselves, but from
the decree of God, does by consequence make God the Author of Sin. And then
that other Doctrine, which is subservient to this, that God does by a Physical
and Natural influence upon the Minds and Wills of Men, determine them to every
action that they do, to bad actions as well as good. I know they who say so,
tell us that God only determines Men to the action, but not to the evil of it.
For instance, when Cain killed his Brother, God determined him (they say) to
the Natural Action of taking away a Man's Life, which in many Cases may be done
without Sin. Very true: but if in these Circumstances the Natural Action could
not be done without committing the Sin, he that determined him to the Natural
Action, determined him likewise to the Sin.

I am far from any thought that those that maintain these Doctrines, had any
intention to make God the Author of Sin: but if this be the necessary
Consequence of these Doctrines, there is Reason enough to reject them, how
innocent soever the intention be of those who maintain them.

Secondly, Let not us tempt any Man to Sin. All Piety pretends to be an
imitation of God, therefore let us endeavor to be like him in this. It Is true
indeed, we may be tempted with evil, and therefore we are likely enough to
tempt others: but we ought not to do so. It is contrary to holiness and
goodness, to the temper and disposition of the most perfect Being in the World.
God tempts no Man; nay, it is the proper Work and Employment of the Devil, it is
his very Trade and Profession; he goes about, seeking whom he may betray into
Sin and Destruction. To this end he walks up and down the Earth, waiting all
Opportunities and Advantages upon Men to draw them into Sin; so that we are his
Factors and Instruments, whenever we tempt Men to Sin.

Let those Consider this, who are so active and busy to seduce Men into any
kind of wickedness, and to instruct them in the Arts of Iniquity, who tempt Men
into bad Company and Courses, and take pleasure in debauching a Virtuous
Person, and make it matter of great Triumph to make a sober Man drunk, as if it
were so glorious an Action to ruin a Soul, and destroy that, which is more
worth than the whole World. Whenever you go about this Work, remember whose
Instruments you are, and whose work you do, and what kind of Work it is.
Tempting others to Sin is in Scripture called Murder, for which Reason, the
Devil is said to be a Murderer from the beginning, because he was a Tempter.
Whosoever commits Sin is of the Devil: but whosoever tempts others to Sin,
is a sort of Devil himself.

Thirdly, Since God tempts no Man, let us not tempt him. There is frequent
mention in Scripture of Men's tempting God, i. e. trying him as it were,
whether he will do any thing for their sakes, that is mis-becoming his
Goodness, and Wisdom, and Faithfulness, or any other of his Perfections. Thus
the Israelites are said to have tempted God in the Wilderness forty years
together, and in that space, more remarkably ten times. The meaning of which
Expressions is, that when God had promised Abraham to bring his seed into the
Land of Canaan, that People, by their great and repeated provocations of God,
did often provoke him to have destroyed them, and consequently to have failed
of the Promise which he made to the Fathers. The Devil likewise tempted our
Savior to tempt God, by casting himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple,
in confidence that the Angels would take care of him: but our Savior answers
him, it is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. From which Instance
it appears, that Men are said to tempt God, whenever they expect the protection
of his Providence in an unwarrantable way. God has promised to take care of
good Men: but if they neglect themselves, or willingly cast themselves into
danger, and expect his Providence and Protection, they do not trust God, but
tempt him; they try whether God's Providence will countenance their rashness,
and provide for them, when they neglect themselves; and protect them from those
dangers, to which they wilfully ^xpos^ themselves.

So likewise if we be negligent in our Callings, whereby we should provide for
our Families, if we lavish away that which we should lay up for them, and th^n
depend upon the Providence of God to supply them, and take care of them, we
tempt God to that which is unworthy of him; which is to give approbation to our
folly, and to countenance our sloth and carelessness. We cannot seduce God, and
draw him to do any thing that mis-becomes him, but we tempt him, in expecting
the Care and Protection of his Providence, when we wilfully run our selves into
danger, and neglect the Means of providing for our own safety. And thus I have
done with the first great Principle contained in the Text; viz. That God is not
the Author of the Sins of Men. I proceed now to the

Second, That every Man is his own greatest Tempter. But every Man is tempted,
when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed. God does not tempt any Man
to Sin: but every Man is then tempted, when by his own Lust, his irregular
Inclination and Desire, he is seduced to evil, and enticed; (...), is caught as
it were with a bait, for so the greek word signifies.

In which words the Apostle gives us a true account of the prevalency and
efficacy of temptation upon Men. It is not because God has any design to
ensnare Men in Sin; but their own Cor^uption and vicious inclination seduce
them to that which is evil. To instance in the particular temptation the
Apostle was speaking of, Persecution and Suffering for the Cause of Religion,
to avoid which, many did then forsake the Truth, and Apostatized from their
Christian Profession. The true Cause of which, was not the Providence of God,
which permitted them to be exposed to those Sufferings; but their inordinate
love of the good things of this Life, and their unreasonable fears of the Evils
and Sufferings of it; they valued the enjoyments of this present Life, more
than the favor of God, and that Eternal Happiness which he had promised to
them in another Life; and they feared the Persecutions of Men, more than the
threatenings of God, and the dreadful punishments of another World. They had an
inordinate affection for the ease and pleasure of this Life, and their
unwillingness to part with ease, was a great temptation to them to quit their
Religion; by this bait they were caught, when it came to the trial:

And thus it is proportionably in all other sorts of temptations. Men are
betrayed by themselves, and the t^mptation without has a Party within them,
with which it holds a secret correspondence, and which is ready to yield and
give consent to it; so that it is our own consent, and treachery to our selves,
that makes any temptation Master of us, and without that we are not to be
overcome; Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and
enticed. It is the Lust of Men complying with the temptations which are offered
to us, which renders them effectual, and gives them the Victory over us.

In the handling of this Argument, I shall from these words of the Apostle
observe to you these two things.

First, That as the Apostle does here acquit God from any hand in tempting Men
to Sin, so he does not ascribe the prevalency of temptation to the Devil.

Secondly, That he ascribes the prevalency of temptation to the Lust and
vicious inclinations of Men, which seduce them to a compliance with the
temptations that are presented to them; Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn
aside of his own lust, and enticed. These two Observations shall be the subject
of my present Discourse.

First, That as the Apostle does here acquit God from any hand in tempting M^n
to Sin, so he does not ascribe the prevalency and efficacy of temptation to the
Devil. That he acquits God, I have shown at large in my former Discourse. It is
evident likewise, that he does not ascribe the efficacy and prevalency of
temptation to the Devil; for the Apostle in this Discourse of his concerning
temptations, makes no express mention of the Devil; he supposes indeed, that
baits are laid for Men, every Man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own
lust, and enticed. i. e. when he plays with the baits that are laid for him,
and swallows them. And the Scripture elsewhere frequently tells us, that the
Devil is very active and busy to tempt Men, and is continually laying baits
before them: but their own Lusts are the Cause why they are caught by them.

And I do the rather insist upon this, because Men are apt to lay great load
upon the Devil, in the business of temptation, hoping thereby either wholly, or
at least in a great measure to excuse themselves; and therefore I shall here
consider, how far the Devil by his temptations is the cause of the Sins which
Men by compliance with those temptations are drawn into.

First, It is certain that the Devil is very active and busy to Minister to
them the occasions of Sin, and temptations to it. For ever since he fell from
God, partly out of enmity to him, and partly out of envy and malice to Mankind,
he has made it his great business and employment to seduce Men to Sin; and to
this end he walks up and down the Earth, and watches all occasions and
opportunities to tempt Men to Sin; and so far as his Power reaches, and God
permits him, he lays baits and temptations before them in all their ways,
presenting them wi^h the occasions and opportunities to Sin, and with such
baits and allurements as are most ^uitable to their tempers, and most likely to
prevail with their particular inclinations, and as often as he can, surprising
Men with these at the easiest time of access, and with such Circumstances, as
may give his temptations the greatest force and advantage. Of this the
Scripture assures us in general, when it tells us of these wiles and devices of
Satan, and of the methods of his temptations; so that though we do not
particularly discern how and when he does this, yet we have no reason to doubt
of the thing, if we believe that there is such a Spirit in the World, as the
Scripture particularly tells us there is, that works in the Children of
disobedience, and that God, from whom nothing is hidden, and who sees all the
secret Engines which are at work in the World, to do us good or harm, has in
mercy to Mankind, given us particular warning of it, that we may not be wholly
ignorant of our Enemies, and their malicious Designs upon us, and that we may
be continually upon our guard, aware of our danger, and armed against it.

Secondly, The Devil does not only present to Men the temptations and occasions
of Sin; but when he is permitted to make nearer approaches to them, does excite
and stir them up to comply with these temptations, and to yield to them. And
this he does, not only by employing his Instruments to solicit for him, and to
draw Men to Sin by bad Counsel and Example, which we see frequently done, and
probably very often by the Devil's instigation; (those who are very wicked
themselves, and consequently more enslaved to the Devil, and under his Power,
being as it were Factors for him to seduce others;) but besides this, it is not
improbable but the Devil himself does many times immediately excite Men to Sin,
by working upon the humors of their Bodies, or upon their Imaginations; and by
that means infusing and suggesting evil motions into them; or by diverting them
from those Thoughts and Considerations, which might check and restrain them
from that wickedness to which he is tempting them; or by some other ways and
means more secret and unknown to us. For the power of Spirits, whether good or
bad, and the manner of their operation upon our Minds, are things very secret,
and of which we can give little or no account; but yet for all that, we have
many times reason sufficient to believe a thing to be so, when we are wholly
ignorant of the manner of it.

And there is Reason from what is said in Scripture to believe, that the Devil,
in some Cases, has a more immediate power and influence upon the Minds of Men,
to excite them to Sin, and, where he discovers a very bad inclination or
resolution, to help it forward, and to keep Men to it; as when it is said, John
13. 27. that the Devil entered into Judas, to push him on in that ill design
which he had already engaged in, of betraying our Savior. And Acts 5. 3. Satan
is said to have filled the heart of Ananias, to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to
keep back part of the price for which he had sold his Estate; which expressions
do seem to intimate to us some more immediate power and influence which the
Devil had upon those Persons: but then it is very observable, that this power is
never ascribed to the Devil, but in the case of great and horrid Sins, and
wh^re Men are beforehand notoriously depraved, and either by the actual
commission of some former great Sin, or by entertaining some very wicked
design, have provoked God to permit the Devil a nearer access to them. For
Judas had first taken Council how to betray Christ, before it is said the Devil
entered into him, to push him on to the execution of it. And Ananias his
Covetousness had first tempted him to keep back part of his Estate, before it
is said the Devil filled his heart to lie to the Holy Ghost; so that what power
the Devil has over Men, they first give it him^ they consent to his outward
temptations, before he can get within them. Hence it is that in Scripture great
Sinners are described, as being more immedi^tely under the government and
influence of the Devil. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, where the Apostle speaking of those,
who from Heat^enisin were Converted to Christianity, You (says he) has he
quickened, who were once dead in trespasses and sins; wherein in times past ye
walked, according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience,
or unbelief; (...), the Spirit that s^^ll acts and inspires the Children of
unbelief^ that is, those who continue in their infidelity, and would not
believe and obey the Gospel. When Men are notoriously wicked, and disobedient
to the Counsels of God, the Devil is said to act and inspire them, which
certainly signifies some more immediate power and influence which he has over
such Persons.

For as it is very probable, that the Devil is sometimes permitted to come near
good Men, so as to tempt them; so by notorious wickedness and impiety, Men do
give admission to him, and he is permitted by the just judgment of God, to
exercise greater Dominion over them. By resisting his temptations, we drive him
from us. So St. James tells us, Chap. 4. ver. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will
flee from you: but as we yield to his temptations, he continually makes nearer
approaches to us, and gains a greater power over us.

Thirdly, But for all this, the Devil can force no Man to Sin; his temptations
may move and excite Men to Sin, but that they are prevalent and effectual,
proceeds from our own will and consent; it is our own Lusts closing with his
Temptations, that produce Sin. The Devil has more or less power over Men,
according as they give way to him; but never so much as to force their Wills,
and to compel them to consent to, and comply with his temptations. The grace of
God does hardly offer this violence to Men for their good, in order to their
Salvation; and therefore much less will he permit the Devil to have this power
over Men, to their ruin and destruction. God's commanding us to resist the
Devil, supposes that his temptations are not irresistible.

Fourthly, From what has been said, it appears, that though the Devil be
frequently accessory to the Sins of Men, yet we our selves are the Authors of
them; he tempts us many times to Sin, but it is we that commit it. His
temptations may sometimes be so violent as to extenuate our fault, but never so
forcible as wholly to excuse us; for we are so far guilty of Sin, as we give
our consent to it; and how powerful soever the temptation be to any kind of
evil, there is always enough of our own will in it to render us guilty.

I am far from thinking that the Devil tempts Men to all the evil that they do.
I rather think that the greatest part of the wickedne^^ that is committed in
the world, springs from the evil motions of Men's own Minds. Men's own Lusts are
generally to them the worst Devil of the two, and do more strongly incline them
to Sin, than any Devil without them can tempt them to it. It is not to be
doubted, that the Devil does all the mischief he can to the Souls of Men, so
far as God permits him; and though the number of Evil Angels be probably very
great, yet it is but finite, and every one of them has a limited power; and
though they be very active, yet they can be but one where at once; so that his
malice at the utmost does only all the evil that it can, not all that it would;
he plyes where he has the best Custom, where he has the fairest Opportunity,
and the greatest hopes; he leaves Men many times for a season (as it is said)
he did our Savior, because he despairs of success at that time; and it may be
sometimes when he is gone, these Persons grow secure, and through their own
security and folly fall into those Sins, which the Devil with all his baits and
wiles, whilst they were upon their guard, could not tempt them to commit.

Others after he has made them sure, and put them into the way of it, will go
on of themselves, and are as mad of Sinning, and as forward to destroy
themselves, as the Devil himself could wish; so that he can hardly tempt Men to
any wickedness, which he does not find them inclined to of themselves. These he
can trust with themselves, and leave them to their own inclinations and
conduct, finding by experience, that they will do as ill things of their own
motion, as if Satan stood continually at their right hand to prompt them, and
put them on, so that he can go into a far Country, and employ himself
elsewhere, and leave them for a long time, being confident that in his absence
they will not bury their Talent, and hide it in a Napkin, but will improve it
to a great advantage. And I wish that our own Age did not afford us too many
instances of this kind, of such forward and expert Sinners as need no Tempter
either to instruct or excite them to that which is evil. Now in this Case the
Devil betakes himself to other Persons, and removes his Snares and Baits where
he thinks there is more need and occasion for them.

So that we may reasonably conclude, that there is a great deal of wickedness
committed in the World, which the Devil has no immediate hand in, though he
always rejoices in it when it is done; and that there is a great deal more
reason to attribute all good to the Motions and Operations of the Spirit of
God, than to ascribe all Sin and wickedness in the World to the Devil; because
the Spirit of God is more powerful, and is always every where, and is more
intent upon his design, and as forward to promote it, as the Devil can be to
carry on his work; nay, I doubt not but he is more active to excite Men to
good, than the Devil can be to tempt them to Evil. And yet for all this, I
think there is no great reason to doubt, but that good Men do many good actions
of their own inclination, without any special and immediate motion from the
Spirit of God. They are indeed at first regenerate, and sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, and are continually afterward under the conduct of the same Spirit: but
where there is a new Nature, it is of it self inclinable to that which is good,
and will bring forth fruits, and do actions answerable. Much less do I think
that the Devil tempts every Man to all the evil that he does, or the greatest
part. When the Lusts of Men, and the habits of Vice are grown strong and
confirmed, the Devil may spare his temptations in a great measure; for after
wicked Men are wound up to such a pitch of impiety, they will go a great while
of themselves.

I have done with the first Observation, that as the Apostle acquits God from
having any hand in tempting Men to Sin, so neither does he ascribe the efficacy
and prevalency of temptation to the Devil. I proceed to the

Second Observation, That he ascribes the efficacy and success of temptation to
the lusts and vicious inclinations of Men, which seduce them to a consent and
compliance with the temptations which are offered to them. Every Man is
tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust and enticed. We have many
powerful Enemies; but we are much more in danger of treachery from within, than
of assaults from without. All the power of our Enemies could not destroy us, if
we were but true to our selves; so that the Apostle had great reason to ascribe
the efficacy of temptation, to the irregular desires and vicious inclinations
of Men, rather than to those temptations which the Providence of God permits
them to be assaulted with, and consequently to lay the blame of Men's Sins
chiefly upon themselves.

And that chiefly upon these two accounts.

First, Because the Lusts of Men are in a great measure voluntary.

Secondly, God has put it in our power to resist these temptations, and
overcome them. Now so far as the Lusts of Men are voluntary, it is their own
fault that they are seduced by them; and if God has put it in our power to
resist and overcome temptations, we may blame our selves, if we be overcome and
foiled by them.

First, The Lusts of Men are in a great measure voluntary. By the Lusts of Men,
I mean their irregular desires, and vicious inclinations. I grant that the
Nature of Man is very much corrupted, and degenerated from its Primitive
Integrity and Perfection^ but we who are Christians, have received that grace
in Baptism, whereby our Natures are so far healed, as if we be not wanting to
our selves, and do not neglect the means which God has appointed to us, we may
mortify our Lusts, and live a new Life; so that if our Lusts remain
unmortified, we our selves are in fault, much more if they gain new strength,
and proceed to habits; for this could not be, if we did not after we come to
Age, and are able to discern between, and to choose good and evil, voluntarily
consent to Iniquity, and by wilful and deliberate Practice of known Sins,
improve the evil inclinations of our Nature into vicious habits: but if instead
of mortifying and subduing the evil propensions of our Nature (which is no very
difficult work to most persons, if they begin it betimes) we will cherish and
give new Life and Power to them, we forfeit the grace which we received in
Baptism, and bring our selves again under the Power and Dominion of Sin; and no
wonder then, if our Lusts seduce us, and make us ready to comply with the
temptations of the World, and the Devil.

Nay, and after this it is still our own fault, if we do not mortify our
Lusts; for if we would hearken to the Counsel of God, and obey his Calls to
Repentance, and sincerely beg his Grace and Holy Spirit to this purpose, we
might yet recover our selves, and by the Spirit mortify the L^sts of the Flesh;
for though we have left God, he has not quite forsaken us, but is ready to
afford his Grace again to us, though we have neglected and abused it, and to give
his Holy Spirit to those that ask him, though they have forfeited it; so that
though our Lusts spring from something which is Natural, yet that they live and
have dom^^ion over us, is voluntary, because we ^ight Remedy it if we would,
and make use of those Means which God in the Gospel offers to us.

Secondly, God has put it in our power to resist these temptations, and
overcome them; so that it is our own fault, if we yield to them, and be
overcome by them.

It is naturally in our power to resist ma^y sorts of temptations; and the
grace of God, if we do not neglect it, and be not wanting to ou^ selves, puts
it into our power to resist any temptation that may happen to us.

First, It is naturally in our power to resist many sorts of temptations. If we
do but make use of our Natural Reason, and those Considerations which are
common and obvious to Men, we may easily resist the temptations to a great many
Sins. Some Sins are so horrid in their Nature, that when we have the strongest
temptations to them, we cannot but have a natural aversion from them; as
deliberate Murder, the danger and guilt whereof, are both so great, as make it
easy for any considerate Man to resist the strongest temptation to it, even
that of revenge. A plain act of injustice, whether by great fraud, or by down
right oppression, is so base and disgraceful, so odious and abhorred by humane
Nature, that it is not difficult to a Man that has but a common understanding,
and common inclination to be honest, to overcome the greatest temptation of
gain and advantage; nay he must offer considerable violence to his Nature and
Reason, to bring himself to it at first. Profaneness and contempt of God and
Religion is so monstrous a fault, and of so dreadful an appearance, that every
Man that will but use his Reason, can have no temptation to it, either from
gratifying his humor, or pleasing his Company, or showing his wit, that can be
of equal force with the Arguments which every Man's Mind and Conscience is apt
to suggest to him against it.

Nay, there are many Sins much inseriour to these, the temptations whereto may
by the ordinary Reasons and Considerations of prudence and interest, be baffled
and put out of Countenance. To instance in common Swearing, to which I think
there is no temptation, either from pleasure or advantage, but only from
fashion and custom. Now this temptation is easy to be conquered, by
considering that every Man that professes to believe the Bible, must
acknowledge it to be a Sin; and if any Man be convin'd that it is a Sin, I dare
undertake to convince him that he can leave it. He that can choose at any time
whether he will Speak or not (which it is certainly in every Man's power to do)
can choose whether he will swear when he speaks. If he says he does it by custom
and habit, and when he does not think of it; a very little Care and Resolution
will in a short time cure any Man of that Custom; so that it is naturally in
every Man's power to break off this Sin.

Secondly, The grace of God puts it into our power, if we do not neglect it,
and be not wanting to our selves, to resist any temptation that may happen to
us; and what the grace of God puts into our power, is as truly in our power, as
what we can do our selves. God offers his grace to every Man under the Gospel,
for he has promised to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him; and it is
naturally in every Man's power to ask it, otherwise the Promise signifies
nothing; for if no Man can ask the Spirit of God, 'till he first have it, then
to promise it to them that ask it, is to promise it to them who have it
already, and then it is needless to ask it. And if God offer his grace to every
Man, then it is every Man's fault if he have it not; and every Man that has it,
may by the ordinary assistance of that grace, resist any ordinary temptation.
And if at any time God suffers good Men to be assaulted, he has promised in
such Cases an Extraordinary grace and assistance; and that either he will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, or, that with the temptation he
will find a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.

And thus I have done with the Second thing I propounded to speak to from these
words, That every Man is his own greatest tempter. Every Man is tempted, when
he is drawn aside of his own lust and enticed. And now the proper Inferences
from what I have been all this while Discoursing to you, are these three.

First, Not to think to excuse our selves, by laying the blame of our Sins upon
the temptation of the Devil. That the Devil tempts us is not our fault, because
we cannot help it; but it is our voluntary compliance with his temptations, our
consenting to that evil which he solicits us to, which makes us guilty. Every
Man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own Lust; the Lusts of our own
hearts give the efficacy to the temptations of the Devil. Men many times Sin
upon the motions and suggestions of the Devil: but though he be guilty of
tempting us, we are guilty of consenting to his temptations.

Many times we are not sure that the Devil tempts us to such a Sin; but we are
sure that we commit it, and consequently that we are guilty of it. Nay it is
certain, if there were no Devil, many would be wicked, and perhaps not much
less wicked than they are. The Lusts and vicious inclinations of Men would
yield to the temptations of the World, though there were none to manage them, and
to set them on to the greatest advantage; so that we cannot excuse our faults
upon this account, that we are tempted by the Devil. If this were a sufficient
excuse for us, the Devil would take no pleasure in tempting us; the whole
design of his temptation being to make us guilty, and by the guilt of Sin to
make us miserable.

Secondly, From hence we learn what reason we have to pray to God, that he
would not lead us into temptation; i. e. not permit us to fall into it; for in
the Phrase of Scripture, God is many times said to do those things, which his
Providence permits to be done. The best of us have some remainders of Lust,
some irregular desires and appetites, which will be apt to betray us to Sin,
when powerful temptations are presented to us; so that it is a great happiness
to the best of Men, to be kept by the Providence of God out of the way of
violent temptations; for our own strength to resist them is but small, and we
are apt to be secure, and to neg^^ct our guard; we are easy to be surp^ized,
and in continual danger through our own weakness or carelessness. Our greatest
security is, if we be sincere, and heartily desirous to do well, and firmly
resolved against Sin, and do depend upon God for his grace and assistance, that
his Providence will not suffer us to fall into the hands of dangerous and
violent temptations, which probably would be too hard for us; he who knows what
our strength is, will not suffer us to be tempted, above what we are able.

Thirdly, From hence we may learn the best way to disarm Temptations, and to
take away the power of them, and that is by mortifying our Lusts, and subduing
our vicious Inclinations. When this is done, (which by the grace of God may be
done) Temptation has lost its greatest advantage upon us. It Is the Conspiracy
of our Lusts, with the Temptations that set upon us, that betrays us into their
power. The true Reason why Men fall into Sin, is not because they are tempted,
but because there is something within them, which inclines and disposes them to
comply with the Temptation, and to yield to it. It is said, when the Devil came
to our Savior to Tempt him, that he found nothing in him, and therefore his
Temptations had no force upon him. The more we mortify our Lusts, the less the
Devil will find in us, for his Temptations to work upon. Every spark is
dangerous, when it falls upon Combustible Matter; but though sparks fly never so
thick, there is no danger, so long as there is nothing about us to catch fire.

If we will not be drawn aside and enticed to Sin, let us mortify our Lusts;
for so far as we are mortified, we are out of the power of Temptation.

Men are apt to complain of Temptations, that they are too hard for them, and
that they are not able to resist them, though they pray to God continually for
his Grace to that purpose. This indeed is one means very proper and necessary
to be used; but this is not all that we are to do; we must break off habits of
Sin, and subdue our Lusts, and keep under our Inclinations, and then we shall
find our selves able to resist and encounter Temptations with more success. And
'till we do this, in vain do we pray for God's Grace, and depend upon him for
strength to overcome the Temptations that do assault us; for God's Grace was
never designed to countenance the sloth and negligence of Men, but to
encourage and second our Resolutions and Endeavors of well-doing. If we expect
God's Grace and Assistance upon other Terms, we tempt God, and provoke him to
leave us to the power of Temptations, to be drawn away and enticed by our own
Lusts.

FINIS.

