Imprimatur, Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom. November. 2.
1677.

SERMONS PREACHED Upon several Occasions.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D.D. Dean of Canterbury, Preacher to the Honorable Society
of Lincoln's Inn, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The (...)

Printed (...) at t^^ (...)

SERMONS Preached upon Several OCCASIONS.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Lincoln's Inn, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The Second Volume.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Gellibrand, and are to be Sold by Henry Bonwicke, at
the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's-Church-Yard, 1678.

SERMON I. ISaiah IX.12, 13, For all this his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still: For the people turns not to him that smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. SERMON II. Heb. III.13, Exhort
one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. SERMON III. 1 Cor. III.15, But he himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. SERMON IV. Psalm. CXIX.156, Great peace have
they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. SERMON V. Psalm. CXIX.59,
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. SERMON VI. Psalm.
CXIX.60, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. SERMON VII. 1
John III.10, In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: whosoever does not righteousness is not of God. SERMON VIII. Luke XV.7,
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that
repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons which need no
repentance. SERMON IX. Matthew. IX.31, 32, Wherefore I say unto you, all manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

SERMON X. Acts X.38. -- Who went about doing good.
A SERMON Preached before the KING, June 30th 1667.
Isa. IX.12, 13. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still: For the people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.


IN the former part of this 12th verse, the Prophet threatens that Israel
should be brought into great distress, and set upon by Enemies on every side,
the Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and that they should devour
Israel with open mouth: And though this was like to be a very sore and dreadful
Judgment, yet he foretells that this would not stay Gods hand, nor satisfy his
anger, because he foresaw that they would still grow worse, and continue
impenitent. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still: For the people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.

In which words there are these two things, very useful at all times, but at
this time especially most proper and seasonable for our consideration.

1. The design and intention of God in sending Judgments upon a People; and
that is, to reclaim them from their sins, implied in these words, For the
people turns not to him that smites them; which intimate to us, that this is
the end which God aims at in his Judgments, to take us off from our sins, and
to bring us to himself.

2. The reason of the continuance of Gods Judgments; because the people were
not reclaimed by them. And this is fully expressed in the Text, that therefore
Gods anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, because the
people turns not unto him that smites them, etc.

Of these Two I crave leave to speak as plainly and briefly as I can.

I. The design and intention of God in sending Judgments upon a people; And
that is to reclaim them from their sins. This indeed is the intention of all
Gods dispensations toward us in this World. The end of all his mercies and
benefits, is to take us off from sin, and to oblige and win us to our duty: So
the Apostle tells us Romans 2.4, That the design of Gods goodness, and
long-suffering, and forbearance toward us, is, to lead us to Repentance.

And this is the way wherein God delights to deal with us. The way of Judgment
and severity is that which he is more averse from, a course which he
unwillingly takes with us, and not without some difficulty and reluctance, He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: And were it not
that we are such perverse Creatures as not to be wrought upon by kindness, so
wild as not to be tamed by gentle usage, God would not handle us in any other
way. It is our obstinacy and intractableness to the methods of his goodness
which constrains, and almost forces him against his inclination, to take the
Rod into his hand, and to chastise us with it. He would draw us with the cords
of love, and the bands of a man, (as he expresses himself in the Prophet), but
we will not follow him: And therefore we provoke him to turn these Cords into
whips, and to change the gentle methods of his kindness into ways of harshness
and severity.

And yet when he comes to take this course with us, he still, like a kind and
tenderhearted Father, aims at our benefit and advantage. He designs kindness
to the sons of men by all those judgments which do not kill them, and cut them
off from the opportunity and possibility of improving them. If he send Evils
upon us, it is that thereby he may do us some greater good: If he afflict us,
it is not because it is pleasant to him to deal harshly with us, but because it
is profitable and necessary for us to be so dealt withal: And if at any time
he imbitter our lives by miseries and sufferings, it is because he is loath to
see us perish in pleasant ways, and chooses rather to be somewhat severe
toward us, than suffer us to be utterly undone.

This Moses declares to have been the great end of all the severe Providence
of God toward the People of Israel, in their long wandering in the Wilderness,
and all the difficulties and hardships they were there exercised withal for
the space of forty years, Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16: Who led thee through that great and
terrible Wilderness, wherein were fiery Serpents and Scorpions, etc. That he
might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter
end.

So that the afflicting providence of God are not only apt in their own nature
to do us good, but which is a more express argument of the Divine goodness, God
intends and aims at this end by them: He does not send Judgments upon this
Theater of the World for his sport and pastime, nor set on one part of his
Creation to bait another for his own diversion: He does not, like some of the
cruel Roman Emperors, take pleasure to exercise men with dangers, and to see
them play bloody prizes before him.

Nay, he does nothing that is severe out of humor and passion, as our earthly
Parents many times do. Indeed he is angry with us for our sins; but yet so as
still to pity our persons: And when his Providence makes use of any sharp and
cutting instruments, it is with this merciful design, to let out our
corruption: If he cast us into the Furnace of affliction, it is that he may
refine and purify us from our dross.

So that though the Judgments of God be Evils in themselves, yet considering
the intention of God in them, they are no real objections against his goodness,
but rather arguments for it; as will appear if we consider these three things.

1. That the Judgments of God are proper for the cure of a far greater Evil of
another kind.

2. They are proper for the prevention of far greater Evils of the same kind.

3. They are not only proper to these Ends, but in many cases very necessary.

First, The Judgments of God are very proper for the cure of a far greater Evil
of another kind; I mean the Evil of sin. We take wrong measures of things, when
we judge those to be the greatest Evils which afflict our bodies, wound our
reputation, and impoverish our Estates. For those certainly are far the
greatest, which affect our noblest Part; which vitiate our understandings, and
deprave our wills, and wound and defile our souls. What corrupt humors are to
the body, that sin is to the souls of men, their disease and their death.

Now it is very agreeable with the goodness and mercy of the Divine providence,
to administer to us whatever is proper for the cure of so great an evil. If we
make our selves sick, that is our own folly, and no fault of the Physician; but
we are beholden to him if he recover us, though it be by very bitter and
unpleasing means. All temporal Judgments which are short of Death, are properly
Medicinal; and if we will but suffer them to have their kindly operation upon
us, they will work a cure; and how grievous and distastful soever they may be
for the present, they will prove mercies and blessings in the issue. Upon this
account David reckons afflictions among the happy blessings of his life, Psalm.
119.72, It is good for me (says he) that I have been afflicted; And he gives
the reason of it in the same Psalm, ver. 67, Before I was afflicted I went
astray, but now have I learned thy precepts.

So that though all afflictions are Evils in themselves, yet they are good for
us; because they discover to us our disease, and tend to our cure: They are a
sensible argument and conviction to us of the evil and danger of sin. We are
commonly such fools as Solomon speaks of, who make a mock of sin; and like
Children, will be playing with the edge of it till it cut and wound us: We are
not sufficiently sensible how great an evil it is, till we come to feel the
dismal effects and consequences of it. And therefore to rectify our
apprehensions concerning it, God makes us to suffer by it. Thus Elihu describes
to us the happy effect of afflictions upon sinners, Job 36.8, 9, 10, If they be
bound in fetters, and held in cords of affliction, then God shows them their
work, and their transgression that they have exceeded. He opens also their
ear to discipline, and commands that they return from their iniquity. God
does but invite and entreat us by his mercies, but his Judgments have a more
powerful and commandng voice. When he holds men in cords of affliction, then he
opens their ear to discipline. In our prosperity we are many times incapable
of counsel and instruction; but when we are under Gods correcting hand, then
are we fit to be spoken withal.

Secondly, The Judgments of God are likewise proper for the preventing of far
greater evils of the same kind; I mean farther punishments. In sending of
temporal Judgments upon sinners, God usually proceeds with them by degrees:
First he lets fly several single shots at them, and if upon these they will
take warning and come in, they may prevent the broad-sides and volleys of his
wrath.

But the great advantage of all is, that temporal Judgments may prove to us the
opportunities of preventing the miserable and unspeakable torments of a long
Eternity. For all Judgments which are not final, leaving men a space of
Repentance, have in them the mercy of Reprieve, which by a serious and timely
return to God, may be improved into a Pardon.

Besides, that adversity and afflictions do usually dispose men, and put them
into a fit temper for Repentance; They fix our minds, and make us serious, and
are apt to awaken us to consideration, and suggest to us such thoughts and
meditations as these: If temporal evils be so grievous, how insupportable then
will be the extreme and endless torments of the next life? If in this day of
Gods grace and patience we sometimes meet with such severity, what may we not
look for in the day of vengeance? If these drops of Gods wrath which now and
then fall upon sinners in this world, fill them with so much anguish and
affliction, how deplorably miserable will those wretches be upon whom the
storms of his fury shall fall? Who would venture to continue in sin, when the
greatest miseries and calamities which we feel in this life, are but a small
and inconsiderable earnest of those woeful wages which sinners shall receive in
the Day of Recompenses?

Thirdly, The Judgments of God are not only proper to these Ends, but in many
cases very necessary. Our condition many times is such, as to require this
severe way of proceeding, because no other course that God has taken, or can
take with us, will probably do us good. God does not delight in the miseries
and calamities of his Creatures, but we put him upon these extremities; or
rather his own goodness and wisdom together, do prompt and direct him to these
harsh and rigorous ways. May be we have brought our selves into that dangerous
state, and the malignity of our distemper is such, that it is not to be removed
without violent Physic; and that cannot be administered to us without making us
deadly sick.

So that the Judgments of God which are many times abroad in the earth, are
nothing else but the wise Methods which the great Physician of the World uses
for the cure of Mankind; They are the Rods of his School, and the Discipline of
his Providence, that the inhabitants of the world may learn righteousness: They
are a merciful invention of Heaven, to do men that good which many times
nothing else will; and to work that blessed effect upon us, which neither the
wise counsels and admonitions of Gods Word, nor his milder and gentler dealings
with us can usually attain.

Thus we find in the Parable, Luke 15. that the Providence of God makes use of
hunger and extreme necessity to bring home the Prodigal; and by him our Savior
represents to us the temper of most sinners: For till we have spent that stock
of mercies which God has given us, till we come to be pinched with want, and
are ready to perish, we are not apt to entertain thoughts of returning to our
Father.

It may be there are some sinners which are more tractable and easy to be
reduced to goodness, that are not so headstrong and obstinate in their way, but
that they may be reclaimed by milder and softer means: But there are likewise a
great many senseless and outrageous sinners, who are madly and furiously bent
upon their own ruin: Now to treat these fairly, with the allurements of
kindness, and the gentle arts of persuasion, would be to no purpose: The only
way that is left of dealing with them, is rigor and severity. When sinners are
thus besides themselves, some thing that looks like Cruelty is perhaps the
greatest mercy that can be shown to them; nothing so proper for such persons as
a dark Room, and a spare Diet, and severe Usage; A Rod for the back of Fools,
as the Wiseman speaks.

Thus have I done with the first thing I propounded to speak to, namely, The
merciful design and intention of God in sending Judgments upon a People, which
is, to bring them to Repentance, and by Repentance to prevent their Ruin. I
proceed to the

II. The Reason of the continuance of Gods Judgments, viz. because the people
were not reclaimed by them; therefore his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still, because the people turns not to him that smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.

And how can it be expected it should be otherwise; When incorrigibleness under
the Judgments of God is a provocation of so high a nature, a sign of a most
depraved and incorrigible temper, and an argument of the greatest obstinacy in
evil? Upon this account we find that the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture brands
Ahaz as a singular and remarkable sort of sinner, (2 Chronicles. 28.22.) because, in
the time of his distress he sinned yet more against the Lord. The longer
Pharaoh and the Egyptians resisted the Judgments of God, the more still they
were hardened, and the more they were plagued: Levit. 26.23, after God had
there threatened his people with several sore Judgments for their sins, he tells
them, that if they will not be reformed by all these things, he will punish
them seven times more, and after that, seven times more for their sins: And if
in such a case the just God will punish seven times more, we may safely
conclude that sins after Judgments are seven times greater.

So likewise, Deuteronomy. 28, after a long and dreadful Catalogue of Curses there
denounced against the people of Israel in case of their disobedience, God at
last threatens them with a Foreign Enemy, that should distress them in their
gates; And if they would not be reclaimed by all this, he tells them, That he
has still more and greater Judgments for them in store, v. 58, and 59, If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law, that thou may fear this
great and glorious Name, THE LORD THY GOD, then the Lord will make thy Plagues
wonderful. If we be of so strange and monstrous a disposition, as to grow worse
under Judgments, God will deal with us after an unusual and prodigious manner,
he will make our plagues wonderful.

This incorrigible temper the Prophets of old every where make the great
aggravation of the sin of Israel, Isa. 1.4, 5, Ah sinful Nation! a people laden
with iniquity; and after a great many other expressions to set forth what
heinous sinners they were, he sums up all in this, That they were so far from
being reformed by the several Judgments of God which had been inflicted upon
them, that they were the worse for correction; Why should they be stricken any
more? they will revolt more and more. So likewise, Hos. 7.9, 10, Ephraim,
though brought very low, is represented as of the same refractory temper,
Strangers have devoured his strength, etc. But they do not return to the Lord,
nor seek him for all this. I will mention but one Text more (and methinks it
bears but too near a resemblance with our own condition, both in respect of the
judgments which have been upon us, and our carriage under them,) Amos 4. where
God upbraids his people several times with this, as the great aggravation of
their sins, That they continued impenitent under all those terrible Judgments
of God which had been upon them; I have sent among you (says he) Famine; and
then Pestilence; and then the Sword; and last of all a terrible Fire which had
almost utterly consumed them, verse. 11. I have overthrown some of you as I
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning: yet have ye not returned unto me. And because all these Judgments had
not been effectual to reclaim them, He tells them that he was resolved to go on
in punishing; and therefore he bids them to expect it, and prepare themselves
for it, verse. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I
will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. When God has begun
to punish a people, and they are not amended by it, the honor of his Justice
is concerned to proceed, and not to give over. By every sin that we commit, we
offend God; but if he smite us, and we stand out against him, then do we
contend with him, and strive for mastery. And when the sinner is upon these
stubborn and insolent terms, then prepare to meet thy God; A bitter Sarcasme,
as if man could be a match for God, and a poor weak creature in any wise able
to encounter him to whom Power belongs. There Is a severe expression concerning
Gods dealing with such perverse and obstinate sinners, Psalm. 18.26, With the
froward thou will show thy self froward, or, as the words may more properly and
conveniently be rendered, with the froward thou will wrestle. God will not be
outbrav'd by the sins of men; and therefore if we continue impeninent we have
all the reason in the world to expect that God will go on to punish.

But to come nearer to our selves, and to consider our own case; which is in
truth so very bad that we may almost be afraid to consider it. The wise and
good God, like a prudent and indulgent Father, has used all the arts of his
Providence toward this Nation, to reclaim us. He has invited us to him by
many blessings, but we would not come; Bishop Sanderson.
so that (to borrow an apt illustration from a great Divine of our own) we have
forced him to deal with us as Absalom did with Joab; he sent one civil message
to him after another; but he would not come; at last he sets on fire his
Corn-field to try whether that would bring him: This course God has taken with
us; we would not be persuaded by messages of kindness (by his many blessings
and favors) to return to him, and therefore has he sent amongst us the
terrible messengers of his wrath. First we were engaged in a Foreign War; and
though God was pleased to give us some considerable success in it, yet it seems
our provocations were so great, that he was resolved to punish us. He was loath
to let us fall into the hands of men; and therefore he took the work into his
own hand, and punished us himself, by sending a Pestilence amongst us, the
sorest and most destructive that has befallen this Nation for many Ages. But
we did not upon this, return to him; and therefore his fierce anger kindled a
fearful Fire amongst us, which has laid the honor of our Nation, one of the
greatest and richest Cities in the World in the dust; and that by so sudden and
irresistible, so dismal and amazing a devastation as, in all the circumstances
of it is, scarce to be paralleled in any History.

I doubt not but most of us were mightily affected with this Judgment whilst it
was upon us. So astonishing a calamity, could not but make us open our eyes a
little, and awaken us to consideration; Even the richman in the Gospel, though
he had all his lifetime been immersed in sensuality, yet could not but lift up
his eyes when he was in Flames.

And surely God expects, that such Judgments as these should not only rouse us
a little for the present, but that they should have a permanent operation and
effect upon us, and work a thorough and lasting reformation amongst us; but yet
I am afraid that this dreadful Fire has had no other influence upon us, but
what it uses to have upon Metals, which are only melted by it for the present,
but when the Fire is removed, they suddenly cool and return to their former
hardness.

One would have thought, that the sense of such a calamity as this, should have
remained longer upon us. Methinks God seemed to say to us after this Judgment
as he did once to Jerusalem, Zeph. 3.7, Surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction; but we (like them) have been but the more forward to
provoke him, ( they rose early and corrupted their doings) we have after all
this hardened our hearts from his fear, and refused to return. And therefore
God is now come to one of his last Judgments, Our Enemy distresseth us in our
Gates. God has begun to let us fall into the hands of men, and by giving our
Enemies a sudden and fatal advantage upon us, has smitten us with a Breach
great as the Sea.

These were terrible calamities indeed to come so thick and so swiftly upon us,
like desolation, and as a whirlwind. Such a quick succession of Judgments,
treading almost upon one another heels, does but too plainly declare that God
is highly incensed against us. For surely these are not the wounds of a Friend,
but the terrible assaults of an Enemy. They do not look like the displeasure of
a Father, but the severity of a Judge; not like visitation, but like vengeance.

And besides these more visible Judgments upon the Nation, we are by a secret
curse of God insensibly decayed in our riches and strength. We are, I know not
how, strangely impoverisht in the midst of plenty, and almost undone by
victories. And which adds to our misery, few among us seem to be sufficiently
sensible of it, or to take any notice by what silent steps and imperceptible
degrees (like gray hairs and the infirmities of old age) poverty and weakness
are stealing in upon us; so that we may fitly apply to our selves, what the
Prophet says of Ephraim, Hos. 7.9, Strangers have devoured his strength, and he
knows it not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and yet he knows
it not.

And our condition, as we are a Church, is not much better. How is this famous
Protestant Church of ours, which was once the admiration of her Friends, and
the envy of her Enemies, sunk and declined in her glory, and reduced into a
very narrow compass? So that she is left like the Daughter of Sion, (Isa. 1.8.)
as a Cottage in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, as a besieged
City; straightened and hemmed in on all parts, by the impudence of Atheism, the
insolences of Popery, and the turbulency of Faction; all which do every day
visibly and apace gain ground upon her, and distress her on every side; just as
the condition of the Jewish Church is described before my Text, The Syrians
before, and the Philistines behind, both ready to devour Israel with open mouth.

And surely it is not for nothing that God has brought us thus low, that he
has sent all these Judgments upon us, and that he does still threaten us with
more: The reason is plain, because we are still impenitent; the people turns
not to him that smites them. There has been almost an universal degeneracy
amongst us, and there is still, I fear, a general impenitency, the people
turns not, etc. Notwithstanding all those dismal Calamities which our eyes
have seen, wickedness does still prevail in the Nation, and overflows it like a
mighty Deluge; so as to overspread all Ranks and Orders of men: And not only
so, but is grown impudent, and appears with a whores forehead; all kind of
modesty seems to have forsaken the sinners of this Age.

And is this Repentance? to live in filthy and abominable lusts, to tear the
Name of God by horrid Oaths and Imprecations; to be Atheistical and profane,
and by an unexampled boldness to turn the Word of God it self, and the gravest
and most serious matters of Religion into Raillery? This is not to turn to him
that smites us, but to turn upon him and smite him again. And yet such crying
and clamorous sins as these, are almost come to be the garb and fashion of the
Nation, and to be aecounted the wit and gallantry of the Age.

And Shall not God visit for these things? shall not his soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? Yes, he has visited; and it is for these things that the
wrath of God has been so manifestly revealed from Heaven against us. For this
cause, misery and destruction have been in our ways, and the way of peace have
we not known, because there has been no fear of God before our eyes. Hence it
is, that God's anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still,
because the people turns not to him that smites them, neither do they seek
the Lord of Hosts.

But do not we seek God? Do we not every day acknowledge our sins to him, and
pray that he would have mercy upon us miserable offenders, and grant, that we
may hereafter live godly, righteous and sober lives? Do not we seek the Lord of
Hosts, when we continually beg of him to save and deliver us from the hand of
our enemies? Indeed we do thus seek him, but we should first turn to him;
otherwise, if we hope our prayers will prevail with God to do us good, we do
but trust in lying words. If we go on in our sins, our very prayers will become
sin, and increase our guilt: For the prayer of the wicked (that is, of one that
is resolved to continue so) is an abomination to the Lord. Can we think it
reasonable for men to address themselves to God after this manner? Lord, though
we have no mind to turn to thee, yet we pray thee turn away thine anger from
us; though we are resolved not to forsake our sins, yet we make no doubt but
that thy mercy will forgive them: Give peace in our time, O Lord, that we may
pursue our lusts securely and without disturbance: Deliver us, we pray thee,
from the hands of our Enemies, that we may sin against thee without fear all
the days of our lives. Would it not be horrible impudence and impiety to put up
any such petitions to God? And yet this, I fear, is the most genuine
interpretation of our prayers and lives compared together.

And if this be our case, what can we expect? God may give us peace with our
Enemies, but then he will find out some other way to punish us: For if we still
persist in our Atheism and Profaneness, in our contempt of God and of his holy
Worship, in our scorn and derision of Religion, in our abominable lusts and
horrid impieties, what can we look for, but that God should be angry with us
until he have consumed us, and there be no escaping? Nothing can be a sadder
presage of our ruin, than not to be reformed by those dreadful judgments of God
which have been upon us. This was that which brought final destruction upon the
Egyptians in the Red Sea, that they had held out so obstinately against so many
Judgments, and had been hardened under ten Plagues. To be impenitent after such
severe corrections, is to poison our selves with that which is intended for our
Physic, and by a miraculous kind of obstinacy to turn the Rods of God into
Serpents.

And now perhaps some will be apt to say, That these are things fit for men of
our Profession, because it is our Trade and we live by it. Indeed they are so,
things very fit to be said, and withal very fit for every one to consider, who
professes himself a Christian, and who owns the belief of a God, and a
Providence, and another World. And if they be so, where is the fault? Is it,
that there is a peculiar Profession of men whose proper work it is to tell men
of their faults, and to persuade them to reform? No, there is no harm in that
neither. Is it then that they live by their Profession, and yet would be
believed? Yes, there lies the force of the objection. To which I shall only at
present return this answer, That men do not argue thus in other cases, where
yet the reason seems to be the very same. In matters that concern their Bodies
and Estates, the Physician and the Lawyer are believed, though it is verily
thought that they live by their Professions as well as we; why then should men
deal so partially and unequally only with their Souls? Were we not moved by
better principles, and swayed by the arguments and considerations of another
World, we might, for ought we know, with every whit as much advantage to our
selves, suffer men to be quiet, and to sleep on securely in their sins; If we
did not believe our selves in these matters, what should hinder, but that we
might with as much gravity and confidence cry Peace, Peace, when there is no
Peace, and flatter men with as much art, and with as good a grace as any of
those can do, who live delicately, and wear soft clothing?

But we believe the threatenings of God, and therefore do we speak: We know the
terror of the Lord, and therefore we endeavor to persuade men. And O! that we
could persuade them to break off their sins by righteousness, and to turn every
one from the evil of his way, and from the violence that is in his hands: And
then, who can tell but God may turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger that we perish not.

The good God make us all wise, to know in this our day the things that belong
to our peace, before they be hid from our eyes; and grant that we may all turn
to him that has smitten us, by Repentance and real Reformation of our lives;
that God may be pleased to turn away his Anger from us, and to stretch out his
hand for our Deliverance; which we humbly beg of him for the sake of Christ. To
whom with the Father, etc.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, IN LENT, 1671.
Heb. III.13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.


AMong the many considerations which the Word of God and our own Reason offer
to us to discourage us from sin this is none of the least considerable, that he
that once engages in a vicious course is in danger to proceed in it, being
insensibly trained on from one degree of wickedness to another: so that the
farther he advances, his retreat grows more difficult, because he is still
pushed on with a greater violence. All error, as well of practice as of
judgment, is endless; and when a man is once out of the way, the farther he
shall go on the harder he will find it to return into the right way. Therefore
there is great reason why men should be often cautioned against the beginnings
of sin: or if they have been so unhappy as to be engaged in a bad course, why
they should be warned to break it off presently and without delay, lest by
degrees they be hardened in their wickedness, till their case grow desperate
and past remedy. And to this purpose is the Apostles advice here in the Text;
Exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin.

From which words I shall

1. Endeavor to represent to you the growing danger of sin; and by what steps
and degrees bad habits do insensibly gain upon men, and harden them in an evil
course.

2. I shall from this consideration take occasion to show what great reason and
need there is to warn men of this danger; and to endeavor to rescue them out
of it. And then

3. I shall apply my self to the duty here in the Text, of exhorting men with
all earnestness and importunity to resist the beginnings of sin; or if they be
already entered upon a wicked course, to make haste out of this dangerous state;
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

I. First, I shall endeavor to represent to you the growing danger of sin; and
by what steps and degrees bad habits do insensibly gain upon men, and harden
them in an evil course. All the actions of men which are not natural, but
proceed from deliberation and choice, have something of difficulty in them,
when we begin to practice them; because at first we are rude and unexercised in
that way: but after we have practiced them awhile, they become more easy: And
when they are easy, we begin to take pleasure in them: And when they please
us, we do them frequently, and think we cannot repeat them too often: And by
frequency of acts a thing grows into a habit: And a confirmed habit is a second
kind of Nature: And so far as any thing is natural, so far it is necessary, and
we can hardly do otherwise; nay, we do it many times when we do not think of
it. For by virtue of a habit, a man's mind or body becomes pliable and inclined
to such kind of actions as it is accustomed to, and does as it were stand bent
and charged such a way; so that being touched and awakened by the least
occasion it breaks forth into such or such actions. And this is the natural
progress of all habits indifferently considered, whether they be good or bad.

But vicious habits have a greater advantage, and are of a quicker growth. For
the corrupt nature of a man is a rank soil, to which vice takes easily, and
wherein it thrives apace. The mind of man has need to be prepared for piety
and virtue; it must be cultivated to that end, and ordered with great care and
pains: But vices are weeds that grow wild and spring up of themselves. They are
in some sort natural to the soil, and therefore they need not to be planted and
watered, it is sufficient if they be neglected and let alone. So that vice
having this advantage from our nature, it is no wonder if occasion and
temptation easily draw it forth.

But that we may take a more distinct account of the progress of sin, and by
what steps vice gains upon men, I shall mark out to you some of the chief and
more observable gradations of it.

1. Men begin with lesser sins. No man is perfectly wicked on the sudden. Juven.
Sunt quaedam vitiorum elementa; there are certain rudiments of vice, in which
men are first entered, and then they proceed by degrees to greater and fouler
crimes. For sin has its infancy and tender age, and its several states of
growth. Men are not so totally degenerate but at first they are ashamed when
they venture upon a known sin, though it be but small in comparison. Hence it
is that at first men are very sollicitous to palliate and hide their faults by
excuses; but after they have frequently committed them, and they grow too
visible to be concealed, then they will attempt to defend and maintain them;
and from thence they come by degrees to take pleasure in them, and in those
that do the same things.

2. After men have been some time initiated in these lesser sins, by the
commission of these they are prepared and disposed for greater: such as lay
waste the conscience, and offer more violence to the light and reason of their
minds. By degrees a sinner may grow to be so hardy as to attempt those crimes
which at first he could not have had the thought of committing without horror.
Like Hazael, who when he was told by the Prophet Elisha what barbarous
cruelties he should one day be guilty of toward the people of Israel, when he
should come to be King of Syria, he abominated the very thought and mention of
them; Is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing? and yet, for all
this, we know he did it afterward. It Is true indeed when a sinner is first
tempted to the commission of a more gross and notorious sin, his conscience is
apt to boggle and start at it, he does it with great difficulty and regret; the
terrors of his own mind, and the fears of damnation, are very troublesome to
him: But this trouble wears off by degrees; and that which at first was
difficult, does by frequent practice and long custom become tolerable.

3. When a man has proceeded thus far, he begins to put off shame, one of the
greatest restraints from sin which God has laid upon humane nature. And when
this curb once falls off, there is then but little left to restrain and hold us
in. At first setting out upon a vicious course men are a little nice and
delicate, like young Travelers, who at first are offended at every speck of
dirt that lights upon them; but after they have been accustomed to it, and have
traveled a good while in foulways, it cease to be troublesome to them to be
dashed and bespattered.

4. After this, it is possible, men may come to approve their vices. For if
men's judgments do not command their Wills and restrain their lusts it is great
odds but in process of time the vicious inclinations of their Wills will put a
false bias upon their judgments: And then it is no wonder if men come to boast
of their sins, and to glory in their vices, when they are half persuaded that
they are generous and commendable qualities. Thus much is certain in
experience, that some men have gotten so perfect a habit of some sins, as not
to know and take notice many times when they commit them: As in the case of
swearing, which some men have so accustomed themselves to, that without any
consideration they do of course put an oath or two into every sentence that
comes from them. And it has been observed of some persons that they have told
an untruth so often, and averred it with so much confidence, till at last,
forgetting that it was a lie at first, they themselves have in process of time
believed it to be true.

5. From this pitch of wickedness men commonly proceed to draw in others, and
to make proselytes to their vices. Now this signifies not only a great
approbation of sin, but even a fondness for it, when men are not content to sin
upon their own single accounts, but they must turn zealous agents and factors
for the Devil; become teachers of sin and ministers of unrighteousness, and are
factiously concerned to propagate together with their Atheistical principles
their lewd practices, and to draw followers and Disciples after them.

And when they are arrived to this height, it is natural for them to hate
reproof, and to resist the means of their recovery; to quarrel against all the
remedies that shall be offered to them, and to count those their greatest
enemies who have so much courage and kindness as to deal plainly with them, and
to tell them the truth. And then all the wise counsels of Gods Word, and the
most gentle and prudent admonitions in the world, when they are tendered to
such persons, serve only to provoke their scorn or their passion. And surely
that man is in a sad case, that is so disposed that in all probability he will
turn the most effectual means of his amendment into the occasion of new and
greater sins.

But that which renders the condition of such persons much more sad and
deplorable is, that all this while God is withdrawing his grace from them. For
every degree of sin causes the Holy Spirit of God with all his blessed motions
and assistances to retire farther from them: And not only so, but the Devil
(that evil Spirit which the Scripture tells us, works effectually in the
children of disobedience) does according as men improve in wickedness, get a
greater and a more established dominion over them. For as they who are
reclaimed from an evil course, are said in Scripture to be rescued out of the
snare of the Devil, and to be turned from the power of Satan unto God; So, on
the other hand, the farther men advance in the ways of sin, so much the farther
they depart from God, from under the influences of his grace, and the care of
his protection and providence; and they give the Devil, (who is not apt to
neglect his advantages upon them) greater opportunities every day to gain the
firmer possession of them.

And thus, by passing from one degree of sin to another, the sinner becomes
hardened in his wickedness, and does insensibly slide into that state in which
without a miraculous grace of God he is like for ever to continue. For the mind
of man, after it has been long accustomed to evil, and is once grown old in
vice, is almost as hard to be rectified, as it is to recover a body bowed down
with age to its first streightness. The Scripture speaks of some that commit
sin with greediness, and that drink up iniquity as the Ox drinks up water,
with a mighty appetite and thirst, as if they were not able to refrain from it.
And to express to us the miserable condition of such persons, it represents
them as perfect slaves to their vices, that have sold themselves to do
wickedness, and are led captive by Satan at his pleasure. And when men have
brought themselves to this pass, they are almost under a fatal necessity of
sinning on. I do not believe that God has absolutely predestined any man to
ruin; but by a long course of wilful sins men may in a sort predestinate
themselves to it, and choose wickedness so long till it almost become
necessary; and till they have brought themselves under all imaginable
disadvantages of contributing any thing toward their own recovery; being bound
in the chains of their own wickedness, and held in the cords of their sins:
Nay, like Sampson, not only bound by those lusts which they have embraced, but
likewise robbed of all their strength whereby they should break loose from
those bonds. God grant that none of us may ever have the woeful experience of
it: But I am horribly afraid it is too true, that a sinner may arrive to that
confirmed state of impiety as almost totally to lose his liberty to do better:
He may attain to that perfection in vice, as to continue to be a bad man upon
the same account that the Historian extravagantly says Cato was virtuous, Vell.
Patere.
quia aliter esse non potuit; because he could not be otherwise. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? It is the Scripture
comparison to set forth to us how hard a thing it is for a man to be brought to
goodness, that has been long accustomed to do evil. He that is thus deeply
engaged and entangled in a bad course, will scarce ever have the heart and
resolution to break loose from it, unless he be forced violently out of it by
some severe affliction, by a sharp sickness, or by a terrible calamity, or by
the present apprehensions of death and the terrors of a future Judgment. Nor
will these be effectual neither to change such a person, without an
extraordinary degree of Gods grace; which, considering the greatness and the
continuance of his provocations, he has very little reason to expect or hope
God should ever bestow upon him. Wretched man! that have brought thy self into
this miserable state, out of which there is but just a possibility left of thy
being rescued: that have neglected thy disease so long, till it is almost too
late to apply remedies: that have provoked God so far, and sinned to such a
prodigious height, that thou have reason almost to despair both of his grace
and assistance for thy repentance, and of his mercy for thy pardon. I speak not
this to discourage even the greatest of sinners from repentance. Though their
case be extremely difficult, yet it is not quite desperate. For those things
which seem impossible with men, are possible with God. But I speak it on
purpose to stop sinners in their course; and to discourage men from going on in
sin till they be hardened through the deceitfulness of it; and have brought
themselves by insensible degrees, into that dangerous and difficult state which
I have all this while been representing to you. I come now to the

II. Second thing I propounded, which was; from this consideration to show what
great reason and need there is to warn men of this danger; and to endeavor to
rescue them out of it. The Apostle directs this precept to all Christians.
Exhort one another daily, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin. That is, lest you be hardened by degrees, and be finally ruined. And
surely, every man is concerned to do what in him lies to rescue his brother
from so imminent a danger; It is every ones place and duty to endeavor to save
those whom he sees ready to perish: Much more does it concern those who are
peculiarly set apart for this work; I mean, the Ministers of Gods holy Word;
whose proper office and business it is to exhort and warn every man day and
night; who are set as watchmen to the house of Israel; and whose blood, in case
any of them miscarry through our neglect, shall be required at our hands. So
that if we believe the threatenings of God, which we declare to others; if we
have any apprehension of the dreadful misery of another world; if we have any
sense of our own duty and safety; if we have any pity for perishing souls, we
cannot but be very importunate with sinners to look about them, and to consider
their danger, and to bethink themselves seriously of the miserable event and
issue of a wicked life: We cannot but be earnest with them to break off their
sins, and to give glory to God by repentance, before darkness come, and their
feet stumble upon the dark mountains. When we are convinced more fully than we
can desire, that misery and destruction are in their ways; when we plainly see
the evil day hasting toward them a-pace, and destruction coming upon them like
a whirlwind; heaven above threatening them, and hell beneath moving her self to
meet them at their coming, can we possiby do less than to warn such persons to
flee from the wrath which is to come, and out of a sad apprehension of the
danger that hangs over them, to caution them against it, and endeavor with all
our might to rescue them from the misery which is ready to swallow them up?
Indeed one would be apt to think it a very vain thing to dissuade men from
being miserable; to use great vehemence of argument to hinder a man from
leaping into a pit, or from running into the fire; to take great pains to argue
a sick man into a desire of health, and to make a prisoner contented to have
his shackles knocked off, and to be set at liberty; one would think all this
were perfectly needless: But yet we see in experience sin is a thing of so
stupifying a nature, as to make men insensible of their danger, although it be
so near, and so terrible. It is not so with men in other cases: When we labor
of any bodily distemper, it is much to find a man that is patient of his
disease; but when our souls are mortally sick, that we should be contented with
our condition, and fond of our disease, that we should fight with our
Physician, and spurn at our remedy; this surely is the height of distraction,
for men to be thus absolutely bent upon their own ruin, and to resolve to make
away themselves forever. And we who are the Messengers of God to men, must be
born of the rocks, and have hearts harder than the nether millstone, if we can
patiently look on and endure to see men perish, without using our utmost
endeavor to save them. Therefore I shall in the

III. Third and last place apply my self to this work of Exhortation, the duty
commanded here in the Text. And here I shall address my self to two sorts of
persons.

1. To persuade those who are yet innocent of great crimes, to resist the
beginnings of sin, lest it gain upon them by degrees.

2. To press and urge those that are already entered upon a wicked course, that
they would make haste out of this dangerous state; lest, at last, they be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

1. To persuade those who are yet in some measure innocent, to resist the
beginnings of sin lest it gain upon them by degrees. Vice may easily be
discouraged at first. It Is like a slight disease; which is easy to be cured,
but dangerous to be neglected. The first approaches of sin and temptation are
usually very modest; but if they be not discountenanced they will soon grow
upon us, and make bolder attempts. Every inclination to sin, every compliance
with temptation is a going down the hill: While we keep our standing we may
command our selves; but if we once put our selves into violent motion downward,
we cannot stop when we please.

Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit -- All Vice stands upon a Precipice; and to
engage in any sinful course, is to run down the hill. And if we once let loose
the propensions of our nature, we cannot gather in the reins and govern them as
we please: If we give way to presumptuous sins, they will quickly get dominion
over us. It is much easier not to begin a bad course, than to put a stop to our
selves after we have begun it. Stulta res est nequitiae modus. Seneca.
It Is a fond thing for a man to think to set bounds to himself in any thing
that is bad; to resolve to sin in number, weight and measure, with great
temperance and discretion, and government of himself: That he will commit this
sin, and then give over; entertain but this one temptation, and after that he
will shut the door and admit of no more. Our corrupt hearts when they are once
in motion, they are like the raging sea, to which we set no bounds, nor say to
it hitherto thou shall go and no further. Sin is very cunning and deceitful,
and does strangely gain upon men when they once give way to it. It is of a very
bewitching nature, and has strange arts of address and insinuation: The giving
way to a small sin does marvellously prepare and dispose a man for a greater:
By giving way to one little vice after another, the strongest resolution may be
broken. For though it be not to be snapt in sunder at once, yet by this means
it is untwisted by degrees, and then it is easy to break it one thread after
another. It Is scarce imaginable of what force one sinful action is to produce
more: For sin is very teeming and fruitful; and though there be no blessing
annexed to it, yet it does strangely increase and multiply. As there is a
connection of one virtue with another, so vices are linkt together, and one sin
draws many after it. When the Devil tempts a man to commit any wickedness, he
does as it were lay a long train of sins; and if the first temptation take,
they give fire to one another. Let us then resist the beginnings of sin;
because then we have most power, and sin has least. This is the first.

2. To persuade those who are already engaged in a wicked course, to make haste
out of this dangerous state. And there is no other way to get out of it but by
repentance; that is, by a real change and reformation of our lives; for herein
the nature of true repentance does consist. And without this all the devices
which men use, to get rid of the guilt of their sins, are vain and to no
purpose. It Is not to be done by a formal confession and absolution, nor by a
long pilgrimage, nor by one of those little Tickets from Rome, which they call
Indulgences. A wise man would much sooner persuade himself that God would not
at all punish the sins of men, than that he would forgive them so easily, and
receive great offenders to favor upon such slight terms. Let us not deceive
our selves; there is one plain way to Heaven, viz. sincere repentance, and a
holy life; and there is no getting thither by tricks. And without this change
of our lives, all our sorrow, and fasting, and humiliation for sin, which at
this season we make profession of, will signify nothing. There is an excellent
passage of the Son of Syrach to this purpose, Eccles. 34.25, 26, He that
washes himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again, what
avails his washing? so is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and goes
again and does the same things, who will hear his prayer, or what does his
humbling profit him? There is this plain difference between trouble for sin and
repentance; sorrow only respects sins past, but repentance is chiefly
preventive of sins for the future: And God therefore requires that we should be
troubled for our sins, that we may resolve to leave them.

And to oblige us to a vigorous and speedy resolution in this matter, let us
consider that we have engaged too far already in a bad course; and that every
day our retreat will grow more dangerous and difficult; that by our delays we
make work for a sadder and longer repentance, than that which we do now so
studiously decline: Let us consider likewise, that our life is concerned in the
case; that except we repent and turn, we shall die; and that the evil day may
overtake us, while we are deliberating whether we should avoid it or not: that
vice is so far from being mortified by age, that by every days continuance in
it we increase the power of it; and so much strength as we add to our disease,
we certainly take from our selves: And this is a double weakening of us, when we
do not only lose our own strength, but the enemy gets it, and imploys it
against us. The deceitfulness of sin appears in nothing more than in keeping
men off from this necessary work, and persuading them to hazard all upon the
unreasonable hopes of the mercy of God, and the uncertain resolution of a
future repentance. I do not think there are any here but do either believe, or
at least are vehemently afraid that there is another life after this; and that
a wicked life, without repentance, must unavoidably make them miserable in
another world; and that to cast off all to a deathbed repentance, puts things
upon a mighty hazard. And they have a great deal of reason to think so: For
alas, how unfit are most men at such a time for so great and serious a work as
repentance is, when they are unfit for the smallest matters: And how hard is it
for any man, then to be assured of the truth and reality of his repentance,
when there is no sufficient opportunity to make trial of the sincerity of it. I
deny not the possibility of the thing; but it is much to be feared that the
repentance of a dying sinner is usually but like the sorrow of a malefactor
when he is ready to be turned off; he is not troubled that he has offended the
Law, but he is troubled that he must die. For when death is ready to seize upon
the sinner, and he feels himself dropping into destruction, no wonder if then
the man's stomach come down, and he be contented to be saved; and seeing he must
stay no longer in this world, be desirous to go to Heaven rather than Hell; and
in order to that, be ready to give some testimonies of his repentance: no
wonder if when the rack is before him, this extort confession from him; and if
in hopes of a pardon he make many large promises of amendment, and freely
declare his resolurion of a new and better life. But then it is the hardest
thing in the world to judge, whether any thing of all this that is done, under
so great a fear and force, be real. For a sick man as he has lost his appetite
to the most pleasant meats and drinks, so likewise his sinful pleasures and
fleshly lusts are at the same time nauseous to him; and for the very same
reason: For sickness having altered the temper of his body, he has not at that
time any gust or relish for these things. And now he is resolved against sin,
just as a man that has no stomach is resolved against meat. But if the fit
were over, and death would but raise his siege, and remove his quarters a
little farther from him, it is to be feared that his former appetite would soon
return to him, and that he would sin with the same eagerness he did before.
Besides, how can we expect that God should accept of his repentance at such a
time; when we are conscious to our selves, that we did resolve to put off our
repentance till we could sin no longer. Can we think it fit for any man to say
thus to God in a dying hour; Lord, now the world leaves me, I come to thee. I
pray thee give me eternal life, who could never afford to give thee one good
day of my life: Grant that I may live with thee, and enjoy thee for ever, who
could never endure to think upon thee. I must confess that I could never be
persuaded to leave my sins out of love to thee, but now I repent of them for
fear of thee: I am conscious to my self that I would never do any thing for thy
sake; but yet I hope thy goodness is such, that thou will forgive all the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of my life, and accept of this forced
submission which I now make to thee. I pray thee do not at last frustrate and
disappoint me in this design which I have laid, of sinning while I live, and
getting to heaven when I die. Surely no man can think it fit to say thus to
God; and yet I am afraid this is the true interpretation of many a man's
repentance who has deferred it till he comes to die. I do not speak this to
discourage repentance even at that time. It is always the best thing we can do.
But I would by all means discourage men from putting off so necessary a work
till then. It Is true indeed when it is come to this, and a sinner finds himself
going out of the world, if he have been so foolish and so cruel to himself, as
to put things upon this last hazard; repentance is now the only thing that is
left for him to do; this is his last remedy, and the only refuge he has to fly
to: And this is that which the Minister in this case ought by all means to put
the man upon, and earnestly to persuade him to. But when we speak to men in
other circumstances, that are well and in health, we dare not for all the world
encourage them to venture their souls upon such an uncertainty. For to speak
the best of it, it is a very dangerous remedy; especially when men have
designedly contrived to rob God of the service of their best days, and to put
him off with a few unprofitable sighs and tears at the hour of death. I desire
to have as large apprehensions of the mercy of God as any man; but withal, I
am very sure that he is the hardest to be imposed upon of any one in the world.
And no man that has any worthy apprehensions of the Deity, can imagine him to
be so easy, as to forgive men upon the last word and intimation of their
minds; and to have such a fondness for offenders as would reflect upon the
prudence of any Magistrate and Governor upon earth. God grant that I may
sincerely endeavor to live a holy and virtuous life; and may have the comfort
of that when I come to die: And that I may never be so unwise as to venture all
my hopes of a blessed eternity upon a deathbed repentance.

I will conclude all with those excellent sayings of the Son of Syrach,
(Eccles. 5.6, 7.16.11, 12.18.21, 22, Say not, Gods mercy is great, and he will
be pacified for the multitude of my sins. For mercy and wrath is with him; he
is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure: And as his mercy is great,
so are his corrections also. Therefore make no tarrying to turn to the Lord,
and put not off from day to day: For suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come
forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed. Humble thy self before thou
be sick, and in the time of sins show repentance. Let nothing hinder thee to
pay thy vows in due time, and defer not till death to be justified.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, In April 1672.
1 Cor. III.15. But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.


THE Context is thus. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as
a wise Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds
thereon: but let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. For other
foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Now if any
man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay,
stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it;
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of
what sort it is. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; But he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

In these Words the Apostle speaks of a sort of persons, who held indeed the
foundation of Christianity, but built upon it such doctrines or practices as
would not bear the trial; which he expresses to us by wood, hay, and stubble,
which are not proof against the fire. Such a person, the Apostle tells us, has
brought himself into a very dangerous state, though he would not absolutely
deny the possibility of his salvation; He himself shall be saved, yet so as by
fire.

That by fire here, is not meant the fire of Purgatory, as some pretend (who
would be glad of any shadow of a Text of Scripture to countenance their own
dreams) I shall neither trouble you nor my self to manifest; since the particle
of similitude [(...)] plainly shows, that the Apostle did not intend an escape
out of the fire literally, but such an escape as men make out of a house or
Town that is on fire. Especially since very learned persons of the Church of
Rome do acknowledge, that Purgatory cannot be concluded from this Text; nay, all
that Estius contends for from this place is, that it cannot be concluded from
hence, that there is no Purgatory; which we never pretended, but only that this
Text does not prove it.

It is very well known, that this is a Proverbial phrase, used not only in
Scripture, but in profane Authors, to signify a narrow escape out of a great
danger. He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, (...), out of the fire. Just as
(...) is used 1 Pet. 3.20. where the Apostle speaking of the eight persons of
Noah's family, who escaped the flood, (...), they escaped out of the water. So
here this phrase is to be rendered in the Text, he himself shall escape, yet so
as out of the fire. The like expression you have, Amos 4.11, I have plucked them
as a firebrand out of the fire. And Jude 23, Others save with fear, plucking
them out of the fire. All which expressions signify the greatness of the
danger, and the difficulty of escaping it; as one who when his house at
midnight is set on fire, and being suddenly waked, leaps out of his bed, and
runs naked out of the doors, taking nothing that is within along with him, but
employing his whole care to save his body from the flames, as St. Chrysostom
upon another occasion expresses it. And so the Roman Orator Tully.
(who, it is likely did not think of Purgatory) uses this phrase; Quo ex
judicio, velut ex incendio, nudus effugit; From which Judgment or Sentence he
escaped naked, as it were out of a burning. And one of the Greek Orators
Aristides
tells us, That to save a man out of the fire, was a common proverbial speech.

From the words thus explained, the Observation that naturally arises is this,
That men may hold all the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, and yet may
superadd other things whereby they may greatly endanger their salvation. What
those things were, which some among the Corinthians built upon the foundation
of Christianity, whereby they endangered their Salvation, we may probably
conjecture, by what the Apostle reproves in this Epistle, as the tolerating of
incestuous marriages, communicating in Idol-feasts, etc. And especially by the
doctrine of the false Apostles, who at that time did so much disturb the peace
of most Christian Churches, and who are so often and so severely reflected upon
in this Epistle. And what their Doctrine was, we have an account Act. 15. viz.
that they imposed upon the Gentile Christians, Circumcision, and the
observation of the Jewish Law, teaching, that unless they were circumcised, and
kept the Law of Moses, they could not be saved. So that they did not only build
these Doctrines upon Christianity, but they made them equal with the
Foundation, saying, that unless men believed and practiced such things, they
could not be saved.

In speaking to this Observation, I shall reduce my discourse to these two
Heads.

1. I shall represent to you some Doctrines and Practices which have been built
upon the Foundation of Christianity, to the great hazard and danger of men's
salvation. And to be plain, I mean particularly by the Church of Rome.

2. I shall enquire, whether our granting a possibility of salvation (though
with great hazard) to those in the communion of the Roman Church, and their
denying it to us, be a reasonable argument and encouragement to any man to
betake himself to that Church.

And there is the more reason to consider these things, when so many seducing
Spirits are so active and busy to pervert men from the truth; and when we see
every day so many and their Religion so easily parted. For this reason these
two Considerations shall be the subject of the following Discourse.

I. First, We will consider some Doctrines and Practices which the Church of
Rome has built upon the foundation of Christianity, to the great hazard and
danger of men's salvation. It is not denied by the most judicious Protestants,
but that the Church of Rome do hold all the Articles of the Christian Faith
which are necessary to salvation. But that which we charge upon them, as a just
ground of our separation from them, is, the imposing of new Doctrines and
Practices upon Christians, as necessary to salvation, which were never taught
by our Savior, or his Apostles; and which are either directly contrary to the
Doctrine of Christianity, or too apparently destructive of a good life. And I
begin,

1. With their Doctrines. And, because I have no mind to aggravate lesser
matters, I will single out four or five points of Doctrine, which they have
added to the Christian Religion, and which were neither taught by our Savior
and his Apostles, nor owned in the first ages of Christianity. And the

First which I shall mention, and which being once admitted, makes way for as
many errors as they please to bring in, is, their Doctrine of Infallibility.
And this they are very stiff and peremptory in, though they are not agreed
among themselves, where this Infallibility is seated; whether in the Pope
alone, or a Council alone, or in both together, or in the diffusive body of
Christians. But they are sure they have it, though they know not where it is.

And is this no prejudice against it? can any man think, that this privilege
was at first conferred upon the Church of Rome, and that Christians in all Ages
did believe it, and had constant recourse to it, for determining their
differences, and yet that that very Church, which has enjoyed and used it so
long, should now be at a loss where to find it? Nothing could have fallen out
more unluckily, than that there should be such differences among them, about
that which they pretend to be the only means of ending all differences.

There is not the least intimation in Scripture of this privilege conferred upon
the Roman Church; nor do the Apostles, in all their Epistles, ever so much as
give the least direction to Christians to appeal to the Bishop of Rome for a
determination of the many differences, which even in those times happened among
them. And it is strange they should be so silent in this matter, when there
were so many occasions to speak of it, if our Savior had plainly appointed
such an infallible Judge of controversies, for this very end, to decide the
differences that should happen among Christians. It is strange, that the
ancient Fathers in their disputes with Heretics, should never appeal to this
Judge; nay, it is strange they should not constantly do it, in all cases, it
being so short and expedite a way for the ending of controversies. And this
very consideration to a wise man is instead of a thousand arguments, to
satisfy him that in those times no such thing was believed in the world.

Now this Doctrine of Infallibility, if it be not true, is of so much the more
pernicious consequence to Christianity, because the conceit of it does confirm
them that think they have it, in all their other errors; and gives them a
pretense of assuming an Authority to themselves, to impose their own fancies
and mistakes upon the whole Christian world.

2. Their Doctrine about Repentance; Which consists in confessing their sins to
the Priest; which if it be but accompanied with any degree of contrition, does
upon absolution received from the Priest put them into a state of salvation,
though they have lived the most lewd and debauched lives that can be imagined;
than which nothing can be more plainly destructive of a good life. For if this
be true, all the hazard that the most wicked man runs of his salvation, is only
the danger of so sudden a death as gives him no space for confession and
absolution. A case that happens so rarely, that any man that is strongly
addicted to his lusts, will be content to venture his salvation upon this
hazard; and all the arguments to a good life will be very insignificant to a
man that has a mind to be wicked, when remission of sins may be had upon such
cheap terms.

3. The Doctrine of Purgatory; By which they mean a state of temporary
punishments after this life, from which men may be released, and translated
into Heaven, by the prayers of the living, and the sacrifice of the Mass. That
this Doctrine was not known in the primitive Church, nor can be proved from
Scripture, we have the free acknowledgment of as learned and eminent men as any
of that Church; which is to acknowledge that it is a superstructure upon the
Christian Religion. And though in one sense, it be indeed a building of gold
and silver upon the foundation of Christianity, considering the vast revenues
which this Doctrine (and that of Indulgences, which depends upon it) brings
into that Church; yet I doubt not, but in the Apostles sense, it will be found
to be hay and stubble. But how groundless soever it be, it is too gainful a
Doctrine to be easily parted withal.

4. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation. A hard word, but I would to God that
were the worst of it; the thing is much more difficult. I have taken some pains
to consider other Religions that have been in the world, and I must freely
declare, that I never yet, in any of them, met with any Article or Proposition,
imposed upon the belief of men, half so unreasonable and hard to be believed as
this is: And yet this, in the Romish Church, is esteemed one of the most
principal Articles of the Christian Faith; though there is no more certain
foundation for it in Scripture, than for our Saviors being substantially
changed into all those things which are said of him, as that he is a rock, a
vine, a door, and a hundred other things.

But this is not all. This Doctrine has not only no certain Foundation in
Scripture, but I have a far heavier charge against it, namely, that it
undermines the very foundation of Christianity it self And surely nothing
ought to be admitted to be a part of the Christian Doctrine, which destroys the
reason of our belief of the whole. And that this Doctrine does so, will appear
evidently, if we consider what was the main argument which the Apostles used to
convince the world of the truth of Christianity; and that was this, That our
blessed Savior, the Author of this Doctrine, wrought such and such miracles,
and particularly that he rose again from the dead: And this they proved,
because they were eyewitnesses of his miracles, and had seen him and conversed
with him after he was risen from the dead. But what if their senses did deceive
them in this matter? then it cannot be denied, but that the main proof of
Christianity falls to the ground.

Well! We will now suppose (as the Church of Rome does) Transubstantiation to
have been one principal part of the Christian Doctrine, which the Apostles
preached. But if this Doctrine be true, then all men's senses are deceived in a
plain sensible matter, wherein it is as hard for them to be deceived, as in any
thing in the world: For two things can hardly be imagined more different, than
a little bit of water, and the whole body of a man.

So that the Apostles persuading men to believe this Doctrine, persuaded them
not to trust their senses, and yet the argument which they used to persuade
them to this was built upon the direct contrary principle, that men's senses are
to be trusted. For if they be not, then notwithstanding all the evidence the
Apostles offered for the resurrection of our Savior, he might not be risen;
and so the faith of Christians was vain. So that they represent the Apostles as
absurdly as is possible, viz. going about to persuade men out of their senses,
by virtue of an argument, the whole strength whereof depends upon the certainty
of sense.

And now the matter is brought to a fair issue. If the testimony of sense be to
be relied upon, then Transubstantiation is false: If it be not, then no man is
sure that Christianity is true. For the utmost assurance that the Apostles had
of the truth of Christianity, was the testimony of their own senses concerning
our Saviors miracles; and this testimony every man has against
Transubstantiation. From whence it plainly follows, that no man (no not the
Apostles themselves) had more reason to believe Christianity to be true, than
every man has to believe Transubstantiation to be false. And we who did not
see our Saviors Miracles (as the Apostles did) and have only a credible
relation of them, but do see the Sacrament, have less evidence of the truth of
Christianity than of the falsehood of Transubstantiation.

But cannot God impose upon the senses of men, and represent things to them
otherwise than they are? Yes, undoubtedly. And if he has revealed that he does
this, are we not to believe him? Most certainly. But then we ought to be
assured that he has made such a Revelation; which Assurance no man can have,
the certainty of sense being taken away.

I shall press the business a little farther. Supposing the Scripture to be a
Divine Revelation, and that these words [ This is my Body] if they be in
Scripture, must necessarily be taken in the strict and literal sense, I ask
now, What greater evidence any man has, that these words [ This is my Body] are
in the Bible, than every man has that the Bread is not changed in the
Sacrament? Nay no man has so much; for we have only the evidence of one sense
that these words are in the Bible, but that the Bread is not changed we have
the concurring testimony of several of our senses. In a word, if this be once
admitted, that the Senses of all men are deceived in one of the most plain
sensible matters that can be, there is no certain means left either to convey
or prove a Divine Revelation to men; nor is there any way to confute the
grossest impostures in the World: For if the clear evidence of all man's senses
be not sufficient for this purpose, let any man, if he can, find a better and
more convincing argument.

5. I will instance but in one Doctrine more; And that shall be, their Doctrine
of deposing Kings in case of Heresy, and absolving their Subjects from their
Allegiance to them. And this is not a mere speculative Doctrine, but has been
put in practice many a time by the Bishops of Rome, as every one knows that is
versed in History. For the troubles and confusions which were occasioned by
this very thing, make up a good part of the History of several Ages.

I hope no body expects that I should take the pains to show, that this was not
the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, nor of the Primitive Christians.
The Papists are many of them so far from pretending this, that in some times
and places, when it is not seasonable and for their purpose, we have much a-do
to persuade them that ever it was their Doctrine. But if Transubstantiation be
their Doctrine, this is; for they came both out of the same Forge, I mean the
Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the Third. And if (as they tell us)
Transubstantiation was then established, so was this. And indeed one would
think they were Twins, and brought forth at the same time, they are so like one
another, that is, both of them so monstrously unreasonable.

II. I come now in the second place, to consider some Practices of the Church
of Rome; which I am afraid will prove as bad as her Doctrines. I shall instance
in these five.

1. Their celebrating of their Divine service in an unknown tongue. And that
not only contrary to the practice of the primitive Church, and to the great end
and design of Religious worship, which is the edification of those who are
concerned in it, (and it is hard to imagine how men can be edified by what they
do not understand) but likewise in direct contradiction to St. Paul, who has
no less than a whole Chapter, wherein he confutes this practice as fully, and
condemns it as plainly, as any thing is condemned in the whole Bible. And they
that can have the face to maintain that this practice was not condemned by St.
Paul, or that it was allowed and used in the first Ages of Christianity, need
not be ashamed to set up for the defense of any paradox in the World.

2. The Communion in one kind. And that notwithstanding, that even by their own
acknowledgment, our Savior instituted it in both kinds, and the primitive
Church administered it in both kinds. This I must acknowledge is no addition to
Christianity, but a sacrilegious taking away of an essential part of the
Sacrament. For the Cup is as essential a part of the institution as the Bread;
and they might as well, and by the same authority, take away the one as the
other, and both as well as either.

3. Their worshipping of Images. Which practice (notwithstanding all their
distinctions about it, which are no other but what the Heathens used in the
same case) is as point blank against the second Commandment, as a deliberate
and malicious killing of a man is against the sixth. But if the case be so
plain, a man would think that at least the Teachers and Guides of that Church
should be sensible of it. Why, they are so, and afraid the people should be so
too; And therefore in their ordinary Catechisms and Manuals of Devotion, they
leave out the second Commandment, and divide the tenth into two to make up the
number; lest if the common people should know it, their Consciences should
start at the doing of a thing so directly contrary to the plain command of God.

4. The worshipping of the bread and wine in the Eucharist, out of a false and
groundless persuasion, that they are substantially changed into the body and
blood of Christ. Which if it be not true (and it has good fortune if it be,
for certainly it is one of the most incredible things in the whole World) then
by the confession of several of their own learned Writers, they are guilty of
gross idolatry.

5. The worship and invocation of Saints and Angels; and particularly of the
Virgin Mary, which has now for some Ages been a principal part of their
Religion. Now a man may justly wonder that so considerable a part of Religion,
as they make this to be, should have no manner of foundation in the Scripture.
Does our Savior any-where speak one word concerning the worshipping of Her?
Nay, does he not take all occasions to restrain all extravagant apprehensions
and imaginations concerning the honor due to Her, as foreseeing the degeneracy
of the Church in this thing? When he was told that his Mother and Brethren were
without: Who (says he) are my mother and my brethren? He that does the will of
my Father, the same is my mother, and sister, and brother. And when the Woman
brake forth into that rapture concerning the blessed Mother of our Lord,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck! Our
Savior diverts to another thing, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. Does either our Savior or his Apostles in all their
particular Precepts and directions concerning Prayer, and the manner of it, and
by whom we are to address our selves to God, give the least intimation of
praying to the Virgin Mary, or making use of her Mediation? And can any man
believe, that if this had been the practice of the Church from the beginning,
our Savior and his Apostles would have been so silent about so considerable a
part of Religion; Insomuch that in all the Epistles of the Apostles I do not
remember that her Name is so much as once mentioned? And yet the worship of her
is at this day in the Church of Rome, and has been so for several Ages, a main
part of their public worship, yea and of their private devotions too; in which
it is usual with them to say ten Ave Mary's for one Pater Noster, that is, for
one Prayer they make to Almighty God, they make ten addresses to the blessed
Virgin; for that is the proportion observed in their Rosaries. He that
considers this, and had never seen the Bible, would have been apt to think,
that there had been more said concerning Her in Scripture, than either
concerning God, or our blessed Savior; and that the New Testament were full
from one end to the other of precepts and exhortations to the worshipping of
Her; and yet when all is done, I challenge any man to show me so much as one
sentence in the whole Bible that sounds that way. And there is as little in the
Christian Writers of the first three hundred years. The truth is, this practice
began to creep in among some superstitious people about the middle of the
fourth century; And I remember particularly, that Epiphanius, who lived about
that time, calls it the Heresy of the Women.

And thus I have given you some Instances of several Doctrines and Practices,
which the Church of Rome have built upon the Foundation of Christianity. Much
more might have been said of them; but from what has been said, any man may
easily discern how dangerous they are to the salvation of men.

I proceed now in the Second place.

II. To consider, whether our granting a possibility of salvation, though with
great hazard, to those in the Communion of the Roman Church, and their denying
it to us, be a sufficient argument and encouragement to any man to quit our
Church and go to theirs. And there is the more need to consider this, because
this is the great popular argument, wherewith the emissaries and agents of that
Church are wont to assault our people. Your Church (say they) grants that a
Papist may be saved; Ours denies that a Protestant can be saved: therefore it
is safest to be of our Church, in which salvation, by the acknowledgment of
both sides, is possible.

For answer to this, I shall endeavor to show, that this is so far from being
a good argument, that it is so intolerably weak and sophistical, that any
considerate man ought to be ashamed to be caught by it. For either it is good
of it self, and sufficient to persuade a man to relinquish our Church, and to
pass over to theirs, without entering into the merits of the cause on either
side, and without comparing the Doctrines and Practices of both the Churches
together, or it is not. If it be not sufficient of it self to persuade a man to
leave our Church, without comparing the Doctrines on both sides, then it is to
no purpose, and there is nothing got by it. For if upon examination and
comparing of Doctrines, the one appear to be true, and the other false, this
alone is sufficient inducement to any man to cleave to that Church where the
true Doctrine is found; and then there is no need of this argument.

If it be said, that this argument is good in it self, without the examination
of the Doctrines of both Churches; this seems a very strange thing for any man
to affirm, That it is reason enough to a man to be of any Church, whatever her
Doctrines and Practices be, if she do but damn those that differ from her, and
if the Church that differs from her do but allow a possibility of salvation in
her Communion.

But they who use this argument, pretend that it is sufficient of it self; and
therefore I shall apply my self to show, as briefly and plainly as I can, the
miserable weakness and insufficiency of it, to satisfy any man's conscience or
prudence to change his Religion. And to this end I shall, 1. Show the weakness
of the principle upon which this argument relies. 2. Give some parallel
instances by which it will clearly appear that it concludes false. 3. I shall
take notice of some gross absurdities that follow from it. 4. Show how unfit it
is to work upon those to whom it is propounded. And 5. How improper it is to be
urged by those that make use of it.


I. I shall show the weakness of the principle upon which this argument relies;
And that is this, That whatever different parties in Religion agree in, is
safest to be chosen. The true consequence of which principle, if it be driven
to the head, is, to persuade men to forsake Christianity, and to make them take
up in the principles of natural Religion, for in these all Religions do agree.
For if this principle be true, and signify any thing, it is dangerous to
embrace any thing wherein the several parties in Religion differ; because that
only is safe and prudent to be chosen wherein all agree. So that this argument,
if the foundation of it be good, will persuade further than those who make use
of it desire it should do; for it will not only make men forsake the Protestant
Religion, but Popery too; and which is much more considerable, Christianity it
self.

II. I will give some parallel instances, by which it will clearly be seen that
this argument concludes false. The Donatists denied the Baptism of the
Catholics to be good, but the Catholics acknowledged the Baptism of the
Donatists to be valid. So that both sides were agreed, that the Baptism of the
Donatists was good; therefore the safest way for St. Austin and other
Catholics (according to this argument) was to be Baptized again by the
Donatists, because by the acknowledgment of both sides, Baptism among them was
valid.

But to come nearer to the Church of Rome. Several in that Church hold the
personal Infallibility of the Pope, and the lawfulness of deposing and killing
Kings for Heresy, to be de fide, that is, necessary Articles of Faith, and
consequently, that whoever does not believe them, cannot be saved. But a great
many Papists, though they believe these things to be no matters of Faith, yet
they think those that hold them may be saved, and they are generally very
favorable toward them. But now, according to this argument, they ought all to
be of their opinion in these points, because both sides are agreed, that they
that hold them may be saved; but one side positively says, that men cannot be
saved if they do not hold them.

But my Text furnishes me with as good an instance to this purpose as can be
desired. St. Paul here in the Text acknowledges the possibility of the
salvation of those who built hay and stubble upon the foundation of
Christianity; that they might be saved, though with great difficulty, and, as
it were, out of the fire. But now among those builders with hay and stubble,
there were those who denied the possibility of St. Paul's salvation, and of
those who were of his mind. We are told of some who built the Jewish Ceremonies
and observances upon the foundation of Christianity, and said, that unless men
were Circumcised and kept the Law of Moses, they could not be saved. So that by
this argument St. Paul and his followers ought to have gone over to those
Judaizing Christians, because it was acknowledged on both sides that they might
be saved. But these Judaizing Christians were as uncharitable to St. Paul and
other Christians, as the Church of Rome is now to us; for they said positively,
that they could not be saved. But can any man think, that St. Paul would have
been moved by this argument, to leave a safe and certain way of salvation, for
that which was only possible, and that with great difficulty and hazard? The
argument, you see, is the very same, and yet it concludes the wrong way; which
plainly shows, that it is a contingent argument, and concludes uncertainly and
by chance, and therefore no man ought to be moved by it.

III. I shall take notice of some gross absurdities that follow from it. I
shall mention but these two:

1. According to this principle, it is always safest to be on the uncharitable
side. And yet uncharitableness is as bad an evidence, either of a true
Christian, or a true Church, as a man would wish. Charity is one of the most
essential marks of Christianity; and what the Apostle says of particular
Christians, is as true of whole Churches, that though they have all Faith, yet
if they have not Charity, they are nothing.

I grant that no Charity teaches men to see others damned, and not to tell
them the danger of their condition. But it is to be considered, that the
damning of men is a very hard thing; and therefore whenever we do it, the case
must be wonderfully plain. And is it so in this matter? They of the Church of
Rome cannot deny, but that we embrace all the Doctrines of our Savior,
contained in the Apostles Creed, and determined by the Four first General
Councils: And yet they will not allow this, and a good life, to put us within a
possibility of salvation, because we will not submit to all the innovations
they would impose upon us. And yet I think there is scarce any Doctrine or
Practice in difference between them and us, which some or other of their most
learned Writers have not acknowledged, either not to be sufficiently contained
in Scripture, or not to have been held and practiced by the primitive Church;
so that nothing can excuse their uncharitableness toward us. And they pay dear
for the little advantage they get by this argument; for they do what in them
lies, to make themselves no Christians, that they may prove themselves the
truer and more Christian Church; A medium which we do not desire to make use of.

2. If this argument were good, then by this trick a man may bring over all the
world to agree with him in an error, which another does not account damnable,
whatever it be; provided he do but damn all those that do not hold it; and
there wants nothing but confidence and uncharitableness to do this. But is
there any sense, that another man's boldness and want of charity should be an
argument to move me to be of his opinion? I cannot illustrate this better, than
by the difference between a skilful Physician and a Mountebank. A learned and
skilful Physician is modest, and speaks justly of things: He says, that such a
method of cure which he has directed is safe, and withal, that that which the
Mountebank prescribes, may possibly do the work, but there is great hazard and
danger in it: But the Mountebank, who never talks of any thing less then
infallible cures, (and always the more Mountebank, the stronger pretense to
infallibility), he is positive that that method which the Physician prescribes
will destroy the patient, but his receipt is infallible, and never fails. Is
there any reason in this case, that this man should carry it, merely by his
confidence? And yet if this argument be good, the safest way is to reject the
Physicians advice, and to stick to the Mountebanks. For both sides are agreed,
that there is a possibility of cure in the Mountebank's method, but not in the
Physician's; and so the whole force of the argument lies in the confidence of
an ignorant man.

IV. This argument is very unfit to work upon those to whom it is propounded:
For either they believe we say true in this, or not. If they think we do not,
they have no reason to be moved by what we say. If they think we do, why do
they not take in all that we say in this matter? Namely, that though it be
possible for some in the communion of the Roman Church to be saved, yet it is
very hazardous; and that they are in a safe condition already in our Church.
And why then should a bare possibility, accompanied with infinite and apparent
hazard, be an argument to any man to run into that danger?

Lastly, This argument is very improper to be urged by those who make use of
it. Half of the strength of it lies in this, that we Protestants acknowledge,
that it is possible a Papist may be saved. But why should they lay any stress
upon this? What matter is it, what we Heretics say, who are so damnably
mistaken in all other things? Methinks, if there were no other reason, yet
because we say it, it should seem to them to be unlikely to be true. But I
perceive, when it serves for their purpose we have some little credit and
authority among them.

By this time I hope every one is in some measure satisfied of the weakness of
this argument, which is so transparent, that no wise man can honestly use it,
and he must have a very odd understanding that can be cheated by it. The truth
is, it is a casual and contingent argument, and sometimes it concludes right,
and oftener wrong; and therefore no prudent man can be moved by it, except only
in one case, when all things are so equal on both sides, that there is nothing
else in the whole world to determine him; which surely can never happen in
matters of Religion necessary to be believed. No man is so weak, as not to
consider in the change of his Religion, the merits of the cause it self; as not
to examine the Doctrines and Practices of the Churches on both sides; as not to
take notice of the confidence and Charity of both Parties, together with all
other things which ought to move a conscientious and a prudent man: And if upon
enquiry there appear to be a clear advantage on either side, then this argument
is needless, and comes too late, because the work is already done without it.

Besides, that the great hazard of salvation in the Roman Church (which we
declare upon account of the Doctrines and Practices which I have mentioned)
ought to deter any man much more from that Religion, than the acknowledged
possibility of salvation in it, ought to encourage any man to the embracing of
it: Never did any Christian Church build so much hay and stubble upon the
foundation of Christianity; and therefore those that are saved in it, must be
saved, as it were, out of the fire. And though Purgatory be not meant in the
Text, yet it is a Doctrine very well suited to their manner of building; for
there is need of an ignis purgatorius, of a fire to try their work what it is,
and to burn up their hay and stubble. And I have so much Charity (and I desire
always to have it) as to hope, that a great many among them who live piously,
and have been almost inevitably detained in that Church by the prejudice of
education and an invincible ignorance, will upon a general repentance find
mercy with God; and though their work suffer loss and be burnt, yet they
themselves may escape, as out of the fire. But as for those who have had the
opportunities of coming to the knowledge of the truth, if they continue in the
errors of that Church, or apostatize from the truth, I think their condition so
far from being safe, that there must be extraordinary favorable circumstances
in their case to give a man hopes of their salvation.

I have now done with the two things I propounded to speak to. And I am sorry
that the necessary defense of our Religion, against the restless importunities
and attempts of our adversaries upon all sorts of persons, has engaged me to
spend so much time in matters of dispute, which I had much rather have employed
in another way. Many of you can be my witnesses, that I have constantly made it
my business, in this great Presence and Assembly, to plead against the
impieties and wickedness of men; and have endeavored, by the best arguments I
could think of, to gain men over to a firm belief and serious practice of the
main things of Religion. And, I do assure you, I had much rather persuade any
one to be a good man, than to be of any party or denomination of Christians
whatsoever. For I doubt not, but the belief of the ancient Creed, provided we
entertain nothing that is destructive of it, together with a good life, will
certainly save a man; and without this no man can have reasonable hopes of
salvation, no not in an infallible Church, if there were any such to be found
in the world.

I have been, according to my opportunities, not a negligent observer of the
genius and humor of the several Sects and Professions in Religion. And upon
the whole matter, I do in my conscience believe the Church of England to be the
best constituted Church this day in the world; and that, as to the main, the
Doctrine, and Government, and Worship of it, are excellently framed to make men
soberly Religious: Securing men on the one hand, from the wild freaks of
Enthusiasm; and on the other, from the gross follies of Superstition. And our
Church has this peculiar advantage above several Professions that we know in
the world, that it acknowledges a due and just subordination to the civil
Authority, and has always been untainted in its loyalty.

And now shall every trifling consideration be sufficient to move a man to
relinquish such a Church? There is no greater disparagement to a man's
understanding, no greater argument of a light and ungenerous mind, than rashly
to change ones Religion. Religion is our greatest concernment of all other, and
it is not every little argument, no nor a great noise about infallibility,
nothing but very plain and convincing evidence, that should sway a man in this
case. But they are utterly inexcusable, who make a change of such concernment,
upon the insinuations of one side only, without ever hearing what can be said
for the Church they were baptized and brought up in, before they leave it. They
that can yield thus easily to the impressions of every one that has a design
and interest to make Proselytes, may at this rate of discretion change their
Religion twice a day, and instead of morning and evening Prayer, they may have
a morning and an evening Religion.

Therefore, for Gods sake, and for our own Souls sake, and for the sake of our
Reputation, let us consider and show our selves men; Let us not suffer our
selves to be shaken and carried away with every wind; Let us not run our selves
into danger when we may be safe. Let us stick to the foundation of Religion,
the Articles of our common belief, and build upon them gold, and silver, and
precious stones, I mean, the virtues and actions of a good life; and if we
would do this, we should not be apt to set such a value upon hay and stubble.
If we would sincerely endeavor to live holy and virtuous lives, we should not
need to cast about for a Religion, which may furnish us with easy and indirect
ways to get to Heaven.

I will conclude all with the Apostles Exhortation; Wherefore, my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord.

Now the God of peace, which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom he Glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, IN LENT, March 20th 1673^
Psalm. CXIX.156. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them.


IN these words there are two things contained, The Description of a good man,
and the Reward of his goodness. 1. The Description of a good man. He is said to
be one that loves the Law of God, that is, that loves to meditate upon it, and
to practice it. 2. The Reward of his goodness; Great peace have they that love
thy Law. The word Peace is many times used in Scripture in a very large sense,
so as to comprehend all kind of happiness: sometimes it signifies outward peace
and quiet in opposition to war and contention; and sometimes inward peace and
contentment in opposition to inward trouble and anguish. I understand the Text
chiefly in this last sense, not wholly excluding either of the other.

My design at present from these words is, to recommend Religion to men from
the consideration of that inward peace and pleasure which attends it. And
surely nothing can be said more to the advantage of Religion in the opinion of
considerate men than this. For the aim of all Philosophy, and the great search
of wise men, has been how to attain peace and tranquillity of mind. And if
Religion be able to give this, a greater commendation need not be given to
Religion.

But before I enter upon this Argument, I shall premise two things by way of
Caution.

First, That these kind of Observations are not to be taken too strictly and
rigorously, as if they never failed in any one instance. Aristotle observed
long since, that moral and proverbial sayings are understood to be true
generally and for the most part; and that is all the truth that is to be
expected in them: As, when Solomon says, Train up a child in the way wherein he
should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it: This is not to be so
taken, as if no child that is piously educated did ever miscarry afterward,
but that the good education of children is the best way to make good men, and
commonly approved to be so by experience. So here, when it is said that great
peace have they that love Gods Law; the meaning is, that Religion has
generally this effect, though in some cases, and as to some persons, it may be
accidentally hindered.

Secondly, When I say that Religion gives peace and tranquillity to our minds,
this is chiefly to be understood of a Religious state, in which a man is well
settled and confirmed, and not of our first entrance into it, for that is more
or less troublesome according as we make it. If we begin a religious course
betimes, before we have contracted any great guilt, and before the habits of
sin be grown strong in us, the work goes on easily, without any great conflict
or resistance. But the case is otherwise when a man breaks off from a wicked
life, and becomes religious from the direct contrary course, in which he has
been long and deeply engaged. In this case no man is so unreasonable as to
deny, that there is a great deal of sensible trouble and difficulty in the
making of this change; but when it is once made, peace and comfort will spring
up by degrees, and daily increase, as we grow more confirmed and established in
a good course.

These two things being premised, I shall now endeavor to show, that Religion
gives a man the greatest pleasure and satisfaction of mind, and that there is
no true peace, nor any comparable pleasure to be had in a contrary course. And
that from these two heads. From Testimony of Scripture; and from the Nature of
Religion, which is apt to produce peace and tranquillity of mind.

I. First, From Testimony of Scripture. I shall select some of those Texts
which are more full and express to this purpose, Job 22.21, speaking of God,
Acquaint thy self now with him, and be at peace. To acquaint our selves with
God, is a phrase of the same importance with coming to God, and seeking of him,
and many other like expressions in Scripture, which signify nothing else but
to become religious, Psalm. 37.38, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
for the end of that man is peace: Or, as these words are rendered, according to
the LXX. in our old Translation, Keep innocence, take heed to the thing that is
right, for that shall bring thee peace at the last. Prove. 3.17, Where Solomon
speaking of Wisdom, which with him is but another name for Religion, says, Her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Isa. 32.17; The
work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness
and assurance for ever. Matt. 11.28, 29, Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Now to come to Christ, is to become
his Disciples, to believe and practice his Doctrine; for so our Savior
explains himself in the next words; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and
ye shall find rest for your souls. Romans 2.10, Glory and honor and peace to
every man that works good.

And on the contray; the Scripture represents the condition of a sinner to be
full of trouble and disquiet. David, though he was a very good man, yet when he
had grievously offended God, the anguish of his mind was such, as even to
disorder and distemper his body, Psalm. 38.2, 3, 4, Thine arrows stick fast in
me, and thy hand presses me sore; there is no soundness in my flesh, because
of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin; for
mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. Isa. 57.20, 21, The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt; there is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked. And Isa. 59.7.8, Misery and destruction are in their paths,
and the way of peace they know not; they have made themselves crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. Romans 2.9, Tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of man that does evil.

You see how full and express the Scripture is in this matter. I come now in the

II. Second place, To give you a more particular account of this, from the
Nature of Religion, which is apt to produce peace and tranquillity of mind. And
that I shall do in these three particulars.

1. Religion is apt to remove the chief causes of inward trouble and disquiet.

2. It furnishes us with all the true causes of peace and tranquillity of mind.

3. The reflection upon a religious course of life, and all the actions of it,
does afterward yield great pleasure and satisfaction.

First, Religion is apt to remove the chief causes of inward trouble and
disquiet. The chief causes of inward trouble and discontent are these two,
Doubting and anxiety of mind, and Guilt of Conscience. Now Religion is apt to
free us from both these.

1. From Doubting and anxiety of mind. Irreligion and Atheism makes a man full
of doubts and jealousies whether he be in the right, and whether at last things
will not prove quite otherwise than he has rashly determined. For though a man
endeavor never so much to settle himself in the principles of Infidelity, and
to persuade his mind that there is no God, and consequently that there are no
rewards to be hoped for, nor punishments to be feared in another life; yet he
can never attain to a steady and unshaken persuasion of these things: And
however he may please himself with witty reasonings against the common belief
of mankind, and smart reparties to their arguments, and bold and pleasant
raillery about these matters; yet I dare say, no man ever sat down in a clear
and full satisfaction concerning them. For when he has done all that he can to
reason himself out of Religion, his conscience ever and anon recoyls upon him,
and his natural thoughts and apprehensions rise up against his reasonings, and
all his wit and subtilty is confuted and born down by a secret and strong
suspicion, which he can by no means get out of his mind, that things may be
otherwise.

And the reason hereof is plain, because all this is an endeavor against
nature, and those vigorous instincts which God has planted in the minds of men
to the contrary. For whenever our minds are free, and not violently hurried
away by passion, nor blinded by prejudice, they do of themselves return to
their first and most natural apprehensions of things. And this is the reason
why, when the Atheist falls into any great calamity, and is awakened to an
impartial consideration of things, by the apprehension of death and judgment,
and despairs of enjoying any longer those pleasures, for the sake of which he
has all this while rebelled against Religion, his courage presently sinks, and
all his arguments fail him, and his case is now too serious to admit of
jesting, and at the bottom of his soul he doubts of all that which he asserted
with so much confidence, and set so good a face upon before; and can find no
ease to his mind, but in retreating from his former principles, nor no hopes of
consolation for himself, but in acknowledging that God whom he has denied, and
imploring his mercy whom he has affronted.

This is always the case of these persons when they come to extremity; not to
mention the infinite checks and rebukes, which their own minds give them upon
other occasions; so that it is very seldom that these men have any tolerable
enjoyment of themselves, but are forced to run away from themselves into
company, and to stupify themselves by intemperance, that they may not feel the
fearful twitches and gripings of their own minds.

Whereas he who entertains the principles of Religion, and therein follows his
own natural apprehensions, and the general voice of mankind, and is not
conscious to himself, that he knowingly and wilfully lives contrary to these
principles, has no anxiety in his mind about these things; being verily
persuaded they are true, and that he has all the reason in the world to think
so; And if they should prove otherwise (which he has no cause to suspect) yet
he has this satisfaction, that he has taken the wisest course, and has
consulted his own present peace and future security, infinitely better than the
Atheist has done, in case he should prove to be mistaken. For it is a fatal
mistake to think there is no God, if there be one; but a mistake on the other
hand has no future bad consequences depending upon it; nor indeed any great
present inconvenience, Religion only restraining a man from doing some things,
from most of which it is good he should be restrained however: so that at the
worst, the religious man is only mistaken, but the Atheist is miserable if he
be mistaken: miserable beyond all imagination, and past all remedy.

2. Another, and indeed a principal cause of trouble and discontent to the
minds of men is Guilt. Now Guilt is a consciousness to our selves that we have
done amiss; and the very thought that we have done amiss is apt to lie very
cross in our minds, and to cause great anguish and confusion. Besides that
Guilt is always attended with Fear, which naturally springs up in the mind of
man from a secret apprehension of the mischief and inconvenience that his sin
will bring upon him, and of the vengeance that hangs over him from God, and
will overtake him either in this world, or the other.

And though the sinner, while he is in full health and prosperity, may make a
shift to divert and shake off these fears; yet they frequently return upon him,
and upon every little noise of danger, upon the apprehension of any calamity
that comes near him, his guilty mind is presently jealous that it is making
toward him, and is particularly levelled against him. For he is sensible that
there is a just power above him, to whose indignation he is continually liable,
and therefore he is always in fear of him; and how long soever he may have
escaped punishment in this world, he cannot but dread the vengeance of the
other; And these thoughts are a continual disturbance to his mind, and in the
midst of laughter make his heart heavy; And the longer he continues in a wicked
course, the more he multiplies the grounds and causes of his fears.

But now Religion frees a man from all this torment, either by preventing the
cause of it, or directing to the cure; either by preserving us from guilt, or
clearing us of it in case we have contracted it. It preserves us from guilt by
keeping us innocent; and in case we have offended, it clears us of it, by
leading us to repentance and the amendment of our lives; which is the only way
to recover the favor of God, and the peace of our own consciences, and to
secure us against all apprehension of danger from the divine Justice; though
not absolutely from all fear of punishment in this world, yet from that which
is the great danger of all, the condemnation and torment of the world to come.
And by this means a man's mind is settled in perfect peace, Religion freeing him
from those tormenting fears of the Divine displeasure, which he can upon no
other terms rid himself of; whereas the sinner is always sowing the seeds of
trouble in his own mind, and laying a foundation of continual discontent to
himself.

Secondly, As Religion removes the chief grounds of trouble and disquiet, so it
ministers to us all the true causes of peace and tranquillity of mind. Whoever
lives according to the rules of Religion, lays these three great foundations of
peace and comfort to himself.

1. He is satisfied that in being religious he does that which is most
reasonable.

2. That he secures himself against the greatest mischiefs and dangers, by
making God his Friend.

3. That upon the whole matter he does in all respects most effectually consult
and promote his own interest and happiness.

1. He is satisfied that he does that which is most reasonable. And it is no
small pleasure to be justified to our selves, to be satisfied that we are what
we ought to be, and do what in reason we ought to do; that which best becomes
us, and which according to the primitive intention of our Being is most
natural, for whatever is natural is pleasant. Now the practice of piety toward
God, and of every other grace and virtue which Religion teaches us, are things
reasonable in themselves, and what God when he made us, intended we should do.
And a man is then pleased with himself, and his own actions, when he does what
he is convinced he ought to do; and is then offended with himself, when he goes
against the light of his own mind, by neglecting his duty, or doing contrary to
it; for then his conscience checks him, and there is something within him that
is uneasy, and puts him into disorder; As when a man eats or drinks any thing
that is unwholsom, it offends his stomach. and puts his body into an unnatural
and a restless state.

For every thing is then at rest and peace, when it is in that state in which
Nature intended it to be; and being violently forced out of it, it is never
quiet till it recover it again. Now Religion and the practice of its virtues,
is the natural state of the soul, the condition to which God designed it. As
God made man a Reasonable creature, so all the acts of Religion are reasonable
and suitable to our nature: And our souls are then in health, when we are what
the Laws of Religion require us to be, and do what they command us to do. And
as we find an unexpressible ease and pleasure when our body is in its perfect
state of health, and on the contrary every distemper causes pain and
uneasiness; so is it with the soul. When Religion governs all our inclinations
and actions, and the temper of our minds, and the course of our lives is
conformable to the precepts of it, all is at peace. But when we are otherwise,
and live in any vicious practice, how can there be peace, so long as we act
unreasonably, and do those things whereby we necessarily create trouble and
disturbance to our selves? How can we hope to be at ease, so long as we are in
a sick and diseased condition? Till the corruption that is in us be wrought
out, our spirits will be in a perpetual tumult and fermentation; and it is as
impossible for us to enjoy the peace and serenity of our minds, as it is for a
sick man to be at ease: He may use what arts of diversion he will, and change
from one place and posture to another: but still he is restless, because there
is that within him which gives him pain and disturbance. There is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked. Such men may dissemble their condition, and put on
the face and appearance of pleasantness and contentment; but God, who sees all
the secrets of men's hearts, knows it is far otherwise with them. There is no
peace, says my God, to the wicked.

2. Another ground of peace which the religious man has, is, That he has made
God his Friend. Now Friendship is peace and pleasure both; It is mutual love,
and that is a double pleasure; And it is hard to say which is the greatest, the
pleasure of loving God, or of knowing that he loves us. Now whoever sincerely
endeavors to please God, may rest perfectly assured that God has no
displeasure against him; for the righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his
countenance shall behold the upright, that is, he will be favorable to such
persons. As he hates the workers of iniquity, so he takes pleasure in them that
fear him, in such as keep his covenant and remember his commandments to do them.

And being assured of his favor, we are secured against the greatest dangers
and the greatest fears; and may say with David, Return then unto thy rest, O my
soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: The Lord is my light and
my salvation, whom shall I fear; The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? What can reasonably trouble or discontent that man who has
made his peace with God, and is restored to his favor, who is the best and
most powerful friend, and can be the sorest and most dangerous enemy in the
whole World?

3. By being religious we do most effectually consult our own interest and
happiness. A great part of Religion consists in moderating our appetites and
passions, and this naturally tends to the composure of our minds. He that lives
piously and virtuously acts according to Reason, and in so doing maintains the
present peace of his own mind; and not only so, but he lays the foundation of
his future happiness to all Eternity. For Religion gives a man the hopes of
eternal life: And all pleasure does not consist in present enjoyment; there is
a mighty pleasure also, in the firm belief and expectation of a future good;
and if it be a great and a lasting good, it will support a man under a great
many present evils. If Religion be certainly the way to avoid the greatest
evils, and to bring us to happiness at last, we may contentedly bear a great
many afflictions for its sake. For though all suffering be grievous, yet it is
pleasant to escape great dangers, and to come to the possession of a mighty
good, though it be with great difficulty and inconvenience to our selves. And
when we come to heaven (if ever we be so happy as to get thither) it will be a
new and a greater pleasure to us, to remember the pains and troubles whereby we
were saved and made happy.

So that all these, put together, are a firm foundation of peace and comfort to
a good man. There is a great satisfaction in the very doing of our duty, and
acting reasonably, though there may happen to be some present trouble and
inconvenience in it. But when we do not only satisfy our selves in so doing,
but likewise please him whose favor is better than life, and whose frowns are
more terrible than death; when in doing our duty we directly promote our own
happiness, and in serving God do most effectually serve our own interest, what
can be imagined to minister more peace and pleasure to the mind of man?

This is the second thing. Religion furnishes us with all the true causes of
peace and tranquillity of mind.

Thirdly, The Reflection upon a religious and virtuous course of life does
afterward yield a mighty pleasure and satisfaction. And what can commend
Religion more to us, than that the remembrance of any pious and virtuous action
gives us so much contentment and delight? So that whatever difficulty and
reluctance we may find in the doing of it, to be sure, there is peace and
satisfaction in the looking back upon it. No man ever reflected upon himself
with regret for having done his duty to God or man; for having lived soberly,
or righteously, or godly in this present world. Nay, on the contrary, the
conscience of any duty faithfully discharged, the memory of any good we have
done, does refresh the soul with a strange kind of pleasure and joy. Our
rejoicing is this (says St. Paul) the testimony of our consciences, that in
all simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world.

But, on the other side, the course of a vicious life, all acts of impiety to
God, of malice and injustice to men, of intemperance and excess in reference to
our selves, do certainly leave a sting behind them. And whatever pleasure there
may be in the present act of them, the memory of them is so tormenting, that
men are glad to use all the arts of diversion to fence off the thoughts of
them. One of the greatest troubles in the world to a bad man is to look into
himself, and to remember how he has lived. I appeal to the consciences of men
whether this be not true.

And is not here now a mighty difference between these two courses of life;
that when we do any thing that is good, if there be any trouble in it, it is
soon over, but the pleasure of it is perpetual: when we do a wicked action, the
pleasure of it is short and transient, but the trouble and sting of it remains
for ever? The reflection upon the good we have done, gives a lasting
satisfaction to our minds; but the remembrance of any evil committed by us
leaves a perpetual discontent.

And, which is yet more considerable, a religious and virtuous course of life
does then yield most peace and comfort, when we most stand in need of it; in
times of affliction, and at the hour of death. When a man falls into any great
calamity, there is no comfort in the world like to that of a good conscience:
This makes all calm and serene within, when there is nothing but clouds and
darkness about him. So David observes of the good man, Psalm. 112.4, Unto the
upright there arises light in darkness. All the pious and virtuous actions
that we do, are so many seeds of peace and comfort, sown in our consciences,
which will spring up and flourish most in times of outward trouble and
distress. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart. And, at the hour of death, The righteous has hopes in his death, says
Solomon. And what a seasonable refreshment is it to the mind of man, when the
pangs of death are ready to take hold of him, and he is just stepping into the
other world, to be able to look back with satisfaction upon a religious and
well-spent life? Then, if ever, the comforts of a good man do overflow, and a
kind of heaven springs up in his mind, and he rejoices in the hopes of the
glory of God. And that is a true and solid comfort indeed, which will stand by
us in the day of adversity, and stick close to us when we have most need of it.

But with the ungodly it is not so: His guilt lies in wait for him especially
against such times, and is never more fierce and raging than in the day of
distress; so that according as his troubles without are multiplied, so are his
stings within. And surely affliction is then grievous indeed, when it falls
upon a galled and uneasy mind. Were it not for this, outward afflictions might
be tolerable; the spirit of a man might bear his infirmities, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? But especially at the hour of death. How does the guilt of
his wicked life then stare him in the face? What storms and tempests are raised
in his soul? which make it like the troubled sea when it cannot rest. When
Eternity, that fearful and amazing sight, presents it self to his mind, and he
feels himself sinking into the regions of darkness, and is every moment in a
fearful expectation of meeting with the just reward of his deeds; with what
regret does he then remember the sins of his life? and how full of rage and
indignation is he against himself for having neglected to know, when he had so
many opportunities of knowing them, the things that belonged to his peace; and
which, because he has neglected them, are now, and likely to be for ever, hid
from his eyes?

And if this be the true case of the righteous and wicked man, I need not
multiply words, but may leave it to any man's thoughts, in which of these
conditions he would be. And surely the difference between them is so very
plain, that there can be no difficulty in the choice.

But now, though this discourse be very true, yet for the full clearing of this
matter, it will be but fair to consider what may be said on the other side; And
the rather, because there are several objections which seem to be countenanced
from experience, which is enough to overthrow the most plausible speculation.
As,

1. That wicked men seem to have a great deal of pleasure and contentment in
their vices.

2. That Religion imposes many harsh and grievous things, which seem to be
inconsistent with that pleasure and satisfaction I have spoken of.

3. That those who are religious, are many times very disconsolate and full of
trouble.

To the first. I deny not that wicked men have some pleasure in their vices;
but when all things are rightly computed, and just abatements made, it will
amount to very little. For it is the lowest and meanest kind of pleasure, it is
chiefly the pleasure of our bodies and our senses, of our worst part; the
pleasure of the beast, and not of the man; that which least becomes us, and
which we were least of all made for. Those sensual pleasures which are lawful,
are much inferior to the least satisfaction of the mind; and when they are
unlawful, they are always inconsistent with it. And what is a man profited, if
to gain a little sensual pleasure, he lose the peace of his soul? Can we find
in our hearts to call that pleasure, which robs us of a far greater and higher
satisfaction than it brings? The delights of sense are so far from being the
chief pleasure for which God designed us, that, on the contrary, he intended we
should take our chief pleasure in the restraining and moderating of our sensual
appetites and desires, and in keeping them within the bounds of Reason and
Religion.

And then, It is not a lasting pleasure. Those fits of mirth which wicked men
have, how soon are they over? Like a sudden blaze, which after a little flash
and noise is presently gone. It is the comparison of a very great and
experienced man in these matters, Like the crackling of thorns under a pot
(says Solomon), so is the laughter of the fool, that is, the mirth of the
wicked man; it may be loud, but it lasts not.

But, which is most considerable of all, the pleasures of sin bear no
proportion to that long and black train of miseries and inconveniences which
they draw after them. Many times, poverty and reproach, pains and diseases upon
our bodies, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that does evil. So that if these pleasures were greater than they are, a
man had better be without them, than purchase them at such dear rates.

To the second. That Religion imposes many harsh and grievous things, which
seem to be inconsistent with that pleasure and satisfaction I have spoken of:
As, the bearing of persecution, repentance and mortification, fasting and
abstinence, and many other rigours and severities. As to persecution; This
Discourse does not pretend that Religion exempts men from outward troubles, but
that, when they happen, it supports men under them, better than any thing else.
As for Repentance and mortification; this chiefly concerns our first entrance
into Religion, after a wicked life, which I acknowledged, in the beginning of
this discourse, to be very grievous: But this does not hinder, but that though
Religion may be troublesome at first to some persons, whose former sins and
crimes have made it so, it may be pleasant afterward when we are accustomed to
it. And whatever the trouble of repentance be, it is unavoidable, unless we
resolve to be miserable; for except we repent we must perish. Now there is
always a rational satisfaction in submitting to a less inconvenience to remedy
and prevent a greater. As for Fasting and abstinence; which is many times very
helpful and subservient to the ends of Religion, there is no such extraordinary
trouble in it, if it be discreetly managed, as is worth the speaking of. And as
for other rigours and severities, which some pretend Religion does impose, I
have only this to say, that if men will play the fool, and make Religion more
troublesome than God has made it, I cannot help that: And, that this is a
false representation of Religion, which some in the world have made, as if it
did chiefly consist not in pleasing God, but in displeasing and tormenting our
selves. This is not to paint Religion like her self, but rather like one of the
Furies, with nothing but whips and snakes about her.

To the third. That those who are religious are many times very disconsolate
and full of trouble. This, I confess, is a great Objection indeed, if Religion
were the cause of this trouble; but there are other plain causes of it, to
which Religion, rightly understood, is not accessory. As, false and mistaken
principles in Religion. The imperfection of our Religion and obedience to God.
And a melancholy temper and disposition. False and mistaken principles in
Religion. As this for one; That God does not sincerely desire the salvation of
men, but has from all eternity effectually barred the greatest part of mankind
from all possibility of attaining that happiness which he offers to them; and
every one has cause to fear that he may be in that number. This were a
melancholy consideration indeed, if it were true; but there is no ground
either from Reason or Scripture to entertain any such thought of God. Our
destruction is of our selves; and no man shall be ruined by any decree of God,
who does not ruin himself by his own fault.

Or else, the imperfection of our Religion and obedience to God. Some, perhaps,
are very devout in serving God, but not so kind and charitable, so just and
honest in their dealings with men. No wonder if such persons be disquieted; the
natural consciences of men being not more apt to disquiet them for any thing,
than for the neglect of those moral duties, which natural light teaches them.
Peace of conscience is the effect of an impartial and universal obedience to
the laws of God; and I hope no man will blame Religion for that which plainly
proceeds from the want of Religion.

Or lastly. A melancholy temper and disposition; which is not from Religion,
but from our nature and constituion, and therefore Religion ought not to be
charged with it.

And thus I have endeavored, as briefly and plainly as I could, to represent
to you what peace and pleasure, what comfort and satisfaction, Religion,
rightly understood and sincerely practiced, is apt to bring to the minds of
men. And I do not know by what sort of Argument Religion can be more
effectually recommended to wise and considerate men. For in persuading men to
be religious, I do not go about to rob them of any true pleasure and
contentment, but to direct them to the very best, nay indeed the only way of
attaining and securing it.

I speak this in great pity and compassion to those who make it their great
design to please themselves, but do grievously mistake the way to it. The
direct way is that which I have set before you, a holy and virtuous life, to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously and
godly in this present world. A good man (says Solomon) is satisfied from
himself: He has the pleasure of being wise, and acting reasonably; the
pleasure of being justified to himself in what he does, and of being acquitted
by the sentence of his own mind. There is a great pleasure in being innocent,
because that prevents guilt and trouble; It is pleasant to be virtuous and
good, because that is to excel many others; and it is pleasant to grow better,
because that is to excel our selves: Nay, it is pleasant even to mortify and
subdue our lusts, because that is Victory: It is pleasant to command our
appetites and passions, and to keep them in due order, within the bounds of
Reason and Religion, because this is a kind of Empire, this is to govern. It is
naturally pleasant to rule and have power over others, but he is the great and
the absolute Prince who commands himself. This is the Kingdom of God within us,
a dominion infinitely to be preferred before all the Kingdoms of this world,
and the glory of them. It is the Kingdom of God, described by the Apostle,
which consists in righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. In a word;
The pleasure of being good and of doing good, is the chief happiness of God
himself.

But now the wicked man deprives himself of all this pleasure, and creates
perpetual discontent to his own mind. O the torments of a guilty conscience!
which the sinner feels more or less all his life long. But, alas, thou do not
yet know the worst of it, no not in this World. What will thou do when thou
come to die? What comfort will thou then be able to give thy self? or what
comfort can any one else give thee? when thy conscience is miserably rent and
torn, by those waking furies, which will then rage in thy breast, and thou
know not which way to turn thy self for ease; then, perhaps at last, the
Priest is unwillingly sent for, to patch up thy conscience as well as he can,
and to appease the cries of it; and to force himself out of very pity and good
nature, to say, peace, peace, when there is no peace. But alas man! what can we
do? what comfort can we give thee, when thine iniquities testify against thee
to thy very face? How can there be peace, when thy lusts and debaucheries, thy
impieties to God and thy injuries to men, have been so many? How can there be
peace, when thy whole life has been a continued contempt and provocation of
Almighty God, and a perpetual violence and affront to the light and reason of
thy own mind?

Therefore whatever temptation there may be in sin at a distance, whatever
pleasure in the act and commission of it, yet remember that it always goes off
with trouble, and will be bitterness in the end. Those words of Solomon have a
terrible sting in the conclusion of them, Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment. This one thought which will very
often unavoidably break into our minds (that God will bring us into judgment)
is enough to dash all our contentment, and to spoil all the pleasure of a
sinful life. Never expect to be quiet in thine own mind, and to have the true
enjoyment of thy self, till thou live a virtuous and religious life.

And if this discourse be true (as I am confident I have every man's conscience
on my side) I say, if this be true, let us venture to be wise and happy, that
is, to be Religious. Let us resolve to break off our sins by repentance, to
fear God and keep his Commandments, as ever we desire to avoid the unspeakable
torments of a guilty mind, and would not be perpetually uneasy to our selves.

Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we may every one of us know and do
in this our day the things that belong to our peace, before they be hid from
our eyes. And the God of peace which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in us
always that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 26th 1674/5.
A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 26th 1674/5.
PSALM. CXIX.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.


THE two great causes of the ruin of men, are Infidelity and want of
consideration. Some do not believe the principles of Religion, or at least have
by arguing against them rendered them so doubtful to themselves, as to take
away the force and efficacy of them: But these are but a vevery small part of
mankind, in comparison of those who perish for want of considering these
things. For most men take the principles of Religion for granted, That there is
a God, and a Providence, and a State of Rewards and Punishments after this
life, and never entertained any considerable doubt in their minds to the
contrary: But for all this, they never attended to the proper and natural
consequences of these principles, nor applied them to their own case; They
never seriously considered the notorious inconsistency of their lives with this
belief, and what manner of persons they ought to be who are verily persuaded of
the truth of these things.

For no man that is convinced that there is a God, and considers the necessary
and immediate consequences of such a persuasion, can think it safe to affront
Him by a wicked life: No man that believes the infinite happiness and misery of
another world, and considers withal that one of these shall certainly be his
portion, according as he demeans himself in this present life, can think it
indifferent what course he takes. Men may thrust away these thoughts, and keep
them out of their minds for a long time; but no man that enters into the
serious consideration of these matters, can possibly think it a thing
indifferent to him whether he be happy or miserable for ever.

So that a great part of the evils of men's lives would be cured, if they would
but once lay them to heart; would they but seriously consider the consequences
of a wicked life, they would see so plain reason, and so urgent a necessity for
the reforming of it, that they would not venture to continue any longer in it.
This course David took here in the Text, and he found the happy success of it;
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

In which Words there are these two things considerable.

I. The course which David here took for the reforming of his life; I thought
on my ways.

II. The success of this course. It produced actual and speedy reformation; I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; I made haste and
delayed not to keep thy commandments.

These are the two heads of my following discourse; which when I have spoken
to, I shall endeavor to persuade my self and you to take the same course which
David here did, and God grant that it may have the same effect.

I. We will consider the course which David here took for the reforming of his
life; I thought on my ways, or, as the words are rendered in our old
Translation, I called mine own ways to remembrance. And this may either
signify a general survey and examination of his life, respecting indifferently
the good or bad actions of it: Or else, which is more probable, it may
specially refer to the sins and miscarriages of his life; I thought on my ways,
that is, I called my sins to remembrance. Neither of these senses can be much
amiss in order to the effect mentioned in the Text, viz. the reformation and
amendment of our lives; and therefore neither of them can reasonably be
excluded, though I shall principally insist upon the later.

1. This thinking of our ways may signify a general survey and examination of
our lives, respecting indifferently our good and bad actions. For Way is a
Metaphorical word, denoting the course of a man's life and actions. I thought on
my ways, that is, I examined my life, and called my self to a strict account
for the actions of it; I compared them with the Law of God, the rule and
measure of my duty, and considered how far I had obeyed that Law, or offended
against it; how much evil I had been guilty of, and how little good I had done,
in comparison of what I might and ought to have done: That by this means I
might come to understand the true state and condition of my soul, and
discerning how many and great my faults and defects were, I might amend
whatever was amiss, and be more careful of my duty for the future.

And it must needs be a thing of excellent use, for men to set apart some
particular times for the examination of themselves, that they may know how
accounts stand between God and them. Pythagoras (or whoever were the Author of
those golden verses which pass under his name) does especially recommend this
practice to his Scholars, every night before they slept, to call themselves to
account for the actions of the day past; enquiring wherein they had
transgressed, what good they had done that day, or omitted to do. And this no
doubt is an admirable means to improve men in virtue, a most effectual way to
keep our consciences continually waking and tender, and to make us stand in awe
of our selves, and afraid to sin, when we know beforehand that we must give so
severe an account to our selves of every action.

And certainly it is a great piece of wisdom to make up our accounts as
frequently as we can, that our repentance may in some measure keep pace with
the errors and failings of our lives, and that we may not be oppressed and
confounded by the insupportable weight of the sins of a whole life falling upon
us at once; and that perhaps at the very worst time, when we are sick and weak,
and have neither understanding nor leisure to recollect ourselves, and to call
our sins distinctly to remembrance, much less to exercise any fit and proper
acts of repentance for them. For there is nothing to be done in Religion when
our Reason is once departed from us; then darkness has overtaken us indeed,
and the night is come when no man can work. But though we were never so
sensible, and should do all we can at that time, yet after all this, how it
will go with us God alone knows. I am sure it is too much presumption for any
man to be confident that one general and confused act of repentance will serve
his turn for the sins of his whole life. Therefore there is great reason why we
should often examine our selves, both in order to the amendment of our lives,
and the ease of our consciences when we come to dye.

2. This thinking of our ways may particularly and specially refer to the sins
and miscarriages of our lives: I thought on my ways, that is, I called my sins
to remembrance; I took a particular account of the errors of my life, and laid
them seriously to heart; I considered all the circumstances and consequences of
them, and all other things belonging to them; and reasoning the matter
thoroughly with my self, came to a peremptory and fixed resolution of breaking
off this wicked course of life, and betaking my self to the obedience of God's
Laws. And the consideration of our ways taken in this sense (which seems to be
the more probable meaning of the Words) may reasonably imply in it these
following particulars.

1. The taking of a particular account of our sins, together with the several
circumstances and aggravations of them.

2. A hearty trouble and sorrow for them; I thought on my ways, that is, I laid
them sadly to heart.

3. A serious consideration of the evil and unreasonableness of a sinful course.

4. A due sense of the fearful and fatal consequences of a wicked life.

5. A full conviction of the necessity of quitting this course.

6. An apprehension of the possibility of doing this.

1. The taking of a particular account of our sins, together with the several
circumstances and aggravations of them. And to this end, we may do well to
reflect particularly upon the several stages and periods of our lives, and to
recollect at least the principal miscarriages belonging to each of them. And
the better to enable us hereto, it will be useful to have before our eyes some
abridgement or summary of the Laws of God, containing the chief heads of duties
and sins, of virtues and vices; For this will help to bring many of our faults
and neglects to our remembrance, which otherwise perhaps would have been
forgotten by us. We should likewise consider the several relations wherein we
have stood to others, and how far we have transgressed or failed of our duty in
any of those respects.

And having thus far made up our sad account, we may in a great measure
understand the number and greatness of our sins; abating for some particulars
which are slipped out of our memory, and for sins of ignorance, and daily
infirmities, which are innumerable. By all which we may see, what vile wretches
and grievous offenders we have been: especially if we take into consideration
the several heavy circumstances of our sins, which do above measure aggravate
them; the heinousness of many of them, as to their nature, and the injurious
consequences of them to the person, or estate, or reputation of our neighbor;
their having been committed against the clear knowledge of our duty, against the
frequent checks and convictions of our consciences, telling us when we did them
that we did amiss; against so many motions and suggestions of Gods Holy Spirit,
so many admonitions and reproofs from others; and contrary to our own most
serious vows and resolutions, renewed at several times, especially upon the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament, and in times of sickness and distress: and
all this notwithstanding the plainest declarations of Gods will to the
contrary, notwithstanding the terrors of the Lord, and the wrath of God
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men;
notwithstanding the cruel sufferings of the Son of God for our sins, and the
most merciful offers of pardon and reconciliation in his blood: Add to this the
scandal of our wicked lives to our holy Religion, the ill example of them to
the corrupting and debauching of others, the affront of them to the Divine
Authority, and the horrible ingratitude of them to the mercy and goodness and
patience of God, to which we have such infinite obligations. Thus we should set
our sins in order before our eyes, with the several aggravations of them.

2. A hearty trouble and sorrow for sin; I thought on my ways, that is, I laid
my sins sadly to heart. And surely whenever we remember the faults and follies
of our lives, we cannot but be inwardly touched and sensibly grieved at the
thoughts of them; we cannot but hang down our heads, and smite upon our
breasts, and be in pain and heaviness at our very hearts. I know that the
tempers of men are very different, and therefore I do not say that tears are
absolutely necessary to repentance, but they do very well become it; and a
thorough sense of sin will almost melt the most hard and obdurate disposition,
and fetch water out of a very rock. To be sure, the consideration of our ways
should cause inward trouble and confusion in our minds. The least we can do
when we have done amiss, is to be sorry for it, to condemn our own folly, and
to be full of indignation and displeasure against our selves for what we have
done, and to resolve never to do the like again. And let us make sure that our
trouble and sorrow for sin have this effect, to make us leave our sins; and
then we shall need to be the less solicitous about the degrees and outward
expressions of it.

3. A serious consideration of the evil and unreasonableness of a sinful
course. That sin is the stain and blemish of our natures, the reproach of our
reason and understanding, the disease and the deformity of our souls, the great
enemy of our peace, the cause of all our fears and troubles: That whenever we
do a wicked action, we go contrary to the clearest dictates of our reason and
conscience, to our plain and true interest, and to the strongest ties and
obligations of duty and gratitude. And which renders it yet more unreasonable,
sin is a voluntary evil which men wilfully bring upon themselves. Other evils
may be forced upon us, whether we will or no; a man may be poor or sick by
misfortune, but no man is wicked and vicious but by his own choice. How do we
betray our folly and weakness, by suffering our selves to be hurried away by
every foolish lust and passion, to do things which we know to be prejudicial
and hurtful to our selves; and so base and unworthy in themselves, that we are
ashamed to do them, not only in the presence of a wise man, but even of a child
or a fool. So that if sin were followed with no other punishment, besides the
guilt of having done a shameful thing, a man would not by intemperance make
himself a fool and a beast; one would not be false and unjust, treacherous or
unthankful, if for no other reason, yet out of mere greatness and generosity of
mind, out of respect to the dignity of his nature, and out of very reverence to
his own reason and understanding. For let Witty men say what they will in
defense of their vices, there are so many natural acknowledgments of the evil
and unreasonableness of sin, that the matter is past all denial: Men are
generally galled and uneasy at the thoughts of an evil action, both before and
after they have committed it; they are ashamed to be taken in a crime, and
heartily vexed and provoked whenever they are upbraided with it; and it is very
observable, that though the greater part of the world was always bad, and vice
has ever had more servants and followers to cry it up, yet never was there any
Age so degenerate, in which Vice could get the better of Virtue in point of
general esteem and reputation: Even they whose wills have been most enslaved to
sin, could never yet so far bribe and corrupt their understandings, as to make
them give full approbation to it.

4. A due sense of the fearful and fatal consequences of a wicked life. And
these are so sad and dreadful, and the danger of them so evident, and so
perpetually threatening us, that no temptation can be sufficient to excuse a man
to himself and his own reason for venturing upon them. A principal point of
wisdom is to look to the End of things; not only to consider the present
pleasure and advantage of any thing, but also the ill consequences of it for
the future; and to balance them one against the other.

Now sin in its own nature tends to make men miserable. It certainly causes
trouble and disquiet of mind: And to a considerate man, that knows how to value
the ease and satisfaction of his own mind, there cannot be a greater argument
against sin, than to consider that the forsaking of it is the only way to find
rest to our souls.

Besides this, every vice is naturally attended with some particular mischief
and inconvenience, which makes it even in this life a punishment to it self;
and commonly, the providence of God and his just judgment upon sinners strikes
in to heighten the mischievous consequences of a sinful course. This we have
represented in the Parable of the Prodigal; his riotous course of life did
naturally and of it self bring him to want, but the providence of God likewise
concurred to render his condition more miserable, at the same time there arose
a mighty famine in the land; so that he did not only want wherewithal to
supply himself, but was cut off from all hopes of relief from the abundance and
superfluity of others. Sin brings many miseries upon us, and God many times
sends more and greater than sin brings; and the further we go on in a sinful
course, the more miseries and the greater difficulties we involve our selves in.

But all these are but light and inconsiderable, in comparison of the dreadful
miseries of another world; to the danger whereof, every man that lives a wicked
life does every moment expose himself. So that if we could conquer shame, and
had stupidity enough to bear the infamy and reproach of our vices, and the
upbraidings of our consciences for them, and the temporal mischiefs and
inconveniences of them; though for the present gratifying of our lusts we could
brook and dispense with all these, yet the consideration of the end and issue
of a sinful course, is an invincible objection against it, and never to be
answered; though the violence of our sensual appetities and inclinations should
be able to bear down all temporal considerations whatsoever, yet methinks the
interest of our everlasting happiness should lie near our hearts, the
consideration of another world should mightily amaze and startle us; the
horrors of eternal darkness, and the dismal thought of being miserable for
ever, should effectually discourage any man from a wicked life. And this danger
continually threatens the sinner, and may, if God be not merciful to him,
happen to surprise him the next moment. And can we make too much haste, to fly
from so great and apparent a danger? When will we think of saving our selves,
if not when (for ought we know) we are upon the very brink of ruin, and just
ready to drop into destruction?

5. Upon this naturally follows, a full conviction of the necessity of quitting
this wicked course. And necessity is always a powerful and overruling
argument, and does rather compel than persuade: And after it is once evident
leaves no place for further deliberation. And the greater the necessity is, it
is still the more cogent argument. For whatever is necessary, is so in order to
some end; and the greater the end, the greater is the necessity of the means
without which that end cannot be obtained. Now the chief and last end of all
Reasonable creatures is happiness, and therefore whatever is necessary in order
to that, has the highest degree of rational and moral necessity. We are not
capable of happiness, till we have left our sins, for without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.

But though men are convinced of this necessity, yet this does not always
enforce a present change; because men hope they may continue in their sins, and
remedy all at last by repentance. But this is so great a hazard in all
respects, that there is no venturing upon it: And in matters of greatest
concernment wise men will run no hazards, if they can help it. David was so
sensible of this danger, that he would not defer his repentance and the change
of his life for one moment; I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies: I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments. This day,
this hour, for ought we know, may be the last opportunity of making our peace
with God. Therefore we should make haste out of this dangerous state, as Lot
did out of Sodom, lest fire and brimstone overtake us. He that cannot promise
himself the next moment, has a great deal of reason to seize upon the present
opportunity. While we are lingering in our sins, if God be not merciful to us,
we shall be consumed. Therefore make haste, sinner, and escape for thy life,
lest evil overtake thee.

6. Lastly, An apprehension of the possibility of making this change. God who
designed us for happiness at first, and after we had made a forfeiture of it by
sin, was pleased to restore us again to the capacity of it by the Redemption of
our blessed Lord and Savior, has made nothing necessary to our happiness that
is impossible for us to do, either of our selves, or by the assistance of that
grace which he is ready to afford us, if we heartily beg it of him. For that is
possible to us, which we may do by the assistance of another, if we may have
that assistance for asking: And God has promised to give his holy Spirit to
them that ask him. So that notwithstanding the great corruption and weakness of
our natures, since the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared, it is
not absolutely out of our power to leave our sins, and to turn to God: For that
may truly be said to be in our power, which God has promised to enable us to
do, if we be not wanting to our selves.

So that there is nothing on Gods part to hinder this change. He has solemnly
declared, that he sincerly desires it, and that he is ready to assist our good
resolutions to this purpose. And most certainly, when he tell us, that he has
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his
wickedness and live; that he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth; that he would not that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, He means plainly as he says, and does not speak to
us with any private reserve or nice distinction between his secret and revealed
will, that is, he does not decree one thing, and declare the contrary. So far
is it from this, that if a sinner entertain serious thoughts of returning to
God, and do but once move toward him, how ready is he to receive him! This is,
in a very lively manner, described to us in the Parable of the Prodigal Son,
who when he was returning home, and was yet a great way off, what haste does
his Father make to meet him? he saw him, and had compassion, and ran. And if
there be no impediment on Gods part, why should there be any on ours? One would
think all the doubt and difficulty should be on the other side, Whether God
would be pleased to show mercy to such great offenders as we have been. But the
business does not stick there. And will we be miserable by our own choice, when
the Grace of God has put it into our power to be happy? I have done with the
first thing, The course which David here took for the reforming of his life; I
thought on my ways. I proceed to the

II. The success of this course. It produced actual and speedy reformation. I
turned my feet unto thy testimonies; I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. And if we consider the matter thoroughly, and have but patience to
reason out the case with our selves, and to bring our thoughts and
deliberations to some issue, the conclusion must naturally be, the quitting of
that evil and dangerous course in which we have lived. For sin and
consideration can not long dwell together. Did but men consider what sin is,
they would have so many unanswerable objections against it, such strong fears
and jealousies of the miserable issue and event of a wicked life, that they
would not dare to continue any longer in it.

I do not say, that this change is perfectly made at once. A state of sin and
holiness are not like two Ways that are just parted by a line, so as a man may
step out of the one full into the other; but they are like two Ways that lead
to two very distant places, and consequently are at a good distance from one
another, and the farther any man has traveled in the one, the further he is
from the other; so that it requires time and pains to pass from the one to the
other. It sometimes so happens, that some persons are by a mighty conviction
and resolution, and by a very extraordinary and over-powering degree of Gods
grace, almost perfectly reclaimed from their sins at once, and all of a sudden
translated out of the Kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son. And
thus it was with many of the first Converts to Christianity; as their
prejudices against the Christian Religion were strong and violent, so the holy
Spirit of God was pleased to work mightily in them that believed. But in the
usual and settled methods of Gods grace, evil habits are mastered and subdued by
degrees, and with a great deal of conflict, and many times after they are
routed they rally and make head again; and it is a great while before the
contrary habits of grace and virtue are grown up to any considerable degree of
strength and maturity, and before a man come to that confirmed state of
goodness, that he may be said to have conquered and mortified his lusts. But
yet this ought not to discourage us. For so soon as we have seriously begun
this change, we are in a good way, and all our endeavors will have the
acceptance of good beginnings, and God will be ready to help us; and if we
pursue our advantages, we shall every day gain ground, and the work will grow
easier upon our hands; and we who moved at first with so much slowness and
difficulty, shall after a while be enabled to run the ways of Gods commandments
with pleasure and delight.

I have done with the two things I propounded to speak to from these words, The
course here prescribed, and the success of it. And now to persuade men to take
this course, I shall offer two or three Arguments.

1. That Consideration is the proper act of Reasonable creatures. This argument
God himself uses, to bring men to a consideration of their evil ways, Isa.
46.8, Remember, and show your selves men; bring it again to mind, O ye
transgressors. To consider our ways, and to call our sins to remembrance, is to
show our selves men. It Is the great fault and infelicity of a great many, that
they generally live without thinking, and are acted by their present
inclinations and appetites, without any consideration of the future
consequences of things, and without fear of any thing, but of a present and
sensible danger; like Brute creatures, who fear no evils but what are in view,
and just ready to fall upon them: Whereas to a prudent and considerate man, a
good or evil in reversion is capable of as true an estimation, proportionably
to the greatness and distance of it, as if it were really present. And what do
we think has God given us our reason and understandings for, but to foresee
evils at a distance, and to prevent them; to provide for our future security
and happiness, to look up to God our Maker, who has taught us more than the
Beasts of the earth, and made us wiser than the Fowls of heaven; but to
consider what we do, and what we ought to do, and what makes most for our
future and lasting interest, and what against it? What can a Beast do worse,
than to act without any consideration and design, than to pursue his present
inclination without any apprehension of true danger? The most dull and stupid
of all the brute creatures can hardly exercise less reason than this comes to.
So that for a man not to consider his ways, is to the very best intents and
purposes, to be without understanding, and like the beasts that perish.

2. This is the end of Gods patience and long-suffering toward us, to bring us
to consideration. The great design of Gods goodness, is to lead men to
repentance. He winks at the sins of men, that they may repent. He bears long
with us, and delays the punishment of our sins, and does not execute judgment
speedily, because he is loath to surprise men into destruction; because he would
give them the liberty of second thoughts, time to reflect upon themselves, and
to consider what they have done, and to reason themselves into repentance.
Consider this all ye that forget God, lest his patience turn into fury, and he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

3. Consideration is that which we must all come to, one time or other. Time
will come, when we shall consider and cannot help it; when we shall not be able
to divert our thoughts from those things, which we are now so loath to think
upon. Our consciences will take their opportunity, to bring our ways to
remembrance, when some great calamity or affliction is upon us. Thus it was
with the Prodigal, when he was brought to the very last extremity, and was
ready to perish for hunger, then he came to himself. When we come to die, then
we shall think of our ways with trouble and vexation enough; And how glad would
we then be, that we had time to consider them? And perhaps while we are wishing
for more time, Eternity will swallow us up. To be sure, in the other world, a
great part of the misery of wicked men will consist in furious reflections upon
themselves, and the evil actions of their lives. It Is said of the Rich
voluptuous man in the Parable, that in hell he lift up his eyes, being in
torments; as if he had never considered and bethought himself till that time.
But alas! it will then be too late to consider: For then consideration will do
us no good; it will serve to no other purpose, but to aggravate our misery, and
to multiply our stings, and to give new life and rage to those Vultures which
will perpetually prey upon our hearts. But how much a wiser course would it be,
to consider these things in time, in order to our eternal peace and comfort; to
think of them while we may redress them, and avoid the dismal consequences of
them, than when our case is desperate and past remedy?

And now what can I say more, to persuade every one of us to a consideration of
our own ways? We are generally apt to busy our selves in observing the errors
and miscarriages of our neighbors, and are forward to mark and censure the
faults and follies of other men; but how few descend into themselves, and turn
their eyes inward, and say, What have I done? It Is an excellent saying of
Antoninus the great Emperor and Philosopher, No man was ever unhappy, for not
prying into the actions and condition of other men; but that man is necessarily
unhappy, who does not observe himself, and consider the state of his own soul.

This is our proper work; and now is a proper season for it, when we pretend to
God and men to set apart a solemn time for the examination of our selves, and
for a serious review of our lives, in order to humiliation and repentance, to
the reforming and amendment of what is amiss. And though we would venture to
dissemble with men, yet let us not dissemble with God also: For shall not he
that pondereth the heart consider it, and he that keeps thy soul, shall not
he know it; and shall not he render to every man according to his ways?

I know it is a very unpleasant work which I am now putting you upon, and
therefore no wonder that men are generally so backward to it; because it will
of necessity give some present disturbance to their minds. They whose lives
have been very vicious, are so odious a sight, so horrid a spectacle to
themselves, that they cannot endure to reflect upon their own ways; of all
things in the world they hate Consideration, and are ready to say to it, as the
evil Spirit did in the Gospel to our Savior, What have I to do with thee? Art
thou come to torment me before the time? But let not this affright us from it;
for whatever trouble it may cause at present, it is the only way to prevent the
anguish and the torments of Eternity.

The things which I have offered to your consideration, are of huge moment and
importance. They do not concern your bodies and estates, but that which is more
truly your selves, your immortal souls, the dearest and most durable part of
your selves: and they do not concern us for a little while, but forever. Let me
therefore bespeak your most serious regard to them, in the words of Moses to
the people of Israel, after he had set the law of God before them, togeher with
the blessings promised to obedience, and the terrible curses threatened to the
transgression of it, Deuteronomy. 32.46, Set your hearts to the words which I testify
to you this day, for it is not a vain thing, because it is your life. Your
life, your eternal life and happiness depends upon it.

And besides a tender regard to your selves and your own interests, which
methinks every man, out of a natural desire of being happy, and dread of being
miserable, should be forward enough to consider: Be pleased likewise to lay to
heart the influence of your example upon others. I speak now to a great many
persons, the eminence of whose rank and quality renders their examples so
powerful, as to be able almost to give authority either to Virtue or Vice.
People take their fashions from you, as to the habits of their minds as well as
their bodies. So that upon you chiefly depends the ruin or reformation of
manners, our hopes or despair of a better world. What way soever you go, you
are followed by troops. If you run any sinful or dangerous course, you cannot
perish alone in your iniquity, but thousands will fall by your side, and ten
thousands at your right hands: And on the contrary, it is very much in your
power, and I hope in your wills and designs, to be the sovereign restorers of
piety and virtue to a degenerate Age. It is our part indeed to exhort men to
their duty, but it is you that would be the powerful and effectual preachers of
righteousness: We may endeavor to make men proselytes to virtue, but you would
infallibly draw disciples after you: We may try to persuade, but you could
certainly prevail, either to make men good, or to restrain them from being so
bad.

Therefore consider your ways, for the sake of others as well as your selves.
Consider what you have done, and then consider what is fit for you to do, and
if you do it not, what will be the end of these things? And to help you forward
in this work, it is not necessary that I should rip up the vices of the Age,
and set men's sins in order before them. It is much better, that you your selves
should call your own ways to remembrance. We have every one a faithful Monitor
and Witness in our own breasts, who, if we will but hearken to him, will deal
impartially with us, and privately tell us the errors of our lives. To this
Monitor I refer you, and to the grace of God, to make these admonitions
effectual.

Let us then every one of us, in the fear of God, search and try our ways, and
turn unto the Lord. Let us take to our selves words, and say to God, with those
true Penitents in Scripture, I have sinned, what shall be done unto thee, O
thou preserver of men? Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay
my hand upon my mouth, I will abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. For
surely it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more; that which I
know not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity I will do no more. O that
there were such an heart in us! O that we were wise, that we understood this,
that we would consider our latter end! And God, of his infinite mercy, inspire
into every one of our hearts this holy and happy resolution; for the sake of
our blessed Savior and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, Apr. 18th 1675.
Psalm. CXIX.60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


IN the words immediately going before, you have the course which David took
for the reforming of his life, and the success of that course; I thought on my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. A serious reflection upon the
past errors and miscarriages of his life, produced the reformation of it. And
you have a considerable circumstance added in the words that I have now read to
you, viz. that this reformation was speedy and without delay, I made haste, and
delayed not to keep thy commandments. Upon due consideration of his former
life, and a full conviction of the necessity of a change, he came to a
resolution of a better life, and immediately put this resolution in execution;
and to declare how presently and quickly he did it, he expresses it both
affirmatively and negatively; after the manner of the Hebrews, who when they
would say a thing with great certainty and emphasis, are wont to express it
both ways, I made haste, and delayed not; that is, I did with all imaginable
speed betake my self to a better course.

And this is the natural effect of Consideration; and the true cause why men
delay so necessary a work, is, because they stifle their reason, and suffer
themselves to be hurried into the embraces of present objects, and do not
consider their latter end, and what will be the sad issue and event of a wicked
life. For if men would take an impartial view of their lives, and but now and
then reflect upon themselves, and lay to heart the miserable and fatal
consequences of a sinful course, and think whither it will bring them at last,
and that the end of these things will be death and misery: If the carnal and
sensual person would but look about him, and consider how many have been ruined
in the way that he is in, how many lie slain and wounded in it, that it is the
way to hell, and leads down to the chambers of death, this would certainly give
a check to him, and stop him in his course.

For it is not to be imagined, but that that man who has duly considered what
sin is, the shortness of its pleasures, and the eternity of its punishment,
should resolve immediately to break off his sins, and to live another kind of
life. Would any man be intemperate and walk after the flesh, would any man be
unjust and defraud or oppress his neighbor, be profane and live in the
contempt of God and Religion, or allow himself in any wicked course whatsoever,
that considers and believes a Judgment to come, and that because of these
things the terrible vengeance of God will one day fall upon the children of
disobedience? It is not credible, that men who apply themselves seriously to
the meditation of these matters, should venture to continue in so imprudent and
dangerous a course, or could by any temptation whatsoever be trained on one
step farther in a Way that does so certainly and visibly lead to ruin and
destruction.

So that my work at this time shall be, to endeavor to convince men of the
monstrous folly and unreasonableness of delaying the reformation and amendment
of their lives; and to persuade us to resolve upon it, and having resolved, to
set about it immediately and without delay; in imitation of the good man here
in the Text, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. And to
this end, I shall

First, Consider the reasons and excuses which men pretend for delaying this
necessary work, and show the unreasonableness of them.

Secondly, I shall add some farther Considerations, to engage us effectually to
set about this work speedily and without delay.

I. We will consider a little the reasons and excuses which men pretend for
delaying this necessary work, and not only show the unreasonableness of them,
but that they are each of them a strong reason and powerful argument to the
contrary.

1. Many pretend, that they are abundantly convinced of the great necessity of
leaving their sins and betaking themselves to a better course, and they fully
intend to do so; only they cannot at present bring themselves to it, but they
hope hereafter to be in a better temper and disposition, and then they resolve
by Gods grace to set about this work in good earnest, and to go through with it.

I know not whether it be fit to call this a Reason; I am sure it is the
greatest cheat and delusion that any man can put upon himself. For this plainly
shows, that thou do not intend to do this, which thou art convinced is so
necessary, but to put it off from day to day. For there is no greater evidence
that a man does not really intend to do a thing, than when notwithstanding he
ought upon all accounts, and may in all respects better do it at present than
hereafter, yet he still puts it off. Whatever thou pretendest, this is a mere
shift to get rid of a present trouble: It is like giving good words and making
fair promises to a clamorous and importunate creditour, and appointing him to
come another day, when the man knows in his conscience that he intends not to
pay him, and that he shall be less able to discharge the debt then, than he is
at present. Whatever reasons thou have against reforming thy life now, will
still remain and be in as full force hereafter, nay, probably stronger than
they are at present. Thou art unwilling now, and so thou will be hereafter, and
in all likelihood much more unwilling. So that this reason will every day
improve upon thy hands, and have so much the more strength, by how much the
longer thou continuest in thy sins. Thou have no reason in the world against
the present time, but only that it is present; why, when hereafter comes to be
present, the reason will be just the same. So that thy present unwillingness is
so far from being a just reason against it, that it is a good reason the other
way; because thou art unwilling now, and like to be so, nay, more so hereafter;
if thou intendenst to do it at all, thou should set about it immediately, and
without delay.

2. Another reason which men pretend for the delaying of this work, is the
great difficulty and unpleasantness of it. And it cannot be denied, but that
there will be some bitterness and uneasiness in it, proportionably to the
growth of evil habits, and the strength of our lusts, and our greater or less
progress and continuance in a sinful course: So that we must make account of a
sharp conflict, of some pain and trouble in the making of this change, that it
will cost us some pangs and throws before we be born again. For when nature
has been long bent another way, it is not to be expected that it should be
reduced and brought back to its first strenghtness without pain and violence.

But then it is to be considered, that how difficult and painful soever this
work be, it is necessary; and that should overrule all other considerations
whatsoever: that if we will not be at this pains and trouble, we must one time
or other endure far greater, than those which we now seek to avoid: that it is
not so difficult as we imagine, but our fears of it are greater than the
trouble will prove; if we were but once resolved upon the work and seriously
engaged in it, the greatest part of the trouble were over; it is like the fear
of children to go into the cold water, a faint trial increases their fear and
apprehension of it; but so soon as they have plunged into it, the trouble is
over, and then they wonder why they were so much afraid. The main difficulty
and unpleasantness is in our first entrance into Religion; it presently grows
tolerable, and soon after easy, and after that by degrees so pleasant and
delightful, that the man would not for all the world return to his former evil
state and condition of life.

We should consider likewise, what is the true cause of all this trouble and
difficulty; It Is our long continuance in a sinful course that has made us so
loath to leave it; It Is the custom of sinning that renders it so troublesome and
uneasy to men to do otherwise; It Is the greatness of our guilt, heightened and
inflamed by many and repeated provocations, that does so gall our consciences,
and fill our souls with so much terror; It Is because we have gone so far in an
evil way, that our retreat is become so difficult; and because we have delayed
this work so long, that we are now so unwilling to go about it; and
consequently, the longer we delay it, the trouble and difficulty of a change
will increase daily upon us. And all these considerations are so far from being
a good reason for more delays, that they are a strong argument to the contrary:
Because the work is difficult now, therefore do not make it more so; and
because your delays have increased the difficulty of it, and will do more and
more, therefore delay no longer.

3. Another pretended encouragement to these delays, is the great mercy and
patience of God. He commonly bears long with sinners, and therefore there is no
such absolute and urgent necessity of a speedy repentance and reformation of
our lives. Men have not the face to give this for a reason; but yet for all
that, it lies at the bottom of many men's hearts: So Solomon tells us, Eccles.
8.11, Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

But it is not always thus. There are few of us but have seen several instances
of Gods severity to sinners, and have known several persons surprised by a
sudden hand of God, and cut off in the very act of sin, without having the
least respite given them, without time or liberty so much as to ask God
forgiveness, and to consider either what they had done, or whither they were
a-going. And this may be the case of any sinner, and is so much the more likely
to be thy case, because thou do so boldly presume upon the mercy and patience
of God.

But if it were always thus, and thou were sure to be spared yet awhile longer;
what can be more unreasonable and disingenuous, than to resolve to be evil
because God is good, and because he suffers so long, to sin so much the longer,
and because he affords thee a space of repentance, therefore to delay it and
put it off to the last? The proper design of Gods goodness is to lead men to
repentance, and he never intended his patience for an encouragement to men to
continue in their sins, but for an opportunity and an argument to break them
off by repentance.

These are the pretended reasons and encouragements to men to delay their
repentance and the reformation of their lives, and you see how groundless and
unreasonable they are; which was the first thing I propounded to speak to.

II. I shall add some farther considerations, to engage men effectually to set
about this work speedily, and without delay. And because they are many, I shall
insist upon those which are most weighty and considerable, without being very
curious and solicitous about the method and order of them: For provided they be
but effectual to the end of persuasion, it matters not how inartificially they
are ranged and disposed.

1. Consider, that in matters of great and necessary concernment, and which
must be done, there is no greater argument of a weak and impotent mind, then
irresolution; to be undermined, where the case is so plain, and the necessity
so urgent; to be always about doing that, which we are convinced must be done.

Victuros agimus semper, nec vivimus unquam. We are always intending to live a
new life, but can never find a time to set about it. This is as if a man should
put off eating and drinking and sleeping from one day and night to another,
till he have starved and destroyed himself. It seldom falls under any man's
deliberation, whether he should live or not, if he can choose; and if he cannot
choose, it is in vain to deliberate about it. It is much more absurd to
deliberate, whether we should live virtuously and religiously, soberly and
righteously in the world; for that upon the matter is to consult, whether a man
should be happy or not: Nature has determined this for us, and we need not
reason about it; and consequently, we ought not to delay that which we are
convinced is so necessary in order to it.

2. Consider, that Religion is a great and a long work; and asks so much time,
that there is none left for the delaying of it. To begin with Repentance, which
is commonly our first entrance into Religion: This alone is a great work, and
is not only the business of a sudden thought and resolution, but of execution
and action: It Is the abandoning of a sinful course, which we cannot leave till
we have in some degree mastered our lusts; for so long as they are our masters,
like Pharaoh they will keep us in bondage, and not let us go to serve the Lord.
The habits of sin and vice are not to be plucked up and cast off at once; as
they have been long in contracting, so without a miracle, it will require a
competent time to subdue them and get the victory over them: for they are
conquered just by the same degrees that the habits of grace and virtue grow up
and get strength in us.

So that there are several duties to be done in Religion, and often to be
repeated; many graces and virtues are to be long practiced and exercised,
before the contrary vices will be subdued, and before we arrive to a confirmed
and settled state of goodness; such a state as can only give us a clear and
comfortable evidence of the sincerity of our resolution and repentance, and of
our good condion toward God. We have many lusts to mortify, many passions to
govern and bring into order; much good to do, to make what amends and
reparation we can for the much evil we have done: We have many things to learn;
and many to unlearn, to which we shall be strongly prompted by the corrupt
inclinations of our nature, and the remaining power of ill habits and customs:
and perhaps we have satisfaction and restitution to make for the many injuries
we have done to others, in their persons, or estates, or reputations: In a
word, we have a body of sin to put off, which clings close to us, and is hard
to part with; we have to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God; to increase and improve our
graces and virtues; to add to our faith knowledge, and temperance, and patience,
and brotherly kindness, and charity; and to abound in all the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God: We
have to be useful to the world, and exemplary to others in a holy and virtuous
conversation; our light is so to shine before men, that others may see our good
works, and glorify our father which is in heaven.

And do we think all this is to be done in an instant, and requires no time?
That we may delay and put off to the last, and yet do all this work well
enough? Do we think we can do all this in time of sickness and old age, when we
are not fit to do any thing, when the spirit of a man can hardly bear the
infirmities of nature, much less a guilty conscience and a wounded spirit? Do
we think that when the day has been idly spent and squandered away by us,
that we shall be fit to work when the night and darkness comes? When our
understanding is weak, and our memory frail, and our will crooked, and by a
long custom of sinning obstinately bent the wrong way, what can we then do in
Religion? what reasonable or acceptable service can we then perform to God?
when our candle is just sinking into the socket, how shall our light so shine
before men, that others may see our good works?

Alas! the longest life is no more than sufficient for a man to reform himself
in, to repent of the errors of his life, and to amend what is amiss; to put our
souls into a good posture and preparation for another world, to train up our
selves for eternity, and to make our selves meet to be made partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

3. Consider, what a desperate hazard we run by these delays. Every delay of
repentance is a venturing the main chance. It is uncertain whether hereafter we
shall have time for it, and if we have time, whether we shall have a heart to
it, and the assistance of Gods grace to go thorough with it. God indeed has
been graciously pleased to promise pardon to repentance, but he has nowhere
promised life and leisure, the aids of his grace and holy Spirit to those who
put off their repentance: He has nowhere promised acceptance to mere sorrow
and trouble for sin, without fruits meet for repentance, and amendment of life:
He has nowhere promised to receive them to mercy and favor, who only give
him good words, and are at last contented to condescend so far to him, as to
promise to leave their sins when they can keep them no longer. Many have gone
thus far in times of affliction and sickness, as to be awakened to a great
sense of their sins, and to be mightily troubled for their wicked lives, and to
make solemn promises and professions of becoming better; and yet upon their
deliverance and recovery all has vanished and come to nothing, and their
righteousness has been as the morning cloud, and as the early dew which
passes away: And why should any man, merely upon account of a deathbed
repentance, reckon himself in a better condition than those persons, who have
done as much, and gone as far as he; and there is no other difference between
them but this, that the repentance of the former was tried, and proved
insincere, but the deathbed repentance never came to a trial; and yet for all
that, God knows whether it were sincere or not, and how it would have proved if
the man had lived longer. Why should any man, for offering up to God the mere
refuse and dregs of his life, and the days which himself has no pleasure in,
expect to receive the reward of eternal life and happiness at his hands?

But though we do not design to delay this work so long, yet ought we to
consider, that all delays in a matter of this consequence are extremely
dangerous; because we put off a business of the greatest concernment to the
future; and in so doing, put it to the hazard whether ever it shall be done:
For the future is as much out of out power to command, as it is to call back
the time which is past. Indeed if we could arrest time, and strike off the
nimble wheels of his Chariot, and like Joshua bid the Sun stand still, and
make opportunity tarry as long as we had occasion for it; this were something
to excuse our delay, or at least to mitigate and abate the folly and
unreasonableness of it: But this we cannot do. It is in our power, under the
influence of Gods grace and holy Spirit, to amend our lives now, but it is not
in our power to live till to morrow; and who would part with an estate in hand,
which he may presently enter upon the possession of, for an uncertain
reversion? And yet thus we deal in the great and everlasting concernments of
our souls; we trifle away the present opportunities of salvation, and vainly
promise to our selves the future; we let go that which is in our power, and
fondly dispose of that which is out of our power, and in the hands of God.

Lay hold then upon the present opportunities, and look upon every action thou
do, and every opportunity of doing any, as possibly thy last; for so it may
prove, for any thing thou can tell to the contrary. If a man's life lay at
stake, and he had but one throw for it, with what care and with what
concernment would he manage that action? What thou art doing next may, for
ought thou know, be for thy life, and for all eternity. So much of thy life
is most certainly past, and God knows thou have yet done little or nothing
toward the securing of thy future happiness: It is not certain, how much or
how little is remaining, therefore be sure to make the best use of that little
which may be left, and wisely to manage the last stake.

4. Seeing the delay of repentance does mainly rely upon the hopes and
encouragement of a future repentance, let us consider a little how unreasonable
these hopes are, and how absurd the encouragement is which men take from them.
To sin in hopes that hereafter we shall repent, is to do a thing in hopes that
we shall be one day mightily ashamed of it, that we shall one time or other be
heartily grieved and troubled that we have done it: It is to do a thing in
hopes that we shall afterward condemn our selves for it, and wish a thousand
times we had never done it; in hopes that we shall be full of horror at the
thoughts of what we have done, and shall treasure up so much guilt in our
consciences as will make us a terror to our selves, and be ready to drive us
even to despair and distraction. And is this a reasonable hope? Is this a
fitting encouragement for a wise man to give to himself, to any action? And yet
this is plainly the true meaning of men's going on in their sins, in hopes that
hereafter they shall repent of them.

5. If you be still resolved to delay this business, and put it off at present;
consider well with your selves, how long you intend to delay it. I hope not to
the last; not till sickness come, and death make his approaches to you. This is
next to madness, to venture all upon such an after game. It Is just as if a man
should be content to be shipwrackt, in hope that he shall afterward escape by
a plank, and get safe to shore. But I hope none are so unreasonable; yet I fear
that many have a mind to put it off to old age, though they do not care to say
so. Seneca expostulates excellently with this sort of men; Who should ensure
thy life till that time? Who shall pass his word for thee, that the providence
of God will suffer all things to happen and fall out, just as thou have
designed and forecast them? Art thou not ashamed to reserve the relics of thy
life for thy self, and to set apart only that time to be wise and virtuous in,
which is good for nothing? How late is it then to begin to llve well, when thy
life is almost at an end? What a stupid forgetfulness is it of our mortality,
to put off good resolutions to the fiftieth or sixtieth year of our age, and to
resolve to begin to do better at that time of life, to which but very few
persons have reached?

But perhaps thou art not altogether so unreasonable, but desire only to
respite this work, till the first heat of youth and lust be over, till the
cooler and more considerate part of thy life come on: that perhaps thou
think may be the fittest and most convenient season. But still we reckon
upon uncertainties, for perhaps that season may never be: however, to be sure
it is much more in our power, by the assistance of Gods grace, which is never
wanting to the sincere endeavors of men, to conquer our lusts now, and to
resist the most heady and violent temptations to vice, than either to secure
the future time, or to recover that which is once past and gone.

Some seem yet more reasonable, and are content to come lower, and desire only
to put it off for a very little while. But why for a little while? why till to
morrow? To morrow will be as this day, only with this difference, that thou will in all probability be more unwilling and indisposed then.

So that there is no future time which any man can reasonably pitch upon. All
delay in this case is dangerous, and as senseless as the expectation of the
Idiot, described by the Poet; who being come to the river side, and intending
to pass over, stays till all the water in the river be gone by, and has left
the channel a dry passage for him. -- at ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis aevum.
But the river runs, and runs, and will run, and if he should stay a thousand
years, will never be the nearer being dry. So that if the man must go over, and
there be a necessity for it, (as there is for Repentance) the only wise
resolution to be taken in this case, is to wade or swim over as well as he can,
because the matter will never be mended by tarrying.

6. Lastly, consider what an unspeakable happiness it is, to have our minds
settled in that condition, that we may without fear and amazement, nay, with
comfort and confidence, expect death and judgment. Death is never far from any
of us, and the general Judgment of the world may be nearer than we are aware
of; for of that day and hour knows no man: And these are two terrible things;
and nothing can free us from the terror of them, but a good conscience; and a
good conscience is only to be had, either by innocence, or by repentance and
amendment of life. Happy man! who by this means is at peace with God, and with
himself; and can think of death and judgment, without dread and astonishment.
For the sting of death is sin; and the terror of the great day only concerns
those, who have lived wickedly and impenitently, and would not be persuaded,
neither by the mercies of God, nor by the fear of his judgments, to repent and
turn to him: But if we have truly forsaken our sins, and do sincerely
endeavor to live in obedience to the Laws and Commands of God, the more we
think of death and judgment, the greater matter of joy and comfort will these
things be to us: For blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing. Let us therefore, as soon as possibly we can, put our selves
into this posture and preparation; according to that advice of our blessed
Savior, Luke 12.35, 36, Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps
burning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord.

And now I hope that enough has been said, to convince men of the great
unreasonableness and folly of these delays; nay, I believe, most men are
convinced of it by their own thoughts, and that their consciences call them
fools a thousand times for it: But O that I knew what to say, that might
prevail with men, and effectually persuade them to do that, which they are so
abundantly convinced is so necessary.

And here I might address my self to the several ages of persons. You that are
young and have hitherto been in a good measure innocent, may prevent the Devil,
and by an early piety give God the first possession of your souls; and by this
means, never be put to the trouble of so great and solemn a repentance, having
never been deeply engaged in a wicked life: You may do a glorious, I had almost
said a meritorious thing, in cleaving steadfastly to God, and resolving to serve
him, when you are so importunately courted, and so hotly assaulted by the Devil
and the World. However, you may not live to be old; therefore upon that
consideration begin the work presently, and make use of the opportunity that is
now in your hands.

You that are grown up to ripeness of years, and are in the full vigor of your
age; you are to be put in mind, that the heat and inconsiderateness of youth is
now past and gone; that reason and consideration are now in their perfection
and strength; that this is the very age of prudence and discretion, of wisdom
and wariness: So that now is the proper time for you to be serious, and wisely
to secure your future happiness.

As for those that are old, they methinks should need no body to admonish them,
that it is now high time for them to begin a new life, and that the time past
of their lives is too much to have spent in sin and folly. There is no trifling
where men have a great work to do, and but little time to do it in. Your Sun is
certainly going down and near its setting; therefore you should quicken your
pace, considering that your journey is never the shorter because you have but
little time to perform it in. Alas man! thou art just ready to dye, and have
thou not yet begun to live? Are thy passions and lusts yet unsubdued, and have
they had no other mortification than what age has given them? It Is strange to
see, how in the very extremities of old age, many men are as if they had still
a thousand years to live, and make no preparation for death, though it dogs
them at the heels, and is just come up to them and ready to give them the fatal
stroke.

Therefore let us not put off this necessary work of reforming our selves, in
what part and age of our lives soever we be. To day, whilst it is called to
day, least any of you be hardened thorough the decitfulness of sin. Nay, to day
is with the latest to begin this work, had we been wise we would have begun it
sooner. It Is Gods infinite mercy to us, that it is not quite too late, that the
day of Gods patience is not quite expired, and the door shut against us.
Therefore do not defer your repentance to the next solemn time, to the next
occasion. of receiving the blessed Sacrament: Do not say, I will then reform
and become a new man, after that I will take leave of my lusts and sin no more.
For let us make what haste we can, we cannot possibly make too much.

-- properat vivere nemo satis. No man makes haste enough to be good, to cease
to do evil, and to learn to do well. Be as quick as we will, life will be too
nimble for us, and go on faster than our work does; and death will go nigh to
prevent us, and surprise us unawares.

Do, do sinner; abuse and neglect thy self yet a little while longer, till the
time of regarding thy soul and working out thy own salvation be at an end, and
all the opportunities of minding that great concernment be slipped out of thy
hands, never to be recovered, never to be called back again; no, not by thy
most earnest wishes and desires, by thy most fervent prayers and tears; and
thou be brought into the condition of profane Esau, who for once despising the
Blessing, lost it for ever; and found no place of repentance, though he sought
it carefully with tears.

To conclude: Art thou convinced, that thy eternal happiness depends upon
following the advice which has now been given thee? Why then, do but behave
thy self in this case, as thou and all prudent men are wont to do in matters
which thou can not but acknowledge to be of far less concernment. If a man be
traveling to such a place, so soon as he finds himself out of the way, he
presently stops and makes toward the right way, and has no inclination to go
wrong any farther: If a man be sick, he will be well presently if he can, and
not put it off to the future: Most men will gladly take the first opportunity
that presents it self, of being rich or great; every man almost catches at the
very first offers of a great place or a good purchase, and secures them
presently if he can, least the opportunity be gone, and another snatch these
things from him. Do thou thus so much more, in matters so much greater. Return
from the error of thy way, be well, save thy self, as soon as possibly thou
can. When happiness presents it self to thee, do not turn it off, and bid it
come again to morrow. Perhaps thou may never be so fairly offered again;
perhaps the day of salvation may not come again to morrow; nay, perhaps to thee
to morrow may never come. But if we were sure that happiness would come again,
yet why should we put it off? Does any man know how to be safe and happy to
day, and can he find in his heart to tarry till to morrow?

Now the God of all mercy and patience, give every one of us the wisdom and
grace, to know and to do in this our day, the things that belong to our peace,
before they be hid from our eyes; for the sake of our blessed Savior and
Redeemer; To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
now and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, Febr. 25th 1675/6.
1 John III.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of
the Devil: whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.


IT is certainly a matter of the greatest consequence to us, both in order to
our present peace and future happiness, truly to understand our spiritual state
and condition, and whether we belong to God and be his Children or not: And it
is not so difficult as is commonly imagined to arrive at this knowledge, if we
have a mind to it, and will but deal impartially with our selves; For the Text
gives us a plain mark and character whereby we may know it, In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God.

From which words I shall endeavor, by Gods assistance, to lay men open to
themselves, and to represent to every one of us the truth of our condition; and
then leave it to the grace of God, and every man's serious consideration, to
make the best use of it.

And it will conduce very much to the clearing of this matter, to consider
briefly the occasion of these words. And this will best appear by attending
steadfastly to the main scope and design of this Epistle. And I think that no
man that reads it with attention can doubt, but that it is particularly
designed against the impious Sect of the Gnostics; who, as the Fathers tell
us, sprang from Simon Magus, and pretended to extraordinary knowledge and
illumination, from whence they had the name of Gnostics; but notwithstanding
this glittering pretense, they did allow themselves in all manner of impious
and vicious practice, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, as St. Jude
speaks of them. And that St. John particularly aims at this sort of men is very
evident from the frequent and plain allusions throughout this Epistle, to those
Names and Titles which this Sect assumed to themselves, as Chap. 2. ver. 4, He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. And verse. 9, He that says he is in the light, and hates
his brother, is in darkness even until now. Which passages, and many more in
this Epistle, do plainly refer to the pretenses of this Sect, to more than
ordinary knowledge and illumination in the mysteries of Religion;
notwithstanding, they did so notoriously contradict these glorious pretenses by
the impiety of their lives, and particularly by their hatred and enmity to
their Fellow Christians. For, as the ancient Fathers tell us, they pretended
that whatever they did, they could not sin: And this our Apostle intimates in
the beginning of this Epistle, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. And they held it lawful to renounce
Christianity to avoid persecution; and not only so, but also to join with the
Heathen in persecuting the Christians; which seems to be the reason why the
Apostle so often taxes them for hatred to their Brethren; and calls them
Murderers.

Now to show the inconsistence of these principles and practices with
Christianity, the Apostle uses many arguments; amongst which, he particularly
insisteth upon this, That nothing is more essential to a Disciple of Christ and
a Child of God (by which Titles Christians were commonly known), than to
abstain from the practice of all sin and wickedness; verse. 6. of this Chap.
Whosoever abides in him sins not; whosoever sins has not seen him,
neither known him, (whatever knowledge they might pretend to, it was evident
they were destitute of the true knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ) and
verse. 7, Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous; and verse. 8, He that commits sin is of
the Devil; and verse. 9, Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; let men
pretend what they will, wickedness is a plain mark and character of one that
belongs to the Devil; as on the contrary, righteousness is an evidence of a
Child of God, In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil, etc.

I shall briefly explain the words, and then consider the matter contained in
them.

By the children of God, and the children of the Devil, are meant good and bad
men; It being usual in the phrase of Scripture, to call persons or things which
partake of such a nature or quality, the children of those who are eminently
endued with that nature and disposition. Thus they who are of the faith of
Abraham, and do the works of Abraham, are called Abraham's children: In like
manner, those who in their disposition and actions imitate God, are called the
children of God; and on the contrary, those that addict themselves to sin and
impiety are counted of another race and descent, they resemble the Devil, and
belong to him as the Chief and Head of that Faction.

By righteousness, is here meant universal goodness and conformity to the Law
of God, in opposition to sin which is the transgression of that Law.

By being manifest, is meant, that hereby good and bad men are really
distinguished; so that every one that will examine his condition by this mark,
may know of which number he is, and to what Party he belongs.

I come now to the main argument contained in the words, which is to give us a
certain character, and mark of distinction between a good and bad man; (...),
by this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God.

In the management of the following Discourse, I shall proceed in this method.

First, We will consider the character and mark of difference between a good
and bad man, which is here laid down; Whosoever does not righteousness, is not
of God.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, that by this mark every man may, with due
care and diligence, come to the knowledge of his spiritual estate and condition.
By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil.

Thirdly, I shall enquire whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding this,
so many persons are at so great uncertainty concerning their condition.

I. We will consider the character and mark of difference between a good and
bad man, which is here in the Text, Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of
God; which implies likewise on the contrary, that whosoever does righteousness,
is of God. Now in the strictest sense of this phrase, he only who lives in all
the commandments of God blameless, can be said to do righteousness: But in this
sense there is none that does righteousness, no not one, and consequently none
could be the Children of God; but the Text supposes some to be so, and
therefore by doing righteousness the Apostle must necessarily be understood to
mean something that is short of perfect and unsinning obedience. So that the
question is, What doing of righteousness is sufficient to denominate a man a
Child of God, and to put him into a state of grace and favor with Him.

And I do not intend nicely to state this matter. It Is not perhaps possible to
be done; nothing being more difficult, than to determine the very utmost bounds
and limits of things, and to tell exactly and just to a point where the line of
difference between Virtue and Vice, between the state of a good and bad man is
to be placed: And if it could be done, it would be of no great use; for I take
it to be no part of my business to tell men how many faults they may have, and
how little goodness, and yet be the children of God: but rather to acquaint
them, what degrees of holiness and goodness are necessary to give men a clear
and comfortable evidence of their good estate toward God; and then to persuade
them, in order to their peace and assurance, to endeavor after such degrees.

Wherefore to state the business so far as is necessary to give men a
sufficient knowledge of their condition, I shall briefly consider who they are
that in the Apostles sense may be said to be doers of righteousness, or not
doers of it. And because the Apostle lays down the Rule negatively, I shall
therefore

In the first place, enquire who they are that in the Apostles sense may be
said not to do righteousness.

1. They that live in the general course of a wicked life; in the practice of
great and known sins, as injustice, intemperance, filthy and sensual lusts,
profane neglect and contempt of God and Religion; so that by the whole course
and tenor of their actions, it is plain beyond all denial that there is no
fear of God before their eyes. Concerning these the case is so very evident,
that it seems too mild and gentle an expression to call them not doers of
righteousness.

2. They who live in the habitual practice of any one known sin, or in the
neglect of any considerable part of their known duty. For any vicious habit
denominates a man, and puts him into an evil state.

3. They who are guilty of the single act of a very heinous and notorious
crime; as a deliberate act of blasphemy, of murder, perjury, fraud or
oppression, or of any other crime of the like enormity. For though ordinarily
one single act of sin does not denominate one a bad man, when the general
course of the man's life is contrary; yet the single acts of some sorts of sins
are so crying and heinous, and do so stare every man's conscience in the face,
that they are justly esteemed to be of equal malignity with vicious habits of
an inferior kind; because they do almost necessarily suppose a great
depravation of mind, and a monstrous alienation from God and goodness in the
person that deliberately commits them. And they who are guilty in any of these
three degrees now mentioned, are most certainly not doers of righteousness, and
consequently it is manifest that they are not the children of God.

In the second place, I shall enquire who they are, that in the Apostles sense
may be said to do righteousness. In short, they who in the general course of
their lives do keep the Commandments of God. And thus the Scripture generally
expresses this matter, by keeping the commandments of God, and by having
respect to all his commandments, by obedience to the Gospel of Christ, by being
holy in all manner of conversation; by abstaining from all kind of evil, by
cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and by
practicing holiness in the fear of God: To which I shall add the description
which St. Luke gives us of the righteousness of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke
1.6, They were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless. All which expressions do plainly signify the
actual conformity of our lives and actions, in the general course and tenor of
them, to the Laws and commands of God. And this implies these two things; That
the tenor of our lives and actions be agreeable to the Laws of God: And that
these actions be done with a sincere and upright mind, out of regard to God and
another World, and not for low and temporal ends.

And I choose rather to describe a righteous man by the actual conformity of the
general course of his actions to the Law of God, than (as some have done) by a
sincere Desire or resolution of obedience. For a desire may be sincere for the
time it lasts, and yet vanish before it come to any real effect. And how
innocently soever it was intended, it is certainly a great mistake in Divinity,
and of very dangerous consequence to the souls of men, to affirm that a Desire
of grace is grace; and consequently, by the same reason, that a desire of
obedience, is obedience. A sincere desire and resolution to be good is indeed a
good beginning, and ought by all means to be cherished and encouraged; but yet
it is far enough from being the thing desired, or from being accepted for it in
the esteem of God: For God never accepts the Desire for the deed, but where
there is no possibility, no opportunity of doing the thing desired; but if
there be, and the thing be not done, there is no reason to imagine that the
desire in that case should be accepted as if the thing were done. For instance,
If a man give alms according to his ability, and would give more if he were
able, in this case the desire is accepted for the deed. And of this case it is
and no other, that the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8.12, If there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he
has not. That is, God interprets and accepts the charity of men according to
the largeness of their hearts, and not according to the straitness of their
fortunes: But it is a great mistake, to draw a general conclusion from this
Text, that in all cases God accepts the will for the deed. For though a man
sincerely desire and resolve to reform his life (as I doubt not many men often
do) but do it not, when there is time and opportunity for it, these desires and
resolutions are of no account with God; all this righteousness is but as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew which passes away. Men are not apt to
mistake so grossly in other matters. No man believes hunger to be meat, or
thirst to be drink; and yet there is no doubt of the truth and sincerity of
these natural desires. No man thinks that covetousness or a greedy desire to be
rich, is an estate; or that ambition or an insatiable desire of honor is
really advancement: Just so, and no otherwise, a desire to be good is
righteousness. The Apostle's caution a little before the Text may fitly be
applied to this purpose, Little children, let no man deceive you: He that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Not but that the best of
men do sometimes fall through infirmity, and are betrayed by surprise, and born
down by the violence of temptation; but if the general course of our actions be
a doing of righteousness, the grace of the Gospel, in and through the merits of
our blessed Savior, does accept of this imperfect but sincere obedience.

II. I shall endeavor to show, that by this mark every man may, with due care
and diligence, arrive at the certain knowledge of his spiritual estate and
condition. By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. By which the Apostle
means, that this is a real mark of difference betwixt good and bad men, and
that whereby they very often manifest themselves to others; especially when the
course of their lives is eminently pious and virtuous, or notoriously impious
and wicked. But because it does not so much concern us curiously to enquire
into, much less severely to censure the state of other men, I shall only
consider at present, how far by this mark and character every man may make a
certain judgment of his own good or bad condition.

1. By this character, as I have explained it, he that is a bad man may
certainly know himself to be so, if he will but consider his condition, and do
not wilfully deceive and delude himself. As for those who are vicious in the
general course of their lives, or have been guilty of the act of some heinous
and notorious sin, not yet repented of; their case is so plain, for the most
part, even to themselves, that they can have no manner of doubt concerning it.
Such men stand continually convicted, and condemned by the sentence of their
own minds: and whenever they reflect upon themselves (which they do as seldom
as they can) they are a terror to themselves, and full of amazement and
fearful expectation of judgment. Not but that, even in so plain a case, many
men do use great endeavor to cheat themselves; and would be very glad to find
out ways to reconclle a wicked life with the hopes of Heaven, and to gain the
favor, at least the forgiveness of God, without repentance and amendment of
their lives. And to this end they are willing to confess their sins, and to
undergo any Penance that shall be imposed upon them, that only excepted which
only can do them good, I mean, real reformation. And when the Priest has
absolved them, they would fain believe that God has forgiven them too;
however, they return to their former course, and being strongly addicted to
their lusts, between stupidity and foolish hopes, they at last come to this
desperate resolution, to venture all upon the absolution of the Priest, Et
valeat quantum valere potest, let it have what effect it can; though I dare
say, that in their most serious thoughts they are horribly afraid it will do
them no good.

And for those who are sinners of a lesser rate, and perhaps allow themselves
only in one kind of vice, they likewise have reason to conclude themselves in a
bad condition; especially if they consider that he who lives in the breach of
any one commandment of God is guilty of all, because he contemns that authority
which enacted the whole Law. And it is easy for any man to discern the habit of
any sin in himself; as when he frequently commits it, when he takes up no firm
resolutions against it, when he uses no competent care to avoid the
temptations to it, nor puts forth any vigorous endeavors to break off from it;
or however, still continues in the practice of it. For the customary practice
of any known sin, is utterly inconsistent with sincere resolutions and
endeavors against it; there being no greater evidence of the insincerity of
resolutions and endeavors in any kind, than still to go on to do contrary to
them.

2. By this character likewise, they that are sincerely good may generally be
well assured of their good condition, and that they are the children of God.
And there are but two things necessary to evidence this to them; That the
general course and tenor of their actions be agreeable to the Laws of God; and
That they be sincere and upright in those actions. And both these every man may
sufficiently know concerning himself; for if the Laws of God be plain, and lie
open to every man's understanding, then is it as easy for every man to know
when he obeys God and keeps his commandments, as when he obeys the commands of
his Father or his Prince, and when he keeps the known Laws of the Land. And no
sensible and considerate man ever had any doubt of this kind; for if a man can
know any thing, he can certainly tell when he keeps or breaks a known Law; so
that all doubts of this nature are frivolous and idle pretenses to cover men's
faults, and such as they would be ashamed to alledg in any other case.

And a good man may likewise know when he obeys God sincerely. Not but that men
often deceive themselves with an opinion, or at least a groundless hope of
their own sincerity; but if they will deal fairly with themselves, and use due
care and diligence, there are very few cases (if any) wherein they may not know
their own sincerity in any act of obedience to God: For what can a man know
concerning himself, if not the reality of his own intentions? If any man should
in earnest tell me, that he doubted very much whether he had that friendship
for me which he made profession of, and that he was afraid that his affection
to me was not real and sincere, I confess I should doubt of it too; because I
should certainly conclude that no man could know that matter so well as he
himself. And there is no doubt but whoever has a hearty kindness for another,
and a sincere desire to serve and please him, knows he has it. And accordingly
good and holy men in Scripture do every where with great confidence and
assurance appeal to God, concerning the integrity and sincerity of their hearts
toward him: Job and David, Hezekiah and Nehemiah in the old Testament; and in
the new St. Paul for himself and Timothy, makes this solemn profession of their
sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have our conversation in the world.
And I cannot call to mind so much as any one passage in Scripture, from whence
it can be collected that any good man ever doubted of his own sincerity: And to
say the truth, it would not be modesty but impudence in any man to declare that
he suspects himself of hypocrisy; good men have always abhorred the thoughts
of it. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and yet he could not bear to have
his integrity questioned. It was a brave and a generous speech of his, Till I
dye, I will not remove my integrity from me.

And yet it has so happened, that this is become a very common doubt among
religious people; and they have been so unreasonably cherished in it, as to
have it made a considerable evidence of a man's sincerity to doubt of it
himself. It is indeed said in Scripture, Jer. 17.9, That the heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? which is true
concerning our future intentions and actions; no man knowing how his mind may
change hereafter. Little did Hazael think that ever he should do those things
which the Prophet foretold him. But though this be true in it self, yet it is
not the meaning of that Text. For the Prophet in that chapter plainly makes use
of this consideration of the falsehood and deceitfulness of man's heart, as an
argument to take off the people of Israel from trusting in the arm of flesh,
and in those promises which were made to them of foreign assistance from
Egypt: Because men may pretend fair, and yet deceive those that rely upon them;
for the heart of man is deceitful and desperately wicked, and none but God
knows whether men's inward intentions be answerable to their outward
professions; for he searches the heart and tries the reins. And this, I
verily believe, is all that the Prophet here intends, That there is a great
deal of fraud and deceit in the hearts of bad men, so that no man can rely upon
their promises and professions; but God knows the hearts of all men. But now
because God alone knows the hearts of all men, and the sincerity of their
intentions toward one another, does it from hence follow that it is a thing
either impossible or very difficult for any man to know the sincerity of his
own present intentions and actions? To make any such conclusion, were to
condemn the generation of Gods children, those holy and excellent men in
Scripture, Job, and David, and Hezekiah, and St. Paul, who do so frequently
appeal to God concerning their own integrity. And surely when the Apostle
says, No man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man which is in
him, he plainly supposes that every man is conscious to the motions and
intentions of his own mind. I have insisted the longer upon this, that I might
from the very foundation destroy an imagination, which is not only untrue in it
self, but has likewise been a very great hindrance to the peace and comfort of
many good men.

III. Let us enquire whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding this, so
many persons are at so great uncertainty about their spiritual condition. For
the clearing of this matter, we will distinctly consider these three things.
First, The grounds of the false hopes and confidence of men really bad,
concerning their good condition. Secondly, The causeless doubts and jealousies
of men really good concerning their bad condition. And thirdly, The just causes
of doubting in others. As for the troubles and fears of men who are notoriously
bad, and live in the practice of known vices, these do not fall under our
consideration: If they be troubled about their condition, it is no more than
what they ought to be; and if they be only doubtful of it, it is less than they
ought to be. To persons in this condition there is only counsel to be given, to
leave their sins and become better; but no comfort to be administered to them,
till first they have followed that counsel: For till they reform, if they think
themselves to be in a bad condition, they think just as they ought, and as
there is great reason; and no body should go about to persuade them otherwise.

First then, we will consider the grounds of the false hopes and confidence of
men really bad concerning their good condition. I do not now mean the worst of
men, but such as make some show and appearance of goodness. It is very
unpleasing to men to fall under the hard opinion and censure of others, but the
most grievous thing in the world for a man to be condemned by himself; and
therefore it is no wonder that men use all manner of shifts to avoid so great
an inconvenience as is the ill opinion of a man's self concerning himself and
his own condition.

Some therefore rely upon the profession of the Christian Faith and their being
baptized into it. But this is so far from being any exemption from a good life,
that it is the greatest and most solemn obligation to it. Do thou believe the
Doctrine of the Gospel? thou of all men art inexcusable if thou allowest thy
self in ungodliness and worldly lusts.

Others trust to their external Devotion, they frequent the Church and serve
God constantly, they pray to him, and hear his word, and receive the blessed
Sacrament: But let us not deceive our selves, God is not mocked. All this is so
far from making amends for the impiety of our lives, that on the contrary, the
impiety of our lives spoils all the acceptance of our devotions. He that
turns away his ear from hearing the Law (that is, from obeying it) even his
prayer shall be an abomination.

Others, who are sensible they are very bad, depend very much upon their
repentance, especially if they set solemn times apart for it. And there is no
doubt but that a sincere repentance will put a man into a good condition: But
then it is to be considered, that no repentance is sincere but that which
produces a real change and reformation in our lives. For we have not repented
to purpose, if we return again to our sins. It is well thou art in some measure
sensible of thy miscarriage, but thou art never safe till thou have forsaken
thy sins; thy estate and condition toward God is not changed, till thou have
really altered thy self and the course of thy life.

Others satisfy themselves with the exercise of some particular graces and
virtues, Justice, and Liberality, and Charity. And is it not a thousand pities
that thy life is not all of a piece, and that all the other parts of it are not
answerable to these; that thou should lose the reward of so much real
goodness, out of thy fondness to any one vice or lust; that when thou art not
far from the Kingdom of God, for lack of one or two things more thou should
fall short of it? Have thou never heard what the Scripture says, that he who
offends in one point is a transgressour of the whole Law? To make a man a good
man, all parts of goodness must concur, but any one way of wickedness is
sufficient to denominate a man bad.

Lastly, Some, who are very careful of their outward carriage and conversation,
but yet are conscious to themselves of great secret faults and vices, when they
can find no comfort from themselves, and the testimony of their own
consciences, are apt to comfort themselves in the good opinion which perhaps
others have of them. But if we know our selves to be bad, and our own hearts do
condemn us; it is not the good opinion of others concerning us which can either
alter or better our condition. They may have reason for their charity, and yet
thou none for thy confidence. Trust no body concerning thy self rather than thy
self, because no body can know thee so well as thou may know thy self.

These, and such as these, are the hopes of the hypocrite, which Job elegantly
compares to the spiders web, finely and artificially wrought, but miserably
thin and weak; so that we our selves may see through them, and if we lay the
least stress upon them they will break. They are but pleasant dreams and
delusions, which whenever we are awakened to a serious consideration of our
condition by apprehensions of approaching death and judgment, will presently
vanish and disappear; so the same holy man tells us, Job 27.8, What is the hope
of the hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul?

Secondly, We will consider in the next place the causeless doubts and
jealousies of men really good, concerning their bad condition. For as some are
prone beyond all reason to delude themselves with vain hopes of their good
condition, so others are apt as unreasonably to torment themselves with
groundless fears and jealousies that their estate is bad. And of these doubts
there are several occasions, the chief whereof I shall mention, by which we may
judge of the rest that are of the like nature.

1. Some are afraid that they are reprobated from all eternity, and therefore
they cannot be the children of God. This is so unreasonable, that if it were
not a real cause of trouble to some persons, it did not deserve to be
considered. For no man that sincerely endeavors to please God and to keep his
commandments, has from Scripture the least ground to suspect any latent or
secret decree of God against him, that shall work his ruin. But whatever the
decrees of God be concerning the eternal state of men, since they are secret to
us, they can certainly be no rule either of our duty or comfort. And no man
has reason to think himself rejected of God, either from eternity, or in time,
that does not find the marks of Reprobation in himself, I mean an evil heart
and life. By this indeed a man may know that he is out of Gods favor for the
present, but he has no reason at all, from hence to conclude that God has
from all eternity and for ever cast him off. That God calls him to repentance,
and affords to him the space and means of it, is a much plainer sign that God
is willing and ready to have mercy on him, than any thing else is, or can be,
that God has utterly cast him off. And therefore for men to judge of their
condition by the decrees of God which are hid from us, and not by his word
which is near us and in our hearts, is as if a man wandering in the wide sea, in
a dark night when the heaven is all clouded about him, should yet resolve to
steer his course by the stars, which he cannot see, but only guess at; and
neglect the Compass, which is at hand and would afford him a much better and
more certain direction. This therefore is to be rejected as a fond and
groundless imagination, and which ought to trouble no body, because no body
does, nor can know any thing concerning it. Moses has long since very well
determined this matter, Deuteronomy. 29.29, Secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, but those things which are revealed, unto us, and to our children for
ever, that we may do all the words of this Law.

2. Good men are conscious to themselves of many frailties and imperfections,
and therefore they are afraid of their condition. But God considers the
infirmities of our present state, and expects no other obedience from us, in
order to our acceptance with him, but what this state of imperfection is
capable of: And provided the sincere endeavor and general course of our lives
be to please him and keep his Commandments, the terms of the Gospel are so
merciful, that our frailties shall not be imputed to us, so as to affect our
main state, and to make us cease to be the children of God. And though we may
be guilty of many errors and secret sins which escape our notice and
observation, yet it is not impossible for us to exercise such a repentance for
these as will be available for their pardon. For we have to deal with a
merciful God, who is pleased to accept of such an obedience and of such a
repentance as we are capable of performing. Now there is a great difference
between those sins which require a particular repentance before we can hope for
the pardon of them, (as all great and deliberate and presumptuous sins do,
which are never committed without our knowledge, and are so far from slipping
out of our memory, that they are continually flying in our faces, and we cannot
forget them if we would) and sins of infirmity occasioned by surprise and
violence of temptation, through ignorance or inadvertency: For a general
repentance, such as we every day exercise in our devotions and prayers to God,
may suffice for these. I speak not this to hinder any from a more particular
repentance of all their known failings, the more particular the better; but to
remove the groundless fears and jealousies of men about their main estate and
condition. And if any ask, how I know that a general repentance will suffice
for these kind of sins; I answer, Because more than this in many cases is
impossible; so that either we must rest satisfied that God will forgive them
upon these terms, or conclude that they shall not be forgiven at all, which is
contrary to the whole tenor of the Scriptures: I say, in many cases, more than
this is impossible, because sins of ignorance, and those common errors and
frailties of human life, which David calls secret sins, are not particularly
known to us when they are committed, and consequently it is impossible that we
should particularly repent of them. And therefore in this case there can be no
doubt but that God does accept of a general repentance, as he did from David
when he made that humble confession and prayer to him, Psalm. 19.12, Who can
understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret sins.

3. They are afraid their obedience is not sincere, because it proceeds many
times from fear, and not always out of pure love to God. For answer to this: It
is plain from Scripture, that God propounds to men several motives and
arguments to obedience; some proper to work upon their fear, as the threatenings
of punishment; some upon their hope, as the promises of blessing and reward;
others upon their love, as the mercies and forgiveness of God. From whence it
is evident he intended they should all work upon us. And accordingly the
Scripture gives us instances in each kind. Noah moved with fear obeyed God in
preparing an Ark: Moses had respect unto the recompense of reward: Mary
Magdalen loved much. And as it is hard to say, so it is not necessary to
determine just how much influence and no more each of these has upon us: It is
very well if men be reclaimed from their sins and made good, by the joint force
of all the considerations which God offers to us. To be sure, Love is the
noblest and most generous principle of obedience, but fear commonly takes the
first and fastest hold of us, and in times of violent temptation is perhaps the
best argument to keep, even the best of men, within the bounds of their duty.

4. Another cause of doubting in good men is, from a sense of their imperfect
performance of the duties of Religion, and of the abatement of their affections
toward God at some times. They have many wandering thoughts in prayer and other
exercises of devotion, and they cannot for their life keep their minds
continually intent on what they are about. This we should strive against as
much as we can, and that is the utmost we can do; but to cure this wholly is
impossible, the infirmity of our nature and the frame of our minds will not
admit of it: And therefore no man ought to question his sincerity, because he
cannot do that which is impossible for men to do.

And then for the abatement of our affections to God and Religion at some
times, this naturally proceeds from the inconstancy of men's tempers, by reason
of which it is not possible that the best of men should be able always to
maintain and keep up the same degree of zeal and fervor toward God. But our
comfort is, that God does not measure men's sincerity by the Tides of their
affections, but by the constant bent of their resolutions, and the general
tenor of their life and actions.

5. Another cause of these doubts is, that men expect more than ordinary and
reasonable assurance of their good condition; some particular revelation from
God, and extraordinary impression upon their minds, to that purpose, which they
think the Scripture means by the testimony and seal and earnest of the Spirit.
God may give this when, and to whom he pleases; but I do not find he has any
where promised it. And all that the Scripture means by those phrases of the
testimony, and seal, and earnest of the Spirit, is to my apprehension no more
but this, That the Holy Spirit which God bestowed upon Christians in so
powerful and sensible a manner was a seal and earnest of their resurrection to
eternal life, according to that plain Text, Romans 8.11, If the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in
you. But then, who they are that have the Spirit of God, is only to be known by
the real fruits and effects of it. If we be led by the Spirit, and walk in the
Spirit, and do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, then the Spirit of Christ
dwells in us. But this is very far from an immediate and extraordinary
revelation from the Spirit of God to the minds of good men, telling them in
particular that they are the children of God. I know not what peculiar favor
God may show to some, but I know no such thing, nor ever yet met with any wise
and good man that did affirm it of himself: And I fear that in most of those
who pretend to it, it is either mere fancy or gross delusion.

6. As for the case of melancholy, it is not a reasonable case, and therefore
does not fall under any certain rules and directions. They who are under the
power of it, are seldom fit to take that counsel which alone is fit to be given
them; and that is, not to believe themselves concerning themselves, but to
trust the judgment of others rather than their own apprehensions. In other
cases every man knows himself best, but a melancholy man is most in the dark as
to himself. This cause of trouble and doubting is very much to be pitied, but
hard to be removed, unless by physic, or by time, or by chance. One may happen
to say something that may hit the humor of a melancholy man, and satisfy him
for the present; but Reason must needs signify very little to those persons,
the nature of whose distemper it is to turn every thing that can be said for
their comfort into objections against themselves.

Thirdly, But besides those who mistake their condition, either by presuming it
to be better, or fearing it to be worse than it is; there are likewise others
who upon good grounds are doubtful of their condition, and have reason to be
afraid of it: Those I mean, who have some beginnings of goodness, which yet are
very imperfect: They have good resolutions, and do many things well, but they
often fall, and are frequently pulled back by those evil inclinations and
habits which are yet in a great measure unsubdued in them. These I cannot liken
better than to the Borderers between two Countries, who live in the marches and
confines of two powerful Kingdoms, both which have a great influence upon them,
so that it is hard to say whose subjects they are, and to which Prince they
belong: Thus it is with many in Religion, They have pious inclinations, and
have made some fair attempts toward goodness; they have begun to refrain from
sin, and to resist the occasions and temptations to it; but ever and anon they
are mastered by their old lusts, and carried off from their best resolutions;
and perhaps upon a little consideration they repent and recover themselves
again; and after a while are again entangled and overcome.

Now the case of these persons is really doubtful, both to themselves and
others. And the proper direction to be given them, in order to their peace and
settlement, is by all means to encourage them to go on and fortify their good
resolutions; to be more vigilant and watchful over themselves, to strive
against sin and to resist it with all their might. And according to the success
of their endeavors in this conflict, the evidence of their good condition will
every day clear up and become more manifest: The more we grow in grace, and the
seldomer we fall into sin, and the more even and constant our obedience to God
is, so much the greater and fuller satisfaction we shall have of our good
estate toward God: For the path of the just is as the shining light, which
shines more and more unto the perfect day: And the work of righteousness shall
be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

I shall only make two or three Inferences from what has been discoursed upon
this Argument, and so conclude.

1. From hence we learn the great danger of sins of Omission as well as
Commission; Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. The mere neglect
of any of the great duties of Religion, of piety toward God, and of kindness
and charity to men, though we be free from the commission of great sins, is
enough to cast us out of the favor of God, and to shut us for ever out of his
kingdom; I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
sick and in prison and ye visited me not, therefore depart ye cursed.

2. It is evident from what has been said, That nothing can be vainer than for
men to live in any course of sin and impiety, and yet to pretend to be the
Children of God, and to hope for eternal life. The Children of God will do the
works of God, and whoever hopes to enjoy him hereafter will endeavor to be
like him here; Every man that has this hope in Him, purifies himself, even as
He is pure.

3. You see what is the great mark and character of a man's good or bad
condition; whosoever does righteousness is of God, and whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God. Here is a plain and sensible evidence by which
every man that will deal honestly with h^mself may certainly know his own
condition; and then according as he finds it to be, may take comfort in it, or
make haste out of it. And we need not ascend into heaven nor go down into the
deep, to search out the secret counsels and decrees of God; there needs no
anxious enquiry whether we be of the number of Gods elect: If we daily mortify
our lusts, and grow in goodness, and take care to add to our faith and
knowledge, temperance and patience and charity, and all other Christian graces
and virtues, we certainly take the best course in the world to make our calling
and election sure. And without this, it is impossible that we should have any
comfortable and well grounded assurance of our good condition. This one mark of
doing righteousness is that into which all other signs and characters, which
are in Scripture given of a good man, are finally resolved: And this answers
all those various phrases, which some men would make to be so many several and
distinct marks of a child of God; As whether we have the true knowledge of God
and divine illumination, for hereby we know that we know him if we keep his
commandments: Whether we sincerely love God, for this is the love of God that
we keep his commandments: And whether God loves us, for the righteous Lord
loves righteousness, and his countenance will behold the upright. Whether we
be regenerate and born of God, for whosoever is born of God sins not:
Whether we have the Spirit of God witnessing with our Spirits that we are the
children of God, for as many as have the Spirit of God are led by the Spirit,
and by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh: Whether we belong to
Christ, and have an interest in him or not, for they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: In a word, Whether
the promise of heaven and eternal life belong to us, for without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, but if we have our fruit unto holiness, the end will be
everlasting life. So that you see at last, the Scripture brings all to this one
mark, viz. holiness and obedience to the Laws of God, or a vicious and wicked
life; In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil:
Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.

Let us then deal impartially with our selves, and bring our lives and actions
to this trial; and never be at rest till the matter be brought to some issue,
and we have made a deliberate judgment of our condition, whether we be the
children of God or not. And if upon a full and fair examination, our
consciences give us this testimony, that by the grace of God we have denied
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and have lived soberly and righteously and godly
in this present world, we may take joy and comfort in it; for if our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God: But if upon the search and
trial of our ways our case appear clearly to be otherwise, or if we have just
cause to doubt of it, let us not venture to continue one moment longer in so
uncertain and dangerous a condition. And if we desire to know the way of Peace,
the Scripture has set it plainly before us, Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do
well: Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be
as scarlet they shall be white as snow: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Though our
case be very bad, yet it is not desperate; This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all men to be embraced, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners: And he is still willing to save us, if we be but willing to leave our
sins, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness the remaining part of our
lives. We may yet be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God: We who have ventured so long upon the brink of ruin, may yet by the
infinite mercies of God, and by the power of his grace, be rescued from the
base and miserable slavery of the Devil and our lusts into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God.

And thus I have endeavored, with all the plainness I could, to represent
every man to himself, and to let him clearly see what his condition is toward
God, and how the case of his soul and of his eternal happiness stands. And I do
verily believe that what I have said in this matter is the truth of God, to
which we ought all gladly to yield and render up our selves. For great is
Truth, and mighty above all things: She is faithful and impartial in her
counsels, and though she be not always welcome, yet it is always wise to hearken
to her, for in great kindness and charity she lets men know their condition and
the danger of it, that they may take care to prevent it: With her is no
accepting of persons, and in her judgment there is no unrighteousness. I will
conclude all with that excellent advice of a Heathen Philosopher, Antonin. lib.
10.
Make it no longer a matter of dispute what are the marks and signs of a good
man, but immediately set about it, and endeavor to become such an one.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL IN LENT, March 30th 1677.
Luke XV.7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one
sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons which need
no repentance.


AFTER many attempts made in vain, to reclaim sinners from their evil ways, and
to bring them to the wisdom of the just, it is hard for us who are the
messengers of God to men, not to sit down in despondence, and at last quite to
despair of doing good upon them. But when I consider the infinite patience of
God with sinners, and how long his spirit strives with them; why should we, we
who are sinners our selves, think much to bear with sinners, and patiently to
contend with their obstinacy and perverseness? When I consider that our blessed
Savior, the great Preacher and Pattern of righteousness, did not give over the
worst of men, nor despair of their recovery: this methinks should make us, who
are Ambassadors for Christ, unwearied in beseeching men in his stead to be
reconciled to God.

And of this we have a famous instance in this Chapter: The Publicans and
sinners, as they had done several times before, came to hear our Savior: He
treated them very kindly, and conversed familiarly with them; at this the
Pharisees were displeased, and murmured, and this unreasonable murmuring of
theirs gave occasion to the three Parables in this Chapter.

In which our Savior does at once answer the objection of the Pharisees, and
give all possible encouragement to the repentance of these great sinners. He
answers the Pharisees, by letting them plainly see that he was about the best
work in the world, the most acceptable to God, and matter of greatest joy to
all the heavenly inhabitants. Instead of a severe reproof of their
uncharitableness, he offers that calmly to their consideration which ought in
all reason to convince them, that he was no ways to blame for this familiar
conversation of his with sinners; having no other design upon them but to
reclaim them from their vices, and to make them fit company for the best of
men; that he was a spiritual Physician, and therefore his proper work and
employment lay among his Patients. And then, instead of terrifying these
sinners, who seemed to come with a good mind to be instructed by him, he gently
insinuates the most winning arguments and the greatest encouragements to
repentance by showing how ready God was, after all their sins and provocations,
to receive them to his grace and favor, provided they did sincerely repent and
betake themselves to a better course: And not only so, but that the repentance
of a sinner is great joy to the great King of the world, and to all that holy
and heavenly host that attend upon him.

From which method of our Savior, in treating so great sinners so gently, I
cannot but make this observation, for my own use, as well as for others; That
it is good to give, even the greatest of sinners, all the encouragement we can
to repentance; and though men have been never so bad, yet if they have but this
one good quality left in them, that they are patient to be instructed, and
content to hear good counsel, we should use them kindly, and endeavor to
recover them by the fairest means; not so much upbraiding them for their having
been bad, as encouraging them to become better.

To this purpose our Savior uttered three Parables; of the recovery of a lost
sheep; of finding a lost piece of money; of the return of a prodigal son to his
father. And though they all aim at the same scope and design, yet our Savior
uses this variety, not only to convey the same thing to several capacities in
a more acceptable manner, one similitude happening to hit one person, and
another another; but likewise to inculcate so weighty a matter the more upon
his hearers, and to fix it more deeply in their minds.

The words which I have read are the Moral or Application of the first Parable,
concerning a man who had an hundred sheep, and having lost one, leaves the
ninety and nine to go to seek that which was lost; and having found it, with
great joy brings it home. By which our Savior gives us to understand, what joy
God, and the blessed Spirits above, take in the conversion of a sinner. I say
unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents,
more than over ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance. Than
which nothing could have been more proper, both to silence the uncharitable
murmuring of the Pharisees against our Savior, for conversing with publicans
and sinners to so good an end; and likewise to encourage sinners to repent: For
why should the Pharisees be displeased at that, which was so great a pleasure
to God and the holy Angels? and what greater encouragement to repentance than
this, that God is not only willing to receive the returning sinner, but that
the news of his repentance is entertained in heaven with so much joy, that if
it be possible for the blessed Inhabitants of that place to have any thing
added to their happiness, this will be a new accession to it?

There are three things in the words which require a very careful explication.

1. How we are to understand the joy that is in heaven at the conversion of a
sinner?

2. Who are here meant by the just persons that need no repentance?

3. With what reason it is here said, that there is more joy in heaven over one
sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just persons who need no
repentance?

There is something of difficulty in each of these, which deserves our heedful
and attentive consideration.

I. How we are to understand the joy that is in heaven at the repentance of a
sinner? And this (as indeed this whole passage of our Saviors) we are not to
understand too strictly and rigorously, but as spoken in a great measure after
the manner of men, and by way of accommodation to our capacity, so far as the
persons here spoken of are capable of any addition to their joy and happiness.

As it refers to God, it seems very inconsistent with the happiness and
perfection of the Divine nature to suppose Him really capable of joy, any more
than of grief or any other passion. Because this would be to imagine some new
accession to his pleasure and happiness, which being always infinite, can never
have any thing added to it. And therefore we are to understand this, as it
relates to God, in the same manner as we do infinite other passages of
Scripture, where humane passions are ascribed to him, to be spoken by way of
condescension, and after the language and manner of the sons of men; and to
signify only thus much to us, that the conversion of a sinner is a thing
highly pleasing and acceptable to God.

As it refers to Angels, and other blessed Spirits, I see no inconvenience why
it may not be understood more strictly and literally; that they conceive a new
joy at the news of a sinners repentance, and find a fresh pleasure and delight
springing up in their minds whenever they hear the joyful tidings of a sinner
rescued from the slavery of the Devil, and the danger of eternal damnation; of
a new member added to the Kingdom of God, that shall be a companion and sharer
with them in that blessedness which they enjoy. There seems to me to be nothing
in this repugnant to the nature and happiness of blessed Spirits in another
world. For it is certain, that there are degrees of happiness among the
blessed: From whence it necessarily follows, that some of them may be happier
than they are. And it is very probable, since the happiness of Angels and good
men is but finite, that those who are most happy do continually receive new
additions to their blessedness; and that their felicity is never at a stand,
but perpetually growing and improving to all eternity; and that as their
knowledge and love do increase, so likewise the capacity and causes of their
happiness are still more and more enlarged and augmented: So that it is
reasonable enough to suppose, that there is really joy among the Angels and
Spirits of just men made perfect, over every sinner that repents.

II. Who are here meant by the just persons who need no repentance? That our
Savior in this expression gives some glance and reflection upon the Pharisees
(who prided themselves in their own righteousness; and instead of confessing
their sins to God, stood upon their own justification, as if they needed no
repentance) is very probable; because this Parable was designed to answer their
murmurings against him, for conversing with publicans and sinners; and by the
by to give a check to those who were so conceited of their own righteousness,
as if they had no need of repentance. And this is very suitable to what our
Savior elsewhere says to them upon the like occasion, that the whole have no
need of the Physician, but the sick; that he came not to call the righteous,
but the sinners to repentance. But yet though our Savior expresses himself so
as that the Pharisees might with reason enough apply it to themselves, that
there was more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, than over ninety
and nine of them, who were so conceited of their own righteousness, that they
thought they had no need of repentance (for indeed our Savior delivers himself
so, as to leave room for such a severe application) yet I think there is little
doubt to be made but that he intended something further; and that supposing the
Pharisees were as just as they pretended, and were really righteous men, so as
to stand in no need of such a repentance as great sinners do, yet our Savior
affirms, there was more joy in heaven over one penitent sinner, than over
ninety and nine such just persons.

But are there any persons in the world so just, as absolutely to stand in need
of no repentance? No, there was never any such person in the world, him only
excepted who said this, our blessed Savior, who had no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth. And therefore this phrase of needing no repentance is to be
understood in a qualified sense, and with some allowance; otherwise our blessed
Savior had supposed a case which never was, of a great number of perfectly
righteous men. And our Saviors meaning in this is sufficiently explained in
the last Parable of this Chapter, concerning the prodigal Son: Where the
prodigal son is the sinner that repented; and his elder brother, who had always
observed and obeyed his father, he is the just person who needed no repentance.
So that by him our Savior plainly designs those who being religiously educated
and brought up in the fear of God, had never broke out into any extravagant and
vicious course of life, and so in some sense had no need of repentance, that
is, of changing the whole course of their lives, as the prodigal son had. Not
but that the best of men are guilty of many faults and infirmities, which they
have too much cause to repent of, as our Savior sufficiently intimates in that
Parable: For certainly it was no small infirmity in the elder brother, to be so
envious and to take so heinously the joyful welcome and entertainment which his
prodigal brother at his return found from his father: But yet this single fault
and sudden surprise of passion considering the constant duty which he had paid
to his father throughout the course of his life, did not make him such a sinner
as to need such a repentance as his brother did, which consisted in a perfect
change of the whole course of his life. And of such just persons as these, and
of such a repentance as this, it seems very plain that our Savior intended
this discourse.

III. But the main difficulty of all is, with what reason it is here said that
there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, than over ninety
and nine just persons which need no repentance? Is it not better not to offend,
than to sin and repent? Is not innocence better than amendment, and the wisdom
of prevention to be preferred before that of remedy? Is it worth the while to
do amiss to make way for repentance; and is not this almost like sinning that
grace may abound? And if repentance be not better than righteousness, why is
there more joy in heaven over the penitent than over the righteous; nay, over
one penitent sinner, than over ninety and nine just persons? Do not the blessed
always rejoice most in that which is really best? Here is the difficulty; and
it requires some care and consideration clearly to remove it. In order to which
be pleased to consider these three things; which I think to be very material to
the clearing of it.

I. That the same thing, considered in several respects, may in some respects
have the advantage of another thing, and for those reasons be preferred before
it, and yet not have the advantage of it absolutely and in all respects. Moral
comparisons are not to be exacted to a Mathematical strictness and rigor. To
this purpose I have observed in a former discourse, that it was long since
judiciously noted by Aristotle, That moral and proverbial speeches are not to
be taken too strictly, as if they were universally true, and in all cases: It
is sufficient if they be true for the most part, and in several respects which
are very considerable. And of this nature are most of the Proverbs of Solomon;
and whosoever shall go about to make out the truth of them in all cases, does
in my opinion take a very hard task upon himself. But which is nearer to my
purpose, our Savior himself in the Chapter before my Text, and in the moral
application of a Parable too, (namely that of the unjust steward) uses a
proverbial speech just in the same manner; The children of this world are in
their generation wiser than the children of light: Which is only a wise
observation that is generally true, and in many respects, but not absolutely,
and universally. For some men have been as wise and diligent for the glory of
God and interest of their souls, as ever any man was for this world, and for
the advancement of his temporal interest. Of the like nature is this saying
used by our Savior, probably taken (as our Savior did many other proverbial
speeches) from the Jews, and applied to his own purpose. For there are several
sayings of the Jewish Masters much to this purpose: As, Great is the dignity of
penitents; Great is the virtue of them that repent, so that no creature may
stand in their rank and order. And again, The righteous may not stand in the
same place with those that have repented. These I confess were very high
sayings, but yet very well designed for the encouragement of repentance. And
they are not without good reason, as will appear if we consider these two
things.

First, That the greater the difficulty of virtue is, so much the greater is
the praise and commendation of it: And not only we our selves take the more joy
and comfort in it, but it is more admirable and delightful to others. Now it
cannot be denied to be much more difficult to break off a vicious habit, than
to go on in a good way, which we have been trained up in and always accustomed
to. Those that have been well educated have great cause to thank God, and to
acknowledge the care of their Parents and Teachers: For piety and goodness are
almost infinitely easier to such persons, than to those who have wanted this
advantage. It is happy for them they never tasted of unlawful pleasures; if
they had, they would possibly have drank as deep as others: It is well they
were never entangled in a sinful course, nor enslaved to vicious habits, nor
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; if they had, they might possibly
never have been recovered out of the snare of the Devil. By the happiness of a
good education, and the merciful providence of God, a great part of many men's
virtue consists in their ignorance of vice, and their being kept out of the way
of great and dangerous temptations; rather in the good customs they have been
bred up to, than in the deliberate choice of their wills; and rather in the
happy preventions of evil, than their resolute constancy in that which is good.
And God, who knows what is in man, and sees to the bottom of every man's temper
and inclination, knows how far this man would have fallen, had he had the
temptations of other men; and how irrecoverably perhaps, he would have been
plunged in an evil course, had he once entered upon it. So that repentance is a
very great thing; and though it be the most just, and fit, and reasonable thing
in the world, yet for all that, it deserves great commendation, because it is
for the most part so very hard and difficult. And therefore, though absolutely
speaking, innocence is better than repentance, yet, as the circumstances may
be, the virtue of some penitents may be greater than of many just and righteous
persons.

Secondly, There is this consideration further to recommend repentance, that
they who are reclaimed from a wicked course, are many times more thoroughly and
zealously good afterward: Their trouble and remorse for their sins does
quicken and spur them on in the ways of virtue and goodness; and a lively sense
of their past errors is apt to make them more careful and conscientious of
their duty, more tender and fearful of offending God, and desirous, if it were
possible, to redeem their former miscarriages by their good behavior for the
future. Their love to God is usually more vehement, and burns with a brighter
flame; for to whomsoever much is forgiven, they will love much: And they are
commonly more zealous for the conversion of others; as being more sensible of
the danger sinners are in, and more apt to commiserate their case, remembering
that it was once their own condition, and with what difficulty they were
rescued from so great a danger. And for the most part great penitents are more
free from pride and contempt of others, the consideration of what themselves
once were, being enough to keep them humble all their days. So that penitents
are many times more thoroughly and perfectly good, and after their recovery do
in several respects outstrip and excel those who were never engaged in a
vicious course of life: As a broken bone that is well set, is sometimes
stronger than it was before.

2. It will conduce also very much to the extenuating of this difficulty, to
consider that our Savior does not here compare repentance with absolute
innocence and perfect righteousness, but with the imperfect obedience of good
men, who are guilty of many sins and infirmities; but yet upon account of the
general course and tenor of their lives are, by the mercy and favor of the
Gospel, esteemed just and righteous persons, and for the merits and perfect
obedience of our blessed Savior so accepted by God. Now this alters the case
very much, and brings the penitent and this sort of righteous persons much
nearer to one another: so that in comparing them together, the true penitent
may in some cases, and in some respects, have the advantage of the righteous,
and deserve upon some accounts to be preferred before him.

3. Which is principally to be considered for the full clearing of this
difficulty; this passage of our Saviors is to be understood as spoken very
much after the manner of men, and suitably to the nature of humane passions,
and the usual occasions of moving them. We are apt to be exceedingly affected
with the obtaining of what we did not hope for, and much more with the
regaining of what we looked upon as lost and desperate. Whatever be the reason
of it, such is the nature of man, that we are not so sensibly moved at the
continuance of a good which we have long possessed, as at the recovery of it
after it was lost and gone from us. And the reasons of a judicious value and
esteem of a settled pleasure and contentment are one thing, and the causes of
sudden joy and transport another. A continued course of goodness may in it self
be more valuable, and yet repentance after a great fall and long wanderings may
be much more moving and surprising. For where things are constant and keep in
the same tenor, they are not apt in their nature to give any new and sudden
occasion of joy. And this is the reason given in the Parable of the Prodigal
Son; where the Father tells his eldest Son, who was so offended at the joyful
reception and welcome of his prodigal Brother, That He had been always with
him, and all that he had was his; That is, he was sensible of his constant duty
and obedience, than which nothing could have been more acceptable; and that it
had not, nor should not lose its reward: But the return of his other son, after
he had given over all hopes of him, and looked upon his case as desperate, this
was a mavelous surprise, and a happiness beyond expectation; which is the
proper and natural cause of joy and gladness: And therefore he tells him, that
upon such an occasion it was meet that we should make merry and be glad; for
this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found. His
elder sons continuance in his duty was the enjoyment of what he had always had;
but the return of his prodigal son was the retrieving of what he had given up
for lost, and a kind of resurrection from the dead. And thus our blessed
Savior to encourage the repentance of sinners, represents God after the manner
of men; as if our heavenly father did conceive such a joy upon the repentance
of a sinner, as earthly parents are wont to do upon the return of a wild and
extravagant son to himself and his duty.

Having thus as briefly and clearly as I could explained the several
difficulties in the Text, I shall now deduce some Inferences from it, and so
conclude.

1. First, That the blessed Spirits above have some knowledge of the affairs of
men here below, because they are said to rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.
This is spoken more particularly of the Angels, as appears by comparing what is
more generally said in the Text, that there is joy in heaven, with what is more
particularly expressed in the 10 th verse, that there is joy in the presence of
the Angels over one sinner that repents. Now whether the Angels come to this
knowledge by virtue of their ministry here below, for the good of the Elect; and
so in their continual intercourse between heaven and earth, bring to their
fellow servants in heaven the joyful news of the repentance of sinners upon
earth: or whether God be pleased from time to time to reveal it to them, as a
thing extremely welcome and delightful to good spirits, and tending to the
increase of their happiness; as it is not very material to enquire, so perhaps
impossible for us to determine.

However, it cannot from hence be concluded that the Angels or Saints in Heaven
have such an universal knowledge of our condition and affairs, as to be a
reasonable ground and warrant to us to pray to them, yea or to desire them to
pray for us; no, though this were done without any solemn circumstances of
Invocation. For they may very well know some things concerning us, wherein
their own comfort and happiness is likewise concerned, and yet be ignorant of
all the rest of our affairs. This one thing we are sure they know, because our
Savior has told us so; but we are sure of no more. And there is neither equal
reason for their knowledge of our other concernments, nor is there any
revelation in Scripture to that purpose.

2. Secondly, If God and the blessed Spirits above rejoice at the conversion of
a sinner, so should we too: and not fret and murmur as the Pharisees here did.
This is the temper of the Devil, and of very bad men, to regret and envy the
good and happiness of others. For it is reasonable to believe, that
proportionably to the joy that is in heaven at the repentance of a sinner, is
the grief and vexation of the Devil and his instruments, of evil Spirits and
wicked men. And as the Devil delights in destroying souls, and goes about like
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; so no doubt he is in great rage,
and gnasheth out of very discontent, when at any time he is frustrated of his
hopes, and the prey, which he thought himself sure of, is snatched out of his
jaws. And thus we see it is with bad men, they do persecute those that forsake
them and their wicked ways, and refuse any further to go along with them to the
same excess of riot.

And this is no where more visible than among those of the Church of Rome. How
full of wrath and indignation are they against those who out of pure conviction
of the errors and corruptions of their Church come over to Ours? How do they
persecute them with slanders and reproaches, and with all the effects of hatred
and malice? So that many times they can scarce refrain from doing them a real
mischief, even where it is dangerous to themselves to attempt it: As if they
envied them the grace of God, and the opportunity of being saved.

I know it is too natural to those of all Communions to be eager and fierce
against those that desert them: And yet supposing they had the truth certainly
on their side (which they cannot all have), I see no great reason for this
temper and carriage; For why should I cast away my patience and my charity
because another man has made shipwreck of his faith? But I do not remember any
where among mankind to have observed a more implacable malice, a more sincere
and hearty ill will, than they of the Church of Rome do constantly express
toward those that forsake them; nay, though they give never so modest and
reasonable an account of their change, and behave themselves toward their old
friends with all the kindness and compassion in the world: yet their hatred and
indignation against them runs so high, that one may plainly see they would
sooner forgive a man the greatest sins that humane nature can be guilty of, and
the breach of all the ten Commandments, than this one Crime, of leaving their
Church, that is in truth, of growing wiser and better.

3. Thirdly, The consideration of what has been said should mightily inflame
our zeal, and quicken our industry and diligence for the conversion of sinners.
For if the conversion of one soul be worth so much labor and pains, and matter
of such joy to the blessed God and good Spirits; what pains should not we take
in so corrupt and degenerate an Age as this of ours; where impenitent sinners
do so much abound, and the just are almost failed from among the children of
men?

Our blessed Savior indeed (according to the extraordinary decency of all his
Parables) puts the case very charitably, and lays the supposition quite on the
other side: If there were but one sinner in the world, or but one of an
hundred, yet we should very zealously intend, and with all our might, the
reduction of this one lost sheep; and should never be at rest, till this single
wandering soul were found and saved. But God knows this is not our case, but
quite otherwise: which should quicken our endeavors so much the more, and make
us bestir our selves to the utmost; having always in our minds that admirable
saying of St. James, he that converteth a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death. He that knows the value of an immortal soul, and
how fearful a thing it is to perish everlastingly, can think no pains too much
to take to save a soul from death.

4. Lastly, What an argument and encouragement is here to repentance, even to
the greatest of sinners? They, I am sure, stand most in need of it: And though
they of all others have the least reason to look for mercy, yet they shall not
be refused; though they be like the Publicans and Heathens among the Jews, who
were not only reputed, but many times really were the worst of men; though like
the prodigal son here in the Parable, they have run away from their father, and
wasted their estate in lewd and riotous courses; yet whenever they come to
themselves, and are willing to return to their father, to acknowledge their
folly and repent of it, he is ready to receive them; nay, much more ready to
receive them than they can be to come to him: For when the Prodigal was but
coming toward his father, and was yet afar off, the father runs to meet him,
and embraces him with as much kindness as if he had never offended him, and
entertains him with more joy than if he had always continued with him.

How does the great God condescend to encourage our repentance; representing
himself and all the blessed company of heaven as transported with joy at the
conversion of a sinner, and almost setting a greater value upon repentance than
even upon innocence it self? And if our heavenly Father, who has been so
infinitely offended, and so highly provoked by us beyond all patience, be so
ready, so forward, so glad to receive us, and there be no hindrance, no
difficulty, no discouragement on his part; is it possible after all this, that
we can be such fools, and such enemies to our selves, as to be backward to our
own happiness! All of us, the best of us, have too much cause for repentance;
and I fear too many of us stand in need of that repentance intended by our
Savior in the Text, which consists in the change of our whole lives.

But I will not upbraid you with your faults; having no design to provoke, but
only to persuade men. I leave it to every ones conscience to tell him, how
great a sinner, how grievous an offender he has been. God knows we take no
pleasure in mentioning the sins of men, but only in their amendment; and we
would if it were possible even without minding them how bad they have been
persuade and encourage them to be better.

It is but a small consideration to tell you, how much it would cheer and
comfort our hearts, and quicken our zeal and industry for the salvation of
souls, to see some fruit of our labors; that all our pains are not lost, and
that all the good counsel that is from hence tendered to you is not like rain
falling upon the rocks, and showers upon the sands.

But I have much greater considerations to offer to you; that your Repentance
will at once rejoice the heart of God, and Angels, and men: that it is a
returning to a right mind, and the restoring of you to your selves, to the ease
and peace of your own consciences, and to a capacity of being everlastingly
happy: that it is to take pity upon your selves and your poor immortal souls;
and to take due care to prevent, that which is to be dreaded above all things,
the being miserable for ever: and last of all, That if you will not repent now,
the time will certainly come, and that perhaps in this life, when you shall see
the greatest need of repentance, and yet perhaps with miserable Esau find no
place for it, though you seek it carefully with tears; when you shall cry,
Lord, Lord, and the door shall be shut against you; and shall seek to enter,
but shall not be able To be sure in the other World you shall eternally repent
to no purpose; and be continually lamenting your wretched condition without
hopes of remedy; For there shall be weeping and wailing without effect, without
intermission, and without end.

And what cause have we to thank God that this is not yet our case; that we are
yet on this side the pit of destruction and the gulf of despair? O the infinite
patience and boundless goodness of God to sinners! With what clemency has he
spared us, and suffered our manners thus long? and with what kindness and
concernment does he still call upon us to leave our sins and to return to him;
as if in so doing we should make him happy, and not our selves? With what
earnest longings and desires does he wait and wish for our repentance, saying,
O that there were such a heart in them! O that they would hearken unto my
voice! When shall it once be? Thus God is represented in Scripture as patiently
attending and listening what effect his admonitions and counsels, his reproofs
and threatenings will have upon sinners, Jer. 8.6, I hearkened and I heard, but
they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have
I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

And is not this our case? God has long waited for our repentance; and once a
year we solemnly pretend to set about it: But many of us hitherto, I fear,
instead of returning to God, have but more blindly and furiously run on in our
course, like the horse that has no understanding; yea, in this more brutish
than the Beast, that he rusheth into the battle without any consideration of
death or danger, and destroys himself without a syllogism: But we sinners have
Reason, and yet are mad; the greatest part of evildoers are sufficiently
sensible of the danger of their course, and convinced that eternal misery and
ruin will be the end of it; and yet, I know not how, they make a shift upon one
pretense or other to discourse and reason themselves into it.

But because the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than a
two-edged-sword, and comes with a greater weight and force upon the minds of
men than any humane persuasion whatsoever; I will conclude all with those short
and serious counsels and exhortations of God to sinners by his holy Prophets.

Consider and show your selves men, O ye transgressors: Be instructed, O
Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee: seek the Lord while he may be found;
call upon him while he is near: Repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not he your ruin.

A SERMON Concerning the SIN Against the HOLY GHOST.
Matthew XII.31, 32. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men:

And whosoever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.


THE occasion of these words of our blessed Savior was the blasphemy of the
Pharisees against that divine power by which he wrought his miracles, and
particularly did cast out Devils. Which works of his, though they were wrought
by the Spirit of God, yet they obstinately and maliciously imputed them to the
power of the Devil. Upon which our Savior takes occasion to declare the danger
of this sin, which he calls blaspheming of the Holy Ghost: and tells them, that
this was so great a sin above all others, that it is in a peculiar manner
unpardonable. Wherefore I say unto you, etc.

For the explaining of these words, and the nature and unpardonableness of this
sin, we will enquire into these four things:

First, What is the difference between speaking against the Son of Man, and
speaking against the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, Wherein the Nature of this sin or blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
does consist.

Thirdly, In what sense this sin is here said to be peculiarly unpardonable. And

Fourthly, Upon what account it is so.

1. What is the difference between speaking against the son of man and speaking
against the Holy Ghost. The reason of this enquiry is, because the Text plainly
puts a great difference between them, though it be not obvious to discern where
it lies. For our Savior tells us, that whosoever speaks a word against the son
of man, it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost
it shall never be forgiven him: And yet this blasphemy of the Pharisees against
the Holy Ghost was a speaking against the Son of man. For to say that he cast
out Devils by the power of the Devil, though it was a blaspheming of the Holy
Ghost by whose power he wrought these miracles, yet it was likewise a
blaspheming of Christ himself; and was in effect to say, that he was no true
Prophet, nor did come from God, but was a Magician and Impostor.

For the removing of this difficulty I shall not need to say, as some learned
men have done, That by the son of man is here to be understood any man, and
that our Savior is not particularly designed by it. That seems very hard, when
our Savior is so frequently in the Gospel called the son of man. And
especially when St. Luke reciting these words, does immediately before give him
this very title, to put the matter out of all doubt, Luke 12.8, 9, 10, Also I
say unto you, whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man
also confess before the Angels of God: But he that denies me before men, shall
be denied before the Angels of God. Upon which it follows, And whosoever shall
speak a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him. So that in all
reason the Son of man is the very same person that had this Title given him in
the foregoing words, viz. our blessed Savior. So that I take it for granted,
that by speaking against the son of man, is here meant speaking against Christ:
And by speaking against him, as it is opposed to speaking against the Holy
Ghost, is meant all those reproaches and contumelies which they cast upon our
Saviors person, without reflecting upon that divine power which he testified
by his miracles. As, their reproaching him with the meanness of his birth, Is
not this the Carpenters son? with the place of it (as they supposed) out of
Galilee arises no Prophet: Their reflecting upon his life, saying that he was
a wine-bibber and a glutton, a friend of publicans and sinners; with many other
calumnies which they maliciously cast upon him.

But by speaking against the Holy Ghost is meant their blaspheming and
reproaching that divine power whereby he wrought his miracles: which though it
did at last likewise reflect upon our Saviors person, yet it was an immediate
reflection upon the Holy Ghost, and a blaspheming of him; and therefore it is
called speaking against the Holy Ghost by way of distinction or opposition to
the other calumnies which they used against our Savior; which were proper
blasphemies and reproaches of his Person, but not of the Holy Ghost also, as
this was. This seems to me to be the true difference here intended by our
Savior between speaking against the Son of man, and speaking against the Holy
Ghost. Let us in the

II. Second place, enquire wherein the Nature of this sin or blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost does consist. And the true Nature of this sin, though it be so
plainly to be gathered from our Saviors description of it, yet I know not how
a great many learned men have made a hard shift to mistake it. Some have made
it to be final Impenitency, because that is unpardonable. But why that rather
than any thing else that is bad should be called a blaspheming of the Holy
Ghost, it is hard to give a reason. Others have placed the nature of it in a
wilful and malicious opposition of the truth: which though it be a great sin,
and included in the sin here spoken of, or a concomitant of it; yet is there
great reason to believe that this is not all that is here meant by it. Others
would have it to consist in a malicious opposition of the Truth, when men know
and are convinced that it is the Truth, which is a great sin indeed, if ever
any man were guilty of it; but it is a great Question whether humane nature be
capable of it. And to mention no more, others think it to consist in a
renouncing of the truth for fear of suffering; which made Francis Spira to
think that he had committed this sin.

But with all due respect to the judgment of others, I cannot think that any of
these is the sin our Savior here describes. As I shall endeavor plainly to
show, by considering the occasion of our Saviors mentioning of it; the persons
upon whom our Savior charge this sin; and upon what account he charge them
with it.

At the 22 ver. of this Chapter there was brought to our Savior one possessed
with a Devil blind and dumb, and he healed him. Upon this the people were
amazed, and said, is not this the son of David? that is, the Messiah. The
Pharisees hearing this, with great bitterness and contempt said, This fellow
does not cast out Devils but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Upon on this
our Savior represents to them the unreasonableness of this calumny: and that
upon these two considerations: 1 st. That it was very unlikely that the Devil
should lend him this power to use it against himself. Every kingdom divided
against it self is brought to desolation: and every city or house divided
against it self shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself, how shall then his kingdom stand? 2 dly, Our Savior tells
them, they might with as much reason attribute all miracles to the Devil. There
were those among themselves who cast out Devils in the name of the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (as Origin and Tertullian, and Justin Martyr tell us).
Of these our Savior speaks, and asks the Pharisees, by what power they cast
them out. But they aknowledged that these did it by the power of God: and there
was no cause but their malice, why they should not have acknowledged that he
did it likewise by the same power, ver. 27, If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils,
by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.
That is, this may be sufficient to convince you malice of to me: But if I cast
out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you; That
is, the Messiah is come: Because he wrought these and other miracles to prove
that he was the Messiah. And then it follows, Wherefore I say unto you, all
manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

So that the Pharisees are the persons charged with this sin or blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost. And their blasphemy was plainly this, that when he cast
out Devils by the Spirit of God, they said he did it by the power of the Devil:
they maliciously ascribed these works of the Holy Ghost to the Devil.

And that this is the ground why our Savior charge them with this sin
against the Holy Ghost is yet more plain from St. Mark, Mark 3.28, 29, 30,
Verily I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: but he that blasphemeth
against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation: because they said he has an unclean Spirit. That is, because the
Pharisees charged him to be a Magician, and to have a familiar Spirit, by whose
assistance he did those works, when in truth he did them by the Spirit of God,
therefore our Savior declares them guilty of this sin of blaspheming the Holy
Ghost, which should never be forgiven.

So that the nature of this sin did consist in a most malicious opposition to
the utmost evidence that could be given to the truth of any Religion. Our
blessed Savior to show that he was sent by God, and came from him, wrought
miracles, such as did plainly evidence a divine power and presence accompanying
of him. For in St. Luke he is said to do them by the finger of God, Luke 11.20,
By the finger of God, that is, to do such things as were an undeniable evidence
of the divine power and presence. And this is the utmost testimony that God
ever gave to any person that was sent by him. And the Pharisees were
eyewitnesses of those miracles which our Savior wrought, so that they could
not deny them: Yet such was their opposition to him and his doctrine, that,
though they saw these things done by him, and could not deny the reality of
them, yet rather than they would own him to be the Messiah, and his Doctrine to
come from God, they most maliciously and unreasonably ascribed them to the
power of the Devil. And this was the blasphemy which they were guilty of
against the Holy Ghost. And herein lay the greatness of their sin, in resisting
the evidence of those miracles which were so plainly wrought by the Holy Ghost;
and which though themselves saw, yet they maliciously imputed them to the
Devil, rather than they would be convinced by them. And this is so very plain,
that hardly any man that considers our Saviors discourse upon this occasion
can otherwise determine the nature of this sin; especially if he do but attend
to those remarkable words which I cited before ( Mark 3.29,) but he that
blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost has never forgiveness, but is in danger of
eternal damnation; because they said he has an unclean spirit. I come now to
the

III. Third thing I propounded, namely, in what sense this sin is here said to
be peculiarly unpardonable? For this our Savior positively affirms to be in
this different from all other sins, that it is capable of no pardon: I say unto
you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men: And to show
what he means by the not forgiving of it, he tells us, that eternal punishment
shall follow it in the other World. Whosoever speaks a word against the son
of man it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost
it shall never be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. Which St. Mark expresses more plainly; that it shall bring those who are
guilty of it to eternal damnation, Mark 3.29, He that blasphemeth against the
Holy Ghost has never forgiveness, but is liable to eternal damnation. So that
when our Savior says, it shall never be forgiven, neither in this world nor in
the world to come, he does not intend to insinuate that some sins which are not
forgiven in this world, may be forgiven in the other: but in these words he
either alludes to the opinion of the Jews concerning the effect of the highest
excommunication, the sentence whereof they held not to be reversible, neither
in this world nor the other; or else the reason of this expression may probably
be to meet with a common and false opinion amongst the Jews, which was, that
some sins which are not pardoned to men in this life, may by sacrifices be
expiated in the other; and therefore he says it shall never be forgiven,
neither in this world nor the other. And St. Mark more plainly, that those who
are guilty of it shall never have forgiveness, but be liable to eternal
damnation. So that our Savior's meaning seems plainly to be this, that this
sin is altogether incapable of forgiveness. I know some have endeavored to
mollify this matter, but (I think) without sufficient reason. Grotius
understands the words comparatively, that any sort of sin shall sooner be
forgiven than this against the Holy Ghost; and that our Savior only intended
to express the greatness and heinousness of this sin above others; in which
respect the pardon of it would be more difficult than of any other sin; but yet
that the case of such a person is not absolutely desperate: But if our Savior
had intended to say that this sin was absolutely unpardonable, I would fain
know how could he have expressed the matter in higher fuller words? Dr. Hammond
mollifies the words another way; that this sin shall never be pardoned but upon
a particular repentance for it: As if our Savior's meaning was, that a general
repentance, which was sufficient for sins of Ignorance, would not be sufficient
in this case, but there must be a particular repentance for it, without which
it would never be pardoned. But this is by no means agreeable to the scope of
our Savior's discourse: Because he plainly intends to difference this from all
other sorts of sins, I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy, shall be
forgiven unto men. But according to this interpretation our Savior must mean,
that all other sins would be forgiven upon a general repentance; which is not
true, for there are many other sins besides sins of Ignorance; there are wilful
and heinous sins, such as wilful murder and adultery and blasphemy, (that only
excepted which is against the Holy Ghost) and the like gross sins, which all
Divines hold shall not be forgiven, but upon a particular repentance. So that
this interpretation does not sufficiently difference this sin from all other
sorts of sins, which yet it is very plain our Savior intended to do. It
remains then that these words must in all reason be understood absolutely; that
the persons that are guilty of this great sin shall never have it forgiven to
them. And it may be this will not seem so harsh, when we have considered in the

IV. Fourth place, how it comes to pass that this sin is above all others
incapable of pardon: And that, upon these two accounts.

First, Because by this sin men resist their last remedy, and oppose the best
and utmost means of their conviction. What can God be imagined to do more to
convince a man of a Divine Revelation, or of the truth of any Doctrine or
message that comes from him, than to work miracles to this purpose? And what
greater assurance can men have that miracles are wrought, than to be
eyewitnesses of them themselves? And if men will resist such evidence, what
can God do more for their satisfaction? If when men see plain miracles wrought,
they will say that it is not the power of God that does them, but the power of
the Devil: And if when men see the Devils cast out, they will say that the
Devil conspires against himself, this is to outface the Sun at Noonday, and
there is no way left to convince such perverse persons of the truth of any
Divine Revelation. So that there is no remedy, but such persons must continue
in their opposition to the truth. For this is such a sin as does in its own
nature shut out and prevent all remedy. And he that thus perversely and
maliciously opposes the truth, must upon the same grounds unavoidably continue
in his opposition to it; because there is nothing left to be done for his
conviction, more than is already done. If God should send a person immediately
from heaven to him, to convince him of his error, he can give him no greater
testimony that he comes from God than miracles: And if when God enables that
person to work these by the power of his Spirit, this man will obstinately
impute them to the power of the Devil, he defeats all the imaginable means of
his own conviction. So that it is no wonder if that sin be unpardonable, which
resists the last and utmost means which God has ever yet thought fit to use to
bring men to repentance and salvation. And if God were willing to reveal
himself, and the way to pardon and salvation to such a one, he does by this
very temper and disposition render himself incapable of being satisfied and
convinced concerning any divine Revelation.

Secondly, Because this sin is of that high nature that God is therefore justly
provoked to withdraw his grace from such persons; and, it is probable, resolved
so to do: without which grace they will continue impenitent. There is no doubt
but God, if he will, can work so powerfully upon the minds of men by his Grace
and Spirit, as to convince the most obstinate: and supposing them to be
convinced and repent, it cannot be denied but that they would be forgiven. And
therefore, when our Savior here says, they shall not be forgiven, it is
reasonable to suppose that he means, that when persons are come to that degree
of obstinacy and malice, God will (as justly he may) withdraw his grace from
them: His spirit will not strive with them, to overcome their obstinacy; but
will leave them to the bias of their own perverse and malicious minds; which
will still engage them in a further opposition to the truth, and finally sink
them in perdition. So that being deserted by God, and for want of the necessary
help and aid of his grace (justly withdrawn from them) continuing finally
impenitent, they become incapable of forgiveness both in this world and that
which is to come. And there is nothing that can seem harsh or unreasonable in
this, to those who grant (as I think all men do) that God may be so provoked by
men as justly to withdraw his grace from them in this life; that grace which is
necessary to their repentance. And surely if any provocation be likely to do
it, this cannot be denied to be of all others the greatest, obstinately and
maliciously to oppose the utmost evidence that God ever gave to the truth of
any Doctrine revealed by him. And of this the Pharisees, who are here charged
with this sin against the Holy Ghost, were notoriously guilty, in resisting the
clear evidence of our Saviors miracles.

And thus I have done with the four things I propounded to enquire into from
these words. Namely, The difference between speaking against the Son of man,
and speaking against the Holy Ghost; wherein the Nature of this sin or
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost does consist; and in what sense this sin is
said to be unpardonable; and upon what account it is so, Namely, because men by
this sin resist their last remedy, and oppose the best and utmost means of
their conviction: And because it may reasonably be supposed, that upon a
provocation of this high nature God may, and is resolved to withdraw that grace
from such persons which is necessary to their repentance, without which their
sin remains for ever unpardonable.

All that now remains is to make this discourse some way or other useful to our
selves. And it may very well serve to these two purposes. First, to comfort
some very good and pious persons who are liable to despair out of an
apprehension that they have committed this sin. Secondly, To caution others
against the approaches to it.

1. First, To comfort some very good and pious persons, who are liable to
despair upon an apprehension that they have committed this great and
unpardonable sin; and consequently, are utterly incapable of ever being
restored to the mercy and favor of God. And nothing can be more for the
comfort of such persons than to understand aright what the nature of this sin
was, and wherein the heinousness of it does consist; which I have endeavored
to manifest. And if this be the Nature of it which I have declared, as it seems
very plain that it is, then I cannot see how any person now is likely to be in
those circumstances as to be capable of committing it. And being a sin of so
heinous a nature, and declared by our Savior to be absolutely unpardonable,
there is no reason to extend it beyond the case to which our Savior applies
it; which was the resisting of the evidence of the miracles which were wrought
for the truth of Christianity, by those who were eyewitnesses of them, that
is, by those who had the utmost assurance of them that humane nature is capable
of. And not only a bare resistance of that evidence, but with a very malicious
circumstance, so as to impute those works which were wrought by the Holy Ghost,
to the power of the Devil. This was the case of the Pharisees, whom our Savior
charge with this sin. And no body has warrant to extend this sin any further
than this case: and without good warrant it would be the most uncharitable
thing in the world to extend it any further.

That which comes nearest to it, both in the heinousness of the crime, and the
unpardonableness of it, is total Apostasy from Christianity after the
embracing of it, and full conviction of the truth of it. And this the Scripture
seems to place, if not in the same rank, yet, very near to it. And of this the
Apostle speaks very often in the Epistle to the Hebrews under the name of
unbelief, and sin by way of eminence, as being the great sin that Christians
were in danger of falling into, called in that Epistle (Heb. 12.1.) (...), the
sin which Christians, by reason of the circumstances they were then in, were
especially subject to: And he parallels it with the case of the Jews in the
wilderness, concerning whom God swear that they should not enter into his rest,
namely, the earthly Canaan, which was a type of Heaven. Chap. 3. ver. 18. And
Chap. 6. ver. 4, 5, 6, more expressly. For it is impossible that those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, if they should fall away, to renew them again to repentance.
Where by impossible, the least that can be meant is, that it is extremely
difficult for such persons to recover themselves by repentance. And it is
observable that those persons are said to have been partakers of the Holy
Ghost; by which is meant, that they were either endued with a power of miracles
by the Holy Ghost, or were under the conviction of them as having seen them
wrought by others. So that this Apostasy may be said in that respect to be a
sin against the Holy Ghost. So likewise, Chap. 10. ver. 26, If we sin wilfully
after we have received the knowledge of the truth (that is, if we apostatize
from Christianity after we have embraced the profession of it, as appears
plainly from the scope of the Apostles discourse) there remains no more
sacrifice for sin: which expression declares this sin either to be
unpardonable, or something very like it. And at the 29. verse. Those persons are
said to tread under foot the Son of God, and to do despite unto the Spirit of
Grace. Which signifies that the sin there spoken of is more immediately
committed against the Holy Spirit of God. St. Peter likewise declares the great
danger of this sin, 2 Pet. 2.20, If after they have escaped the pollutions of
the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning. St. John likewise seems to speak of this sin of Apostasy, and to
call it a sin unto death: Discouraging Christians rather, from praying for
those who were fallen into it; which gives great suspicion that he looked upon
it as hardly pardonable, 1 John 5.16, If any man see his brother sin a sin not
unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for those that sin not
unto death. There is a sin unto death; I do not say that he shall pray for it.
Now that by the sin unto death, the Apostle here means Apostasy from the
Christian Religion to the Heathen Idolatry seems extremely probable from what
follows, ver. 18, We know that whosoever is born of God sins not, but
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not; that is, he preserves
himself from Idolatry, which the Devil had seduced the world into, ver. 19, And
we know that we are of God; and the whole world lies in wickedness, (...), in
the wicked one; that is, is under the power of the Devil: And we know that the
Son of God is come, and has given us understanding to know him that is true;
that is, to distinguish between the true God and Idols. And then it follows,
this is the true God, and eternal life: Little children keep your selves from
Idols. Which last caution is a key to the understanding of all the rest; and
makes it very probable that the sin unto death is Apostasy from Christianity
unto Idolatry: Otherwise it is hard to imagine how the last clause comes in;
Little children keep your selves from Idols. And this is that sin which of all
other approaches nearest to this sin against the Holy Ghost, which our Savior
speaks of; and concerning the pardonableness of which the Scripture seems to
speak very doubtfully. But if it were of the same unpardonable nature, yet this
can be no trouble to those persons I am speaking of, who cannot but know
themselves to be far enough from the guilt of this sin.

As for those other sins which by some are taken to be the sins against the
Holy Ghost, they are either such as no man is capable of committing, as a
malicious opposition to the truth when I am convinced and know it to be the
truth: For this is a contradiction. Because to know any thing to be the truth
is to believe it to be so: and therefore no man can disbelieve it while he
believes it to be truth. Or else, they are such as no man can know he is guilty
of in this life; as, final impenitency; which supposes a man to live and die
without repentance. Or else, such as I think not good man is incident to; as, a
malicious and perverse opposing of the truth after sufficient means of
conviction. However, none of these are that which the Scripture descrihes to be
the sin against the Holy Ghost, as I have already shown.

But still there are two things which usually trouble honest and well-meaning
persons; but are rather the effects of Melancholy than any reasonable ground of
trouble. Some think that every deliberate sin against knowledge, and after
conviction, is the sin against the Holy Ghost. This is aknowledged to be a very
great aggravation of sin, and such as calls for a great and particular
repentance; but does by no means render a man incapable of forgiveness. Others
are troubled with blasphemous thoughts, and those they think to be the sin
against the Holy Ghost. But this is generally the mere effect of Melancholy.
And the persons that are troubled with these black thoughts are no ways
consenting to them; but they rise in their minds perfectly against their wills,
and without any approbation of theirs: And in this case they are so far from
being the unpardonable sin, that I hope, yea and verily believe they are no
sins at all, but the mere effects of a bodily distemper; and no more imputed to
us, than the wild and idle ravings of a man in a frenzy or a fever: And God
forbid that the natural effects of a bodily disease should bring guilt upon our
souls. So that these persons have reason enough for comfort; but the misery is,
their present distemper renders them incapable of it.

2. Secondly, The other Use I would make of this discourse is, to caution men
against the degrees and approaches of this sin. For if the sin against the Holy
Ghost be of such a high nature and so unpardonable, then all approaches to it
are very dreadful. Such as are, profane scoffing at Religion, and the Holy
Spirit of God which dwells in good men: Abuse of the holy Scriptures, which
were indicted by the Spirit of God: Perverse Infidelity, notwithstanding all the
evidence which we have for the Truth of Christianity, and sufficient assurance
of the Miracles wrought for the confirmation of it, brought down to us by
credible History, though we were not eyewitnesses of them: Obstinacy in a
sinful and vicious course, notwithstanding all the motives and arguments of the
Gospel to persuade men to repentance. Sinning against the clear conviction of
our Consciences, and the motions and suggestions of God's Holy Spirit to the
contrary: Malicious opposing of the Truth, when the Arguments for it are very
plain and evident to any impartial and unprejudiced mind; and when he that
opposes the Truth, has no clear satisfaction in his own mind to the contrary,
but suffers himself to be furiously and headily carried on in his opposition to
it. These are all sins of a very high nature, and of the nearest affinity with
this great and unpardonable sin, of any that can easily be instanced in. And
though God, to encourage the repentance of men, have not declared them
unpardonable, yet they are great provocations; and if they be long continued
in, we know not how soon God may withdraw his grace from us, and suffer us to
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Be ready then to entertain the truth of God, whenever it is fairly propounded
to thee; and with such evidence, as thou art willing to accept in other
matters, where thou have no prejudice nor interest to the contrary. Do nothing
contrary to thy known duty, but be careful in all things to obey the
convictions of thine own conscience, and to yield to the good motions and
suggestions of God's Holy Spirit, who works secretly upon the minds of men, and
inspires us many times gently with good thoughts and inclinations, and is
grieved when we do not comply with them; and after many repulses will at last
withdraw himself from us, and leave us to be assaulted by the temptations of
the Devil, and to be hurried away by our own lusts into ruin and perdition.

A SERMON OF CHARITY AND ALMS.
Acts X.38. -- Who went about doing good.


WHen Almighty God designed the Reformation of the World, and the restoring of
Man to the Image of God, the Pattern after which he was first made, he did not
think it enough to give us the most perfect Laws of holiness and virtue; but
has likewise set before us a living Pattern, and a familiar Example, to excite
and encourage us, to go before us and show us the way, and, as it were, to lead
us by the hand in the obedience of those Laws. Such is the Sovereign Authority
of God over men, that he might, if he had pleased, have only given us a Law
written with his own hand, as he did to the people of Israel from Mount Sinai:
but such is his Goodness, that he has sent a great Ambassador from Heaven to
us, God manifested in the flesh, to declare and interpret his will and
pleasure; and not only so, but to fulfill that Law himself, the observation
whereof he requires of us. The bare Rules of a good life are a very dead and
ineffectual thing in comparison of a living Example, which shows us the
possibility and practicableness of our Duty; both that it may be done, and how
to do it. Religion indeed did always consist in an Imitation of God, and in our
resemblance of those excellencies which shine forth in the best and most
perfect Being: but we may imitate him now with much greater ease and advantage,
since God was pleased to become Man, on purpose to show us how Men may become
like to God. And this is one great End for which the Son of God came into the
world, and was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and conversed so long and
familiarly with mankind; that in his own Person and Life he might give us the
Example of all that holiness and virtue which his Laws require of us. And as he
was in nothing liker the Son of God than in being and doing good; so is he in
nothing a fitter Pattern for our imitation, than in that excellent character
given of him here in the Text, that He went about doing good.

In which words two things offer themselves to our consideration.

First, Our Savior's great Work and Business in the world, which was, to do
good: (...), Who employed himself in being a benefactour to mankind. This
refers more especially to his healing the bodily diseases and infirmities of
men. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power; who
went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil.
Intimating to us by this instance of his doing good, that he who took so much
pains to rescue men's Bodies from the power and possession of the Devil, would
not let their Souls remain under his tyranny. But though the Text instanceth
only in one particular, yet this general expression of doing good comprehends
all those several ways whereby he was beneficial to mankind.

Secondly, Here is his Diligence and Industry in this work, He went about doing
good; he made it the great business and constant employment of his life. I
shall propound to you the Pattern of our Savior in both these particulars.

I. His great Work and Business in the world was, to do good. The most pleasant
and delightful, the most happy and glorious work in the world. It is a work of
a large extent, and of an universal influence; and comprehends in it all those
ways whereby we may be useful and beneficial to one another. And indeed it were
pity that so good a thing should be confined within narrow bounds and limits.
It reaches to the Souls of men, and to their Bodies; and is conversant in all
those ways and kinds whereby we may serve the Temporal or Spiritual good of our
neighbor, and promote his present and his future happiness. What our Blessed
Savior did in this kind, and we, in imitation of him, ought to do, I shall
reduce to these two Heads. First, Doing good to the Souls of men, and
endeavoring to promote their spiritual and eternal happiness. Secondly, The
procuring of their Temporal good, and contributing as much as may be to their
happiness in this present life.

1. Doing good to the Souls of men, and endeavoring to promote their spiritual
and eternal happiness, by good Instruction, and by good Example.

First, By good Instruction. And under Instruction I comprehend all the means
of bringing men to the knowledge of their duty, and exciting them to the
practice of it; by instructing their Ignorance, and removing their Prejudices,
and rectifying their Mistakes, by Persuasion, and by Reproof; and by making
lasting provision for the promoting of these Ends.

By instructing men's Ignorance. And this is a duty which every man owes to
another, as he has opportunity; but especially to those who are under our care
and charge, our Children and Servants, and near Relations; those over whom we
have a special authority, and a more immediate influence. This our Blessed
Savior made his great work in the world, to instruct all sorts of persons in
the things which concerned the Kingdom of God, and to direct them in the way to
eternal happiness; by public teaching, and by private conversation, and by
taking occasion from the common occurrences of humane life, and every object
that presented it self to him, to instill good counsel into men, and to raise
their minds to the consideration of divine and heavenly things. And though this
was our Savior's great Employment, and is theirs more particularly whose
office it is to teach others: yet every man has private opportunities of
instructing others, by admonishing them of their duty, and by directing them to
the best means and helps of knowledge; such as are Books of Piety and Religion,
with which they that are rich may furnish those who are unable to provide them
for themselves.

And then by removing men's Prejudices against the Truth, and rectifying their
Mistakes. This our Savior found very difficult; the generality of those with
whom he had to do, being strongly prejudiced against Him and his Doctrine by
false Principles, which they had taken in by education, and been trained up to
by their Teachers. And therefore he used a great deal of meekness in
instructing those that opposed themselves, and exercised abundance of patience
in bearing with the infirmities of men, and their dullness and flowness of
capacity to receive the Truth.

And this is great Charity, to consider the inveterate Prejudices of men;
especially those which are rooted in education, and which men are confirmed in
by the reverence they bear to those that have been their Teachers. And great
allowance is to be given to men in this case, and time to bethink themselves,
and to consider better. For no man that is in an Error think he is so: and
therefore if we go violently to rend their Opinions from them, they will but
hold them so much the faster; but if we have patience to unrip them by degrees,
they will at last fall in pieces of themselves.

And when this is done, the way is open for Counsel and Persuasion. And this
our Savior administered in a most powerful and effectual manner, by encouraging
men to Repentance, and by representing to them the infinite advantages of
obeying his Laws, and the dreadful and dangerous consequences of breaking of
them. And these are arguments fit to work upon mankind, because there is
something within us that consents to the equity and reasonableness of God's
Laws. So that whenever we persuade men to their duty, how backward soever they
may be to the practice of it, being strongly addicted to a contrary course; yet
we have this certain advantage, that we have their Consciences and the most
inward sense of their minds on our side, bearing witness, that what we counsel
and persuade them to, is for their good.

And if need be, we must add Reproof to Counsel. This our Savior did with
great freedom, and sometimes with sharpness and severity, according to the
condition of the persons he had to deal withal. But because of his great
Authority, being a Teacher immediately sent from God, and of his intimate
knowledge of the hearts of men, he is not a pattern to us in all the
circumstances of discharging this duty; which, if any other, requires great
prudence and discretion, if we intend to do good, the only end to be aimed at
in it. For many are fit to be reproved, whom yet every man is not fit to
reprove; and in that case we must get it done by those that are fit, and great
regard must be had to the time, and other circumstances of doing it, so as it
may most probably have its effect.

I will mention but one way of Instruction more, and that is, by making lasting
provision for that purpose: as, by founding Schools of learning, especially to
teach the poor to read, which is the Key of knowledge; by building of Churches
and endowing them; by buying or giving in Impropriations, or the like. These
are large and lasting ways of teaching and instructing others, which will
continue when we are dead and gone; as it is said of Abel, that being dead, he
yet speaks. And this our Savior virtually did, by appointing his Apostles
after he had left the World to go and teach all Nations, and ordering a
constant Succession of Teachers in his Church, to instruct men in the Christian
Religion, together with an honorable Maintenance for them. This we cannot do
in the way that he did, who had all power in heaven and earth; but we may be
subservient to this Design in the ways that I have mentioned. Which I humbly
commend to the consideration of those whom God has blessed with great Estates,
and made capable of effecting such great works of Charity.

Secondly, Another way of doing good to the Souls of men is by good Example.
And this our Blessed Savior was in the utmost perfection. For he fulfilled all
righteousness, had no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. And this we
should endeavor to be, as far as the frailty of our nature and imperfection of
our present state will suffer. For good Example is an unspeakable benefit to
mankind, and has a secret power and influence upon those with whom we
converse, to form them into the same disposition and manners. It is a living
Rule, that teaches men without trouble, and lets them see their faults without
open reproof and upbraiding. Besides that it adds great weight to a man's
counsel and persuasion, when we see that he advises nothing but what he does;
nor exacts any thing from others from which he himself desires to be excused.
As, on the contrary, nothing is more cold and insignificant, than good counsel
from a bad man, one that does not obey his own precepts, nor follow the advice
which he is so forward to give to others.

These are the several ways of doing good to the Souls of men; wherein we, who
are the Disciples of the Blessed Jesus, ought, in imitation of his Example, to
exercise our selves according to our several capacities and opportunities. And
this is the noblest Charity, and the greatest kindness that can be shown to
humane nature; it is in the most excellent sense, to give eyes to the blind, to
set the prisoners at liberty, to rescue men out of the saddest slavery and
captivity, and to save Souls from death. And it is the most lasting and durable
benefit; because it is to do men good to all eternity.

2. The other way of being beneficial to others is, by procuring their Temporal
good, and contributing to their happiness in this present life. And this, in
subordination to our Savior's great design of bringing men to eternal
Happiness, was a great part of his business and employment in this world. He
went about healing all manner of sicknesses and diseases, and rescuing the
Bodies of men from the power and possession of the Devil.

And though we cannot be beneficial to men in that miraculous manner that he
was, yet we may be so in the use of ordinary means: We may comfort the
afflicted, and vindicate the oppressed, and do a great many acts of Charity
which our Savior, by reason of his poverty, could not do without a miracle: We
may supply the necessities of those that are in want, feed the hungry, and
cloth the naked, and visit the sick, and minister to them such comforts and
remedies as they are not able to provide for themselves: We may take a Child
that is poor and destitute of all advantages of education, and bring him up in
the knowledge and fear of God; and, without any great expense, put him into a
way wherein, by his diligence and industry, he may arrive to a considerable
fortune in the world, and be able afterward to relieve hundreds of others. Men
glory in raising great and magnificent Structures, and find a secret pleasure
to see Sets of their own planting to grow up and flourish: But surely it is a
greater and more glorious work, to build up a Man, and to see a Youth of our
own planting, from the small beginnings and advantages we have given him, to
grow up into a considerable fortune, to take root in the world, and to shoot up
to such a height, and spread his branches so wide, that we who first planted
him may our selves find comfort and shelter under his shadow. We may many times
with a small liberality shore up a Family that is ready to fall, and struggles
under such necessities, that it is not able to support it self. And if our
minds were as great as sometimes our estates are, we might do great and public
works of a general and lasting advantage, and for which many generations to
come might call us blessed.

And those who are in the lowest condition may do great good to others by their
Prayers, if they themselves be as good as they ought. For the fervent prayer of
a righteous man avails much. The intercession of those who are in favor with
God (as all good men are) are not vain wishes, but many times effectual to
procure that good for others, which their own endeavors could never have
effected and brought about.

I have done with the First thing, The great Work and Business which our
Blessed Savior had to do in the world; and that was, to do good. I proceed to
the

II. Second thing contained in the Text, Our Savior's Diligence and industry
in this work, He went about doing good. He made it the great business and
constant employment of his life; he traveled from one place to another to seek
out opportunities of being useful and beneficial to mankind. And this will
fully appear, if we briefly consider these following particulars.

First, How unwearied our blessed Savior was in doing good. He made it his
only business, and spent his whole life in it. He was not only ready to do good
to those that came to him, and gave him opportunity for it, and besought him to
do it; but went himself from one place to another, to seek out objects to
exercise his Charity upon. He went to those who could not, and to those who
would not come to him: for so it is written of him, He came to seek and to save
that which was lost. He was contented to spend whole days in this work, to live
in a crowd, and to be almost perpetually oppressed with company: and when his
Disciples were moved at the rudeness of the people in pressing upon him, he
rebuked their impatience; and, for the pleasure he took in doing good, made
nothing of the trouble and inconvenience that attended it.

Secondly, If we consider how much he denied himself in the chief comforts and
conveniences of humane life, that he might do good to others. He neglected the
ordinary refreshments of nature, his meat and drink and sleep, that he might
attend this work. He was at every body's beck and disposal, to do them good.
When he was doing cures in one place, he was sent for to another; and he either
went, or sent healing to them, and did by his word at a distance what he could
not come in person to do. Nay, he was willing to deny himself in one of the
dearest things in the world, his reputation and good name. He was contented to
do good, though he was ill thought of and ill spoken of for it. He would not
refuse to do good on the Sabbath Day, though he was accounted profane for so
doing. He knew how scandalous it was among the Jews to keep company with
Publicans and Sinners; and yet he would not decline so good a work, for all the
ill words they gave him for it.

Thirdly, If we consider the malicious opposition and sinister construction
that his good deeds met withal. Never did so much goodness meet with so much
enmity, endure so many affronts, and so much contradiction of Sinners. This
great Benefactour of mankind was hated and persecuted, as if he had been a
public Enemy. While he was instructing them in the meekest manner, they were
ready to stone him for telling them the truth: and when the fame of his
Miracles went abroad, though they were never so useful and beneficial to
mankind, yet upon this very account they conspire against him, and seek to take
away his life. Whatever he said or did, though never so innocent, never so
excellent, had some bad interpretation put upon it; and the great and shining
Virtues of his life were turned into Crimes and matter of accusation. For his
casting out of Devils, he was called a Magician; for his endeavor to reclaim
men from their vices, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; for his free and
obliging conversation, a wine-bibber and a glutton. All the benefits which he
did to men, and the blessings which he so liberally shed among the people, were
construed to be a design of Ambition and Popularity, and done with an intention
to move the people to Sedition, and to make himself a King: Enough to have
discouraged the greatest goodness, and have put a damp upon the most generous
mind, and to make it sick and weary of well-doing. For what more grievous, than
to have all the good one does ill interpreted, and the best actions in the
world made matter of calumny and reproach?

And then, Lastly, If we consider how cheerfully, notwithstanding all this, he
persevered and continued in well-doing. It was not only his business, but his
delight; I delight (says he) to do thy will, O my God. The pleasure which
others take in the most natural actions of life, in eating and drinking when
they are hungry, he took in doing good; it was his meat and drink to do the
will of his Father. He plied this work with so much diligence, as if he had
been afraid he should have wanted time for it. I must work the work of him that
sent me, while it is day: the night comes, when no man can work. And when he
was approaching toward the hardest and most unpleasant part of his Service,
but of all others the most beneficial to us, I mean, his Death and Sufferings,
he was not at ease in his mind till it was done; How am I straightened, (says he)
till it be accomplished? And just before his Suffering, with what Joy and
Triumph does he reflect upon the good he had done in his life? Father, I have
glorified thee upon earth, and have finished the work which thou have given me
to do. What a blessed Pattern is here of diligence and industry in doing good?
how fair and lovely a copy for Christians to write after?

And now that I have set it before you, it will be of excellent use to these
two purposes: To show us our Defects; and to excite us to our Duty.

I. To show us our Defects. How does this blessed Example upbraid those who
live in a direct contradiction to it; who, instead of going about doing good,
are perpetually intent upon doing mischief; who are wise and active to do evil,
but to do good have no inclination, no understanding? And those likewise, who,
though they are far from being so bad, yet wholly neglect this blessed work of
doing good? They think it very fair to do no evil, to hurt and injure no man:
but if Preachers will be so unreasonable as to require more, and will never be
satisfied till they have persuaded them out of their estate, and to give to the
poor till they have almost impoverished themselves, they desire to be excused
from this importunity. But we are not so unreasonable neither. We desire to put
them in mind, that to be charitable according to our power is an indispensable
duty of Religion: that we are commanded not only to abstain from evil, but to
do good; and that our Blessed Savior has given us the example of both; he did
not only do no sin, but he went about doing good. And upon this nice point it
was, that the young rich man in the Gospel and his Savior parted. He had kept
the Commandments from his youth, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not steal: he had been very careful of the negative part
of Religion: But when it came to parting with his Estate, and giving to the
poor, this he thought too hard a condition, and upon this he forsook our
Savior, and forfeited the Kingdom of heaven. And it is very considerable, and
ought to be often and seriously thought upon, that our Savior, describing to
us the Day of Judgment, represents the great Judge of the world acquitting and
condemning men according to the good which they had done, or neglected to do,
in ways of mercy and charity; for feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked,
and visiting the sick, or for neglecting to do these things: Than which nothing
can more plainly and effectually declare to us the necessity of doing good, in
order to the obtaining of eternal Happiness.

There are many, indeed, who do not altogether neglect the doing of this work,
who yet do in a great measure prevent and hinder themselves from doing it as
they ought, under a pretense of being employed about other Duties and parts of
Religion. They are so taken up with the exercises of Piety and Devotion in
private and public, with Prayer, and reading and hearing Sermons, and
preparing themselves for the Sacrament, that they have scarce any leisure to
mind the doing of good and charitable offices to others: or, if they have, they
hope God will pardon his servants in this thing, and accept of their Piety and
Devotion instead of all. But they ought to consider, that when these two parts
of Religion come in competition, Devotion is to give way to Charity, Mercy
being better than Sacrifice: that the great End of all the Duties of Religion,
Prayer, and reading and hearing the Word of God, and receiving the holy
Sacrament, is to dispose and excite us to do good, to make us more ready and
forward to every good work: and that it is the greatest mockery in the world,
upon pretense of using the means of Religion, to neglect the end of it; and
because we are always preparing our selves to do good, to think that we are for
ever excused from doing any.

Others are taken up in contending for the Faith, and spend all their zeal and
heat about some Controversies in Religion; and therefore they think it but
reasonable that they should be excused from those meaner kind of Duties,
because they serve God, as they imagine, in a higher and more excellent way; as
those who serve the King in his Wars use to be exempted from Taxes and Offices.
But do those men consider upon what kind of Duties more especially, our Blessed
Savior and his Apostles lay the great weight and stress of Religion? that it
is to the Meek and Merciful and Peaceable that our Savior pronounces
Blessedness? that pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is
this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction? that the wisdom
which is from above is full of mercy and good works? These are the great and
weighty things of Religion, which, whatever else we do, ought not to be left
undone. Do they consider, that a right Faith is wholly in order to a good Life,
and is of no value any farther then it has an influence upon it? so that
whatever other Duties we may be obliged to, nothing can excuse us from this.
How much better is it to do good, to be really useful and beneficial to others,
and how much more clearly and certainly our duty, than to quarrel about
doubtful and uncertain opinions? Were men Christians indeed, they would be so
much delighted and taken up with this better work, (more acceptable to God, and
more profitable to men) that they could not find leisure, or, if they could,
they could not find in their hearts to employ all their time and zeal about
things which are at so great a distance from the life and heart of Religion, as
most of those Questions are which Christians at this day contend and languish
about. Were we possessed with the true spirit of Christianity, these would be
but dry and insipid and tastless things to us, in comparison of the blessed
employment of doing good in a more real and substantial way. If the sincere
love of God and our neighbor were but once thoroughly kindled in our hearts,
these pure and heavenly flames would in a great measure extinguish the
unchristian heats of dispute and contention; as Fires here below are ready to
languish and go out, when the Sun in his full strength shines upon them.

II. But the hardest part of my task is yet behind (and it is strange it should
be so): And that is, to persuade us to the imitation of this Blessed Example.
Let us go and do likewise; let the same mind be in us that was in Christ Jesus;
let us tread in the steps of the great God and the best man that ever was, our
Blessed Savior, who went about doing good. Methinks the work it self is of
that nature, that men should not need to be courted to it by persuasion, nor
urged by importunity. The very proposal of the thing, and the Pattern which I
have set before you, is temptation and allurement enough to a generous and
well-disposed mind. But yet to inflame you the more to so good a work, be
pleased to dwell with me a little upon these following Considerations.

First, It is an argument of a great and generous mind, to employ our selves in
doing good, to extend our thoughts and care to the concernments of others, and
to use our power and endeavors for their benefit and advantage: Because it
shows an inclination and desire in us, to have others happy as well as our
selves.

Those who are of a narrow and envious spirit, of a mean and sordid
disposition, love to contract themselves within themselves, and like the
hedg-hog, to shoot out their quills at every one that comes near them. They
take care of no body but themselves; and foolishly think their own Happiness
the greater, because they have it alone and to themselves. But the noblest and
most heavenly dispositions think themselves happiest when others share with
them in their happiness. Of all Beings God is the farthest removed from Envy;
and the nearer any creature approaches to him in blessedness, the farther is
it off from this hellish quality and disposition. It is the temper of the
Devil, to grudg happiness to others; he envied that Man should be in Paradise,
when He was cast out of Heaven.

Other Perfections are (as one says) of a more melancholic and solitary
disposition, and shine brightest when they are alone, or attained to but by a
few; once make them common, and they lose their luster. But it is the nature of
Goodness, to communicate it self; and the farther it spreads, the more glorious
it is. God reckons it as one of his most glorious Titles, as the brightest Gem
in his Diadem, The Lord mighty to save. He delights not to show his Sovereignty
in ruining the innocent, and destroying helpless creatures; but in rescuing
them out of the jaws of Hell and destruction. To the Devil belongs the Title of
The Destroyer.

Without this quality of Goodness, all other Perfections would change their
nature, and lose their excellency. Great Power and Wisdom would be terrible,
and raise nothing but dread and suspicion in us: For Power without Goodness
would be Tyranny and Oppression, and Wisdom would become Craft and Treachery. A
Being endued with Knowledge and Power, and yet wanting Goodness, would be
nothing else but an irresistible Evil, and an omnipotent Mischief. We admire
Knowledge, and are afraid of Power, and suspect Wisdom; but we can heartily love
nothing but Goodness, or such Perfections as are in conjunction with it. For
Knowledge and Power may be in a nature most contrary to God's; the Devil has
these perfections in an excelling degree. When all is done, nothing argues a
great and generous mind but only Goodness; which is a propension and
disposition to make others happy, and a readiness to do them all the good
offices we can.

Secondly, To do good is the most pleasant employment in the World. It is
natural; and whatever is so, is delightful. We do like our selves whenever we
relieve the wants and distresses of others. And therefore this Virtue among all
others has peculiarly entitled it self to the name of Humanity. We answer our
own Nature, and obey our Reason, and show our selves Men, in showing Mercy to
the miserable. Whenever we consider the evils and afflictions of others, we do
with the greatest reason collect our duty from our nature and inclination, and
make our own wishes and desires and expectations from others, a law and rule to
our selves. And this is pleasant, to follow our Nature, and to gratify the
importunate dictates of our own Reason. So that the benefits we do to others
are not more welcome to them that receive them, than they are delightful to us
that do them. We ease our own nature and bowels, whenever we help and relieve
those who are in want and necessity. As, on the contrary, no man, that has not
divested himself of humanity, can be cruel and hard-hearted to others, without
feeling some pain in himself. There is no sensual pleasure in the World
comparable to the delight and satisfaction that a good man takes in doing good.
This Cato in Tully boasts of, as the great comfort and joy of his old age; That
nothing was more pleasant to him, then the conscience of a well-spent life, and
the remembrance of many benefits and kindnesses done to others. Sensual
pleasures are not lasting, but presently vanish and expire: but that is not the
worst of them, they leave a sting behind them; as the pleasure goes off: --
Succedit frigida cura, Sadness and melancholy come in the place of it, guilt
and trouble and repentance follow it. But the pleasure of doing good remains
after the thing is done; the thoughts of it lie easy in our minds, and the
reflection upon it afterward does for ever minister joy and delight to us. In a
word, that frame of mind which inclines us to do good is the very temper and
disposition of Happiness. Solomon, after all his experience of worldly
pleasures, pitcheth at last upon this as the greatest felicity of humane life,
and the only good use that is to be made of a prosperous and plentiful fortune,
Eccl. 3.12, I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice and
do good in his life. And a greater and a wiser than Solomon has said, that it
is more blessed to give than to receive.

Thirdly, To employ our selves in doing good, is to imitate the highest
Excellency and Perfection. It is to be like God, who is good, and does good;
and to be like him in that which he esteems his greatest glory, and that is,
his Goodness. It is to be like the Son of God, who, when he took our nature
upon him, and lived in the World, went about doing good. It is to be like the
blessed Angels, whose great employment it is to be ministering spirits for the
good of others. To be charitable and helpful and beneficial to others, is to be
a good Angel, and a Savior, and a God to men. And the Example of our blessed
Savior more especially, is the great Pattern which our Religion propounds to
us. And we have all the reason in the World to be in love with it; because that
very Goodness which it propounds to our imitation was so beneficial to our
selves: when we our selves feel and enjoy the happy effects of that good which
he did in the World, this should mightily endear the Example to us, and make us
forward to imitate that love and kindness to which we are indebted for so many
blessings, and upon which all our hopes of happiness do depend.

And there is this considerable difference between our Savior's charity to us,
and ours to others: He did all purely for our sakes, and for our benefit;
whereas all the good we do to others is a greater good done to our selves. They
indeed are beholden to us for the kindness we do them, and we to them for the
opportunity of doing it. Every ignorant person that comes in our way to be
instructed by us; every sinner whom we reclaim, every poor and necessitous man
whom we relieve, is a happy opportunity of doing good to our selves, and of
laying up for our selves a good treasure against the time which is to come,
that we may lay hold on eternal life. By this principle the best and the
happiest man that ever was, governed his life and actions, esteeming it a more
blessed thing to give than to receive.

Fourthly, This is one of the greatest and most substantial Duties of Religion;
and next to the love and honor which we pay to God himself, the most
acceptable service that we can perform to him. It is one half of the Law, and
next to the first and great Commandment, and very like unto it: like to it in
the excellency of its nature, and in the necessity of its obligation. For this
commandment we have from him, that he who loves God, love his brother also.
The first Commandment excels in the dignity of the object; but the Second has
the advantage in the reality of its effects. For our righteousness extends
not to God, we can do him no real benefit; but our charity to men is really
useful and beneficial to them. For which reason God is contented, in many
cases, that the external Honor and Worship which by his positive commands he
requires of us, should give way to that natural duty of Love and Mercy which we
owe to one another. And to show how great a value he puts upon Charity, he has
made it the great testimony of our Love to himself; and for want of it rejects
all other professions of love to him as false and insincere. If any man say, I
love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar. For he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

Fifthly, This is that which will give us the greatest comfort when we come to
die. It will then be no pleasure to men to reflect upon the great estates they
have got, and the great places they have been advanced to, because they are
leaving these things, and they will stand them in no stead in the other world;
Riches profit not in the day of wrath: But the conscience of well-doing will
refresh our Souls even under the very pangs of death. With what contentment
does a good man then look upon the good he has done in his life? and with what
confidence does he look over into the other world, where he has provided for
himself bags that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not? For
though our estates will not follow us into the other world, our good works
will; though we cannot carry our riches along with us, yet we may send them
before us, to make way for our reception into everlasting habitations. In
short, works of Mercy and Charity will comfort us at the hour of death, and
plead for us at the day of Judgment, and procure for us at the hands of a
merciful God a glorious recompense at the resurrection of the just. Which leads
me to the

Last consideration I shall offer to you; which is, the reward of doing good
both in this world and the other. If we believe God himself, he has made more
particular and encouraging promises to this grace and virtue, than to any other.

The advantages of it in This World are many and great. It is the way to derive
a lasting blessing upon our estate. Acts of charity are the best Deeds of
Settlement. We gain the prayers and blessings of those to whom we extend our
charity; and it is no small thing to have the blessing of them that are ready
to perish to come upon us. For God hears the prayers of the destitute; and his
ear is open to their cry. Charity is a great security to us in times of evil:
and that not only from the special promise and providence of God, which are
engaged to preserve from want those that relieve the necessities of others; but
likewise from the nature of the thing, which makes way for its own reward in
this world. He that is charitable to others, provides a supply and retreat for
himself in the day of distress: For he provokes mankind by his example, to like
tenderness toward him; and prudently bespeaks the commiseration of others,
against it comes to be his turn to stand in need of it. Nothing in this World
makes a man more and surer friends than charity and bounty, and such as will
stand by us in the greatest troubles and dangers. For a good man (says the
Apostle) one would even dare to die. It Is excellent counsel of the Son of
Sirach; Lay up thy treasure according to the Commandment of the Most high, and
it shall bring thee more profit than gold. Shut up thy alms in thy storehouse,
and it shall deliver thee from all affliction: It shall fight for thee against
thine enemies, better than a mighty shield and strong spear. It has sometimes
happened, that the obligation that men have laid upon others by their Charity,
has, in case of danger and extremity, done them more kindness than all the
rest of their Estate could do for them; and their Alms have literally delivered
them from death.

But what is all this to the endless and unspeakable Happiness of the Next
life; where the returns of doing good will be vastly great beyond what we can
now expect or imagine! For God takes all the good we do to others as a debt
upon himself; and he has estate and treasure enough to satisfy the greatest
obligations we can lay upon him. So that we have the Truth, and Goodness, and
Sufficiency of God for our security, that what we scatter and sow in this kind,
will grow up to a plentiful harvest in the other World: and that all our pains
and expense in doing good for a few days, will be recompensed and crowned with
the Joys and Glories of Eternity.

FINIS.

