The most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.


Several DISCOURSES OF REPENTANCE. viz. The Necessity of Repentance and Faith.
Of confessing and forsaking Sin, in order to Pardon. Of Confession, and Sorrow
for Sin. The Unprofitableness of Sin in this Life, an Argument for Repentance.
The Shamefulness of Sin, an Argument for Repentance. The final Issue of Sin, an
Argument for Repentance. The present and future Advantage of an Holy and
Virtuous Life. The Nature and Necessity of holy Resolution. The Nature and
Necessity of Restitution. The Usefulness of Consideration, in order to
Repentance. The Danger of Impenitence, where the Gospel is preached.


By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The EIGHTH VOLUME, Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The Necessity of Repentance and Faith. ACTS XX.21. Testifying both
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Page 1 SERMON II. Preached on Ash Wednesday. Of confessing and forsaking Sin,
in order to Pardon. PROVE. XXVIII.13. He that covers his Sins shall not
prosper: but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

p. 29 SERMON III. Of Confession and Sorrow for Sin. PSALM. XXXVIII.18. I will
declare mine Iniquity, and be sorry for my Sin.

p. 69 SERMON IV. Preached on Ash Wednesday, 1689. The Unprofitableness of Sin
in this Life, an Argument for Repentance. JOB XXXIII.27, 28. He looks upon
men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the light.

p. 101 SERMON V, VI, VII, VIII. The Shamefulness of Sin, an Argument for
Repentance. ROMANS VI.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? For the end of those things is Death. But now being made free
from sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the
end everlasting life.

p. 137, 169, 193, 225 SERMON IX, X, XI. The Nature and Necessity of holy
Resolution. JOB XXXIV.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have
born chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou
me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

p. 271, 299, 327 SERMON XII, XIII. The Nature and Necessity of Restitution.
LUKE XIX.8, 9. And if I have taken any thing from any Man by false accusation,
I restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to
this house.

p. 353, 385 SERMON XIV. The Usefulness of Consideration, in order to
Repentance. DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this,
that they would consider their latter end!

p. 417 SERMON XV. The Danger of Impenitence, where the Gospel is preached.
MATTHEW. XI.21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

p. 443
SERMON I. Sermon. 1.
The Necessity of Repentance and Faith.
Acts XX.21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.


TO have seen St. Paul in the Pulpit, was one of those three things which St.
Augustine thought worth the wishing for. And sure it were very desirable to
have seen this glorious Instrument of God, who did such wonders in the World,
to have heard that plain and powerful Eloquence of his, which was so mighty
through God, for the casting down of strong holds, Vol. 8.
and the subduing of men to the obedience of the Gospel; to have beheld the
zeal of this holy man, who was all on fire for God, with what ardency of
affection, and earnestness of expression, he persuaded men to come in to
Christ, and entertain the Gospel. This were very desirable; but seeing it is a
thing we cannot hope for, it should be some satisfaction to our curiosity, to
know what St. Paul preached, what was the main Subject of his Sermons, whither
he referred all his Discourses, and what they tended to. This he tells us in the
words that I have read to you, that the main substance of all his Sermons was
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Occasion of the words was briefly this. St. Paul being in his Journey to
Jerusalem, and intending to be there by the day of Pentecost, that he might not
be hindered in his Journey, he resolves to pass by Ephesus, and only to call to
him the Elders of the Church to charge them with their duty, and the care of
the Church; and to engage them hereto, he tells them how he had carried and
demeaned himself among them, v. 18. with what diligence and vigilance he had
watched over them, with what affection and earnestness he had preached to them,
v. 19, 20. And here in the Text he tells them, what had been the sum of his
Doctrine, and the substance of those many Sermons he had preached among them,
and what was the End and Design of all his Discourses, viz. To persuade men to
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; Testifying both
to the Jews and Greeks, etc.

I shall explain the words a little, and then fix upon the Observations which I
intend to speak to, because I design this only as a Preface to some larger
Discourses of Faith and Repentance.

For explication. Testifying, the word is (...), which signifies to testify,
to prove a thing by testimony; so it is used, Heb. 2.6. But one in a certain
place testifyeth, saying. In heathen Writers the word is often used in a Law
sense, for contesting by Law, and pleading in a Cause; and from hence it
signifies, earnestly to contend or persuade by arguments and threatenings. In
the use of the LXX. it signifies to protest, to convince, to press earnestly,
to persuade. It is used most frequently by St. Luke in a very intense
signification, and is sometimes joined with Exhorting, which is an earnest
persuading to a thing, Acts 2.40. And with many other words did he testify and
exhort, saying, save your selves from this untoward generation; and with
Preaching, Acts 8.25. And when they had testified and preached the word of the
Lord; and so Acts 18.5. Being pressed in spirit, he testified to the Jews, that
Jesus was the Christ. Being pressed in spirit, signifies intention and
vehemence in testifying to them, that he did vehemently endeavor to convince
them; it seems to be equivalent to the expression, v. 28. where it is said,
Apollos did mightily convince the Jews that Jesus was the Christ; that is, did
use such Persuasions and Arguments as were sufficient to convince; and to
mention no more, Acts 28.23. He expounded and testified the Kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus.

St Paul in his Epistle to Timothy uses this word in a most vehement sense,
for giving a solemn charge, 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, the word is (...); and so 2 Timothy 2.14. charging them before the
Lord, that they strive not about words; and so 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before
God and the Lord Jesus Christ; and here in the Text the word seems to be of a
very high and intense signification because of the circumstances mentioned
before and after; he tells us before, that he taught them at all seasons, v.
18. publicly and from house to house, v. 20. and afterward at the 31. v. that
he warned them day and night with tears; so that testifying to the Jews
Repentance and Faith, must signify his pressing and persuading of them with
the greatest vehemence, to turn from their sins, and believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ; his charging on them these things as their duty, his pleading with them
the necessity of Faith and Repentance, and earnestly endeavoring to convince
them thereof.

Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: What is the
Reason of this appropriation of Repentance and Faith, the one as properly
respecting God, and the other our Lord Jesus Christ? I answer. Repentance does
properly respect God, because he is the party offended, and to whom we are to
be reconciled; the Faith of the Gospel does properly refer to the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the chief and principal Object of it; so that by testifying to them
repentance toward God, etc. we are to understand that the Apostle did
earnestly press and persuade them to repent of their sins, whereby they had
offended God, and to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Messiah, the
person that was ordained of God, and sent to be the Savior of the world.

From the Words thus explained, this is the Observation that does naturally
arise,

That Repentance and Faith are the sum and substance of the Gospel; and that
Ministers ought with all earnestness and vehemence to press people to repent
and believe, to charge them with these, as their duty, and by all means to
endeavor to convince them of the necessity of them.

In the handling of this, I shall do these Two things.

First, Show you what is included in Repentance and Faith, that you may see
that they are the sum of the Gospel. And,

Secondly, Show you the necessity of them.

First, What is included in these.

I. Repentance; this properly signifies a change of mind, a conviction that we
have done amiss, so as to be truly sorry for what we have done, and heartily to
wish that we had not done it. To repent, is to alter our mind, to have other
apprehensions of things than we had, to look upon that now as evil, which we
did not before; from whence follows sorrow for what we have done, and a
resolution of mind for the future not to do again that which appears now to us
to be so evil, that we are ashamed of it, and troubled for it, and wish we had
never done it. So that repentance implies a conviction that we have done
something that is evil and sinful, contrary to the Law we are under, and those
Obligations of duty and gratitude that lie upon us, whereby God is highly
provoked and incensed against us, and we in danger of his wrath, and the sad
effects of his displeasure; upon which we are troubled, and grieved, and
ashamed for what we have done, and wish we had been wiser, and had done
otherwise; hereupon we resolve never to do any thing that is sinful, that is
contrary to our duty and obligations to God, and by which we may provoke him
against us. These two things are contained in a true repentance, a deep sense
of, and sorrow for the evils that are past, and the sins that we have
committed; and a firm purpose and resolution of obedience for the future, of
abstaining from all sin, and doing what ever is our duty; the true effect of
which Resolution, is the breaking off the practice of sin and the course of a
wicked life, and a constant course of obedience.

II. Faith in Christ is an effectual believing the Revelation of the Gospel,
the History and the Doctrine of it; the History of it, that there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, that he was the true Messiah, prophesied of and
promised in the Old Testament, that he was born and lived and preached, and
wrought the Miracles that are recorded, that he was crucified, and rose again,
and ascended into Heaven, that he was the Son of God, and sent by him into the
world, by his Doctrine to instruct, and by the Example of his life to go before
us in the way to happiness, and by the Merit and Satisfaction of his death and
sufferings, to appease and reconcile God to us, and to purchase for us the
pardon of our sins and eternal life, upon the Conditions of Faith and
Repentance and sincere Obedience; and that to enable us to the performance of
these Conditions, he promised and afterward sent his holy Spirit, to accompany
the preaching of his Gospel, and to assist all Christians to the doing of that
which God requires of them; this is the History of the Gospel.

Now the Doctrine of it contains the Precepts and Promises and Threatenings of
it, and Faith in Christ includes a firm belief of all these; of the Precepts of
the Gospel as the matter of our duty, and the Rule of our life; and of the
Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel, as arguments to our duty, to encourage
our Obedience, and deter us from sin. So that he that believes the Lord Jesus,
believes him to be the great Guide and Teacher sent from God, to bring and
conduct men to eternal happiness, and that therefore we ought to hearken to him
and follow him; this is to believe his Prophetical Office. He believes that he
is the Author of salvation, and has purchased for us forgiveness of sins,
ransom from hell, and eternal life and blessedness upon the Conditions before
mentioned, and therefore that we ought to rely upon him only for salvation, to
own him for our Savior, and to beg of him his holy Spirit, which he has
promised to us, to enable us to perform the Conditions required on our part;
this is to believe his Priestly Office. And lastly, He believes that the
Precepts of the Gospel, being delivered to us by the Son of God, ought to have
the authority of Laws upon us, and that we are bound to be obedient to them;
and for our encouragement if we be so, that there is a glorious and eternal
Reward promised to us; and for our terror if we be not, there are terrible and
eternal Punishments threatened to us; to which Rewards, the Lord Jesus Christ at
the day of Judgment, will sentence men, as the great Judge of the world; and
this is to believe the Kingly Office of Christ. And this is the sum of that
which is meant by Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, which the Apostle says
was one Subject of his preaching.

And the proper and genuine effect of this Faith, is to live as we believe, to
conform our lives to the Doctrine, to the truth whereof we assent. Hence it is
that true Christians, that is, those who fashioned their lives according to the
Gospel, are called believers; and the whole of Christianity is many times
contained in this word believing, which is the great Principle of a Christian
life. As in the Old Testament all Religion is expressed by the fear of God; so
in the New, by Faith in Christ.

And now you see what is included in Repentance and Faith, you may easily judge
whether these be not the sum of the Gospel, that men would forsake their sins
and turn to God, and believe the revelation of the Gospel concerning Jesus
Christ, that is, heartily entertain it and submit to it. What did Christ preach
to the Jews, but that they would repent of their sins, and believe on him as
the Messiah? And what did the Apostles preach, but to the same purpose? When
St. Peter preached to the Jews, Acts 2. the effect of his Sermon and the scope
of it was to persuade them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus, that
is, to profess their belief in him, v. 38. And so Acts 3.19. This is the
conclusion of his discourse, repent therefore and be converted; and then he
propounded Christ to them as the Object of their Faith, being the great Prophet
that was Prophesied of by Moses, who should be raised up among them, v. 22. So
likewise St. Paul when he preached to the Jews and Gentiles, these were his
great Subjects, Acts 17.30. This is the conclusion of his Sermon to the
Athenians, to persuade them to repent, by the consideration of a future
Judgment; and to persuade them to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was to
be the Judge of the world, from the Miracle of his Resurrection; But now he
commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day, etc.
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. So that you see that these are the great Doctrines of the Gospel, and
were the sum of the Apostles preaching; all their Sermons were perswasives to
these two Duties of Repentance and Faith.

Secondly, For the Necessity of these Doctrines. They are necessary for the
escaping of eternal misery, and attaining of everlasting happiness. And this
will appear, by considering the Nature of them, and the Relation they have to
both these.

For the avoiding of eternal punishment, it is necessary that guilt should be
removed, which is an obligation to punishment, and that cannot be but by
pardon; and sure we cannot imagine that God will ever pardon us without
repentance; he will never remit to us the punishment of sin, so long as we tell
him we are not at all troubled for what we have done, and we are of the same
mind still, and will do the same again; and till we repent, we tell God this,
and we may be sure God will not cast away his Pardons upon those that despise
them; so that Repentance is necessary to the escaping of Hell.

And Faith in Christ is necessary to it; for if this be the method of God's
grace, not to pardon sin without Satisfaction, and Jesus Christ has made
Satisfaction for sin by the merit of his Sufferings, and if it be necessary
that we should believe this, that the benefit hereof may redound to us; then
Faith in Christ is necessary to the obtaining of the pardon of sin, by which
the guilt of sin is removed, that is, our obligation to eternal punishment.

And then for attaining Salvation. Christ having in the Gospel revealed to us
the way and means to eternal happiness, it is necessary that we should believe
this Revelation of the Gospel by Jesus Christ, in order to this end. So that
you see the necessity of Faith and Repentance, because without these we can
neither escape Misery, nor attain to Happiness.

I should now come to draw some Inferences from this Discourse, but I will
first give satisfaction to a Query or two, to which this Discourse seems to
have given occasion.

1. Query. You will say, why do I call Repentance a Doctrine of the Gospel? It
is a Doctrine of Nature. Natural Religion tells us, that when we have offended
God, we ought to be sorry for it, and resolve to amend and reform.

Ans. I do not make the Doctrine of Repentance proper to the Gospel, as if it
had not been revealed to the world before; but because it is a Doctrine which
the Gospel very much presses and persuades men to, and because the great
Motives and Enforcements of it, are peculiar to the Gospel. So that the
Doctrine of Repentance, considered with those powerful Reasons and Arguments to
it, which the Gospel furnishes us withal, is in this sense proper to the
Gospel, and not known to the world before.

There are two Motives and Enforcements to Repentance which the Gospel
furnishes us with.

1. Assurance of Pardon and Remission of sins in case of repentance, which is a
great encouragement to repentance, and which, before the Gospel, the world had
never any firm and clear assurance of.

2. Assurance of eternal Rewards and Punishments after this life, which is a
strong Argument to persuade men to change their lives, that they may avoid the
misery that is threatened to impenitent sinners, and be qualified for the
Happiness which it promises to Repentance and Obedience. And this the Apostle
tells us in the forementioned place, Acts 17.30, 31. is that which does as it
were make Repentance to be a new Doctrine that did come with the Gospel into
the world, because it was never before enforced with this powerful Argument;
the time's of that ignorance God winked at; but now he calls upon all men every
where to repent; because, etc. When the world was in ignorance, and had not
such assurance of a future state, of eternal Rewards and Punishments after this
life, the Arguments to Repentance were weak and feeble in comparison of what
they now are, the necessity of this Duty was not so evident. But now God has
assured us of a future Judgment, now Exhortations to Repentance have a
commanding power and influence upon men; so that Repentance, both as it is that
which is very much pressed and inculcated in the Gospel, and as it has its chief
Motives and Enforcements from the Gospel, may be said to be one of the great
Doctrines of the Gospel.

Query 2. Whether the preaching of Faith in Christ, among those who are already
Christians, be at all necessary? Because it seems very improper, to press those
to believe in Christ, who are already persuaded that he is the Messiah, and do
entertain the History and Doctrine of the Gospel.

Ans. The Faith which the Apostle here means, and which he would persuade men
to, is an effectual belief of the Gospel; such a Faith as has real effects
upon men, and makes them to live as they believe; such a Faith as persuades
them of the need of these Blessings that the Gospel offers, and makes them to
desire to be partakers of them, and in order thereto to be willing to submit to
those Terms and Conditions of Holiness and Obedience, which the Gospel
requires. This is the Faith we would persuade men to, and there is nothing more
necessary to be pressed upon the greatest part of Christians than this; for how
few are there among those who profess to believe the Gospel, who believe it in
this effectual manner, so as to conform themselves to it? The Faith which most
Christians pretend to, is merely negative; they do not disbelieve the Gospel,
they do not consider it, nor trouble themselves about it, they do not care nor
are concerned whether it be true or not; but they have not a positive belief of
it, they are not possessed with a firm persuasion of the truth of those matters
which are contained in it; if they were, such a persuasion would produce real
and positive effects. Every man naturally desires Happiness, and it is
impossible that any man that is possessed with this belief, that in order to
Happiness it is necessary for him to do such and such things, and that if he
omit or neglect them, he is unavoidably miserable, that he should not do them.
Men say they believe this or that, but you may see in their lives, what it is
they believe. So that the preaching of this Faith in Christ, which is the only
true Faith, is still necessary.

I. Inference. If Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
be the sum and substance of the Gospel, then from hence we may infer the
Excellency of the Christian Religion, which insists only upon these things
which do tend to our Perfection and our Happiness. Repentance tends to our
recovery, and the bringing of us back as near as may be to innocence. Primus
innocentiae graedus est non peccasse; secundus, penitentia: and then Faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, tho it be very comprehensive, and contains many things
in it, yet nothing but what is eminently for our advantage, and does very much
conduce to our happiness. The Historical part of the Gospel acquaints us with
the Person and Actions of our Savior, which conduces very much to our
understanding of the Author and Means of our Salvation. The Doctrinal part of
the Gospel contains what God requires on our part, and the Encouragements and
Arguments to our Duty, from the consideration of the Recompense and Rewards of
the next life. The Precepts of Christ's Doctrine are such as tend exceedingly to
the Perfection of our nature, being all founded in Reason, in the nature of
God, and of a Reasonable Creature; I except only those positive Institutions of
the Christian Religion, the two Sacraments, which are not burdensome, and are
of excellent use. This is the first.

II. we may learn from hence what is to be the sum and end of our Preaching, to
bring men to Repentance and a firm belief of the Gospel; but then it is to be
considered, that we preach Repentance, so often as we preach either against sin
in general, or any particular sin or vice; and so often as we persuade to
holiness in general, or to the performance of any particular Duty of Religion,
or to the exercise of any particular Grace; for Repentance includes the
forsaking of sin, and a sincere resolution and endeavor of reformation and
obedience. And we preach Repentance so often as we insist upon such
Considerations and Arguments, as may be powerful to deter men from sin, and to
engage them to holiness. And we preach Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, so
often as we declare the grounds of the Christian Religion, and insist upon such
Arguments as tend to make it credible, and are proper to convince men of the
Truth and Reasonableness of it; so often as we explain the Mystery of Christ's
incarnation, the History of his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Intercession, and the proper Ends and Use of these; so often as we open the
Method of God's Grace for the salvation of sinners, the Nature of the Covenant
between God and us, and the Conditions of it, and the way how a sinner is
justified and has his sins pardoned, the Nature and Necessity of Regeneration
and Sanctification; so often as we explain the Precepts of the Gospel, and the
Promises and Threatenings of it, and endeavor to convince men of the Equity of
Christ's Commands, and to assure them of the Certainty of the Eternal Happiness
which the Gospel promises to them that obey it, and of the Eternal Misery which
the Gospel threatens to those that are disobedient; all this is preaching Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ.

III. This may correct the irregular humor and itch in many people, who are not
contented with this plain and wholesome food, but must be gratified with sublime
Notions and unintelligible Mysteries, with pleasant passages of Wit, and
artificial strains of Rhetoric, with nice and unprofitable Disputes, with bold
interpretations of dark Prophecies, and peremptory Determinations of what will
happen next year, and a punctual stating of the time when Antichrist shall be
thrown down, and Babylon shall fall, and who shall be employed in this Work. Or
if their humor lies another way, you must apply your self to it, by making
sharp Reflections upon matters in present controversy and debate, you must dip
your style in Gall and Vinegar, and be all Satyr and Invective against those
that differ from you, and teach people to hate one another, and to fall
together by the ears; and this men call Gospel preaching, and speaking of
Seasonable Truths.

Surely St. Paul was a Gospel Preacher, and such an one as may be a Pattern to
all others; and yet he did none of these; he preached what men might
understand, and what they ought to believe and practice, in a plain and
unaffected and convincing manner; he taught such things as made for peace, and
whereby he might edify and build up men in their holy Faith. The Doctrines
that he preached will never be unseasonable, that men should leave their sins,
and believe the Gospel, and live accordingly.

And if men must needs be gratified with Disputes and Controversies, there are
these great Controversies between God and the sinner to be stated and
determined; Whether this be Religion, to follow our own lusts and inclinations,
or to endeavor to be like God, and to be conformed to him, in Goodness, and
Mercy, and Righteousness, and Truth, and Faithfulness? Whether Jesus Christ be
not the Messiah and Savior of the world? Whether Faith and Repentance and
Sincere Obedience be not the Terms of Salvation, and the necessary Conditions
of Happiness? Whether there shall be a future Judgment, when all men shall be
sentenced according to their works? Whether there be a Heaven and Hell? Whether
good men shall be eternally and unspeakably happy, and wicked men extremely and
everlastingly miserable? These are the great Controversies of Religion, upon
which we are to dispute on God's behalf against sinners. God asserts, and
sinners deny these things, not in Words, but which is more emphatical and
significant, in their Lives and Actions. These are practical Controversies of
Faith, and it concerns every man to be resolved and determined about them, that
he may frame his life accordingly.

And so for Repentance; God says, Repentance is a forsaking of sin, and a
through change and amendment of life; the sinner says that it is only a formal
Confession, and a slight asking of God forgiveness: God calls upon us speedily
and forthwith to repent; the sinner says it is time enough, and it may safely
be deferred to sickness or death; these are important Controversies and matters
of moment. But men do not affect common Truths; whereas these are most
necessary: And indeed whatever is generally useful and beneficial, ought to be
common, and not to be the less valued, but the more esteemed for being so.

And as these Doctrines of Faith and Repentance are never unseasonable, so are
they more peculiarly proper when we celebrate the Holy Sacrament, which was
instituted for a solemn and standing Memorial of the Christian Religion, and is
one of the most powerful Arguments and Perswasives to repentance and a good
life.

The Faith of the Gospel does more particularly respect the death of Christ;
and therefore it is called Faith in his Blood, because that is more especially
the Object of our Faith; the Blood of Christ, as it was a Seal of the truth of
his Doctrine, so it is also a Confirmation of all the Blessings and Benefits of
the New Covenant.

And it is one of the greatest Arguments in the world to repentance. In the
Blood of Christ we may see our own guilt, and in the dreadful Sufferings of the
Son of God, the just desert of our sins; for he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities; therefore the Commemoration of his Sufferings should call our sins
to remembrance, the Representation of his Body broken, should melt our hearts;
and so often as we remember that his blood was shed for us, our eyes should run
down with rivers of tears; so often as we look upon him whom we have pierced,
we should mourn over him. When the Son of God suffered, the rocks were rent in
sunder; and shall not the consideration of those sufferings be effectual to
break the most stony and obdurate heart?

What can be more proper when we come to this Sacrament, than the renewing of
our Repentance? When we partake of this Passover, we should eat it with bitter
herbs. The most solemn Expressions of our Repentance fall short of those
Sufferings which our blessed Savior underwent for our sins; if our head were
waters, and our eyes fountains of tears, we could never sufficiently lament the
cursed Effects and Consequences of those provocations which were so fatal to
the Son of God.

And that our Repentance may be real, it must be accompanied with the
Resolution of a better life; for if we return to our sins again, we trample
under foot the Son of God, and profane the Blood of the Covenant, and out of
the Cup of Salvation we drink our own damnation, and turn that which should
save us into an instrument and Seal of our own ruin.

SERMON II. Sermon. 2.
Preached on Ash Wednesday. Of confessing and forsaking Sin, in Order to Pardon.
PROVE. XXVIII.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.


SInce we are all sinners, and liable to the Justice of God, it is a matter of
great moment to our comfort and happiness, to be rightly informed by what
Means, and upon what Terms, we may be reconciled to God, and find mercy with
him. And to this purpose the Text gives us this advice and direction, whosoever
confesses and forsakes his sin, shall have mercy.

Vol. 8.
In which words there is a great Blessing and Benefit declared and promised to
sinners, upon certain Conditions. The Blessing and Benefit promised, is the
mercy and favor of God, which comprehends all the happy Effects of God's mercy
and goodness to sinners. And the Conditions upon which this Blessing is
promised are two, Confession of our sins, and forsaking of them; and these two
contain in them, the whole nature of that great and necessary Duty of
Repentance, without which a sinner can have no reasonable hopes of the mercy of
God.

I. Here is a Blessing or Benefit promised, which is the mercy and favor of
God. And this in the full extent of it, comprehends all the Effects of the
mercy and goodness of God to sinners, and does primarily import the pardon and
forgiveness of our sins. And this probably Solomon did chiefly intend in this
expression; for so the mercy of God does most frequently signify in the Old
Testament, viz. the forgiveness of our sins. And thus the Prophet explains it,
Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon.

But now since the clear revelation of the Gospel, the mercy of God does not
only extend to the pardon of sin, but to power against it; because this also is
an Effect of God's free grace and mercy to sinners, to enable them, by the
grace of his holy Spirit, to master and mortify their lusts, and to persevere
in Goodness to the end.

And it comprehends also our final pardon and absolution at the great day,
together with the glorious Reward of eternal life, which the Apostle
expresses, by finding mercy with the Lord in that day. And this likewise is
promised to Repentance, Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached
unto you; that is, that when Jesus Christ who is now preached unto you shall
come, you may receive the final sentence of absolution and forgiveness.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the Blessing and Benefit here
promised, the mercy of God; which comprehends all the blessed Effects of the
divine grace and goodness to sinners, the present pardon of sin, and power to
mortify sin, and to persevere in a good course, and our final absolulution by
the sentence of the great day, together with the merciful and glorious Reward
of eternal life.

II. We will consider in the next place, the Conditions upon which this
Blessing is promised, and they are two, the Confessing and Forsaking of our
sins, whosoever confesses and forsakes his sin, shall have mercy; and these two
do contain and constitute the whole nature of Repentance, without which a
sinner can have no reasonable hopes to find mercy with God. I begin with the

First, the Confession of our sins; by which is meant a penitent acknowledgment
of our faults to God; to God I say, because the Confession of our sins to men
is not, generally speaking, a Condition of the forgiveness of them, but only in
some particular cases, when our sins against God are accompanied and
complicated with scandal and injury to men. In other cases the Confession of
our sins to men is not necessary to the pardon of them, as I shall more fully
show in the progress of this Discourse.

All the difficulty in this matter is, that the Confession of our sins is
opposed to the covering and concealing of them; he that covers his sin shall
not prosper: but whosoever confesses them, shall have mercy; but no man can hope
to hide his sin from God, and therefore confession of them to God cannot be
here meant. But this Objection, if it be of any force, quite excludes
Confession to God, as no part of Solomon's meaning; when yet Confession of our
sins to God, is granted on all hands, to be a necessary Condition of the
forgiveness of them. And to take away the whole ground of this Objection; men
are said in Scripture, when they do not confess their sins and repent of them,
to hide and conceal them from God: Not to acknowledge them is as if a man went
about to cover them. And thus David opposes confession of sins to God, to the
hiding of them, Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid, I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; so that
this is no reason, why the Text should not be understood of the Confession of
our sins to God.

But because the necessity of confessing our sins to men (that is to the
Priest) in order to the forgiveness of them, is a great point of difference
between us and the Church of Rome, it being by them esteemed a necessary
Article of Faith, but by us, so far from being necessary to be believed, that
we do not believe it to be true; therefore for the clear stating of this
matter, I shall briefly enquire into these Two things.

I. Whether Confession of our sins to the Priest, as taught and practiced in
the Church of Rome, be necessary to the forgiveness of them.

II. How far the disclosing and revealing of our sins to the Ministers of God
is convenient upon other accounts, and for other purposes of Religion.

I. Whether Confession of our sins to the Priest, and the manner in which it is
taught and practiced in the Church of Rome, be necessary to the forgiveness of
them. What manner of Confession this is, the Council of Trent has most
precisely determined, viz. Secret Confession to the Priest alone, of all and
every mortal sin, which upon the most diligent search and examination of our
Consciences we can remember our selves to be guilty of, since our Baptism;
together with all the Circumstances of those sins, which may change the nature
of them; because without the perfect knowledge of these, the Priest cannot make
a judgment of the nature and quality of men's sins, nor impose fitting Penance
for them. This is the Confession of sins required in the Church of Rome, which
the same Council of Trent, without any real ground from Scripture or
Ecclesiastical Antiquity, does most confidently affirm to have been instituted
by our Lord, and by the Law of God to be necessary to salvation, and to have
been always practiced in the Catholic Church.

I shall as briefly as I can examine both these Pretenses, of the Divine
Institution, and Constant Practice of this kind of Confession.

First, For the Divine Institution of it, they mainly rely upon three Texts; in
the first of which there is no mention at all of Confession, much less of a
particular Confession of all our sins with the Circumstances of them; in the
other two there is no mention of Confession to the Priest; and yet all this
ought clearly to appear in these Texts, before they can ground a Divine
Institution upon them; for a Divine Institution is not to be founded upon
obscure Consequences, but upon plain words.

The First Text, and the only one upon which the Council of Trent grounds the
Necessity of Confession, is John 20.23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are
remitted; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained: It is a sign they
were at a great loss for a Text to prove it, when they are glad to bring one
that has not one word in it concerning Confession, nor the least intimation of
the necessity of it.

But let us see how they manage it to their purpose. The Apostles and their
Successors (says Bellarmine) by this power of remitting and retaining sins,
are constituted Judges of the case of Penitents; but they cannot judge without
hearing the Cause, and this infers particular Confession of sins to the Priest,
from whence he concludes it necessary to the forgiveness of sins.

But do not the Ministers of the Gospel exercise this power of remitting sins
in Baptism? And yet particular Confession of all sins to the Priest is not
required, no not in the Church of Rome, in the Baptism of adult Persons. And
therefore according to them, particular Confession of sin to the Priest, is not
necessary to his exercising the power of remitting sins, and consequently the
necessity of Confession cannot be concluded from this Text.

And to show how they are puzzled in this matter, Vasquez by a strange device
concludes the necessity of Confession from the power of retaining sins; for
(says he) if the Priest have a power of retaining sins, that is of denying
Pardon and Absolution to the Penitent, then he may impose Confession as a
Condition of forgiveness, and not absolve the Penitent upon other terms. But
supposing the Priest to have this unreasonable power, this makes Confession no
otherwise necessary by Divine Institution, than going to Jerusalem or China is,
in order to the forgiveness of our sins, or submitting to any other foolish
condition, that the Priest thinks fit to require; for according to this way of
reasoning, this power of retaining sins, makes every foolish thing that the
Priest shall impose upon the Penitent, to be necessary by Divine Command and
Institution.

But the truth is, this power of remitting and retaining sins, is exercised by
the Ministers of the Gospel, in the administration of the Sacraments, and the
preaching of the Gospel, which is called the word of reconciliation, the
ministry whereof is committed to them: And thus the ancient Fathers understood
it; and as a great Divine told them in the Council of Trent, it was perhaps
never expounded by any one Father concerning the business of Confession.

The Second Text they allege to this purpose is, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Here indeed is
Confession; but general, not particular, as appears by the opposition, If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: but
if we confess our sins, that is, if we acknowledge our selves to have been
sinners: And then here is not a word of confessing to the Priest; the
Confession here meant is plainly to God, because it follows, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, that is, God, who is necessarily understood in the
former part of the sentence; as if it had run thus, if we confess our sins to
God, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.

The Third Text is, Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one
for another. And here again there is only mention of Confession, but not a word
of the Priest; and for another Reason, if I had been to advise them, they
should not have pressed this Text for their service in this cause, because it
does them as much hurt as good; for it is certain, the Duty of Confession here
enjoined is reciprocal and mutual, confess your sins one to another: So that if
by virtue of this Text the People are bound to confess their sins to the
Priest, the Priest is hereby as much obliged to confess his sins to the People;
which I dare say is more than they have a mind to prove from this Text. The
plain meaning whereof is this, that as Christians should be ready to perform
all mutual Offices of Charity, so to assist and comfort one another by their
Counsel and Prayers; and therefore the Apostle advises Christians when they
are sick, if at the same time they be under any spiritual trouble, by reason of
the Guilt of any sin lying upon their Consciences, to lay open their case to
one another, that so they may have the help of one another Advice and Prayers;
confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed, both of your bodily and spiritual distemper: not that the Priest or
Minister is here excluded; St. James had spoken of that particular before, that
when any was sick, he should send for the Elders of the Church, that he might
in the first place have the benefit of their Counsel and Prayers; and then
because private Christians may also be useful to one another in this kind, he
adds, that they should also lay open their condition and troubles to one
another, that so they might have the help of one another Advice and Prayers;
and very probably all the Confession here meant of private Christians to one
another is of the offenses and injuries they may have been guilty of, one
toward another; that they should be reconciled upon this occasion, and as a
testimony of their Charity, should pray one for another; whereas they are bound
to send for the Elders of the Church, and they are to pray over them, as an act
not only of Charity, but of Superiority, and by virtue of their Office in the
Church, a more especial blessing being to be expected from their Prayers.

These three Texts are the main Arguments from Scripture, which they of the
Church of Rome bring to prove their auricular or secret Confession to be of
Divine Institution; and woeful proofs they are; which shows what miserable
shifts they are reduced to, who resolve to maintain a bad cause.

I proceed in the Second place, to discover the Falsehood of their other
Pretenses, that this kind of Confession has always been practiced in the
Catholic Church; and not only so, but believed absolutely necessary to the
remission of men's sins and their eternal salvation.

The truth of the whole matter is this; public Confession and Penance for open
and scandalous Crimes was in use, and with great strictness observed in the
first Ages of Christianity, and there was then no general Law or Custom, that
exacted secret Confession of sins to the Priest, as a necessary part of
repentance, and condition of forgiveness: afterward public Penance was by
degrees disused, which plainly shows that, in the opinion of the Church, this
Discipline, how useful soever, was not of absolute necessity to restore men to
the favor of God.

In place of this came in private Confession to the Priest, particularly
appointed to this Office, and called the Penitentiary; but upon occasion of a
scandal that happened, this also was abrogated by Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople; which shows that neither was this necessary. And this act of
Nectarius was justified by his Successor St. Chrysostom, who does over and over
most expressly teach, that Confession of our sins to men is not necessary to the
forgiveness of them, but that it is sufficient to confess them to God alone; so
that St. Chrysostom does plainly stand condemned by the Decrees of the Council
of Trent.

And thus for several Ages the matter rested, till the degeneracy of the Church
of Rome growing toward its height, about the IX. and X. Centuries, some began
to contend for the necessity of secret Confession, and this in the year 1215.
in the IV. Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent III. was decreed and
established.

And this is the first public Law that was made in the Christian Church
concerning this matter, notwithstanding all the boasts of the Council of Trent,
about the antiquity of this Institution and Practice; for Gratian, who lived
about 50 years before this Council, tells us, that in his time several wise and
religious men were of the contrary opinion, and did not hold Confession
necessary by virtue of any Divine Law. Afterward in the Council of Florence,
and especially in that of Trent, this Decree of the Council of Lateran was
confirmed and enlarged in many particulars, of which I have already given some
account.

And whereas they pretend for themselves the universal Practice not only of the
past, but present Church, we are able to show from clear Testimony of their own
Writers, that Confession, as taught and practiced in the Church of Rome, is no
where else in use at this day, neither among the Abyssines, nor Indians of St.
Thomas, nor the Nestorians, nor the Armenians, nor the Jacobites, Churches of
great antiquity and vast extent. And as for the Greek Church, if we may believe
Gratian, and the Author of the Gloss upon the Canon Law, the Greeks had
anciently no Tradition concerning the necessity of Confession, nor do they at
this day agree with the Roman Church in all points concerning it.

So that, in short, there is no Nation nor Church throughout the whole world,
that bear the name of Christian, the Roman Church only excepted, that does
fully embrace and maintain the whole Doctrine of the Council of Trent
concerning Confession; and yet according to their principles, the whole is of
equal necessity to be believed, as any part of it. With what face then do they
declare, that this manner of Confession always was, and still is observed in
the Catholic, that is in the whole Christian Church?

I have not time to show the great and manifold inconveniences and mischiefs of
this practice. How infinite a torture it is to the Consciences of men, by
entangling them in endless doubts and scruples; and how great a scandal it is
to the Christian Profession, in the lewd management of it by the Priests, is
evident from the two Bulls of Pope Pius the IV. and Gregory XV. which mention
things too shameful to be declared; not to insist upon other horrible abuses of
it to the vilest and wickedest purposes; not so much to direct the Consciences
of men, as to dive into their Secrets, of which there are so many plain and
notorious Instances, that they are past denial.

The other thing pretended for it is, that it is a great restraint upon men
from sin. And very probably it is so, to modest and well disposed persons: but
experience shows how quite contrary an effect it has upon others, who are the
far greatest part of mankind. Does not all the world see in the Popish
Countries, in the time of their Carnival, just before Lent, the Anniversary
season of Confession, how scandalous a liberty men take of doing lewd and
wicked things; and that for this very Reason, because their Consciences are
presently to be eased and scoured (as they call it) by Confession and
Absolution? And they therefore take the opportunity to gratify their lusts, and
fill up the measure of their iniquity at that time; because with one labor
they can set their Consciences right, and clear them of all guilt; and they
look upon this as a special piece of spiritual good husbandry, to quit their
scores with God at once, that so they may have no occasion to trouble him, nor
the Priest, nor themselves again for a good while after. So that Confession,
instead of being a restraint from sin, gives great encouragement to it, by
deluding men into a vain hope of obtaining the pardon of their sins from time
to time, tho they still continue in the practice of them; by which device, men's
sins are at once remitted and retained; the Priest remits them by Absolution,
and the penitent retains them, by going on still in the Commission of them, in
hope of obtaining a new Absolution as often as occasion shall require. I
proceed to the

II. Enquiry, namely, How far the disclosing and revealing our sins to the
Ministers of God, may be convenient upon other accounts and to other purposes
of Religion? To which the Answer is very plain and short; so far as is
necessary either to the direction, or the ease of men's Consciences.

There are many Cases wherein men, under the guilt and trouble of their sins,
can neither appease their own minds, nor sufficiently direct themselves,
without recourse to some pious and prudent Guide; in these cases, men certainly
do very well, and many times prevent a great deal of trouble and perplexity to
themselves, by a timely discovery of their condition to some faithful Minister,
in order to their direction and satisfaction, without which they shall never
perhaps be able to clear themselves of the obscurity and entanglement of their
own minds, but by smothering their trouble in their own breasts, shall proceed
from one degree of melancholy to another, till at last they be plunged either
in distraction or despair; whereas the discovery of their condition in time,
would prove a present and effectual remedy. And to this purpose, a general
Confession is for the most part sufficient; and where there is occasion for a
more particular discovery, there is no need of raking into the particular and
foul circumstances of men's sins, to give that advice which is necessary for the
cure and ease of the Penitent; a thing so far from being desirable, that it
must needs be very grievous to every modest and good man.

And thus far Confession is not only allowed, but encouraged among Protestants.
In the Lutheran Churches, Chemnitius tells us, that private geneneral
Confession is in use and practice. And Calvin freely declares, that he is so
far from being against peoples repairing to their Pastors to this purpose, that
he earnestly wishes it were every where observed before the receiving of the
Sacrament. And the same is the sense of our own Church, laying no necessity
upon men in this matter, but advising, especially before the SaSacrament, those
who have any trouble upon their Consciences, to repair to some discreet and
faithful Minister of God's Word, for advice and satisfaction. And thus all the
good use, which can be made of Confession, may be had in our Church, without
the ill Effects and Consequences of the Romish Confession, and without laying a
Yoke upon the Consciences of men, which our Savior never laid.

And now I have, as briefly and as plainly as I could, stated this Controversy
between us and the Church of Rome, concerning the necessity and use of secret
Confession to the Ministers of God, as the proper Guides and Directors of our
Consciences: But it is granted on all hands, that Confession of our sins to God
is necessary; and there is no doubt but it is here intended in the Text, viz. a
Penitent acknowledgment of our sins; the nature whereof I shall briefly explain
to you.

And it must not only be a general Confession that we are sinners; but there
must be a particular acknowledgment of our sins to God, so far as upon a
particular discussion and examination of our Consciences, we can call them to
remembrance, especially our most heinous sins, which our Consciences will not
suffer us to forget, must be particularly acknowledged, with the several
aggravations of them.

And this Confession must be accompanied with such a shame and sorrow for our
sins, as produces in us a sincere resolution to leave them, and to betake our
selves to a better course. These are the principal ingredients of a Penitent
Confession.

1. There must be shame, without which there is no hope of amendment.
Confession always supposes conviction of a fault; and he that is truly
convinced that he has done amiss, cannot but be ashamed of what he has done.
And thus the Penitents in Scripture were wont to make Confession of their sins
to God; Ezra 9.6. O my God (says he) I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face
to thee my God. So Jeremiah, Chapter 3.25. We lie down in our shame, and our
confusion covers us; for we have sinned against the Lord. And so likewise
Daniel, Chapter 9.5. We have sinned, and have committed Iniquity, and done
Wickedly, unto us belongs confusion of Face. And thus our Savior describes
the Penitent behavior of the Publican, as ashamed to look up to that God whom
he had offended, Luke 18.13. He would not lift up so much as his eyes to
heaven; but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

2. Confession must be always accompanied with great sorrow for our sins,
considering the great dishonor we have brought to God, and the danger into
which we have brought our selves; I will declare mine iniquity, (says David,)
and I will be sorry for my sin.

And this Sorrow must be proportionable to the degree of our Sin. If we have
been very wicked, and have sinned greatly against the Lord, and have multiplied
our transgressions, and continued long in an evil course, have neglected God,
and forgotten him days without number, the measure of our sorrow, must bear
some proportion to the degree of our Sins; if they have been as Scarlet and
Crimson, (as the Prophet expresses it) that is, of a deeper dye than ordinary,
our Sorrow must be as deep as our Guilt; for it is not a slight trouble and a
few tears that will wash out such stains.

Not that tears are absolutely necessary, though they do very well become, and
most commonly accompany a sincere Repentance. All tempers are not in this
alike; some cannot express their sorrow by tears, even then when they are most
inwardly and sensibly grieved. But if we can easily shed tears upon other
occasions; certainly rivers of tears ought to run down our eyes, because we
have broken Gods Laws, the Reasonable, and Righteous, and good Laws of so good
a God, of so Gracious a Sovereign, of so mighty a Benefactor, of the Founder of
our Being, and the perpetual Patron and Protector of our lives: but if we
cannot command our tears, there must however be great trouble and contrition of
Spirit, especially for great sins; to be sure to that degree as to produce the

3. Property I mentioned of a Penitent Confession, namely, a sincere Resolution
to leave our sins, and betake our selves to a better course. He does not
confess his fault, but stand in it, who is not resolved to amend. True Shame
and Sorrow for our Sins is utterly inconsistent with any thought of returning
to them. It argues great obstinacy and impudence to confess a fault and
continue in it. Whenever we make Confession of our sins to God, surely it is
meet to say unto him, I will not offend any more, that which I know not teach
thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

This is the first part of Repentance mentioned in the Text, the first
Condition of our finding mercy with God, the Penitent acknowledgment of our
sins to him. I proceed to the

Second Condition required to make us capable of the mercy of God, which is the
actual forsaking of our sins; whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have
mercy. I shall not go about to explain what is meant by forsaking sin, it is
that which every body can understand, but few will do; there lies all the
difficulty. I shall only put you in mind, that forsaking of sin comprehends our
return to our duty, that necessarily follows from it. In sins of Commission, he
that has left any Vice, does thereby become master of the contrary Virtue,
virtus est vitium fugere; not to be drunk, is to be sober; not to oppress, or
defraud, or deal falsely, is to be Just and Honest: and for sins of Omission,
the forsaking of them is nothing else, but the doing of those Duties which we
omitted and neglected before. And therefore what Solomon here calls forsaking
of sin, is elsewhere in Scripture more fully expressed, by ceasing to do evil,
and learning to do well. Isa. 1.16. By forsaking our sins and turning to God;
Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked man forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. By turning from all our sins, and
keeping all Gods Laws and Statutes; Ezekiel. 18.21. If the wicked will turn from
all his sins which he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right.

And this is a most Essential part of Repentance, and a necessary condition of
our finding mercy with God. That part of Repentance which I have mentioned and
insisted upon before, the Penitent acknowledgment of our sins to God, with
Shame and Sorrow for them, and a firm purpose and Resolution to leave them, all
this is but Preparatory to the actual forsaking of them: that which perfects
and compleats our Repentance, is to turn from our evil ways, and to break off
our sins by righteousness.

And these terms of confessing and forsaking our sins, are Reasonable in
themselves, and Honorable to God, and Profitable to us, and upon lower Terms
we have no reason to expect the Mercy of God, nor in truth are we capable of
it, either by the present forgiveness of our sins, or the final absolution of
the great day, and the blessed Reward of Eternal Life. God peremptorily
requires this change, as a condition of our Forgiveness and Happiness; Repent
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.19. If thou will
enter into life, keep the commandments, Matthew. 19.17. Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. And why should any man hope for the Mercy of
God upon other Terms, than those which he has so plainly and peremptorily
declared?

It is a mean and unworthy thought of God, to imagine that he will accept men
to his favor and eternal life upon other Terms than of better obedience. Will
any wise Father or Prince accept less from his Children and Subjects? will they
be satisfied with sighs and tears, as well as with Obedience? And well pleased
if they be but melancholy for their faults, though they nenever mend them? We
must not impute that to God, which would be a defect of Wisdom and good
Government, in any Father or Prince upon Earth. God values no part of
Repentance upon any other account, but as it tends to reclaim us to our Duty,
and ends in our Reformation and amendment.

This is that which qualifies us for the Happiness of another Life, and makes
us meet to be made partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. And
without this, though God should be pleased to forgive us, yet we could not
forgive our selves; and notwithstanding the legal discharge from Guilt, the
Sting of it would remain, and we should, like our first Parents after they had
sinned, run away and hide our selves from God, though he spoke never so kindly to
us. God has placed in every Man's mind an inexorable Judge, that will grant no
Pardon and Forgiveness but to a reformed Penitent, to him that has such a
sense of the Evil of his past Life, as to become a better man for the future.

And whoever entertains any other notion of the Grace and Mercy of God to
Sinners, confounds the Nature of Things, and does plainly overthrow the Reason
of all Laws, which is to restrain men from Sin: But when it is committed, to
Pardon it without Amendment, is to Encourage the Practice of it, and to take
away the Reverence and Veneration of those Laws, which seem so severely to
forbid it. So that next to impunity, the forgiveness of Men's sins upon such
easy and unfit Terms, gives boldness and encouragement to sin, and must
necessarily in the opinion of men lessen the Honor and Esteem of God's Laws.

And thus I have Considered and Explained both the Blessing and Benefit which
is here promised and declared, viz. the Mercy and Favor of God, which
comprehends both the present Forgiveness of our Sins, and Power against them,
and Grace to Persevere in Goodness to the end, and our final Absolution at the
great day, and the Glorious and Merciful Reward of Eternal Life: and likewise
the Conditions upon which this Blessing is promised, viz. the Penitent
acknowledgment of our sins to God, with such Shame and Sorrow for them, as
produces a sincere Resolution of leaving them, and returning to a better
course, and the actual forsaking of them, which involves in it our actual
return to our Duty, and a Constant and Sincere obedience to the Laws of God in
the future course of our lives.

I shall now make some Application of this Discourse to our selves. I am sure
we are all nearly concerned in it. The best of us have many sins to confess and
forsake; some of us very probably have need to change the whole course of our
Lives, to put us into a capacity of the Mercy of God. This work can never be
unseasonable; but there cannot be a more proper time for it, than when we are
solemnly preparing our selves to receive the Holy Sacrament; in which as we do
Commemorate the great Mercy of God to Mankind, so we do likewise renew and
confirm our Covenant with him, that Holy Covenant wherein we engage our selves
to forsake our sins, as ever we expect the forgiveness of them at God's hand.

To persuade us hereto, be pleased to consider the Reasonableness of the Thing,
the infinite Benefit and Advantage of it; and which is beyond all other
Arguments, the absolute Necessity of it, to make us capable of the Mercy and
Forgiveness of God, in this World and the other, and to deliver us from the
wrath which is to come, and from those terrible storms of vengeance, which will
infallibly fall upon impenitent sinners: So that we have all the Reason and all
the Encouragement in the World, to resolve upon a better course. Upon this
Condition, the Mercy of God is ready to meet and embrace us, God will Pardon
our greatest provocations, and be perfectly reconciled to us. So he has
declared by the Prophet, Isaiah 1.16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well.
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red as crimson, they
shall be as wool. And what greater Encouragement can we desire, than that upon
so easy and advantageous Terms, God should be so ready to have an end put to
all Controversies and Quarrels between him and us.

I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to take up a serious
Resolution to break off your sins by repentance, and to reform whatever, upon
due search and trial of your ways, you shall find to be amiss in your lives.

I beseech you by the Mercies of God, that Mercy which naturally leads to
repentance, and which is long-suffering to usward, on purpose that we may not
perish, but come to repentance, which has spared us so often, and is not yet
exhausted and tired out by our intolerable obstinacy, and innumerable
provocations; that mercy which moved the Son of God to become man, to live
among us, and to die for us; who now as it were speaks to us from the Cross,
extending his pierced Hands, and painful Arms to embrace us, and through the
gasping wounds of his side lets us see the tender and bleeding Compassion of
his Heart; that mercy which if we now despise it, we shall in vain one day
implore, and catch hold of, and hang upon, to save us from sinking into Eternal
Perdition; that mercy, which how much soever we now presume upon, will then be
so far from interposing between us and the wrath of God, that it will highly
inflame and exasperate it: For whatever impenitent sinners may now think, they
will then certainly find that the Divine Justice, when it is thoroughly
provoked, and whetted by his abused Mercy and Goodness, will be most terribly
severe, and like a Rasor set with Oil, will cut the keener for its smoothness.

Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver: Consider and show your selves men, O ye transgressors!

We do consider all this (may some perhaps say) but we have been great sinners,
so great, that we doubt whether our case be not already desperate.

This, if it be sensibly said, with deep Sorrow and Contrition, with that Shame
and Confusion of face, which becomes great offenders, is a good Confession, and
the best Reason in the World, why ye should now break off your sins: For if
what you have already done, do really make your case so doubtful and difficult;
do not by sinning yet more and more against the Lord, make it quite Desperate
and past Remedy; do but you Repent, and God will yet return and have Mercy upon
you. And do not say you cannot do it, when it must be done, or you are undone.
Power and necessity go together; when men are hard pressed they find a power
which they thought they had not; and when it comes to the push, men can do that
which they plainly see they either must do, or be ruined for ever.

But after all this, I am very sensible how great a need there is of God's
powerful Assistance in this case, and that it is not an ordinary resolution,
and common measure of God's Grace, that will reclaim those who have been long
habituated to an evil course.

Let us therefore earnestly beg of him, that he would make these Counsels
effectual, that he would grant us repentance unto life, that he would make us
all sensible of our faults, sorry for them, and resolved to amend them; and let
us every one put up David's prayer to God for our selves, Deal with thy Servant
according to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes; order my steps in thy word,
and let not any iniquity have dominion over me; teach me, O Lord, the way of
thy statutes, that I may keep them unto the end.

I have now done; I am only to mind you of another Duty, which is to accompany
our Repentance, and Fasting, and Prayer, as a Testimony of the Sincerity of our
Repentance, and one of the best means to make our Fasting and Prayer acceptable
to God, and to turn away his Judgments from us, and that is Charity and Alms to
the Poor, whose number is very great among us, and their necessities very
pressing and clamorous, and therefore do call for a bountiful Supply.

And to convince men of the Necessity of this Duty, and the Efficacy of it in
Conjunction with our Repentance, and Fasting, and Prayers, I shall only offer
to your consideration a few plain Texts of Scripture, which need no comment
upon them. Dan. 4.27. it is the Prophets advice to Nebuchadnezzar; Break off
thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity, by showing mercy to the poor; if
so be it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. Acts 10.4. the Angel there
tells Cornelius, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before
God. Isa. 58.5. Is not this the fast which I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that
thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house; when thou see the naked,
that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then
shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth
speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the Glory of the Lord
shall be thy rereward; then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer thee,
thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am. To which I will only add that
Gracious promise of our Savior; Blessed are the merciful; for they shall find
mercy; and that terrible sentence in St. James, He shall have Judgment without
mercy, that has showed no mercy.

SERMON III. Sermon. 3.
Of Confession, and Sorrow for Sin.
PSALM. XXXVIII.18. I will declare mine iniquity, and be sorry for my Sin.


IN this Psalm David does earnestly beg Mercy and Forgiveness of God, and in
order to the obtaining of it, he declares both his Sins, and his Repentance for
them in these Words, which contain in them two of the Necessary Ingredients, or
at least Concomitants of a true Repentance, viz. Confession of Sin, and Sorrow
for it.

Vol. 8.
I shall speak something of the first of these, viz. Confession of Sin: but the
Second, viz. Sorrow for Sin, shall be the main Subject of my Discourse.

I. Confession of Sin; I will declare mine iniquity, or as it is in the Old
Translation, I will Confess my wickedness. Of which I shall speak under these
three Heads.

I. What Confession of Sin is.

II. How far it is necessary.

III. What are the Reasons and grounds of this necessity.

I. What Confession of Sin is. It is a Declaration or Acknowledgment of some
moral evil or fault to another, which we are conscious to our selves we have
been Guilty of. And this Acknowledgment may be made by us, either to God or
Man. The Scripture mentions both. Confession of our Sins to God is very
frequently mentioned in Scripture, as the first and necessary part of
Repentance; and sometimes, and in some cases Confession to men is not only
recommended, but enjoined.

II. How far Confession of our Sins is Necessary. That it is necessary to
confess our Sins to God, the Scripture plainly declares, and is I think a
matter out of all dispute. For it is a Necessary part of Repentance, that we
should confess our Sins to God, with a due sense of the evil of them; and
therefore the Scripture makes this a Necessary qualification, and Condition of
Pardon and Forgiveness. Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins
shall have mercy. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; implying
that if we do not confess our sins to God, the guilt of them will still remain;
to God I say, for of Confession to him St. John plainly speaks, when he says,
He is faithful and just; Who? God surely; who though he be not named before, yet
is necessarily understood in the words before; If we confess our sins, i. e. to
God, he is faithful and just.

A general Confession of our sins is absolutely necessary; and in some cases a
particular acknowledgment of them, and repentance for them, especially if the
sins have been great and deliberate and presumptuous; in this Case a particular
Confession of them, and Repentance for them, is necessary so far as we can
particularly recollect them, and call them to Remembrance: Whereas for sins of
ignorance and infirmity, of surprise and daily incursion, for lesser Omissions,
and the Defects and Imperfections of our best Actions and Services, we have all
the Reason that can be to believe, that God will accept of a general Confession
of them, and Repentance for them. And if any Man ask me, where I find this
distinction in Scripture, between a general and particular Repentance? I
answer, that it is not necessary it should be any where expressed in Scripture,
being so clearly founded in the Nature and Reason of the thing; because in many
cases it is not possible that we should have a particular Knowledge and
Remembrance of all our particular Sins; as is plain in Sins of ignorance, since
our very calling them by that Name, does necessarily suppose that we do not
know them. It is impossible we should remember those Sins afterward, which we
did not know when they were committed: And therefore either a general
Repentance for these and the other Sins I mentioned of the like Nature, must be
sufficient in order to the Pardon of them; or we must say, that they are
unpardonable, which would be very unreasonable, because this would be to make
lesser Sins more unpardonable, than those which are far greater.

And yet though this difference between a general and particular Repentance be no
where expressly mentioned in Scripture, there does not want foundation for it
there. Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret
Sins. (i. e.) Such as we do not discern and take notice of, when they are
committed: And yet David supposes, that upon a general Acknowledgment of them,
and Repentance for them, we may be cleansed from them; though we cannot make a
particular Acknowledgment of them, and exercise a particular Repentance for
them, because they are secret, and we do not particularly understand what they
are.

As for our confessing our Sins to Men, both Scripture and Reason do in some
cases recommend and enjoin it. As,

1. In order to the obtaining of the Prayers of good men for us. James 5.16.
Confess your Sins one to another; he said before, The prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. This in all probability is
meant of the Miraculous Power of Prayer, which St. Chrysostom reckons among the
Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, bestowed upon Christians in the first Ages of
the Church, and this is very much countenanced and confirmed by what presently
follows after this command of Confessing our Sins one to another, and praying
one for another, and given as the Reason of it; for the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous Man avails much; the Original is (...), the inspired
prayer, which in the verse before, is called the prayer of faith, meaning that
Miraculous Faith, in the Power whereof Christians did obtain of God whatever
they were inspired to ask of him; according to our Savior's promise in the
Gospel, concerning the efficacy of the Prayers of Christians, which we find
mentioned among the other Miraculous Powers, which were to be conferred upon
them by the coming of the Holy Ghost.

2. Confession of our Sins to Men is likewise reasonable, in order to the ease
and satisfaction of our minds, and our being directed in our Duty for the
future. In this Case common Reason and Prudence, without any Precept of
Scripture, will direct men to have recourse to this remedy, viz. to discover
and lay open our disease to some skilful spiritual Physician, to some faithful
Friend or prudent Guide, in order to spiritual advice and direction, for the
peace and satisfaction of our minds. And then,

3. In case our Sins have been public and scandalous, both Reason and the
practice of the Christian Church do require, that when men have publicly
offended, they should give public Satisfaction, and open Testimony of their
Repentance.

But as for private and auricular Confession of our Sins to a Priest in all
cases, and as of absolute necessity to our obtaining Pardon and Forgiveness
from God, as the Church of Rome teaches, this is neither necessary by divine
Precept, nor by any Constitution and Practice of the ancient Christian Church,
as I have shown in my former discourse.

Not to mention the bad consequences of this Practice, and the impious and
dangerous use which has been made of this Seal of Confession, for the
concealing and carrying on of the most wicked and barbarous designs; and the
debauching of the Penitents, by drawing them into the Commission of the same
and greater Sins, than those which they confessed; which the more devout
Persons of that Church have frequently complained of. I proceed now to show
briefly in the

III. Place, the Grounds and Reasons of the necessity of confessing our Sins to
God; and I shall but just mention them.

1. From the Precept and Command of God; for which I have already produced
clear Proof of Scripture.

2. From the Nature of the thing, because without this there can be no
Repentance toward God. He that will not so much as own the faults which he
has been guilty of, can never Repent of them. If we will not confess our Sins
to God, we are never like to be sorry for them. Thus much for the first thing
in the Text, the Confession of our Sins. I proceed now to the

Second Ingredient of Repentance mentioned in the Text, which is Sorrow for
Sin; I will declare mine iniquity, and be sorry for my Sin. In the handling of
this Argument, I shall

I. Consider the Nature of this Passion of Sorrow.

II. The Reason and Grounds of our Sorrow for Sin.

III. The Measure and Degrees of it.

IV. How far the outward expression of our inward grief by Tears is necessary
to a true Repentance.

I. For the Nature of this Passion. Sorrow is a trouble or disturbance of Mind,
occasioned by something that is evil, done or suffered by us, or which we are
in danger of suffering, that tends greatly to our damage or mischief: So that
to be sorry for a thing, is nothing else but to be sensibly affected with the
Consideration of the evil of it, and of the mischief and inconvenience which is
like to redound to us from it: Which if it be a Moral evil, such as Sin is, to
be sorry for it, is to be troubled that we have done it, and to wish with all
our hearts that we had been wiser, and had done otherwise; and if this Sorrow
be true and real, if it abide and stay upon us, it will produce a firm Purpose
and Resolution in us, not to do the like for the future.

It Is true indeed, that we are said to be sorry for the death and loss of
Friends; but this is rather the effect of Natural Affection than of our Reason,
which always endeavors to check and moderate our grief for that which we
cannot help, and labors by all means to turn our Sorrow into patience: And we
are said likewise to grieve for the miseries and sufferings of others; but this
is not so properly Sorrow, as Pity and Compassion. Sorrow rather respects our
selves, and our own doings and Sufferings. I proceed in the

II. Place To enquire into the Reasons and Grounds of our Sorrow for Sin; and
they, as I have already hinted, are these two; the Intrinsecal, or the
Consequent evil of Sin; either the evil of Sin in it is self, or the mischiefs
or inconveniences which it will bring upon us. For every one that is sorry for
any fault he is guilty of, he is so upon one of these two accounts; either upon
the score of ingenuity, or of interest; either because he has done a thing
which is unworthy in it is self, or because he has done something which may
prove prejudicial to himself; either out of a principle of love and gratitude
to God, or from a principle of self-love. And though the former of these be the
better, the more generous principle of Sorrow; yet the latter is usually the
first; because it is the more sensible, and touches us more nearly: For Sin is
a base and ill-natured thing, and renders a Man not so apt to be affected with
the injuries he has offered to God, as with the Mischief which is likely to
fall upon himself. And therefore I will begin with the latter, because it is
usually the more sensible cause of our Trouble and Sorrow for Sin.

1. The great Mischief and Inconvenience that Sin is like to bring upon us.
When a Man is thoroughly convinced of the danger into which his sins have
brought him, that they have made him a child of wrath, and a Son of perdition,
that he is thereby fallen under the heavy dipleasure of Almighty God, and
liable to all those dreadful curses, which are written in his Book, that ruin
and destruction hang over him, and that nothing keeps him from eternal and
intolerable torments, but the Patience and Long-suffering of God, which he does
not know how soon it may cease to interpose between him and the wrath of God,
and let him fall into that endless and insupportable misery, which is the just
portion and desert of his Sins; he that lays to Heart the sad Estate and
Condition, into which he has brought himself by Sin, and the Mischiefs which
attend him every moment of his continuance in that state, and how near they are
to him, and that there is but a step between him and Death, and hardly another
between that and Hell, he cannot surely but be very sorry for what he has
done, and be highly displeased and offended with himself, that he should be the
Author of his own ruin, and have contributed as much as in him lies to his
everlasting undoing.

2. Another and better Principle of Sorrow for Sin, is ingenuity; because we
are sensible, that we have carried our selves very unworthily toward God, and
have been injurious to him, who has laid all possible obligations upon us: For
he has made us, and has given us our beings, and has charged his watchful
Providence with the continual care of us; his bounty has ministered to the
necessities and comforts of our Life; all the Blessings that we enjoy, are the
Effects of his mere love and goodness, without any hope of requital, or
expectation of any other return from us, than of love, of gratitude, and
obedience; which yet are of no advantage to him, but very beneficial and
comfortable to our selves: For he does not expect Duty and Obedience from us,
with any regard of Benefit to himself, but for our sakes, and in order to our
own Happiness.

Nay, his kindness did not stop here, but after we had abused him by our
repeated provocations, yet he still continued his care of us; and when we had
farther provoked him to withdraw his Love, and to call in his abused Goodness,
and had done what lay in us to make our selves miserable, he would not suffer
us to be undone, but found out a Ransom for us, and has contrived a way for
the pardon of all our offenses, and to reconcile us to himself, and to restore
us to Happiness, by the most stupendous and amazing condescension of love and
goodness that ever was, even by giving his only Son to dye for us.

And can we reflect upon all this, and not be sorry and grieved at our very
hearts, that we should be so evil to him, who has been so good to us, that we
should be so undutiful to so loving a Father, so unkind to so faithful and
constant a Friend, so ungrateful and unworthy to so mighty a Benefactor? If any
thing will melt us into Tears, surely this will do it, to consider that we have
sinned against him, who made us, and continually preserves us, and after all
our unkindness to him, did still retain so great a love for us, as to redeem us
from Hell and Destruction, by the Death and Suffering of his Son, and
notwithstanding all our offenses does still offer us Pardon and Peace, Life and
Happiness. Such Considerations as these, seriously laid to heart, should, one
would think break the hardest heart, and make Tears to gush, even out of a
Rock. I proceed in the

III. Place to consider the Measure and Degree of our Sorrow for Sin. That it
admits of degrees, which ought to bear some proportion to the heinousness of
our Sins, and the several aggravations of them, and the time of our continuance
in them, is out of all dispute: For though the least Sin be a just cause of the
deepest Sorrow; yet because our greatest grief can never bear a due proportion
to the vast and infinite evil of Sin, God is pleased to require and accept such
measures of Sorrow, as do not bear an exact correspondence to the Malignity of
Sin, provided they be according to the capacity of our Nature, and in some sort
proportioned to the degree and aggravations of our Sins; i. e. Though the highest
degree of our Sorrow does necessarily fall below the evil of the least Sin; yet
God requires that we should be more deeply affected with some Sins, than others.

But what is the lowest degree which God requires in a true Penitent, and will
accept, as it is impossible for me to tell, so it is unprofitable for any body
to know: For no Man can reasonably make this enquiry with any other design,
than that he may learn how he may come off with God upon the cheapest and
easiest terms. Now there cannot be a worse sign, that a Man is not truly
sensible of the great evil of Sin, than this, that he desires to be troubled
for it, as little as may be, and no longer than needs must: And none surely are
more unlikely to find acceptance with God, than those who deal so nearly, and
endeavor to drive so hard a bargain with him.

And therefore I shall only say this in general, concerning the degrees of our
Sorrow for Sin; that Sin being so great an evil in it self, and of so
pernicious a consequence to us, it cannot be too much lamented and grieved for
by us: And the more and greater our Sins have been, and the longer we have
continued and lived in them, they call for so much the greater Sorrow, and
deeper humiliation from us: For the reasoning of our Savior concerning Mary
Magdalene, She loved much, because much was forgiven her, is proportionably
true in this case, those who have sinned much, should sorrow the more.

And then we must take this Caution along with us, that if we would Judge
aright of the truth of our Sorrow for Sin, we must not measure it so much by
the Degrees of sensible trouble and affliction, as by the rational Effects of
it, which are hatred of Sin, and a fixed purpose and resolution against it for
the future: for he is most truly sorry for his Miscarriage, who looks upon what
he has done amiss, with abhorrence and detestation of the thing, and wishes
he had not done it, and censures himself severely for it, and thereupon
resolves not to do the like again. And this is the Character which St. Paul
gives of a Godly Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. that it works repentance, (...), it
produces a real change in our minds, and makes us to alter our purpose and
resolution: And though such a Person may not be so passionately and sensibly
afflicted for Sin, yet it appears by the Effect, that he has a deeper and more
rational resentment of the evil of it, than that man who is sad and melancholy
and drooping for never so long a time, and after all returns to his former
sinful course; the Degree of his Sorrow may appear greater, but the Effect of
it is really less.

IV. As for the outward expressions of our Grief and Sorrow. The usual sign and
outward expression of Sorrow is Tears; but these being not the Substance of our
Duty, but an external Testimony of it, which some tempers are more unapt to,
than others; we are much less to Judge of the Truth of our Sorrow for Sin by
these, than by our inward sensible Trouble and Affliction of Spirit. Some
Persons are of a more tender and melting disposition, and can command their
Tears upon a little occasion, and upon very short warning; and such Persons
that can weep for every thing else that troubles them, have much more reason to
suspect the Truth of their Sorrow for Sin, if this outward expression of it be
wanting. And we find in Scripture, that the Sorrow of true Penitents does very
frequently discover it self by this outward sign of it. Thus when Ezra and the
people made Confession of their Sins to God, it is said, that they wept very
Sore, Ezra 10. Peter when he reflected upon that great Sin of denying his
Master, it is said, He went forth and wept bitterly. David also was abundant in
this expression of his grief. In the Book of Psalms he speaks frequently of his
sighs, and groans, and of watering his couch with his tears: yea so sensibly
was he affected with the Evil of Sin, that he could shed tears plentifully for
the Sins of others, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because
men keep not thy law. In like manner Jeremiah tells us, that his Soul did weep
in secret places, for the pride and obstinacy of the Jews; that his eye did
weep sore, and run down with tears; Jer. 13.17. And so likewise St. Paul,
Philip 3.18, 19. There are many that walk, of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ. And
there seems to be this natural Reason for it, that all great and permanent
impressions upon the Mind, all deep inward resentments have usually a
proportionable effect upon the Body, and t^^ inferior Faculties.

But though this happen very frequently, yet it is not so constant and certain:
For all men have not the same tenderness of Spirit, nor are equally prone to
tears; nay, though a Man can weep upon natural accounts, as upon the loss of a
Child or near Relation, or an intimate Friend, or when he lies under a sharp
Bodily pain, yet a Man may truly repent, though he cannot express his Sorrow for
Sin the same way, provided he give Testimony of it by more real Effects: And
therefore the Rule, which is commonly given by Casuists in this case, seems to
be more ensnaring, than true and useful; Namely, that that man that can shed
Tears upon account of any evil less than that of Sin, (as certainly all natural
evils are) ought to question the Truth of his Repentance for any Sin that he
has committed, if he cannot shed Tears for it. This I think is not true,
because there is scarce any Man, of so hard and unrelenting a Spirit, but the
loss of a kind Father, or a dear Child, or other near Relation, will force
Tears, from him And yet such a Man, if it were to ^ave his Soul, may not be
able at some times to shed a Tear for his Sins. And the Reason is obvious;
because Tears do proceed from a sensitive trouble, and are commonly the Product
of a natural affection; and therefore it is no wonder, if they flow more readily
and easily upon a natural account; because they are the Effect of a Cause
suitable to their Nature. But Sorrow for Sin, which has more of the Judgment
and Understanding in it, has not it is Foundation in natural affection, but in
Reason; and therefore may not many times express it self in Tears, though it may
produce greater and more proper Effects.

So that upon the whole matter, I see no Reason to call in question the Truth
and Sincerity of that Man's Sorrow and Repentance, who hates Sin and forsakes
it, and returns to God and his Duty, though he cannot shed Tears, and express the
bitterness of his Soul for his Sin, by the same significations that a Mother
does in the loss of her only Son. He that cannot weep like a Child, may resolve
like a Man, and that undoubtedly will find acceptance with God. A learned
Divine has well illustrated this Matter by this Similitude. Two Persons
walking together epsy a Serpent, the one shrieks and cries out at the sight of
it, the other kills it: So is it in Sorrow for Sin; some express it by great
Lamentation and Tears, and vehement transports of passion; others by greater
and more real effects of hatred and detestation, by forsaking their Sins, and
by mortifying and subduing their Lusts: But he that kills it does certainly
best express his inward displeasure and enmity against it.

The Application I shall make of what has been said upon this Argument, shall
be in two particulars.

I. By way of Caution, and that against a double mistake about Sorrow for Sin.

1. Some look upon Trouble and Sorrow for Sin, as the whole of Repentance.

2. Others exact from themselves such a degree of Sorrow, as ends in
melancholy, and renders them unfit both for the Duties of Religion, and of
their particular Calling. The first concerns almost the generality of men; the
latter but a very few in comparison.

1. There are a great many, who look upon Trouble and Sorrow for their Sins, as
the whole of Repentance, whereas it is but an Introduction to it. It is that
which works repentance; but is not Repentance it self. Repentance is always
accompanied with Sorrow for Sin; but Sorrow for Sin does not always end in true
Repentance: Sorrow only respects Sins past; but Repentance is chiefly
preventive of Sin for the future. And God does therefore require our Sorrow for
Sin, in order to our forsaking of it. Heb. 6.1. Repentance is there called
repentance from dead Works. It is not only a Sorrow for them, but a turning
from them.

There is no Reason why men should be so willing to deceive themselves, for
they are like to be the losers by it: But so we see it is, that many men are
contented to be deceived to their own ruin; and among many other ways, which
men have to cheat themselves, this is none of the least frequent, to think that
if they can but shed a few Tears for Sin upon a deathbed, which no doubt they
may easily do, when they see their Friends weeping about them, and apprehend
themselves to be in imminent danger, not only of Death, but of that which is
more terrible, the heavy displeasure, and the fiery Indignation of Almighty
God, into whose hands it is a fearful thing to fall; I say, they think that if
they can but do thus much, God will accept this for a true Repentance, and
hereupon grant them Pardon and eternal life. And upon these fond hopes, they
adjourn their Repentance, and the Reformation of their lives to a dying hour.

Indeed if I were to speak to a Man upon his Deathbed, I would encourage him
to a great Contrition and Sorrow for his Sins, as his last and only remedy, and
the best thing he can do at that time; but on the other hand, when I am
speaking to those that are well and in health, I dare not give them the least
Encouragement to venture their Souls upon this, because it is an hazardous and
almost desperate remedy; especially when men have cunningly and designedly
contrived to rob God of the Service of their lives, and to put him off with a
few unprofitable Sighs and Tears at their departure out of the World. Our
Savior tells us, that it is not every one, that shall say unto him Lord! Lord!
that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and that there is a time, when
many shall seek to enter in, but shall not be able.

The Sum of this Caution is, that men should take heed of mistaking Sorrow for
Sin, for true Repentance, unless it be followed with the forsaking of Sin and
the real Reformation of our Lives. Ahab humbled himself, but we do not find
that he was a true Penitent. Judas was sorry for his Sin, and yet for all that
was the Son of perdition. Esau is a sad type of an ineffectual Sorrow for Sin,
Heb. 12. where the Apostle tells us, that He found no place for Repentance,
that is no way to change the mind of his Father Isaac, though he sought it
carefully with tears. If Sorrow for Sin were Repentance, there would be store
of Penitents in Hell; for there is the deepest and most intense sorrow, weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

2. Another mistake which Men ought to be cautioned against in this Matter, is
of those who exact from themselves such a degree of Sorrow for Sin, as ends in
deep melancholy, as renders them unfit both for the Duties of Religion, and of
their particular Callings. But because there are but very few who fall into
this mistake, I shall need to say the less to it. This only I shall say, that
those who indulge their sorrow to such a degree, as to drown their Spirits, and
to sink them into melancholy and mopishness, and thereby render themselves
unserviceable to God, and unfit for the necessities of this life, they commit
one Sin more to mourn for, and overthrow the End of Repentance by the
indiscreet use of the Means of it. For the End of Sorrow for Sin, is the
forsaking of it, and returning to our Duty: But he that Sorrows for Sin, so as
to unfit him for his Duty, he defeats his own design, and destroys the end he
aims at.

II. The Other part of the Aplication of this Discourse should be, to stir up
this affection of Sorrow in us. And here, if I had time, I might represent to
you the great evil of sin, and the infinite Danger and inconvenience of it. If
the holy men in Scripture, David, and Jeremiah, and St. Paul, were so deeply
affected with the sins of others, as to shed rivers of tears at the remembrance
of them; how ought we to be touched with the sense of our own sins, who are
equally concerned in the dishonor brought to God by them, and infinitely more
in the danger they expose us to! Can we weep for our dead Friends? and have we
no sense of that heavy load of Guilt, of that body of death, which we carry
about with us? Can we be sad and melancholy for temporal Losses and Sufferings,
and refuse to be comforted? And is it no Trouble to us to have lost Heaven and
Happiness, and to be in continual danger of the intolerable Sufferings, and
endless Torments of another World?

I shall only offer to your Consideration, the great Benefit and Advantage
which will redound to us from this godly Sorrow; it works Repentance to
Salvation, not to be repented of, says St. Paul. If we would thus sow in
Tears, we should reap in Joy. This Sorrow would but continue for a time, and in
the morning of the Resurrection there would be Joy to all Eternity, Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. It is but a very little while, and these days of
Mourning will be accomplished; and then all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes;
and the ransomed of the Lord shall come to Sion, with Songs, and everlasting
Joy shall be upon their Heads. They shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow
and Sighing shall flee away. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted: but woe unto you that laugh, for ye shall mourn and weep. If Men will
rejoice in the pleasures of Sin, and walk in the ways of their hearts, and in
the sight of their eyes; if they will remove Sorrow from their heart, and put
away all sad and melancholy Thoughts from them, and are resolved to harden
their Spirits against the sense of Sin, against the Checks and Convictions of
their own Consciences, and the Suggestions of God's Holy Spirit, against all
the Arguments that God can offer, and all the Methods that God can use to bring
them to Repentance; let them know, that for all these things God will bring
them into judgment; and because they would not give way to a timely and a
seasonable Sorrow for Sin, they shall lie down in eternal Sorrow, weeping and
wailing and gnashing of teeth shall be their portion for ever. From which sad
and miserable Estate, beyond all Imagination, and past all Remedy, God of his
infinite Goodness deliver us all, for Jesus Christ his sake,

To whom, etc.

SERMON IV. Sermon. 4.
Preached on Ash Wednesday, 1689. The unprofitableness of Sin in this Life, an
Argument for Repentance.
JOB XXXIII.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; He will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.


THE great Folly and Perverseness of humane Nature is in nothing more apparent,
than in this, that when in all other things Men are generally led and governed
by their Interests, Vol. 8.
and can hardly be imposed upon by any Art, or persuaded by any Solicitation,
to act plainly contrary to it; yet in matter of their Sin and Duty, that is, in
that which of all other is of greatest concernment to them, they have little or
no regard to it; but are so blinded and bewitched with the deceitfulness of
sin, as not to consider the infinite Danger and Disadvantage of it; and at the
same time, to cast the Commandments of God, and the consideration of their own
Happiness behind their backs.

And of this every Sinner, when he comes to himself, and considers what he has
done, is abundantly convinced; as appears by the Confession and Acknowledgment,
which is here in the Text put into the Mouth of a true Penitent; I have sinned,
and perverted that which is right, and it profited me not, etc.

In which Words here is a great Blessing and Benefit promised on God's part,
and the Condition required on our part.

First, The Blessing or Benefit promised on God's part, which is Deliverance
from the ill Consequences and Punishment of Sin; he will deliver his soul from
going into the pit, and his life shall see the light, that is, he will deliver
him from Death and Damnation. And though perhaps temporal Death be here
immediately intended, yet that is a Type of our Deliverance from eternal Death;
which is expressly promised in the Gospel.

Secondly, Here is the Condition required on our part; If any say, I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not. In which
Words there are contained,

I. A penitent Confession of our Sins to God; for he looks upon men, and if
any say, I have sinned, that is, make a penitent Confession of his Sin to God.

II. A true Contrition for our Sin, not only for fear of the pernicious
Consequences of Sin, and the Punishment that will follow it, employed in these
Words, and it profited me not, this is but a very imperfect Contrition: but
from a just sense of the evil nature of Sin, and the Fault and Offense of it
against God, that we have done contrary to Right and our Duty. If any say, I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right. Here you see that true and
perfect Contrition for our Sins, is made a necessary Condition of the Blessing
and Benefit here promised, viz. Deliverance from the Punishment due to them.

III. Here is a description of the evil nature of Sin, it is a perverting of
that which is right. Sin is a perverting of the Constitution and Appointment of
God, and of the Nature and Order of Things. God has given Man a Law and Rule
to walk by, but the foolishness of man perverteth his way. The great Lines of
our Duty are plain and visible to all Men, and if we would attend to the
direction of our own Minds, concerning Good and Evil, every Man would be a law
to himself. He has showed thee, O man, what is good. That which is right and
just and good, is plain and obvious, and offers it self first to us, and when
ever we sin, we go out of the right way that lies plain before us, and turn
aside into crooked paths. But when we do that which is right, we act agreeably
to the Design and Frame of our Beings, and comply with the true Nature and
Order of Things; we do what becomes us, and are what we ought to be: but sin
perverts the Nature of Things, and puts them out of course, I have sinned and
perverted that which was right.

IV. You have here an acknowledgment of the Mischievous and Pernicious
Consequences of Sin; I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not. Which last words are a (...), in which much less is said than
is meant and intended; it profited me not, that is, it was so far from being of
advantage, that the Effects and Consequences of it were very Pernicious and
Destructive.

And this is not only true as to the final issue, and event of an Evil course
in the other World; but I shall endeavor to show, that even in respect of this
World, and the present Life, the Practice of some sins is plainly Mischievous
to the temporal Interests of men; that others are wholly unprofitable; and that
those which pretend to bring some benefit and advantage will, when all accounts
are cast up, and all circumstances duly weighed and considered, be found to do
far otherwise.

First, I shall show, that the Practice of some Vices is Evidently Mischievous
and Prejudicial to us, as to this World; as all those Vices which fall under
the cognizance of Human Laws, and are punished by them; Murder, Theft,
Perjury, Sedition, Rebellion and the like; these cannot be denied to be of
pernicious consequence to men, and therefore the great Patrons of Vice seldom
plead for these, the inconvenience of them is so palpable, that some feel it,
and all may see it every day.

But besides these, there are many other sorts of sin, which human Laws either
take no notice of, or do not so severely Punish, which yet in their Natural
Consequences, are very pernicious to our present interest; either they are a
disturbance to our minds, or dangerous to our health, or ruinous to our Estate,
or hurtful to our Reputation, or it may be at once prejudicial to us, in all,
or most of these respects; and these are the greatest temporal inconveniences
that men are liable to.

All irregular Passions, as Wrath, Malice, Envy, Impatience and Revenge, are
not only a disturbance to our selves, but they naturally draw upon us hatred
and contempt from others. Any one of these passions is enough to render a Man
uneasy to himself, and to make his Conversation disgustful and troublesome to
all that are about him; for all men naturally hate all those, who are of an
envious, or malicious, or revengeful temper, and are apt to rise up and stand
upon their guard against them. Anger and impatience are great deformities of
the mind, and make a Man look as ugly, as if he had a wry and distorted
Countenance; and these passions are apt to breed in others a secret contempt of
us, and to bring our prudence into question, because they are signs of a weak
and impotent mind, that either has lost, or never had the Government of it
self.

There are other Vices, which are plainly pernicious to our health, and do
naturally bring Pains and Diseases upon men; such are Intemperance and Lust;
and though some may pretend to govern themselves, in the Practice of these, with
so much moderation and discretion, as to prevent the notorious bad consequences
of them, yet there are very few or none that do so; this is seldom more than a
Speculation, and men that allow themselves in any lewd or intemperate course,
will find it very hard to govern themselves in it; for after men have forfeited
their innocence, and broke in upon their natural Modesty, they are apt by
degrees to grow profligate and desperate; if a Man gives way but a little to
his own vicious inclinations, they will soon get head of him, and no Man knows
how far they will hurry him at last.

Besides that the Vices I am speaking of, Intemperance and Lust, have other
great inconveniences attending them, they expose men more frequently, than most
other Vices, to occasions of quarrel, in which men often lose their own lives,
or take away other men's, by which they fall under the danger of the Law, and
the stroke of public Justice; or if they escape that, (as too often they do)
they cannot fly from their own Consciences, which do commonly fill them with
the horror and torment of such an action all their days; so pernicious are the
usual Consequences of these Vices, of which we see sad instances every day.

Nor are these Vices less hurtful to men's Estates; for they are extremely
expensive and wasteful, and usually make men careless of all their business and
concernments, liable to be cheated by those, whom they are forced to trust with
their affairs, because they will not mind them themselves, and to be abused by
crafty men, who watch the oportunities of their folly and weakness, to draw
them into foolish bargains. It is an old Observation, that more men perish by
Intemperance, than by the Sword; and I believe it is as true, that more Estates
states are dissipated and wasted by these two riotous Vices, than by all other
Accidents whatsoever.

And there is scarce any notorious Vice, by which men do not greatly suffer in
their Reputation and good Name, even when the times are worst and most
degenerate; any wicked course, whether of debauchery or injustice, is a blemish
to a Man's credit, not only in the esteem of the Sober and Virtuous, but even
of those who are loose and extravagant; for men are sooner brought to Practice
what is bad, than to approve of it, and do generally think all sin and
wickedness to be a stain upon them, whatever in a swaggering humor they may say
to the contrary. A clear evidence of this is, that men do so studiously
endeavor to conceal their Vices, and are so careful that as few as may be
should be conscious to them, and are so confounded if they be discovered, and
so out of all patience when they are upbraided with them, a plain
acknowledgment, that these things are shameful in themselves, and whatever face
men may put upon things, that they do inwardly and at the bottom of their
Hearts believe, that these Practices are deservedly of bad Reputation, and do,
in the general opinion of Mankind, leave a blot upon them.

Secondly, There are other sins, which though they are not usually attended with
Consequences so palpably mischievous, yet are plainly unprofitable, and bring
no manner of advantage to men.

Of this sort is all kind of Profaneness, and customary Swearing in common
Conversation, there is neither profit nor pleasure in them. What does the
Profane Man get by his contempt of Religion? He is neither more respected, nor
better trusted for this quality; but on the contrary, it is many times really
to his prejudice, and brings a great odium upon him, not only from those who
sincerely love Religion, but from others also; though they are conscious to
themselves, that they do not love Religion as they ought, yet they have a
Veneration for it, and cannot endure that any one should speak slightly of it.

And it is as hard to imagine, where the pleasure of Profaneness lies. Men
cannot but at first have a great reluctance in their minds against it, and must
offer considerable violence to themselves, to bring themselves to it; and when
it is grown more familiar, and their Consciences are become more seared and
insensible, yet whenever they are alone and serious, or when any affliction or
calamity is upon them, they are full of fears and anguish, their guilt stares
them in the face, and their Consciences are raging and furious.

And as all kind of Profaneness is unprofitable, so more especially customary
swearing in ordinary Conversation, upon every occasion of passion, or any other
trivial cause, nay it may be without cause, out of mere habit and custom. Now
what can possibly be imagined to be the profit or pleasure of this Vice!
Sensual pleasure in it there can be none, because it is not founded in the
temper of the Body; a Man may be naturally prone to Anger or Lust; but no Man I
think is born with a swearing Constitution.

And there is as little Profit as Pleasure in it; for the common and trivial
use of Oaths makes them perfectly insignificant to their end, and is so far
from giving credit to a Man's word, that it rather weakens the Reputation of it.

Thirdly, Those Vices which pretend to be of Advantage to us, when all accounts
are cast up, and all Circumstances duly considered, will be found to be quite
otherwise. Some Vices pretend to bring in profit; others to yield pleasure, but
upon a through examination of the matter, these pretenses will vanish and come
to nothing.

The Vices which pretend to be most profitable are Covetousness and Oppression,
Fraud and Falsehood, and Perfidiousness: but if we look well into them, we shall
find, that either they do not bring the Advantages they pretended to bring; or
that the inconveniences which attend them are as great or greater, than the
Advantages they bring; or else that the Practice of the opposite Virtues would
be of much greater Advantage to us.

1. Some of these Vices do not bring the Advantages they pretend to do.
Covetousness may increase a Man's Estate, but it adds nothing to his Happiness
and Contentment; for though his Estate grow never so much, his want is still as
great as it was before, and his care and trouble continually greater; so that
so long as he continues Covetous, the more Rich, the less Happy.

And then for Fraud and Falsehood; they are not of that real and lasting
Advantage, that cunning but shortsighted men are apt to imagine. Nothing is
truer than that of Solomon, The lying tongue is but for a moment. A Man can
Practice the Arts of Falsehood and Deceit but for a little while, before they
will be discovered, and when they are discovered, they are so far from being
any Advantage to him, that they turn to his prejudice, and the cunning Man
begins to be in a bad case, and he that was wont to overreach others, is at
last caught himself.

2. Several of these Vices are attended with inconveniences, as great or
greater than the Advantages they bring. If a Man increase his Estate by
Injustice and Oppression, yet he loses his Reputation. Besides, that all
fraudulent and unjust courses are apt to entangle a Man in a great many
inconveniences, and to expose him to troublesome suits, for the keeping of what
he has unjustly gotten; it is very often seen, that what is gotten by
injustice is spent in Law, and though it may be those whom he has wronged never
recover their right, yet first or last the unjust Man is put to more trouble
and vexation about it, than the thing is worth. This Solomon observes, Prove.
15.16. In the revenue of the wicked there is trouble.

The perfidious Man by betraying a Friend or a Trust, may perhaps make some
present Advantage: but then by such a villainy he makes himself odious to all
Mankind, and by this means, at one time or other, prevents himself of greater
advantages which he might have had another way, and perhaps at last is
miserably crushed by those whom he betrayed, who in the change and revolution
of human affairs, may some time or other have the opportunity of being revenged.
Or else,

3. The Practice of the opposite Virtues would be of far greater Advantage to
us.

Truth and Fidelity are in common experience sound to be a better and surer way
of thriving, and more like to last and hold out, than Fraud and Falsehood; and
as honesty is a surer way of raising an Estate, so it brings along with it
greater security of the quiet enjoyment of it; there is never any real
occasion, and seldom any color and pretense of bringing such a Man into
trouble; for which reason Solomon says, Better is the little which the
righteous Man has, than great possessions without right; because, though it be
but little, yet it will wear like Steel, and he is like to enjoy it quietly,
and may increase it; whereas the unjust Man is continually in danger of losing
what he has gotten.

And if this be the case, it is very plain, that those Vices which pretend to
bring the greatest Advantage, are really unprofitable; and to these kind of
Vices the Text seems to point more particularly, If any say I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, etc.

But perhaps though there be no profit in any sinful course, yet there may be
some pleasure; that comes next to be examined; and I doubt not to make it
evident, that there is no such pleasure in sin, as can make it a reasonable
Temptation to any Man to venture upon it. The Vices which pretend to bring the
greatest pleasure, are Lewdness, and Intemperance, and Revenge.

The two first of these are the highest Pretenders to Pleasure: but God knows,
and the sinner himself knows, how thin and transitory this pleasure is, how
much trouble attends it, and how many sighs and groans follow it; and whatever
pleasure they may minister to the sense, they bring a great deal of anguish and
perplexity to the mind; so that the trouble which they cause, does more than
counter-vail the pleasure which they bring: and they do not only disturb the
mind, but they disease the Body. How many are there, who for the gratifying of
an inordinate Lust, and for the incomprehensible pleasure of a drunken fit,
have endured the violent burnings of a Fever, or else have consumed the
remainder of their days in languishing sickness and pain?

And the reason of all this is plain, because all the pleasures of sin are
violent, and forced, and unnatural, and therefore not like to continue; they
are founded in some Disease and Distemper of our minds, and therefore always
end in pain and smart.

And as for Revenge; it is indeed a very eager and impatient desire: but so far
surely from being a pleasure, that the very thoughts of it are extremely
troublesome, and raise as great storms in the mind of a Man, as any passion
whatsoever; and I never heard of the pleasure of being in a Storm: it is
pleasant indeed to be out of it, when others are in it. And when Revenge has
satisfied it self, and laid its enemy bleeding at its foot, the Man that
executed it commonly repents himself the next moment, and would give all the
World to undo what he has done; so that if there be any pleasure in Revenge,
it is so flitting and of so short a continuance, that we know not where to fix
it; for there is nothing but tumult and rage before the execution of it, and
after it nothing but remorse and horror; so that if it be a pleasure, it is but
of one moment's continuance, and lasts no longer than the act is a doing; and
what Man in his wits would purchase so short a pleasure at so dear a price?
This is most certainly true, and if it were well considered, sufficient to
convince any reasonable Man of the unreasonableness of this passion.

Cain is a fearful instance of this kind, who after he had drawn his Brother
into the Field, and slain him there, how was he tormented with the guilt of
what he had done, and forced to cry out, my punishment is greater than I can
bear, or (as some Translations render the words,) mine iniquity is greater than
that it can be forgiven, Genesis 4.13! From thy face (says he to God, in the
anguish of his Soul) from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive
and a vagabond in the earth, and it shall come to pass that every one that
finds me shall slay me, v. 14. Every one that finds me, how fearful did his
guilt make him! When probably there was then but one Man in the World besides
himself. And I may say of this sort of men, as St. Jude does of those in his
time, Jude v. 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, they are
guilty of his Crime, and his doom shall be theirs.

And here I cannot but take notice of a great Evil that grows daily upon us,
and therefore deserves with the greatest severity to be discountenanced and
punished, I mean that of Duels, than which what can be more unchristian? And
what can be more unreasonable, than for men upon deliberation, and after the
heat of Passion is over, to resolve to sheath their Swords in one another
Bowels, only for a hasty word? And which is yet more unreasonable, that because
two men are angry, and have quarelled with one another, and will fight it out,
that therefore two more, who have no quarrel, no kind of displeasure against one
another, must fight too, and kill one another if they can, for no reason and
upon no provocation. These false Rules of Honor will not pass in another
World, in the highest and greatest Court of Honor, from whence there is no
Appeal.

I shall conclude this whole Argument with that excellent saying of Cato,
reported in A. Gellius, Cogitate cum animis vestris, etc. Consider (says he)
with your selves, if ye be at any trouble and pain to do a good action, the
trouble will be soon over; but the pleasure and comfort of what ye have done
well, abides with you all your days: but if to gratify your selves, you do any
thing that is wicked, the pleasure will quickly vanish; but the guilt of it
will stick by you for ever.

And is it not then much better to prevent all this trouble, by denying our
selves these sinful pleasures, which will follow us with guilt while we live,
and fill us with horror and despair when we come to die?

I shall now make some reflections upon what has been delivered, and so
conclude.

First, What has been said upon this Argument, ought particularly to move
those who have so great a consideration of this present life, and the temporal
Happiness of it, that the Practice of all Virtues is a friend to their
temporal, as well as eternal welfare, and all Vice is an Enemy to both.

Secondly, This likewise takes off all manner of excuse from Sin and Vice. It
pretends not to serve the Soul, and to profit our future happiness in another
World; and if it be an Enemy also to our present welfare in this world, what is
there to be said for it?

Thirdly, (which I desire to insist a little longer upon) all the Arguments
which I have used, to convince men of the folly of a wicked course, are so many
strong and unanswerable Reasons for Repentance; for when a Man is convinced,
that he has done foolishly, and to his own prejudice, that he has sinned, and
that it profited him not, what can he do less, than to be heartily sorry for
it, and ashamed of it, and resolved to do better for the future? Nothing surely
is more reasonable than Repentance; and yet how hard is it to bring men to it?
Either men will mistake the Nature of it, and not do it effectually; or they
will delay it, and not do it in time.

I. Men mistake the Nature of Repentance; and there are two great mistakes
about it.

1. Of those who make the great force and virtue of it to consist, not so much
in the Resolution of the Penitent, as in the Absolution of the Priest. And this
the Church of Rome, in their Doctrine concerning Repentance does. For their
Sacrament of Penance, (as they call it,) they make to consist of two parts; the
Matter of it, which consists in these three acts of the Penitent, Confession,
Contrition, and Satisfaction; and the Form of it, which is the Absolution of
the Priest, in which they make the main virtue and force of Repentance to
consist, in qua proecipue ipsius vis sita est, are the very words of the
Council of Trent. And here is a wide difference betwixt us; for though the
comfort of the Penitent may in some case consist in the Absolution of the
Priest, yet the Virtue and Efficacy of Repentance does not at all consist in
it, but wholly in the Contrition and sincere Resolution of the Penitent, as the
Scripture every where declares: and to think otherwise, is of dangerous
Consequence; because it encourages Men to hope for the benefit of Repentance,
that is the Pardon and forgiveness of their sins, without having truly
repented. And indeed the Council of Trent have so framed their Doctrines in
this point, that any one may see, that they did not matter how much they abated
on the part of the Penitent, provided the Power of the Priest be but advanced,
and kept up in its full height.

2. The other Mistake is of those, who make Repentance to consist in the bare
Resolution of Amendment, though it never have its effect; that is, though the
sinner either do not what he resolved, or do it only for a fit, and during his
present Trouble and Conviction.

There is one case indeed, and but one, wherein a Resolution not brought to
effect is available, and that is, when nothing hinders the performance and
execution of it, but only want of time and opportunity for it, when the
Repentance is sincere, and the Resolution real, but the Man is cut off between
the actual Reformation which he intended, and which God, who sees things
certainly in their Causes, knows would have followed, if the Man had lived to
give Demonstration of it: but this is nothing to those who have the opportunity
to make good their Resolution, and do not; for, because the resolution which
would have been performed, had there been time and opportunity, is reckoned for
a true Repentance, and accepted of God as if it had been done; therefore the
Resolution which was not brought to effect when there was time and opportunity
for it, has not the Nature of true Repentance, nor will it be accepted of God.

I will add but one thing more upon this Head, because I doubt it is not always
sufficiently considered; and that is this, that a sincere Resolution of a
better course, does imply a Resolution of the means, as well as of the end; he
that is truly resolved against any sin, is likewise resolved against the
occasions and temptations that would lead and draw him to it; otherwise he has
taken up a rash and foolish Resolution, which he is not like to keep, because
he did not resolve upon that which was necessary to the keeping of it. So he
that resolves upon any part of his Duty, must likewise resolve upon the means
which are necessary to the discharge and performance of it; he that is resolved
to be just in his dealing, and to pay his debts, must be diligent in his
Calling, and mind his business; because without this he cannot do the other;
for nothing can be more vain and fond, than for a Man to pretend that he is
resolved upon doing his Duty, when he neglects any thing that is necessary to
put him into a capacity, and to further him in the discharge of it. This is, as
if a Man should resolve to be well, and yet never take Physic, or be careless
in observing his rules which are prescribed in order to his health. So for a
Man to resolve against Drunkenness, and yet to run himself upon the temptations
which naturally lead to it, by frequenting the Company of Lewd and Intemperate
persons, this is, as if a Man should resolve against the Plague, and run into
the Pesthouse. Whatever can reasonably move a Man to be resolved upon any End,
will, if his Resolution be wise and honest, determine him as strongly to use
the Means which are proper and necessary to that End.

These are the common Mistakes about this matter, which Men are the more
willing to run into, because they are loath to be brought to a true Repentance;
the Nature whereof is not difficult to be understood, (for nothing in the world
is plainer;) only men are always slow to understand what they have no mind to
put in practice. But

II. Besides these Mistakes about Repentance, there is another great
Miscarriage in this matter, and that is the delay of Repentance; men are loath
to set about it, and therefore they put it upon the last hazard, and resolve
then to huddle it up as well as they can: but this certainly is great folly, to
be still making more work for Repentance, because it is to create so much
needless trouble and vexation to our selves; it is to go on still in playing a
foolish part, in hopes to retrieve all by an after-game; this is extremely
dangerous, because we may certainly sin, but it is not certain we shall repent,
our Repentance may be prevented, and we may be cut off in our sins; but if we
should have space for it, Repentance may in process of time grow an hundred
times more difficult than it is at present.

But if it were much more certain, and more easy than it is, if it were
nothing but a hearty Sorrow and Shame for our sins, and an asking God
forgiveness for them, without being put to the trouble of reforming our wicked
lives, yet this were great folly, to do those things which will certainly
grieve us after we have done them, and put us to shame, and to ask forgiveness
for them. It was well said of Old Cato, nae tu stultus es homuncio, qui malis
veniam precari, quam non peccare, thou art a foolish man indeed, who chusest
rather to ask forgiveness, than not to offend.

At the best, Repentance implies a fault; it is an after-Wisdom, which
supposes a Man first to have played the fool; it is but the best end of a bad
business; a hard shift, and a desperate hazard, which a Man that had acted
prudently would never have been put to; it is a Plaster after we have
dangerously wounded our selves: but certainly it had been much wiser, to have
prevented the danger of the wound, and the pain of curing it. A wise Man would
not make himself sick if he could, or if he were already so, would not make
himself sicker, though he had the most Effectual and Infallible Remedy in the
world in his power: But this is not the case of a sinner, for Repentance as
well as Faith is the gift of God.

Above all, let me caution you, not to put off this great and necessary work,
to the most unseasonable time of all other, the time of sickness and death,
upon a fond presumption, that you can be reconciled to God when you please, and
exercise such a Repentance as will make your peace with him at any time.

I am heartily afraid, that a very great part of Mankind do miscarry upon this
confidence, and are swallowed up in the gulf of Eternal Perdition, with this
Plank in their Arms. The common Custom is (and I fear it is too common) when
the Physician has given over his Patient, then, and not till then, to send for
the Minister; not so much to enquire into the Man's condition, and to give him
suitable Advice, as to Minister comfort, and to speak Peace to him at a venture.

But let me tell you, that herein you put an extreme difficult task upon us, in
expecting that we should pour Wine and Oil into the wound before it be
searched, and speak smooth and comfortable things to a Man, that is but just
brought to a sense of the long course of a lewd and wicked Life, impenitently
continued in. Alas! what comfort can we give to men in such a case? We are loath
to drive them to despair; and yet we must not destroy them by presumption; pity
and good nature do strongly tempt us to make the best of their case, and to
give them all the little hopes, which with any kind of Reason we can, and God
knows it is but very little that we can give to such Persons upon good ground;
for it all depends upon the degree and sincerity of their Repentance, which God
only knows, and we can but guess at. We can easily tell them what they ought to
have done, and what they should do, if they were to live longer, and what is
the best that they can do in those straights into which they have brought
themselves, viz. to exercise as deep a Sorrow and Repentance for their sins as
is possible, and to cry mightily to God for Mercy, in and through the Merit of
our Blessed Savior. But how far this will be available in these Circumstances
we cannot tell; because we do not know, whether if the Man had lived longer,
this Repentance and these Resolutions which he now declares of a better course,
would have been good.

And after all is done that can be done in so short a time, and in such
Circumstances of confusion and disorder, as commonly attend dying Persons, I
doubt the result of all will be this; that there is much more ground of fear
than hope concerning them; nay perhaps, while we are pressing the dying sinner
to Repentance, and he is bungling about it, he expires in great doubt and
perplexity of mind what will become of him; or if his Eyes be closed with more
comfortable hopes of his condition, the next time he opens them again, he may
find his fearful mistake, like the rich Man in the Parable, who when he was in
hell, lift up his eyes being in torment.

This is a very dismal and melancholy consideration, and commands all men
presently to repent, and not to put off the main work of their lives to the end
of them, and the time of sickness and old Age. Let us not offer up a Carcass to
God instead of a living and acceptable Sacrifice: but let us turn to God, in
the days of our health and strength, before the evil days come, and the years
draw nigh, of which we shall say we have no pleasure in them; before the Sun
and the Moon and the Stars be darkened. As Solomon elegantly expresses it,
Eccl. 12.1, 2. before all the Comforts of Life be gone, before our Faculties be
all ceased and spent, before our Understandings be too weak, and our Wills too
strong; our Understandings be too weak for consideration, and the deliberate
exercise of Repentance, and our Wills too strong and stiff to be bent and bowed
to it.

Let us not deceive our selves, Heaven is not an Hospital made to receive all
Sick and Aged Persons, that can but put up a faint request to be admitted
there; no, no, they are never like to see the Kingdom of God, who instead of
seeking it in the first place, make it their last refuge and retreat, and when
they find the Sentence of Death upon them, only to avoid present Execution, do
bethink themselves of getting to Heaven, and since there is no other Remedy,
are contented to Petition the great King and Judge of the World, that they may
be transported thither.

Upon all these Considerations, let us use no delay in a matter of such mighty
consequence to our eternal Happiness, but let the counsel which was given to
Nebuchadnezzar be acceptable to us; let us Break off our sins by righteousness,
and our iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if so be it may be a
lengthning of our tranquillity. Repentance and Alms do well together; let us
break off our sins by righteousness and our iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor; especially upon this great occasion, which his Majesty's great Goodness
to those distressed Strangers, that have taken Sanctuary among us, has lately
presented us withal, remembering that we also are in the body, and liable to the
like sufferings; and considering on the one hand, that Gracious promise of our
Lord, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall receive mercy; and on the other
hand, that terrible threatening in St. James, He shall have Judgment without
mercy, that has showed no mercy.

To conclude, from all that has been said, let us take up a present Resolution
of a better course, and enter immediately upon it, to day whilst it is called
to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. O that men
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter
end. And grant we beseech the Almighty God, that we may all know and do, in
this our day, the things which belong to our peace, for thy mercy's sake in
Jesus Christ, To whom with thee O Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory now and for ever. Amen.

SERMON V. Sermon. 5.
The Shamefulness of Sin, an Argument for Repentance. The First Sermon on this
Text.
ROMANS VI.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now being made free from
sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life.


THERE are two Passions which do always in some Degree or other accompany a
true Repentance, viz. Sorrow and Shame for our Sins; because these are
necessary to engage men to a Resolution of making that change wherein
Repentance does consist: Vol. 8.
For till we are heartily sorry for what we have done, and ashamed of the evil
of it, it is not likely that we should ever come to a firm and steady purpose
of forsaking our evil ways, and betaking our selves to a better course.

And these two Passions of Sorrow and Shame for our Sins, were wont anciently
to be signified by those outward expressions of Humiliation and Repentance,
which we find so frequently mentioned in Scripture, of being clothed in
Sackcloath as a testimony of our sorrow and mourning for our Sins, and of being
sprinkled upon the head, and covered over with filth and dirt, with dust and
ashes, in token of our shame and confusion of Face for all our Iniquities and
transgressions. Hence are those Expressions in Scripture of Repenting in
Sackcloath and Ashes, of lying down in our shame, and being covered with
confusion, in token of their great sorrow and shame for the manifold and
heinous Sins, which they had been guilty of.

Of the former of these, viz. Trouble and Sorrow for our Sins, I have very
lately Ser. 3.
treated; and of the latter, I intend now by God's assistance to speak, viz.
Shame for our Sins, and that from these Words which I have recited to you; What
fruit had ye then in those things, etc. In which Words the Apostle makes a
comparison between an Holy and Virtuous, and a Sinful and Vicious course of
Life, and sets before us a perfect enumeration of the manifest Inconveniences
of the one, and the manifold Advantages of the other.

First, The manifest Inconveniences of a Vicious and Sinful course; and the
Apostle mentions these three.

I. It is unprofitable, it brings no manner of present Benefit and Advantage to
us, if all things be rightly calculated and considered. What fruit had ye then
in those things? Then (i. e.) at the time when you committed those Sins, had
you any present Advantage by them? No, certainly; but quite contrary.

II. The reflection upon our Sins afterward is cause of shame and confusion to
us; What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?

III. The final issue and consequence of these things is very dismal and
miserable; The end of those things is death. Let us put these things together,
and see what they amount to: No Fruit then when ye did these things, and shame
now when ye come afterward to reflect upon them, and death and misery at the
last.

Secondly, Here is likewise on the other hand represented to us the manifold
Benefit of an Holy and Virtuous Life. And that upon these two accounts.

I. Of the present Benefit of it, which the Apostle calls here fruit; Ye have
your fruit unto Holiness.

II. In respect of the future Reward of it; And the end Everlasting Life. Here
is a considerable Earnest in hand, and a mighty Recompense afterward,
infinitely beyond the proportion of our best Actions and Services, both in
respect of the greatness and the duration of it, Everlasting Life; for a few
transient and very imperfect actions of obedience, a perfect and immutable and
endless state of Happiness. I shall begin with the

First, of the two general Heads. viz. The manifest Inconveniences of a Sinful
and Vicious course; and the Apostle I told you in the Text takes notice of
three.

I. It is unprofitable, and if all things be rightly calculated and considered,
it brings no manner of present Advantage and Benefit to us. What fruit had ye
then in those things? Then, (i. e.) When ye committed those Sins, had you any
present Advantage by them? No certainly, quite the contrary; as if the Apostle
had said, if you seriously reflect upon your former course of Impiety and Sin,
wherein you have continued so long, you cannot but acknowledge that it brought
no manner of advantage to you; and when all accounts are truly cast up, you
must, if you will confess the Truth, own that you were in no sort gainers by
it: For the words are a (...), and the Apostle plainly intends more than he
expresses, What fruit had ye then in those things? (i. e.) The wicked course
which ye formerly lived in, was so far from being any ways Beneficial to you,
that it was on the contrary upon all accounts extremely to your prejudice and
disadvantage.

And this is not only true in respect of the final Issue and Consequence of a
Sinful and Vicious course of Life, that no Man is a gainer by it at the long
run, and if we take into our consideration another World, and the dreadful and
endless misery which a wicked and impenitent Life will then plunge men into,
(which in the farther handling of this Text will at large be spoken to, being
the last of the three Particulars under this First general head:) But it is
true likewise, even in respect of this World, and with regard only to this
present and temporal Life, without looking so far as the future Recompense and
Punishment of Sin in another World.

And this would plainly appear, by an Induction of these three Particulars.

1. It is Evident that some Sins are plainly mischievous to the temporal
Interest of men, as tending either to the disturbance of their minds, or the
endangering of their Health and Lives, or to the prejudice of their Estates, or
the blasting of them in their Reputation and good name.

2. That there are other Sins, which though they are not so visibly burdened and
attended with mischievous Consequences, yet are they plainly unprofitable, and
bring no manner of real Advantage to men, either in respect of gain or
pleasure; such are the Sins of Profaneness, and customary Swearing in common
Conversation.

3. That even those Sins and Vices, which make the fairest pretense to be of
Advantage to us, when all Accounts are cast up, and all Circumstances duly
weighed and considered, will be found to be but pretenders, and in no degree
able to perform and make good what they so largely promise before hand, when
they tempt us to the commission of them. There are some Vices, which pretend to
bring in great profit, and tempt worldly-minded men, whose minds are disposed
to catch at that bait; such are the Sins of Covetousness and Oppression, of
Fraud and Falsehood and Perfidiousness. And there are others which pretend to
bring pleasure along with them, which is almost an irresistible temptation to
voluptuous and sensual men; such are the Sins of Revenge, and Intemperance, and
Lust. But upon a particular examination of each of these, it will evidently
appear, that there is no such profit or pleasure in any of these Vices, as can
be a reasonable temptation to any Man to fall in love with them, and to engage
in the Commission and Practice of them. But I shall not now enlarge upon any of
these, having lately discoursed upon them from another Text. I shall therefore
proceed to the

II. Inconvenience which I mentioned of a sinful and vicious Course, viz. that
the reflection upon our Sins afterward, is cause of great Shame and Confusion
to us. What fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are now ashamed?
And this is a very proper Argument for this Season Preached in Lent.
; because the Passion of Shame, as it is the natural and usual consequent of
Sin, so it is a Disposition necessarily required to a true Repentance.

Most Men when they commit a known Fault are apt to be ashamed, and ready to
blush, whenever they are put in mind of it, and charged with it. Some Persons
indeed have gone so far in Sin, and have waded so deep in a vicious course, as
to be confirmed and hardened in their Wickedness to that degree, as to be past
all Shame, and almost all sense of their Faults; especially in regard of the
more common and ordinary Vices, which are in vogue and fashion, and in the
commission whereof they are countenanced and encouraged by Company and Example.
Such were those of whom the Prophet speaks, Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed, when
they had committed abomination? nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they
blush.

But yet even these Persons, when they come to be sensible of their guilt, so
as to be brought to Repentance, they cannot then but be ashamed of what they
have done. For what face soever Men may set upon their Vices, Sin is shameful
in it self, and so apt to fill Men with confusion of face, when they seriously
reflect upon it, that they cannot harden their Foreheads against all sense of
Shame. And whatever Men may declare to the contrary, this is tacitly
acknowledged by the generality of Men; in that they are so solicitous and
careful to conceal their Faults from the Eyes of others, and to keep them as
secret as they can; and whenever they are discovered, and laid open, it is
matter of great Trouble and Confusion to them; and if any one happen to upbraid
and twit them with their Miscarriages of any kind, they cannot bear with
Patience to hear of them.

There are indeed some few such Prodigies and Monsters of Men, as are able
after great struglings with their Consciences, to force themselves to boast
impudently of their Wickedness, and to glory in their shame; not because they
do really and inwardly believe their Vices to be an Honor and Glory to them,
but because conscious to themselves that they have done shameful things, and
believing that others know it, they put on a Whore's Forehead, and think to
prevent the upbraiding of others, by owning what they have done, and seeming to
glory in it: but yet for all that, these Persons, if they would confess the
Truth, do feel some Confusion in themselves, and they are inwardly sensible of
the Infamy and Reproach of such Actions, for all they would seem to the World
to bear it out so well: For when all is done, there is a wide difference
between the Impudence of a Criminal, and the Confidence and Assurance of a
clear Conscience, that is fully satisfied of its own Innocence and Integrity.
The conscientious Man is not ashamed of any thing that he has done: but the
impudent Sinner only seems not to be so, but all the while feels a great deal
of Confusion in his own Mind. The one is sensible and satisfied that there is
no cause for Shame: the other is conscious to himself that there is cause, but
he offers Violence to himself, and suppresses all he can the sense and show of
it, and will needs face down the World, that he has no Guilt and Regret in his
own Mind for any thing that he has done.

Now that Sin is truly matter of Shame, will be very evident, if we consider
these two things.

First, If we consider the nature of this Passion of Shame.

Secondly, If we consider what there is in Sin, which gives real ground and
occasion for it.

First, For the nature of this Passion. Shame is the Trouble or Confusion of
Mind, occasioned by something that tends to our Disgrace and Dishonor, to our
Infamy and Reproach. Now there is nothing truly and really matter of Shame and
Reproach to us, but what we our selves have done, or have been some way or
other accessory to the doing of, by our own fault or neglect, and by
consequence what it was in our Power and Choice not to have done: For no Man is
ashamed of what he is sure he could not help. Necessity, unless it be wilful
and contracted, and happens through some precedent occasion and fault of our
own, does take away all just cause of Shame.

And nothing likewise is matter of Shame, but something which we ought not to
do, which misbecomes us, and is below the Dignity and Perfection of our Nature,
and is against some Duty and Obligation that is upon us to the contrary; and
consequently is a Reproach to our Reason and Understanding, a Reflection upon
our Prudence and Discretion, and at first sight has an appearance of Ruggednss
and Deformity.

And all Actions of this nature do receive several Aggravations, with respect
to the Persons against whom, and in whose Presence, and under whose Eye and
Knowledge these shameful things are done. Now I shall show in the

Second place, That Sin contains in it whatsoever is justly accounted infamous,
together with all the Aggravations of Shame and Reproach that can be imagined.
And this will appear by considering Sin and Vice in these two respects;

I. In relation to our selves.

II. In respect to God, against whom, and in whose sight it is committed.

I. In relation to our selves, there are these four things which make Sin and
Vice to be very shameful.

1. The natural Ruggedness and Deformity of it.

2. That it is so great a Dishonor to our Nature, and to the Dignity and
Excellency of our Being.

3. That it is so great a Reproach to our Reason and Understanding, and so foul
a Reflection upon our Prudence and Discretion.

4. That it is our own voluntary Act and Choice.

Every one of these Considerations render it very shameful, and all of them
together ought to fill the Sinner with Confusion of face. I shall speak to them
severally.

1. The natural Ruggedness and Deformity of Sin and Vice render it very
shameful Men are apt to be ashamed of any thing in them, or belonging to them,
that looks ugly and monstrous, and therefore they endeavor with great Care and
Art to conceal and dissemble their Deformity in any kind. How strangely do we
see Men concerned with all their Diligence and Skill, to cover and palliate any
Defect or Deformity in their Bodies; an ill Face, if they could, however a foul
and bad Complexion, or blind or squinting Eye, a crooked Body or Limb, and
whatever is ill-favored or monstrous. Now in regard of our Souls and better
part, Sin has all the monstrousness and deformity in it, which we can imagine
in the Body, and much more; and it is as hard to be covered from the Eye of
discerning Men, as the deformity of the Body is; but impossible to be concealed
from the Eye of God, to whom Darkness and Light, secret and open are all one.
But then the moral Defects and Deformities of the Mind have this advantage
above the natural Defects and Deformities of the Body, that the former are
possible to be cured by the Grace of God, in Conjunction with our own Care and
Endeavor: Whereas no Diligence or Skill can ever help or remove many of the
natural Defects and Deformities of the Body.

Sin is the blindness of our Minds, the perverseness and crookedness of our
Wills, and the monstrous irregularity and disorder of our Affections and
Appetites; it is the mis-placing of our Powers and Faculties, the setting of
our Wills and Passions above our Reason; all which is ugly and unnatural, and,
if we were truly sensible of it, matter of great Shame and Reproach to us.

There is hardly any Vice, but at first sight has an odious and ugly
Appearance to a well disciplined and innocent Mind, that has never had any
acquaintance with it. And however Familiarity and Custom may abate the sense of
it is Deformity, yet it is at it was before, and the change that is made in us,
does not alter the nature of the thing. Drunkenness and furious Passion, Pride
and Fashood, Covetousness and Cruelty, are odious, and matter of Shame, in the
sincere and uncorrupted Opinion of all Mankind. And though a Man, by the frequent
Practice of any of these Vices, and a long familiarity with them, may not be so
sensible of the Deformity of them in himself, yet he quickly discerns the
ugliness of them in others, when ever they come in his way, and could with Salt
and Sharpness enough upbraid those whom he sees guilty of them, but that he is
inwardly conscious, that the Reproach may be so easily returned, and thrown
back upon himself. However this is a natural acknowledgment of the Deformity
and Shamefulness of Sin and Vice.

2. They are likewise shameful, because they are so great a Dishonor to our
Nature, and to the Dignity and Excellency of our Being. We go below our selves,
and act beneath the Dignity of our Nature, when we do any thing contrary to the
Rules and Laws of it, or to the revealed Will of God; because these are the
Bounds and Limits which God and Nature has set to Humane Actions; and are the
measures of our Duty, i. e. what is fit and becoming for us to do, and what
not. So that all Sin and Vice is base and unworthy, and beneath the Dignity of
our Nature; it argues a corrupt and diseased Constitution and Habit of Mind, a
crooked and perverse Disposition of Will, and a sordid and mean temper of
Spirit.

And therefore the Scripture does frequently represent a state of Sin and
Wickedness, by that which is accounted the basest and meanest Condition among
Men, by a state of Servitude and Slavery, especially if it had been our Choice,
or the evident and necessary Consequence of our wilful Fault: For we do as bad
as choose it, when we wilfully bring it upon our selves. So that to be a Sinner,
is to be a Slave to some vile Lust, Appetite, or Passion, to some unnatural or
irregular Desire; it is to sell our selves into Bondage, and to part with one
of the most valuable things in the World, our Liberty, upon low and unworthy
terms. Such a State and Condition does unavoidably debase and debauch our
Minds, and break the force and firmness of our Spirits, and robs us, as Dalilah
did Sampson, of our Strength and Courage, of our Resolution and Constancy; so
that Men have not the Heart left to design and endeavor in good earnest their
own Rescue out of this mean and miserable estate, into which by their own Folly
and Fault they have brought themselves.

When Men are engaged into a custom of sinning, and have habituated themselves
to any vicious Course, how do they betray their Weakness and want of
Resolution, by being at the beck of every foolish Lust, and by suffering
themselves to be commanded and burried away by every unruly Appetite and
Passion, to do things which they know to be greatly to their Harm and
Prejudice, and which they are convinced are mean and sordid things, and such as
they are ashamed that any wise Man should see them doing! And there is no
greater Argument of a pitiful and degenerate Spirit, than to commit such things
as a Man would blush to be surprised in, and would be mightily troubled to hear
of afterward. And which is more, after he has been convinced by manifold
Experience, that they are a Shame and Disgrace to him, and make him to hang
down his Head, and let fall his Countenance, whenever he is in better Company
than himself; yet after this to go and do the same things again, which he is
sensible are so shameful, and to be so impotent, and to have so little Command
of himself, as not to be able to free himself from this Bondage, nor the heart
to pray to God that by his Grace he would enable him hereto.

And that Sin is of this shameful Nature, is evident, in that the greatest part
of Sinners take so much Care and Pains to hide their Vices from the sight and
notice of Men, and to this purpose choose Darkness and secret places of
Retirement to commit their Sins in. The Apostle takes notice, that thus much
Modesty was left even in a very wicked and degenerate Age, 1 These. 5.7. They
that be drunk (says he) are drunk in the night. Now all this is a plain
acknowledgment, that Sin is a spurious and degenerate thing, that it misbecomes
Humane Nature, and is below the Dignity of a reasonable Creature: Otherwise why
should Men be so solicitous and concerned to cover their Faults from the sight
of others? If they are not ashamed of them, why do they not bring them into the
broad Light, and show them openly, if they think they will endure it?

So true is that Observation which Plato makes, That though a Man were sure that
God would forgive his Sins, and that Men should never know them, yet there is
that Baseness in Sin, that a wise Man, that considers what it is, would blush
to himself alone to be guilty of it; and though he were not afraid of the
Punishment, would be ashamed of the Turpitude and Deformity of it.

Did but a Man consider seriously with himself, how mean and unmanly it is for
a Man to be drunk; and what an apish and ridiculous thing he renders himself to
all sober Men that behold him, and with what Contempt and Scorn they entertain
such a sight; and how brutish it is to wallow in any unlawful Lust, and how
much a Man descends and stoops beneath himself; what shameful Fear and
Cowardice he betrays when he is frighted to tell a Lie out of Fear, or tempted
thereto for some little Advantage; and yet is so inconsistent with himself, as
to have, or to pretend to have the Courage to fight any Man, that shall tell
him so saucy a Truth, as that he told a Lie.

Would but a Man think before hand, how unworthy, and how unequal a thing it
is, to defraud or cheat his Brother, or to do any thing to another Man, which
he would be loath in the like case that he should do to him; how base a thing it
is, for a Man to be perfidious and false to his Promise or Trust; how monstrous
to be unthankful to one that has highly obliged him, and every way and upon
all occasions deserved well at his Hands; and so I might instance in all other
sorts of Sins; I say, he that considers this well and wisely, though there were
no Law against Sin, and (if it were a possible case, and fit to be supposed)
though there were no such Being as God in the World, to call him to account and
punish him for it, yet out of mere Generosity and Greatness of Mind, out of
pure respect to himself, and the Dignity and Rank of his Being, and of his
Order in the World, out of very Reverence to Humane Nature, and the inward
Persuasion of his own Mind, (however he came by that Persuasion) concerning the
Indeceny and Deformity and Shamefulness of the thing, I say, for these Reasons,
if there were no other, a Man would strive with himself, with all his might, to
refrain from Sin and Vice, and not only blush, but abhor to think of doing a
wicked Action.

3. Sin will yet farther appear shameful, in that it is so great a Reproach to
our Understandings and Reasons, and so foul a Blot upon our Prudence and
Discretion. Omnis peccans aut ignorans est, aut incogitans, is a Saying, I
think, of one of the Schoolmen; (as one would guess by the Latin of it) Every
Sinner is either an ignorant, or inconsiderate Person. Either Men do not
understand what they do, when they commit Sin; or if they do know, they do not
actually attend to, and consider what they know: Either they are habitually or
actually ignorant of what they do: for Sin and Consideration cannot dwell
together; it is so very unreasonable and absurd a thing, that it requires either
gross Ignorance, or stupid Inadvertency, to make a Man capable of committing
it. Whenever a Man sins, he must either be destitute of Reason, or must lay it
aside or asleep for the time, and so suffer himself to be hurried away, and to
act brutishly, as if he had no understanding.

Did but Men attentively consider what it is to offend God, and to break the
Laws of that great Lawgiver, who is able to save or to destroy, they would
discern so many invincible Objections against the thing, and would be filled
with such strong Fears and Jealousies of the fatal Issue and Event of it, that
they would not dare to venture upon it. And therefore we find the Scripture so
frequently resolving the Wickedness of Men into their Ignorance and
Inconsiderateness, Psalm. 14.4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
intimating that by their Actions one would judge so. And the same account God
himself also gives elsewhere of the frequent Disobedience and Rebellion of the
People of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29. They are a nation void of counsel, neither
is there any understanding in them. Oh! that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Knowledge and
Consideration would cure a great part of the Wickedness that is in the World;
Men would not commit Sin with so much greediness, would they but take time to
consider, and bethink themselves what they do.

Have we not reason then to be ashamed of Sin, which casts such a reproach of
Ignorance and Rashness upon us? and of Imprudence likewise and Indiscretion?
Since nothing can be more directly and plainly against our greatest and best
Interest both of Body and Soul, both here and hereafter, both now and to all
Eternity. And there is nothing that Men are more ashamed of, than to be guilty
of so great an Imprudence, as to act clearly against their own Interest, to
which Sin is the most plainly cross and contrary, that it is possible for any
thing to be. No Man can engage and continue in a sinful Course, without being
so far abused and infatuated, as to be contented to part with Everlasting
Happiness, and to be undone and miserable for ever; none but he that can
persuade himself against all the Reason and Sense of Mankind, that there is
pleasure enough in the transient acts of Sin, to make amends for Eternal
Sorrow, and Shame, and Suffering. And can such a Thought as this enter into the
Heart of a considerate Man? Epicurus was so wise, as to conclude against all
Pleasure that would give a Man more Trouble and Disturbance afterward; against
all Pleasures that had Pain and Grief consequent upon them; and he forbids his
Wise Man to taste of them, or to meddle with them; and had he believed any
thing of a future State, he must, according to his Principle, have pronounced
it the greatest Folly that could be, for any Man to purchase the Pleasures and
Happiness of a few Years, at the dear rate of Eternal Misery and Torment. So
that if it be a Disgrace to a Man to act imprudently, and to do things plainly
against his Interest, then Vice is the greatest reproach that is possible.

The 4 th and last Consideration, which renders Sin so shameful to us, is, that
it is our own Voluntary Act and Choice. We choose this Disgrace and willingly
bring this Reproach upon our selves. We pity an Idiot, and one that is
naturally destitute of Understanding, or one that loses the use of his Reason
by a Disease or other inevitable accident: But every one despises him who
besots himself, and plays the fool out of carelessness and a gross neglect of
himself. And this is the Case of the Sinner; there is no Man that sins, but
because he is wanting to himself; he might be wiser and do better, and will
not; but he chooses his own Devices, and Voluntarily runs himself upon those
inconveniences, which it was in his Power to have avoided.

Not but that I do heartily own and lament the great Corruption and Degeneracy
of our Nature, and the strong Propensions which appear so early in us to that
which is Evil: but God has provided a Remedy and Cure for all this: For since
the Grace of God, which brings Salvation unto all men, has appeared, under the
influence and through the assistance of that Grace, which is offered to them by
the Gospel, men may deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World. For I make no doubt, but since
God has entered into a new Covenant of Grace with Mankind, and offered new
Terms of Life and Salvation to us, I say I doubt not, but his Grace is ready at
hand, to enable us to perform all those Conditions which he requires of us, if
we be not wanting to our selves.

There was a way of Salvation established, before the Gospel was clearly
revealed to the World, and they who under that Dispensation, whether Jews or
Gentiles, sincerely endeavored to do the will of God, so far as they knew it,
were not utterly destitute of Divine Grace and Assistance: But now there is a
more plentiful Effusion of God's Grace and Holy Spirit; so that whoever under
the Gospel sins deliberately, sins wilfully, and is wicked, not for want of
Power but of Will to do otherwise. And this is that which makes Sin so shameful
a thing, and so very reproachful to us, that we destroy our selves by our own
folly and neglect of our selves, and become miserable by our own choice; and
when the Grace of God has put it into our Power to be wise and to be happy.

I should now have proceeded to the Second thing I proposed, which was to
consider Sin in relation to God, and to show that it is no less shameful in
that respect, than I have shown it to be with regard to our selves: But this I
shall refer to another opportunity.

SERMON VI. Sermon. 6.
The Shamefulness of Sin, an Argument for Repentance. The Second Sermon on this
Text.
ROMANS VI.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now being made free from
sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life.


IN these words the Apostle makes a comparison, between an Holy and Virtuous,
and a Sinful and Vicious course of Life, and sets before us a perfect
enumeration of the manifest inconveniences of the one, Vol. 8.
and the manifold advantages of the other.

I began with the First of these, viz. to show the manifest inconveniences of a
sinful and vicious course. I am upon the Second inconvenience of a sinful
course, viz. That the reflection upon it afterward is cause of great Shame and
Confusion of face to us; and that

First, in Relation to our selves. Which I have dispatched, and proceed now in
the,

Second Place, to consider Sin in respect of God, against whom, and in whose
sight and presence it is committed; and upon examination it will appear, to be
no less shameful in this respect than the other.

There are some Persons before whom we are more apt to be ashamed and blush,
than before others; as those whom we reverence, those to whom we are greatly
obliged, and those who are clear of those faults which we are guilty of; and
those who hate or greatly dislike what we do; especially if they be present
with us, and in our company; if they stand by us and observe, and take notice
of what we do, and are likely to publish our folly and make it known, and have
Authority and Power to punish us for our faults; we are ashamed to have done
any thing that is vile and unworthy before such Persons. Now to render Sin the
more Shameful, God may be considered by us under all these Notions, and in all
these respects.

1. Whenever we commit any Sin, we do it before him, in his presence, and under
his eye and knowledge, to whom of all persons in the world we ought to pay the
most profound reverence. I remember Seneca somewhere says; that There are some
Persons, quorum interventu perditi quoque homines vitia supprimerent, that are
so awful and so generally reverenced for the eminency of their Virtues, that
even the most profligate and impudent sinners will endeavor to suppress their
Vices, and refrain from any thing that is notoriously bad, and uncomely, whilst
such Persons stand by them, and are in presence. Such an one was Cato among the
Romans. The People of Rome had such a Regard and Reverence for him, that if he
appeared, they would not begin or continue their usual sports, till he was
withdrawn from the Theater, thinking them too light to be acted before a Person
of his Gravity and Virtue: And if they were so much awed by the presence of a
Wise and a Virtuous Man, that they were ashamed to do any thing that was
unseemly before him; how much more should the presence of the Holy God, who is
of purer eyes, than to behold iniquity, make us blush to do any thing that is
lewd and vile in his sight, and fill us with shame and confusion of face at the
thoughts of it? Now whenever we commit any Sin, God looks upon us; and he alone
is an ample Theater indeed. That he observes what we do, ought to be more to
us, than if the Eyes of all the World besides were gazing upon us.

2. He likewise is incomparably our greatest Benefactour, and there is no
Person in the World, to whom in any degree we stand so much obliged, as to him;
and from whom we can expect and hope for so much good, as from him; the
consideration whereof must make us ashamed, so often as we consider, and are
conscious to our selves, that we have done any thing that is grievous and
displeasing to him.

We are wont to have a more peculiar Reverence for those to whom we are
exceedingly beholden, and to be much ashamed to do any thing before them, which
may signify disrespect, and much more enmity against them; because this would
be horrible ingratitude, one of the most odious and shameful of all Vices. And
is there any one to whom we can stand more obliged, than to him that made us,
than to the Author and Founder of our Beings, and the great Patron and
Preserver of our lives? And can there then be any before whom, and against whom
we should be more ashamed to offend? When the Prodigal in the Parable would set
forth the shamefulness of his Miscarriage, he aggravates it from hence, that he
had offended against and before one to whom he had been so infinitely obliged.
Father, says he, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight.

3. We are ashamed likewise to be guilty of any fault or crime before those
Persons who are clear of it, or of any thing of the like nature themselves. Men
are not apt to be ashamed before those who are their fellow-Criminals, and
involved with them in the same guilt, because they do not stand in awe of them,
nor can have any reverence for them. Those, who are equally guilty, must bear
with one another. We are not apt to fear the censures and reproofs of those,
who are as bad as our selves: but we are ashamed to do a foul and unworthy
Action, before those who are innocent and free from the same, or the like Sins
and Vices which we are guilty of.

Now whenever we commit any Sin, it is in the presence of the Holy God, who
has no part with us in our crimes, whose nature is removed at the farthest
distance from Sin, and is as contrary to it as can be. There is no iniquity
with the Lord our God. And therefore of all Persons in the World we should
blush to be guilty of it before him.

4. We are apt also to be ashamed to do any thing before those who dislike and
detest what we do. To do a wicked Action before those who are not offended at
it, or perhaps take pleasure in it, is no such matter of shame to us. Now of
all others, God is the greatest hater of Sin, and the most perfect Enemy to it
in the whole World. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes, than to behold evil, and
can not look on iniquity, i. e. with patience, and without an infinite hatred
and abhorrence of it. Such is the unspotted Purity and Perfection of the Divine
Nature, that it is not possible that God should give the least countenance to
any thing that is Evil. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Thou art not a God, says David there to
him, that have Pleasure in iniquity, neither shall evil dwell with thee: The
wicked shall not stand in thy sight; thou hate all the workers of iniquity.

5. We are ashamed likewise to do any thing that is Evil and unseemly before
those, who we are afraid will publish our faults to others, and will make known
and expose the folly of them. Now whenever we Sin, it is before him who will
most certainly one day bring all our works of darkness into the open light, and
expose all our secret deeds of dishonesty upon the public Stage of the World,
and make all the vilest of our actions known, and lay them open, with all the
shameful Circumstances of them, before men and Angels, to our everlasting Shame
and Confusion. This is the meaning of that Proverbial Speech, so often used by
our Savior, There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither hid
that shall not be made manifest. All the Sins which we now commit with so much
caution, in secret and dark retirements, shall in that great day of Revelation,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, be set in open view, and in
so full and strong a light, that all the World shall see them; and that which
was plotted and contrived in so much secrecy, and hardly whispered in this
World, shall then be proclaimed aloud, and as it were upon the House-tops.

6. and Lastly, We are ashamed and afraid to commit a fault before those, who
we believe will call us to an account for it, and Punish us severely. A Man may
suffer innocently and for a good Cause; but all suffering in that case, is by
wise and good men esteemed honorable and glorious, and though we are Condemned
by men, we are acquitted in our own Consciences: But that which is properly
called Punishment is always attended with Infamy and Reproach; because it
always supposes some fault and crime, as the ground and reason of it. Hence it
is that in this World, men are not only afraid, but ashamed to commit any fault
before those, who they think have Authority and Power to punish it. He is an
impudent Villain indeed, that will venture to cut a Purse in the presence of
the Judge.

Now when ever we commit any Wickedness, we do it under the Eye of the great
Judge of the World, who steadfastly beholds us, and whose Omnipotent Justice
stands by us ready armed and charged for our Destruction, and can in a moment
cut us off. Every sin that we are guilty of, in thought, word, or deed, is all
in the presence of the Holy, and Just, and Powerful God; whose Power enables
him, and whose Holiness and Justice will effectually engage him, one time or
other, if a timely Repentance does not prevent it, to inflict a terrible
Punishment upon all the Workers of iniquity.

You see then by all that has been said upon this Argument, how shameful a
thing sin is, and what Confusion of face the reflection upon our wicked Lives
ought to cause in all of us. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? If ever we be brought to true Repentance for our sins, it
cannot but be matter of great Shame to us.

We find in Scripture that shame does continually accompany Repentance, and is
inseparable from it. This is one Mark and Character of a true Penitent, that he
is ashamed of what he has done. Thus Ezra, when he makes Confession of the
sins of the People, he testifies and declares his Shame, for what they had
done; I said, O my God! I am ashamed and blush to lift up mine Eyes to thee my
God; for our iniquities are increased over our Heads, and our trespasses are
grown up to the Heavens, Ezra 9.6. And may not we of this Nation at this day
take these words unto our selves, considering to what a strange height our sins
are grown, and how iniquity abounds among us? So likewise the Prophet Jeremiah,
when he would express the Repentance of the People of Israel, Jer. 3.25. We lie
down (says he) in our shame, and our Confusion covers us, because we have
sinned against the Lord our God. In like manner the Prophet Daniel, after he
had in the Name of the People made an humble acknowledgment of their manifold
and great Sins, he takes shame to himself, and them for them. Dan. 9.5. We have
sinned, says he, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled in departing from thy Precepts, and from thy Judgments. O Lord,
righteousness belongs to thee; but unto us confusion of face, as at this day;
to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel,
that are near and that are far off, through all the Countries whither thou have
driven them, because of their trespass, which they have trespassed against
thee: O Lord! To us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes,
and to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee. By which we may judge,
how considerable and essential a part of Repentance, this Holy Man esteemed
shame, for the sins they had been guilty of, to be. And indeed upon all
occasions of solemn Repentance, and Humiliation for sin, this taking shame for
their sins is hardly ever omitted, as if there could be no sincere Confession
of sin and Repentance for it, without testifying their shame, and Confusion of
face upon the remembrance of their sins.

Now to stir up this affection of shame in us, let me offer to you these three
Considerations.

I. Consider what great reason we have to be heartily ashamed of all the sins
and offenses which we have been guilty of against God. It was a good old
Precept of Philosophy, that we should reverence our selves, i. e. that we
should never do any thing, that should be matter of Shame and Reproach to us
afterward, nothing that misbecomes us, and is unworthy of us.

I have shown at large, that all Sin and Vice is a dishonor to our Nature, and
beneath the Dignity of it; that it is a great reproach to our Reason, and
directly contrary to our true and best Interest; that it has all the
aggravating circumstances of Infamy and Shame; that every sin that was at any
time committed by us, was done in the presence of one, whom of all Persons in
the World we have most Reason to reverence, and against him, to whom of all
others we stand most obliged for the greatest Favors, for innumerable
Benefits, for infinite Mercy and Patience and Forbearance toward us, in the
presence of the Holy and Just God, who is at the farthest distance from sin,
and the greatest and most implacable Enemy to it in the whole World, and who
will one day punish all our faults, and expose us to open shame for them, who
will bring every work into judgment, and every secret sin that ever we
committed, and take Vengeance upon us for all our iniquities. So that whenever
we sin, we shamefully entreat our selves, and give the deepest wounds to our
Reputation in the esteem of him, who is the most competent Judge of what is
truly Honorable and Praiseworthy, and cloth our selves with shame and
dishonor.

We are ashamed of Poverty, because the poor Man is despised, and almost
ridiculous in the Eye of the proud and covetous rich Man, whose riches are his
high Tower, and make him apt to look down upon the poor Man that is below him,
with contempt and scorn; we are ashamed of a dangerous and contagious Disease,
because all men fly infectious company: but a Man may be poor or sick by
misfortune; but no Man is wicked, but by his own fault and wilful choice.
Ill-natured and inconsiderate men will be apt to contemn us for our poverty and
affliction in any kind: but by our Vices we render our selves odious to God,
and to all good and considerate men.

II. Consider that shame for sin now, is the way to prevent Eternal Shame and
Confusion hereafter. For this is one great part of the Misery of another World,
that the sinner shall then be filled with everlasting shame and confusion at
the remembrance of his faults and folly. The Eternal Misery of wicked men is
sometimes in Scripture represented, as if it consisted only or chiefly in the
Infamy and Reproach which will then overwhelm them, when all their crimes and
faults shall be exposed and laid open to the view of the whole World. Dan.
12.2. where the general Resurrection of the just and unjust is thus described;
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life; and some to everlasting shame and contempt: Where everlasting
life and everlasting shame are opposed, as if Eternal shame were a kind of
perpetual Death.

In this World sinners make an hard shift, by concealing or extenuating their
faults, as well as they can, to suppress or lessen their shame; they have not
now so clear and full Conviction of the evil and folly of their sin; God is
pleased to bear with them and to spare them at present, and they do not yet
feel the dismal effects and consequences of a wicked life: but in the next
World, when the righteous judgment of God is revealed, and the full Vials of
his wrath shall be poured forth upon sinners, they shall then be clothed with
shame, as with a garment, and be covered with confusion; then they will feel
the folly of their sins, and have a sensible Demonstration within themselves of
the infinite Evil of them; their own Consciences will then furiously fly in
their faces, and with the greatest bitterness and rage upbraid and reproach
them with the folly of their own doings; and so long as we are sensible, that
we suffer for our own folly, so long we must unavoidably be ashamed of what we
have done. So that if sinners shall be everlastingly tormented in another
World, it necessarily follows, that they shall be eternally Confounded.

Is it not then better to remember our ways now, and to be ashamed and repent
of them, than to bring everlasting Shame and Confusion upon our selves, before
God, and Angels, and Men? This is the Argument which St. John uses, to take
men off from sin, and to engage them to Holiness and Righteousness of Life. 1.
Joh. 2.28. That when he shall appear, that is, when he shall come to judge the
World, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.

III. And lastly, Consider that nothing sets men at a farther distance from
Repentance, and all hopes of their becoming better, and brings them nearer to
Ruin, than Impudence in a sinful course. There are too many in the World, who
are so far from being ashamed of their Wickedness, and blushing at the mention
of their faults, that they boast of them, and glory in them. God often
complains of this in the People of Israel, as a sad presage of their Ruin, and
an ill sign of their desperate and irrecoverable Condition; Jer. 3.3. Thou
had a whore's forehead, and refusedst to be ashamed; and Jerem. 6.15. Were
they ashamed when they committed abominations? Nay, they were not ashamed,
neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall, and
in the time that I visit them, they shall be cast down. Hear likewise how the
Apostle does lament the case of such Persons, as incurable and past all remedy.
Philip. 3.18, 19. There are many of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you, even weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame. Such
Persons who glory in that which ought to be their shame, what can their end be
but destruction?

There is certainly no greater argument of a degenerate Person, and of one that
is utterly lost to all sense of goodness, than to be void of shame; and as on
the one Hand, they must be very towardly, and well disposs'd to Virtue, who are
drawn by ingenuity, and mere sense of Obligation and Kindness; so on the other
hand, they must be very stupid and insensible, who are not wrought upon by
Arguments of fear, and sense of shame. There is hardly any hopes of that Man,
who is not to be reclaimed from an Evil course, neither by the apprehension of
danger, nor of disgrace, and who can at once securely neglect both his Safety
and Reputation.

Hear how the Prophet represents the deplorable Case of such Persons, Isa. 3.9.
The show of their countenance bears witness against them; in the Hebrew it is,
The hardness of their countenance does testify against them, and they declare
their sin, as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their Souls, for they have
rewarded evil to themselves. When Men are once arrived to that pitch of
Impiety, as to harden their Foreheads against all sense and show of Shame, and
so as to be able to set a good face upon the foulest Matter in the World; woe
unto them, because their Case seems then to be desperate, and past all hopes of
Recovery. For who can hope, that a Man will forsake his Sins, when he is not so
much as ashamed of them? But yet one would think, that those that are not
ashamed of their Impiety, should be ashamed of their Impudence, and should at
least blush at this, that they can do the vilest and the most shameful things
in the World without blushing.

To conclude this whole Discourse, let the Consideration of the evil and
shamefulness of Sin have this double effect upon us, to make us heartily
ashamed of the past Errors and Miscarriages of our Lives, and firmly resolved
to do better for the future.

I. To be heartily ashamed of the past Errors of our Lives. So often as we
reflect upon the manifold and heinous Provocations of the Divine Majesty, which
many of us have been guilty of in the long course of a wicked Life, together
with the heavy Aggravations of our Sins, by all the circumstances that can
render them abominable and shameful, not only in the Eye of God and Men, but of
our own Consciences likewise; we have great reason to humble our selves before
God, in a penitent acknowledgment of them, and every one of us to say with Job,
Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth,
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; and with Ezra, O my God! I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are
increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens: And
now, O my God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
commandments; and with holy Daniel, We have sinned, and have committed
iniquity, and have done wickedly; O Lord! Righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us confusion of face. Thus we should reproach and upbraid our selves,
in the Presence of that Holy God, whom we have so often and so higly offended,
and against whom we have done as evil things as we could, and say with the
prodigal Son in the Parable; Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

If we would thus take shame to our selves, and humble our selves before God,
he would be merciful to us miserable Sinners; he would take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously; and so soon as ever he saw us coming toward him,
would meet us with joy, and embrace us in the Arms of his Mercy. And then,

II. As we should be heartily ashamed of the past Errors and Miscarriages of
our Lives, so we should firmly resolve, by God's Grace, to do better for the
future; never to consent to Iniquity, or to do any thing which we are convinced
is contrary to our Duty, and which will be matter of Shame to us, when we come
to look back upon it, and make our Blood to rise in our Faces at the mention or
intimation of it, which will make us to sneak, and hang down our heads, when we
are twitted and upbraided with it, and which, if it be not prevented by a
timely Humiliation and Repentance, will fill us with Horror and Amazement, with
Shame and Confusion of Face, both at the Hour of Death, and in the Day of
Judgment.

So that when we look into our Lives, and examine the Actions of them, when we
consider what we have done, and what our Doings have deserved, we should, in a
due sense of the great and manifold Miscarriages of our Lives, and from a deep
Sorrow and Shame and Detestation of our selves for them, I say, we should, with
that true Penitent described in Job, take Words to our selves, and say, Surely
it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more; That which I know
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. And thus I
have done with the second Inconvenience of a sinful and vicious Course of Life,
viz. that the reflection upon it afterward causes Shame; What fruit had you
then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?

SERMON VII. Sermon. 7.
The final Issue of Sin, an Argument for Repentance. The Third Sermon on this
Text.
ROMANS VI.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now being made free from
sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life.


THESE words are a Comparison between an Holy and Virtuous and a Sinful and
Vicious Course of Life, and set before us the manifest Inconveniences of the
one, Vol. 8.
and the manifold Advantages of the other. I have entered into a Discourse upon
the First of these Heads, viz. The manifest Inconveniences of a sinful and
vicious Course: And the Text mentions these three.

I. That it is Unprofitable.

II. That the reflection upon it afterward is matter of Shame. These Two I
have spoken largely to. I shall now proceed to the

III. And last Inconvenience, which the Text mentions, of a sinful and vicious
Course of Life, viz. That the final Issue and Consequence of these things is
very dismal and miserable; The end of those things is Death. No Fruit then when
ye did these things; shame now that you come to reflect upon them; and Misery
and Death at the last.

There are indeed almost innumerable Considerations and Arguments to discourage
and deter men from sin; the Unreasonableness of it in it self; the Injustice
and Disloyalty, and Ingratitude of it in respect to God; the ill Example of it
to others; the Cruelty of it to our selves; the Shame and Dishonor that
attends it; the Grief and Sorrow which it will cost us, if ever we be brought
to a due Sense of it; the Trouble and Horror of a guilty Conscience, that will
perpetually haunt us; but above all the miserable Event and sad Issue of a
wicked Course of Life continued in, and finally unrepented of. The Temptations
to sin may be alluring enough, and look upon us with a smiling Countenance, and
the Commission may afford us a short and imperfect Pleasure: but the
Remembrance of it will certainly be bitter, and the End of it miserable.

And this Consideration is of all others the most apt to work upon the
generality of men, especially upon the more obstinate and obdurate sort of
sinners, and those whom no other Arguments will penetrate; that whatever the
present Pleasure and Advantage of sin may be, it will be Bitterness and Misery
in the end.

The two former Inconvenieces of a sinful Course, which I have lately
discoursed of, viz. That sin is Unprofitabte, and that it is Shameful, are very
considerable, and ought to be great Arguments against it to every sinner, and
considerate Man: and yet how light are they, and but as the very small dust
upon the balance, in comparison of that insupportable weight of Misery which
will oppress the sinner at last! Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of Man that does evil. This, this is the sting of all, that the
end of these things is death.

It is very usual in Scripture to express the greatest Happiness, and the
greatest Misery, by Life and Death; Life being the first and most desirable of
all other Blessings, because it is the Foundation of them, and that which makes
us capable of all the rest. Hence we find in Scripture, that all the Blessings
of the Gospel are summed up in this one word, John 20.31. These things are
written, that you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have Life through his Name. 1 John 4.9. In this was
manifest the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son
into the World, that we might live through him. So that under this Term or
Notion of Life, the Scripture is wont to express all happiness to us, and more
especially that eternal Life which is the great Promise of the Gospel. And this
is Life by wa^ of Eminency; as if this frail and mortal and miserable Life,
which we live here in this World, did not deserve that Name.

And on the other Hand, all the Evils which are consequent upon sin, especially
the dreadful and lasting Misery of another World, are called by the Name of
Death, The end of these things is Death. So the Apostle, here in the Text, and
23. v. The wages of sin is Death, not only a Temporal Death, but such a Death
as is opposed to Eternal Life; The wages of sin is Death: but the gift of God
is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that Death here in the Text
is plainly intended to comprehend in it all those fearful and astonishing
Miseries, wherewith the wrath of God will pursue and afflict sinners in another
World.

But what and how great this Misery is, I am not able to declare to you; it
has no more entered into the heart of man, than those great and glorious
things which God has laid up for them that love him: and as I would fain hope,
that none of us here shall ever have the sad experience of it; so none but
those who have felt it, are able to give a tolerable description of the
intolerableness of it.

But by what the Scripture has said of it in general, and in such Metaphors as
are most level to our present Capacity, it appears so full of Terror, that I am
loath to attempt the Representation of it. There are so many other Arguments,
that are more Humane and Natural, and more proper to work upon the Reason and
Ingenuity of Men; as the great Love and Kindness of God to us; the grievous
Sufferings of his Son for us; the Unreasonableness and Shamefulness of sin; the
present Benefit and Advantage, the Peace and Pleasure of an Holy and Virtuous
Life; and the mighty Rewards promised to it in another World, that one would
think these should be abundantly sufficient to prevail with men to gain them to
goodness, and that they need not be frighted into it, and to have the Law laid
to them, as it was once given to the People of Israel, in thunder and
lightning, in blackness, in darkness and tempest, so as to make them exceedinly
to fear and tremble. And it seems a very hard Case, that when we have to deal
with men, sensible enough of their Interest in other Cases, and diligent enough
to mind it, we cannot persuade them to accept of Happiness, without setting
before them the Terrors of Eternal Darkness, and those amazing and endless
Miseries, which will certainly be the Portion of those who refuse so great an
Happiness; this I say seems very hard, that men must be carried to the Gate of
Hell, before they can be brought to set their faces toward Heaven, and to
think in good earnest of getting thither.

And yet it cannot be dissembled, that the Nature of men is so degenerate, as
to stand in need of this Argument; and that men are so far engaged in an Evil
Course, that they are not to be reclaimed from it by any other Consideration,
but of the endless and unspeakable Misery of impenitent sinners in another
World. And therefore God, knowing how necessary this is, does frequently make
use of it; and our Blessed Savior, than whom none was ever more mild and
gentle, does often set this Consideration before men to take them off from sin,
and to bring them to do better. And this St. Paul tells us, Romans 1.18. is one
principal thing which renders the Gospel so powerful an Instrument for the
reforming and saving of Mankind, because therein the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.

So that how harsh and unpleasant soever this Argument may be, the great
stupidity and folly of some men, and their inveterate obstinacy in an Evil
Course makes it necessary for us to press it home, that those who will not be
moved, and made sensible of the danger and inconvenience of sin by gentler
Arguments, may be roused and awakened by the Terrors of Eternal Misery.

That the last Issue and Consequence of a wicked Life will be very Miserable,
the general Apprehension of Mankind concerning the fate of bad men in another
World, and the socret misgivings of men's Consciences, gives men too much ground
to fear. Besides that the Justice of Divine Providence, which is not many times
in this World so clear and manifest, does seem to require that there should be
a time of Recompense, when the Virtue and Patience of good men should be
Rewarded, and the Insolence and Obstinacy of bad men should be Punished. This
cannot but appear very reasonable to any Man, that considers the Nature of God,
and is persuaded that he governs the World, and has given Laws to Mankind, by
the observance whereof they may be Happy, and by the neglect and contempt
whereof they must be Miserable.

But that there might remain no doubts upon the Minds of men, concerning these
matters, God has been pleased to reveal this from Heaven, by a Person sent by
him on purpose to declare it to the World; and to the truth of these Doctrines
concerning a future state and a day of Judgment, and Recompenses, God has
given Testimony by unquestionable Miracles wrought for the Confirmation of
them, and particularly by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead,
whereby he has given an assurance unto all men, that he is the Person ordained
by God to Judge the World in righteousness, and to render to every Man
according to his deeds; to them, who by patient continuance in well doing seek
for glory and honor and immortality, eternal Life; but to them, who obey not
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of Man that does evil.

So that how quietly soever wicked Men may pass through this World, or out of
it, (which they seldom do) Misery will certainly overtake their Sins at last;
unspeakable and intolerable Misery, arising from the anguish of a guilty
Conscience; from a lively Apprehension of their sad Loss; and from a quick
sense of the sharp Pain which they labor under; and all this aggravated and
set off with the Consideration of past Pleasure, and the Despair of future
Ease. Each of these is Misery enough, and all of them together do constitute
and make up that dismal and forlorn State, which the Scripture calls Hell and
Damnation.

I shall therefore briefly represent (for it is by no means desirable to dwell
long upon so melancholy and frightful an Argument,)

First, The principal Ingredients which constitute this miserable State. And,

Secondly, The Aggravations of it.

First, The principal Ingredients which constitute this miserale State; and
they are these three which I have mentioned.

I. The Anguish of a guilty Mind.

II. The lively Apprehensions of the invaluable Happiness which they have lost.

III. A quick Sense of the intolerable Pains which they lie under.

I. The Anguish of a guilty Conscience. And this is natural; for there is a
Worm that abides in a guilty Conscience, and is continually gnawing it. This is
that our Savior calls the Worm that dies not. And though God should inflict no
positive Punishment upon Sinners, yet this is a Revenge which every Man's Mind
would take upon him; for things are so ordered by God in the original Frame and
Constitution of our Minds, that on the one hand Peace and Pleasure, Contentment
and Satisfaction do naturally arise in our Minds from the Conscience of
Well-doing, and spring up in the Soul of every good Man: And on the other hand,
no Man knowingly does an evil Action, but his guilty Conscience galls him for
it, and the remembrance of it is full of Bitterness to him.

And this the Sinner feels in this World; he disguiseth and dissembleth his
Trouble as much as he can, and shifts off these uneasy Thoughts by all the
Diversions he can devise, and by this means palliates his Disease, and renders
his Condition in some sort tolerable unto himself: but when he is alone, or
cast upon the Bed of Sickness, and his Thoughts are let loose upon him, and he
has nothing to give them a Diversion, how does his Guilt ferment and work! and
the Fever, which lurkt before, does now show it self, and is ready to burn him
up; so that nothing can appear more dismal and ghastly, than such a Man does to
himself.

And much more, when Sinners come into the other World, and are entered into the
Regions of Darkness, and the melancholy Shades, where Evil Spirits are
continually wandering up and down; where they can meet with nothing either of
Employment or Pleasure, to give the least Diversion to their pensive Minds;
where they shall find nothing to do, but to reflect upon, and bemoan
themselves; where all the wicked Actions that ever they committed shall come
fresh into their Minds, and stare their Consciences in the face. It is not to
be imagined, what sad Scenes will then be present to their Imaginations, and
what sharp Reflections their own guilty Minds will make upon them, and what
Swarms of Furies will possess them.

So soon as ever they are entered upon that State, they will then find
themselves forsaken of all those Comforts which they once placed so much
Happiness in; and they will have nothing to converse with, but their own
uneasy selves, and those that are as miserable as themselves, and therefore
incapable of administering any Comfort to one another. They will then have
nothing to think on, but what will trouble them; and every new Thought will be
a new increase of their Trouble. Their Guilt will make them restless, and the
more restless they are, the more will their Minds be enraged; and there will be
no end of their Vexation, because the Cause and Ground of it is perpetual. For
there is no possible way to get rid of Guilt, but by Repentance; and there is
no Encouragment, no Argument to Repentance, where there is no hope of Pardon.
So that if God should hold his Hand, and leave Sinners to themselves, and to
the Lashes of their own Conscience, a more severe and terrible Torment can
hardly be imagined, than that which a guilty Mind would execute upon it self.

II. Another Ingredient into the Miseries of Sinners in another World, is the
lively Apprehension of the invaluable Happiness which they have lost by their
own Obstinacy and foolish Choice. In the next World wicked Men shall be for
ever separated from God, who is the Fountain of Happiness, and from all the
Comforts of his Presence and Favor. This, our Savior tells us, is the first
part of that dreadful Sentence that shall be passed upon the wicked at the
great Day; Depart from me; which Words, though they do not signify any positive
Infliction and Torment, yet they import the greatest Loss that can be imagined.
And it is not so easy to determine which is the greatest of Evils, Loss or
Pain. Indeed to a Creature that is only endowed with Sense, there can be no
Misery but that of Pain and Suffering: but to those who have Reason and
Understanding, and are capable of knowing the value of things, and of
reflecting upon themselves in the want of them, the greatest loss may be as
grievous and hard to be born, as the greatest pain.

It Is true, that sinners are now so immerst in the gross and sensual delights
of this World, that they have no apprehension of the Joys of Heaven, and the
Pleasures of God's presence, and of the Happiness that is to be enjoyed in
Communion with him, and therefore they are not now capable of estimating the
greatness of this loss. But this insensibleness of wicked men continues no
longer than this present state, which affords them variety of Objects of
Pleasure and of Business to divert them and entertain them: but when they come
into the other World, they shall then have nothing else to think upon, but the
sad Condition into which they have brought themselves, nothing to do but to
pore and meditate upon their own Misfortune, when they shall lift up their
Eyes, and with the rich Man in the Parable, in the midst of their Torments,
look up to those who are in Abraham's bosom; and their Misery will be mightily
increased by the Contemplation of that Happiness which others enjoy, and
themselves have so foolishly forfeited and fallen short of; insomuch that it
would be happy for them, if that God, from whose presence they are banished,
that Heaven from which they have excluded themselves, and that everlasting
Glory, which they have despised and neglected, might be for ever hid from their
Eyes, and never come into their Minds.

III. This is not all, but besides the sad Apprehension of their Loss, they
shall endure the sharpest Pains. These God has threatened sinners withal, and
they are in Scripture represented to us, by the most grievous and intolerable
Pains that in this World we are acquainted withal, as by the Pain of Burning.
Hence the wicked are said to be cast into the Lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone, and into the fire which is not quenched; which whether it be
literally to be understood or not, is certainly intended to signify the most
severe kind of Torment; but what that is, and in what manner it shall be
inflicted, none know but they that feel it, and lie under it. The Scripture
tells so much in general of it, as is enough to warn men to avoid it; that it
is the effect of a mighty Displeasure, and of Anger armed with Omnipotence, and
consequently must needs be very terrible, more dreadful than we can now
conceive, and probably greater than can be described by any of those Pains and
Sufferings which now we are acquainted withal; for who knows the power of God's
anger, and the utmost of what Almighty Justice can do to Sinners? Who can
Comprehend the vast significancy of those Expressions, Fear him, who after he
has killed, can destroy both body and soul in Hell? and again, It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God? One would think this were
Misery enough, and needed no farther Aggravation; and yet it has Two terrible
ones, from the Consideration of past Pleasures which Sinners have enjoyed in
this World, and from an utter Despair of future Ease and Remedy.

1. From the Consideration of the past Pleasures which Sinners have enjoyed in
this Life. This will make their Sufferings much more sharp and sensible; for as
nothing commends Pleasure more, and gives Happiness a quicker taste and relish,
than precedent Sufferings and Pain, there is not perhaps a greater Pleasure in
the World, than the strange and sudden Ease which a Man finds after a sharp fit
of the Stone or Cholick, or after a Man is taken off the Rack, and Nature which
was in an Agony before is all at once set at perfect Ease: So on the other
Hand, nothing exasperates Suffering more, and sets a keener Edge upon Misery,
than to step into Afflictions and Pain immediately out of a state of great Ease
and Pleasure. This we find in the Parable was the great Aggravation of the rich
Man's Torment, that he had first received his good things, and was afterward
Tormented. We may do well to consider this, that those Pleasures of Sin which
have now so much of Temptation in them, will in the next World be one of the
chief Aggravations of our Torment.

2. The greatest Aggravation of this Misery will be, that it is attended with
the Despair of any future Ease; and when Misery and Despair meet together, they
make a Man completely miserable. The duration of this Misery is expressed to us
in Scripture, by such words as are used to signify the longest and most
interminable duration. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. Matt. 25.41.
Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Mark. 9.43. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. It is there said, that those who know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of his Son, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. And in Rev. 20.10. That
the wicked shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. And what can be
imagined beyond this? This is the perfection of Misery, to lie under the
greatest Torment, and yet be in despair of ever finding the least Ease.

And thus I have done with the First thing I propounded to speak to from this
Text, viz. The manifest Inconveniences of a sinful and vicious Course of Life;
that it brings no present Benefit or Advantage to us; that the reflection upon
it causes Shame; and that it is fearful and miserable in the last Issue and
Consequence of it. What fruit had you, etc.

I should now have proceeded to the Second Part of the Text, which represents
to us the manifold Advantages of an Holy and Virtuous Course of Life; 22.v. But
now being made free from sin, and become the servants of righteousness, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, there is the present Advantage of it; and the end
everlasting life, there is the future Reward of it. But this is a large
Argument, which will require a Discourse by it self, and therefore I shall not
now enter upon it; but shall only make some reflections upon what has been
said, concerning the miserable Issue and Consequence of a wicked Life
impenitently persisted in.

And surely, if we firmly believe and seriously consider these things, we have
no reason to be fond of any Vice; we can take no great Comfort or Contentment
in a sinful Course. If we could for the seeming Advantage and short Pleasure of
some sins, dispense with the Temporal Mischiefs and Inconveniences of them,
which yet I cannot see how any Prudent and Considerate Man could do; if we
could conquer Shame, and bear the Infamy and Reproach which attends most sins,
and could digest the upbraidings of our own Consciences, so often as we call
them to remembrance, and reflect seriously upon them; though for the gratifying
an importunate Inclination, and an impetuous Appetite, all the Inconveniences
of them might be born withal; yet methinks the very thought of the End and
Issue of a wicked Life, that the end of these things is Death, that indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, far greater than we can now describe or
imagine, shall be to every soul of Man that does evil, should overruled us.
Though the violence of an irregular lust and desire are able to bear down all
other Arguments, yet methinks the Eternal Interest of our precious and immortal
Souls should still lie near our Hearts, and affect us very sensibly. Methinks
the Consideration of another World, and of all Eternity, and of that dismal
fate which attends Impenitent Sinners after this Life, and the dreadful hazard
of being miserable for ever, should be more than enough to dishearten any Man
from a wicked life, and to bring him to a better Mind and Course.

And if the plain Representations of these things do not prevail with men to
this purpose, it is a sign that either they do not believe these things, or
else that they do not consider them, one of these two must be the reason why
any Man, notwithstanding these terrible threatenings of God's Word, does venture
to continue in an Evil Course.

It Is vehemently to be suspected, that men do not really believe these things,
that they are not fully persuaded that there is another state after this Life,
in which the righteous God will render to every Man according to his deeds; and
therefore so much Wickedness as we see in the lives of men, so much Infidelity
may reasonably be suspected to lie lurking in their Hearts. They may indeed
seemingly profess to believe these things; but he that would know what a Man
inwardly and firmly believes, should attend rather to his Actions, than to his
Verbal Professions: For if any Man lives so, as no Man that believes the
Principles of the Christian Religion in reason can live, there is too much
reason to question whether that Man does believe his Religion; he may say he
does, but there is a far greater Evidence in the Case than Words; the Actions
of the Man are by far the most credible Declarations of the inward Sense and
Persuasion of his Mind.

Did men firmly and heartily believe that there is a God that governs the
World, and regards the Actions of men, and that he has appointed a day in
which he will judge the World in righteousness, and that all Mankind shall
appear before him in that day, and every Action that they have done in their
whole lives shall be brought upon the Stage, and pass a strict Examination and
Censure, and that those who have made Conscience of their Duty to God and men,
and have lived soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, shall be
unspeakably and eternally Happy in the next; but those who have lived lewd, and
licentious lives, and persisted in an Impenitent Course, shall be extremely and
everlastingly miserable, without Pity, and without Comfort, and without Remedy,
and without Hope of ever being otherwise; I say, if men were fully and firmly
persuaded of these things, it is not Credible, it is hardly Possible that they
should live such Profane and Impious, such Careless and Dissolute Lives, as we
daily see a great part of Mankind do.

That Man that can be awed from his Duty, or tempted to Sin by any of the
Pleasures or Terrors of this World, that for the present enjoyment of his Lusts
can be contented to venture his Soul, what greater Evidence than this can there
be, that this Man does not believe the threatenings of the Gospel, and how
fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God. That Man that
can be willing to undergo an hard Service for several years, that he may be in
a way to get an Estate, and be rich in this World; and yet will not be
persuaded to restrain himself of his Liberty, or to deny his Pleasure, or to
check his Appetite or Lust, for the greatest Reward that God can promise, or
the severest Punishment that he can threaten; can any Man reasonably think,
that this Man is persuaded of any such Happiness or Misery after this Life, as
is plainly revealed in the Gospel, that verily there is a reward for the
righteous, and verily there is a God that judges the Earth? For what can he
that believes not one syllable of the Bible, do worse than this comes to?

A strong and vigorous Faith, even in Temporal Cases, is a powerful Principle
of Action, especially if it be backed and enforced with Arguments of fear. He
that believes the reality of a thing, and that it is good for him, and that it
may be attained, and that if he do attain it, it will make him very happy, and
that without it he shall be extremely miserable; such a Belief and Persuasion
will put a Man upon difficult things, and make him to put forth a vigorous
endeavor, and to use a mighty industry for the obtaining of that, concerning
which he is thus persuaded.

And the Faith of the Gospel ought to be so much the more powerful, by how much
the Objects of hope and fear, which it presents to us, are greater and more
considerable. Did men fully believe the Happiness of Heaven, and the Torments
of Hell, and were they as verily persuaded of the truth of them, as if they
were before their Eyes, how insignificant would all the Terrors and Temptations
of Sense be to draw them into Sin, and seduce them from their Duty.

But although it seems very strange, and almost incredible, that men should
believe these things, and yet live wicked and impious lives; yet because I have
no Mind, and God knows there is no need to increase the number of Infidels in
this Age, I shall choose rather to impute a great deal of the wickedness that is
in the World, to the Inconsiderateness of men, than to their Unbelief. I will
grant that they do in some sort believe these things, or at least that they do
not disbelieve them; and then the great cause of men's ruin must be, that they
do not attend to the Consequence of this Belief, and how men ought to live that
are thus persuaded. Men stifle their Reason, and suffer themselves to be
hurried away by Sense, into the embraces of sensual Objects and things present,
but do not consider what the end of these things will be, and what is like to
become of them hereafter; for it is not to be imagined, but that that Man who
shall calmly consider with himself what Sin is, the shortness of its Pleasure,
and the Eternity of its Punishment, should seriously resolve upon a better
Course of life.

And why do we not Consider these things, which are of so infinite Concernment
to us? What have we our Reason for, but to reflect upon our selves, and to mind
what we do, and wisely to compare things together, and upon the whole matter to
judge what makes most for our true and lasting Interest? to Consider our whole
selves, our Souls as well as our Bodies; and our whole duration not only in
this World, but in the other, not only with regard to Time, but to Eternity? to
look before us to the last Issue and Event of our Actions, and to the farthest
Consequence of them, and to reckon upon what will be hereafter, as well as what
is present; and if we suspect or hope or fear, especially if we have good
reason to believe a future state after Death, in which we shall be happy or
miserable to all Eternity, according as we manage and behave our selves in this
World, to resolve to make it our greatest Design and Concernment while we are
in this World, so to live and demean our selves, that we may be of the number
of those that shall be accounted worthy to escape that Misery, and to obtain
that happiness, which will last and continue for ever.

And if men, would but apply their Minds seriously to the Consideration of
these things, they could not act so imprudently as they do, they would not live
so by chance and without design, taking the Pleasure that comes next, and
avoiding the present Evils which press upon them, without any regard to those
that are future, and at a distance, though they be infinitely greater and more
considerable: If men could have the Patience to debate and argue these matters
with themselves, they could not live so preposterously as they do, preferring
their Bodies before their Souls, and the World before God, and the things which
are Temporal before the things that are Eternal.

Did men verily and in good earnest believe but half of that to be true, which
has now been declared to you, concerning the miserable state of impenitent
Sinners in another World, (and I am very sure, that the one half of that which
is true concerning that state has not been told you) I say did we in any
measure believe what has been so imperfectly represented, What manner of
persons should we all be, in all holy conversation and godliness, waiting for,
and hastening unto (that is making haste to make the best preparation we could
for) the coming of the day of God!

I will conclude all with our Savior's Exhortation to his Disciples, and to
all others; Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of Man: To whom, with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

SERMON VIII. Sermon. 8.
The present and future Advantage of an Holy and Virtuous Life. The Fourth
Sermon on this Text.
ROMANS VI.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now being made free from
sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life.


I Have several times told you, that the Apostle in these words makes a
Comparison between an Holy and Virtuous, and a Sinful and Vicious Course of
Life, Vol. 8.
and sets before us the manifest Inconveniences of the one, and the manifold
Advantages of the other.

I have finished my Discourse upon the First Part of the Comparison; the
manifest Inconveniences of a sinful and vicious Course. I proceed now to the
other Part of the Comparison, which was the

Second Thing I propounded to speak to from these words, viz. the manifold
Benefits and Advantages of an Holy and Virtuous Course; and that upon these Two
accounts.

First, Of the present Benefit and Advantage of it, which the Apostle here
calls Fruit, Ye have your fruit unto holiness.

Secondly, In respect of the future reward of it, and the end everlasting life.
So that here is a considerable Earnest in hand, besides a mighty Recompense
afterward, infinitely beyond the proportion of our best Actions and Services,
both in regard of the greatness and duration of it, everlasting life; that is,
for a few transient acts of Obedience, a perfect and immutable and endless
state of Happiness. And these Two the Apostle mentions in Opposition to the
Inconveniences and Evil Consequences of a wicked and vicious Course; What fruit
had you then in those things, etc.

But before I come to speak to these Two particulars, I shall take notice of
the description which the Apostle here makes, of the change from a state of Sin
and Vice to a state of Holiness and Virtue. But now being made free from sin,
and become the servants of God; intimating that the state of sin is a state of
Servitude and Slavery, from which Repentance and the change which is thereby
made does set us free; but now being made free from sin. And so our Savior
tells us, that whosoever commits sin is the Servant of sin; and this is the
vilest and hardest Slavery in the World, because it is the Servitude of the
Soul, the best and noblest part of our selves; it is the subjection of our
Reason, which ought to rule and bear Sway over the inferior Faculties, to our
sensual Appetites and brutish Passions, which is as uncomely a sight, as to see
Beggars ride on Horse back, and Princes walk on foot; and as Inferior Persons,
when they are advanced to Power, are strangely Insolent and Tyrannical toward
those that are subject to them; so the Lusts and Passions of men, when they
once get the Command of them, are the most domineering Tyrants in the World,
and there is no such Slave as a Man that is subject to his Appetite and Lust,
that is under the Power of irregular Passions and vicious Inclinations, which
transport and hurry him to the vilest and most unreasonable things. For a
wicked Man is a Slave to as many Masters as he has Passions and Vices; and
they are very imperious and exacting, and the more he yields to them, the more
they grow upon him, and exercise the greater Tyranny over him; and being
subject to so many Masters, the poor Slave is continually divided and
distracted between their contrary Commands and Impositions; one Passion hurries
him one way, and another as violently drives him another; one Lust commands him
upon such a Service, and another it may be at the same time calls him to
another Work. His Pride and Ambition bids him spend and lay it out, whilst his
Covetousness holds his Hand fast closed; so that he knows not many times how to
dispose of himself or what to do, he must displease some of his Masters, and
what Inclination soever he contradicts, he certainly displeases himself.

And that which aggravates the Misery of his Condition is, that he voluntarily
submits to this Servitude. In other Cases men are made Slaves against their
wills, and are brought under the Force and Power of others, whom they are not
able to resist: but the sinner chooses this Servitude, and willingly puts his
neck under this yoke. There are few men in the World so sick of their Liberty,
and so weary of their own Happiness, as to choose this Condition: but the Sinner
sells himself, and voluntarily parts with that Liberty, which he might keep,
and which none could take from him.

And which makes this Condition yet more intolerable, he makes himself a Slave
to his own Servants, to those who are born to be subject to him, to his own
Appetites and Passions; and this certainly is the worst kind of Slavery, so
much worse than that of Mines and Galleys, as the Soul is more Noble and
Excellent than the Body.

Men are not usually so sensible of the Misery of this kind of Servitude,
because they are governed by Sense more than Reason: But according to a true
Judgment and Estimation of things, a Vicious Course Life is the saddest Slavery
of all others. And therefore the Gospel represents it as a design every way
worthy of the Son of God, to come down from Heaven, and to debase himself so
far, as to assume our Nature, and to submit to the Death of the Cross, on
purpose to rescue us from this Slavery, and to assert us into the liberty of
the Sons of God. And this is the great design of the Doctrine of the Gospel, to
free men from the Bondage of their Lusts, and to bring them to the Service of
God, whose service is perfect freedom. And therefore our Savior tells us, John
8.31, 32. That if we continue in his word, i. e. if we obey his Doctrine, and
frame our lives according to it, it will make us free; Ye shall know (says he)
the truth, and the truth shall make you free. And if we observe it, the
Scripture delights very much to set forth to us the Benefits and Advantages of
the Christian Religion by the Metaphor of Liberty, and Redemption from
Captivity and Slavery. Hence our Savior is so often called the Redeemer, and
Deliverer, and is said to have obtained eternal Redemption for us. And the
publishing of the Gospel is compared to the Proclaming of the year of Jubilee
among the Jews, when all Persons that would were set at Liberty. Isa. 61.1, 2.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, says the Prophet, speaking in the Person of
the Messiah, because he has anointed me to Proclaim liberty to the Captives,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord. And it is probable that upon this account likewise
the Christian Doctrine or Law is by St. James called the Royal law of liberty.

This is the great design of Christianity, to set men free from the Slavery of
their Lusts, and to this end the Apostle tells us, Tit. 2.13. that Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; and herein the great Mercy
and Compassion of God toward Mankind appeared, in that he sent his Son to
rescue us from that Servitude, which we had so long groaned under, that being
made free from sin, we might become the servants of God, and the servants of
righteousness.

And this he has done not only by the price of his Blood, but by the Power and
Purity of his Doctrine, and the Holy Example of his Life, and by all those
Considerations which represent to us the Misery of our sinful state, and the
infinite danger of continuing in it: and on the other Hand, by setting before
us the Advantages of a Religious and Holy Life, and what a blessed change we
make, when we quit the Service of Sin, and become the Servants of God. It will
not only be a mighty present Benefit to us; but will make us happy to all
Eternity; and these are the Two Considerations which at first I propounded to
speak to at this time.

First, The present Benefit of an Holy and Virtuous Life, which the Apostle
here calls Fruit; But now being made free from sin, and become the servants of
God, ye have your fruit unto holiness.

Secondly, The future Reward and Recompense of it; and the end everlasting life.

First, Let us consider the present Benefit and Advantage of an Holy and
Virtuous Life, which the Apostle here calls Fruit. If all things be truly
considered, there is no Advantage comes to any Man by a wicked and vicious
Course of Life. A wicked Life is no present Advantage; the reflection upon it
afterward is shameful and troublesome; and the end of it miserable. But on the
contrary, the Advantages of an holy and good life are many and great even in
this World, and upon temporal accounts, abstracting from the Consideration of a
future Reward in the World to come.

I shall instance in Five or Six eminent Advantages, which it usually brings to
men in this World.

I. It brings great Peace and Contentment of Mind.

II. It is a very fit and proper Means to promote our outward temporal Interest.

III. It tends to the lengthning our days, and has frequently the Blessing of
long Life attending upon it.

IV. It gives a Man great Peace and Comfort when he comes to die.

V. After Death it transmits a good Name and Reputation to Posterity.

VI. It derives a Blessing upon our Posterity after us. And these are certainly
the greatest Blessings that a wise Man can aim at, and design to himself in
this World. Every one of these taken severally is very considerable; but all of
them together complete a Man's temporal Felicity, and raise it to as high a
pitch as is to be expected in this World.

I. A Religious and Virtuous course of Life is the best way to Peace and
Contentment of Mind, and does commonly bring it. And to a wise Man, that knows
how to value the ease and satisfaction of his own Mind, there cannot be a
greater temptation to Religion and Virtue, than to consider that it is the best
and only way to give rest to his Mind. And this is present Fruit and ready
Payment; because it immediately follows, or rather accompanies the discharge of
our Duty. The fruit of righteousness is peace, says the Prophet; and the
Apostle to the Hebrews speaks of the peaceable fruits of righteousness, meaning
that inward Peace which a Righteous Man has in his own Mind.

A Man needs not to take pains, or to use many Arguments, to satisfy and
content his own Mind, after he has done a good Action, and to convince
himself, that he has no cause to be troubled for it; for Peace and Pleasure do
naturally spring from it: Nay, not only so, but there is an unexpressible kind
of pleasure and delight, that flows from the testimony of a good Conscience.
Let but a Man take care to satisfy himself in the doing of his Duty, and
whatever troubles and storms may be raised from without, all will be clear and
calm within: For nothing but guilt can trouble a Man's Mind, and fright his
Conscience, and make him uneasy to himself; that indeed will wound his Spirit,
and sting his very Soul, and make him full of fearful and tormenting thoughts.
This Cain found after he had committed that crying sin of Murdering his
Brother. Genesis 4.6. The Lord said unto Cain, why art thou wrath? and why is thy
Countenance fallen? His guilt made him full of wrath, and discontent filled his
Mind with vexation, and his Countenance with shame and confusion. When a Man's
conscience is awakened to a sense of his guilt, it is angry and froward, and
harder to be stilled than a peevish Child: But the practice of Holiness and
Virtue does produce just the contrary effects; it fills a Man's Mind with
Pleasure, and makes his Countenance cheerful.

And this certainly, if it be well considered, is no small and contemptible
advantage. The peace and tranquillity of our Minds is the great thing, which
all the Philosophy and Wisdom of the World, did always design to bring men to,
as the very utmost happiness that a Wise Man is capable of in this Life; and
it is that which no considerate Man would part with, for all that this World can
give him. The greatest fortune in this World ought to be no temptation to any
Man in his Wits, to submit to perpetual Sickness and Pain for the gaining of
it; and yet there is no disease in the World, that for the sharpness of it is
comparable to the sting of a guilty Mind, and no pleasure equal to that of
Innocence and a good Conscience. And this naturally springs up in the Mind of a
good Man, where it is not hindered either by a melancholy temper, or by false
Principles in Religion, which fill a Man with groundless fears and jealousies
of the love and favor of God toward him; and excepting these two cases, this
is the ordinary fruit of an holy and good course, which is not interrupted by
frequent falling into sin, and great omissions and violations of our duty: For
in this case the interruptions of our Peace and Comfort will naturally be
answerable to the inequality of our Obedience.

II. Besides the present and inestimable Fruit of Holiness, the quiet and
satisfaction of our own Minds, it is likewise a proper means to promote our
Interest and Happiness in this World. For as every Vice is naturally attended
with some Temporal Inconvenience of Pain or Loss; so there is no Grace or
Virtue, but does apparently conduce to a Man's temporal Felicity. There are
some Virtues which tend to the health of his Body, and the prolonging of his
Life, as Temperance and Chastity; others tend to Riches and Plenty, as
Diligence and Industry in our callings; others to the secure and peaceable
Enjoyment of what we have, as Truth and Fidelity, Justice and Honesty in all
our dealings and intercourse with men. There are other Virtues that are apt to
oblige Mankind to us, and to gain their Friendship and good Will, their Aid and
Assistance, as Kindness, and Meekness, and Charity, and a generous Disposition
to do good to all, as far as we have Power and Opportunity. In a word, there is
no real Interest of this World, but may ordinarily be as effectually promoted
and pursued to as great Advantage, by a Man that Exercises himself in the
Practice of all Virtue and Goodness, and usually to far greater Advantage, than
by one that is Intemperate and Debauched, Deceitful and Dishonest, apt to
disoblige and provoke, sour and ill-natured to all Mankind: For there is none
of these Vices, but is to a Man's real hinderance and disadvantage, in regard
of one kind of Happiness or another, which men aim at and propose to themselves
in this World.

III. A Religious and Virtuous Course of Life does naturally tend to the
prolonging of our days, and has very frequently the Blessing of Health and
long Life attending upon it. The Practice of a great many Virtues is a great
Preservative of Life and Health, as the due government of our Appetites and
Passions, by Temperance and Chastity and Meekness, which prevent the chief
Causes from within of Bodily Diseases and Distempers; the due government of our
Tongues and Conversation in respect of others, by Justice and Kindness, and
abstaining from Wrath and Provocation, which are a great security against the
dangers of outward Violence, according to that of St. Peter. 1 Epist. 3.10. He
that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his Tongue from evil,
and his Lips that they speak no guile, let him eschew evil, and do good, let
him seek peace and ensue it.

And beside the natural tendency of things, there is a special Blessing of God,
which attends good men, and makes their days long in the land which the Lord
their God has given them.

IV. There is nothing gives a Man so much Comfort when he comes to die, as the
reflection upon an holy and good Life; and then surely above all other times
Comfort is most valuable, because our frail and infirm Nature does then stand
most in need of it. Then usually men's Hearts are faint and their Spirits low,
and every thing is apt to deject and trouble them; so that we had need to
provide our selves of some excellent Cordial against that time; and there is no
Comfort like to that of a clear Conscience, and of an innocent and useful Life.
This will revive and raise a Man's Spirits under all the Infirmities of his
Body, because it gives a Man good hopes concerning his Eternal State, and the
hopes of that are apt to fill a Man with Joy unspeakable and full of glory.

The difference between good and bad Men is never so remarkable in this World,
as when they are upon their Deathbed. This the Scripture observes to us, Psalm.
37.37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright, for the end of that Man is
peace.

With what Triumph and Exultation does the Blessed Apostle St. Paul, upon the
review of his Life, discourse concerning his Death and Dissolution? 2 Timothy 4.6,
7, 8. I am now ready, says he, to be offered up, and the time of my departure
is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the righteous Judge will give me at that day. What would not any of
us do to be thus affected when we come to leave the World, and to be able to
bear the thoughts of Death and Eternity with so quiet and well satisfied a
Mind! why, let us but endeavor to live Holy lives, and to be useful and
serviceable to God in our Generation, as this holy Apostle was, and we shall
have the same ground of Joy and Triumph which he had. For this is the proper
and genuine effect of Virtue and Goodness; The work of righteousness is peace,
and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. All the good
Actions that we do in this Life are so many seeds of Comfort sown in our own
Consciences, which will spring up one time or other, but especially in the
approaches of Death, when we come to take a serious review of our lives; for
then men's Consciences use to deal plainly and impartially with them, and to
tell them the truth, and if at that time more especially our hearts condemn us
not, then may we have comfort and confidence toward God.

V. An Holy and Virtuous Life does transmit a good Name and Reputation to
Posterity. And this Solomon has determined to be a much greater Happiness,
than for a Man to leave a great Estate behind him: A good name says he, is
rather to be chosen than great riches. Pious and Virtuous men do commonly gain
to themselves a good Esteem and Reputation in this World, while they are in it;
but the Virtues of good men are not always so bright and shining, as to meet
with that respect and acknowledgment which is due to them in this World. Many
times they are much clouded by the Infirmities and Passions which attend them,
and are shadowed by some affected singularities and morosities, which those
which have lived more retired from the World are more liable to. Besides that
the Envy of others, who are not so good as they, lies heavy upon them, and does
depress them. For bad men are very apt to misinterpret the best Actions of the
good, and put false colors upon them, and when they have nothing else to
object against them, to charge them with Hypocrisy and Insincerity; an
Objection as hard to be answered, as it is to be made good, unless we could see
into the Hearts of men.

But when good men are dead and gone, and the bright and shining Example of
their Virtues is at a convenient distance, and does not gall and upbraid
others, then Envy cease, and every Man is then content to give a good Man his
due Praise, and his Friends and Posterity may then quietly enjoy the Comfort of
his Reputation, which is some sort of Blessing to him that is gone. This
difference Solomon observes to us between good and bad men; The memory of the
just is blessed, or well spoken of: but the name of the wicked shall rot.

VI. And lastly, Religion and Virtue do derive a Blessing upon our Posterity
after us. Oh, that there were such an heart in them, says Moses concerning the
People of Israel, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always,
that it might be well with them and with their Children for ever! And to this
purpose there are many Promises in Scripture of God's Blessing the Posterity of
the righteous, and his showing mercies to thousands of the Children of them
that love him, and keep his Commandments.

And this a great motive to Obedience, and touches upon that Natural Affection
which men bear to their Children; so that if we have any Regard to them, or
Concernment for their Happiness, we ought to be very careful of our Duty, and
afraid to offend God; because according as we demean our selves toward him, we
entail a lasting Blessing or a great Curse upon our Children; by so many and
and so strong bonds has God tied our Duty upon us, that if we either desire
our own Happiness, or the Happiness of those that are dearest to us, and part
of our selves, we must fear God and keep his Commandments.

And thus I have briefly represented to you, some of the chief Benefits and
Advantages which an Holy and Virtuous life does commonly bring to men in this
World, which is the first Encouragement mentioned in the Text; ye have your
fruit unto holiness.

Before I proceed to the Second, I shall only just take notice, by way of
Application, of what has been said on this Argument.

1. That it is a great Encouragement to well-doing, to consider that ordinarily
Piety and Goodness are no hindrance to a Man's temporal Felicity, but very
frequently great promoters of it; so that excepting only the case of
Persecution for Religion, I think I may safely challenge any Man, to show me
how the Practice of any Part or Duty of Religion, how the exercise of any Grace
or Virtue is to the prejudice of a Man's temporal Interest, or does debar him
of any true Pleasure, or hinder him of any real Advantage, which a prudent and
considerate Man would think fit to choose. And as for Persecution and Sufferings
for Religion, God can Reward us for them, if he please, in this World, and we
have all the assurance that we can desire, that he will do it abundantly in the
next.

2. The hope of long life, and especially of a quiet and comfortable death,
should be a great encouragement to an Holy and Virtuous Life. He that lives
well, takes the best course to live long, and lays in for an happy old Age,
free from the Diseases and Infirmities which are naturally procured by a
vicious Youth, and likewise free from the guilt and galling Remembrance of a
wicked Life. And there is no condition, which we can fall into in this World,
that does so clearly discover the difference between a good and bad Man, as a
Deathbed: For then the good Man begins most sensibly to enjoy the comforts of
Well-doing, and the Sinner to taste the bitter fruits of Sin. What a wide
difference is then to be seen, between the hopes and fears of these two sorts
of persons! And surely next to the actual possession of Blessedness, the good
hopes and comfortable prospect of it, are the greatest Happiness; and next to
the actual sense of Pain, the fear of Suffering is the greatest Torment.

Though there were nothing beyond this life to be expected, yet if men were sure
to be possessed with these delightful or troublesome Passions when they come to
dye, no Man that wisely considers things would, for all the Pleasures of sin,
forfeit the Comfort of a Righteous Soul, leaving this World full of the hope of
Immortality; and endure the vexation and anguish of a guilty Conscience, and
that infinite terror and amazement which so frequently possesses the Soul of a
dying Sinner.

3. If there be any spark of a generous mind in us, it should animate us to do
well, that we may be well spoken of when we are gone off the Stage, and may
transmit a grateful Memory of our lives to those that shall be after us. I
proceed now to the

Second Thing I proposed, as the great Advantage indeed, Viz. The glorious
Reward of a Holy and Virtuous Life in another World, which is here called
everlasting Life; And the end everlasting Life; by which the Apostle intends to
express to us, both the Happiness of our future State, and the Way and Means
whereby we are prepared and made meet to be made partakers of it; and that is
by the constant and sincere Endeavors of an holy and good Life. For it is they
only that have their fruit unto holiness, whose end shall be everlasting Life.
I shall speak briefly to these two, and so conclude my discourse upon this Text.

I. The Happiness of our future state, which is here expressed by the name of
everlasting Life; in very few words, but such as are of wonderful weight and
significancy: For they import the Excellency of this state, and the Eternity of
it. And who is sufficient to speak to either of these Arguments? Both of them
are too big to enter now into the heart of Man, too vast and boundless to be
comprehended by humane understanding, and too unweildy to be managed by the
Tongue of Men and Angels, answerably to the unspeakable greatness and glory of
them. And if I were able to declare them unto you, as they deserved, you would
not be able to hear me. And therefore I shall choose to say but little upon an
Argument, of which I can never say enough, and shall very briefly consider
those two things which are comprehended in that short description, which the
Text gives us of our future Happiness, by the name of everlasting Life, viz.
The Excellency of this state, and the Eternity of it.

1. The Excellency of it, which is here represented to us under the notion of
Life, the most desirable of all other things, because it is the Foundation of
all other Enjoyments whatsoever. Barely to be in being, and to be sensible that
we are so, is but a dry Notion of Life. The true Notion of Life is to be well
and to be happy, vivere est been valere. They who are in the most miserable
condition that can be imagined, are in being, and sensible also that they are
miserable. But this kind of Life is so far from coming under the true Notion of
Life, that the Scripture calls it the second death. Revel. 21.8. it is there
said, that The wicked shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. And, Chap. 20. ver. 6. Blessed and
holy is he, that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death
shall have no power. So that a state of mere misery and torment is not Life but
Death; nay, the Scripture will not allow the Life of a wicked Man in this World
to be true Life, but speaks of him as dead. Ephesians. 2.1. speaking of the sinners
among the Gentiles, You, says the Apostle, has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins. And which is more yet, the Scripture calls a Life of
sinful Pleasures (which men esteem the only Happiness of this world) the
Scripture, I say, calls this a Death, 1 Timothy 5.6. She that lives in pleasures,
is dead whilst she lives. A lewd and unprofitable Life, which serves to no
good end and purpose, is a Death rather than a Life. Nay, that decaying and
dying Life which we now live in this World, and which is allayed by the mixture
of so many infirmities and pains, of so much trouble and sorrow, I say, that
even this sort of Life, for all that we are so fondly in love with it, does
hardly deserve the name of Life. But the Life of the world to come, of which we
now speak, this is Life indeed; to do those things which we were made for, to
serve the true Ends of our Being, and to enjoy the Comfort and Reward of so
doing, this is the true notion of Life; and whatever is less than this, is
Death, or a degree of it, and approach toward it. And therefore very well may
Heaven and Happiness be described by the notion of Life, because truly to live
and to be happy are words that signify the same thing.

But what kind of Life this is, I can no more describe to you in the
particularities of it, than Columbus could have described the particular
Manners and Customs of the People of America, before he or any other person in
these parts of the World, had seen it or been there. But this I can say of it
in general, and that from the infallible testimony of the great Creator and
glorious Inhabitants of that blessed place, that it is a state of pure Pleasure
and unmingled Joys, of Pleasures more manly, more spiritual, and more refined,
than any of the Delights of sense, consisting in the enlargement of our Minds
and Knowledge to a greater degree, and in the perfect exercise of Love and
Friendship, in the Conversation of the best and wisest Company, free from
self-interest, and all those unsociable passions of Envy, and Jealousy, of
Malice and Ill Will, which spoil the Comfort of all Conversation in this World,
and, in a word, free from all other Passion or Design, but an ardent and almost
equal desire to contribute all, that by all means possible they can, to the
mutual Happiness of one another: For Charity reigns in Heaven, and is the
brightest Grace and Virtue in the Firmament of Glory, far outshining all other;
as St. Paul, who had himself been taken up into the third Heaven, does expressly
declare to us.

Farther yet, this blessed state consists more particularly in these two
things: In having our Bodies raised and refined to a far greater Purity and
Perfection, than ever they had in this World; and in the consequent Happiness
of the whole Man's Soul and Body, so strictly and firmly united as never to be
parted again, and so equally matched as to be no trouble or impediment to one
another.

(1.) In having our Bodies raised and refined to a far greater Purity and
Perfection, than ever they had in this World. Our Bodies as they are now are
unequally tempered, and in a perpetual flux and change, continually tending to
Corruption, because made up of such contrary Principles and Qualities, as by
their perpetual conflict are always at work, conspiring the Ruin and
Dissolution of them; but when they are raised again, they shall be so tempered
and so refined, as to be free from all those destructive Qualities, which do
now threaten their change and dissolution; and though they shall still consist of
Matter, yet it shall be purified to that degree, as to partake of the
Immortality of our Souls, to which it shall be united, and to be of equal
duration with them. So the Scripture tells us, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. That our dead
Bodies shall be raised incorruptible; for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.

Our Bodies when they are laid down in the Grave are vile Carcases, but they
shall be raised again Beautiful and Glorious, and as different from what they
were before, as the Heavenly Mansions in which they are to reside for ever are
from that dark Cell of the Grave out of which they are raised, and shall then
be endowed with such a Life and Strength and Vigor, as to be able without any
change or decay to abide and continue for ever in the same state.

Our Bodies in this World are gross Flesh and Blood, liable to be affected with
natural and sensual Pleasures, and to be afflicted with natural Pains and
Diseases, to be pressed with the natural necessities of Hunger and Thirst, and
obnoxious to all those Changes and Accidents to which all natural things are
subject: But they shall be raised spiritual bodies, pure and refined from all
the dregs of Matter; they shall not hunger, nor thirst, nor be diseased, or in
Pain any more.

These Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the dust, are continually
decaying, and therefore stand in need of continual Reparation by Food and
Physic: but our House which is from Heaven, (as the Apostle calls it) shall be
of such lasting and durable Materials, as not only Time, but even Eternity it
self, shall make no impression upon it, or cause the least decay in it. They
(says our Blessed Savior) who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World,
and the Resurrection from the dead, cannot die any more: but shall be like the
Angels, and are the children of God, i. e. shall in some degree partake of the
Felicity and Immortality of God himself, who is always the same, and whose
years fail not. Nay, the Apostle expressly tells us, that our Bodies after the
Resurrection shall be spiritual Bodies, so that we shall then be as it were all
Spirit, and our Bodies shall be so raised and refined, that they shall be no
clog or impediment to the Operation of our Souls. And it must needs be a great
comfort to us whilst we are in this World, to live in the hopes of so happy and
glorious a change; when we consider how our Bodies do now oppress our Spirits,
and what a melancholy and dead weight they are upon them, how grievous an
Encumbrance and Trouble and Temptation they are for the most part to us in this
mortal state.

(2.) The blessedness of this state consists likewise in the consequent
Happiness of the whole Man, Soul and Body, so strictly and firmly united as
never to be parted again, and so equally matched as to be no trouble and
impediment to one another.

In this World the Soul and Body are for the most part very unequally yoked, so
that the Soul is not only darkened by the gross Fumes and Clouds which rise from
the Body, but loaded and oppressed by the dull weight of it, which it very
heavily lugs on and draws after it; and the Soul likewise, and the vicious
Inclinations and irregular Passions of it, have many times an ill influence
upon the Body and the humors of it. But in the next World they shall both be
purified, the one from Sin, and the other from Frailty and Corruption, and both
admitted to the blessed sight and enjoyment of the ever blessed God.

But the Consideration of this, (as I said before) is too big for our narrow
apprehensions in this mortal state, and an Argument not fit to be treated of by
such Children, as the wisest of men are in this World; and whenever we attempt
to speak of it, we do but lisp like Children, and understand like Children, and
reason like Children about it. That which is imperfect must be done away, and
our Souls must be raised to a greater Perfection, and our Understandings filled
with a stronger and steadier Light, before we can be fit to engage in so
profound a Contemplation. We must first have been in Heaven, and possessed of
that Felicity and Glory which is there to be enjoyed, before we can either
speak or think of it in any measure as it deserves. In the mean time, whenever
we set about it, we shall find our Faculties oppressed and dazzled with the weight
and splendour of so great and glorious an Argument; like St. Paul, who, when he
was caught up into Paradise, saw and heard those things which when he came down
again into this World, he was not able to express, and which it was not
possible for the Tongue of Man to utter.

So that in discoursing of the state of the Blessed, we must content our selves
with what the Scripture has revealed in general concerning it; that it is a
state of perfect freedom from all those Infirmities and Imperfections, those
Evils and Miseries, those Sins and Temptations which we are liable to in this
World. So St. John describes the Glory and Felicity of that state, as they were
in Visions represented to him, Rev. 21.2, 3, 4. And I John saw the holy City,
the new Jerusalem, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband. And I heard a
great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold! the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away;
that is, all those Evils which we saw or suffered in this World, shall for ever
vanish and disappear, and, which is the great Privilege and Felicity of all
that there shall no Sin be there, v. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, and consequently there shall be no Misery and Curse
there. So we read, Chap. 22.3, 4. And there shall be no more curse; but the
throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him,
and they shall see his face. In which last words our Employment and our
Happiness are expressed; but what in particular our Employment shall be, and
wherein it shall consist, is impossible now to describe; it is sufficient to
know in the general, that our Employment shall be our unspeakable Pleasure, and
every way suitable to the Glory and Happiness of that state, and as much above
the noblest and most delightful Employments of this World, as the Perfection of
our Bodies, and the Powers of our Souls, shall then be above what they are now
in this World.

For there is no doubt, but that he who made us, and endued our Souls with a
desire of Immortality, and so large a Capacity of Happiness, does understand
very well by what way and means to make us happy, and has in readiness proper
Exercises and Employments for that state, and every way more fitted to make us
Happy, than any Condition or Employment in this World is suitable to a temporal
Happiness; Employments that are suitable to the spirits of just men made
perfect, united to Bodies purified and refined almost to the Condition of
Spirits; Employments which we shall be so far from being weary of, that they
shall minister to us a new and fresh delight to all Eternity; and this perhaps,
not so much from the variety, as from the perpetual and growing Pleasure of
them.

It is sufficient for us to know this in the general, and to trust the infinite
Power and Wisdom and Goodness of God, for the particular manner and
circumstances of our Happiness; not doubting but that he, who is the eternal
and inexhaustible Spring and Fountain of all Happiness, can and will derive and
convey such a share of it to every one of us as he thinks fit, and in such ways
as he, who best understands it, is best able to find out.

In a word, the Happiness of the next Life shall be such as is worthy of the
great King of the World to bestow upon his faithful Servants, and such as is
infinitely beyond the just Reward of their best Services; it is to see God, i.
e. to contemplate and love the best and most perfect of Beings, and to be for
ever with the Lord, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand there are pleasures for evermore.

I will say no more upon this Argument, lest I should say less, and because
whoever ventures to wade far into it, will soon find himself out of his depth,
and in danger to be swallowed up and lost in that great abyss, which is not to
be fathomed by the shallow Faculties of Mortal men.

I shall therefore only mention the

2. Thing I proposed to speak to, viz. The Eternity of this Happiness; And the
end everlasting life; by which the Apostle intends to express the utmost
Perfection, but not the final Period of the Happiness of good men in another
World. For to a perfect state of Happiness these two Conditions are requisite,
that it be immutable, and that it be interminable, that it can neither admit of
a change nor of an end. And this is all that I shall say of it, it being
impossible to say any thing that is more intelligible and plain, concerning
that which is infinite, than that it is so. I should now have proceeded to the

II. Thing I proposed, viz. By what Way and Means, we may be prepared, and made
meet to be made partakers of this Happiness; and that is, (as I have told you
all along) by the constant and sincere endeavor of an Holy and good Life; for
the Text supposes that they only who are made free from Sin, and become the
Servants of God, and who have their Fruit unto Holiness, are they whose end
shall be everlasting Life: But this is an Argument which I have had so frequent
occasion to speak to, that I shall not now meddle with it. All that I shall do
more at present shall be to make an Inference or two from what has been said
upon this Argument.

I. The Consideration of the Happy State of good men in another World, cannot
be but a great comfort and support to good men under all the Evils and
Sufferings of this present Life. Hope is a great Cordial to the Minds of men,
especially when the thing hoped for does so vastly outweigh the present
grievance and trouble. The Holy Scriptures, which reveal to us the Happiness of
our future state, do likewise assure us that there is no comparison between the
Afflictions and Sufferings of good men in this World, and the Reward of them in
the other. I reckon (says St. Paul) Romans 8.8. that the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us.

Particularly the Consideration of that glorious change which shall be made in
our Bodies at the Resurrection, ought to be a great comfort to us under all the
Pains and Diseases which they are now liable to, and even against Death it
self. One of the greatest burdens of Humane Nature, is the frailty and
infirmity of our Bodies, the necessities which they are frequently pressed
withal, the Diseases and Pains to which they are liable, and the fear of death,
by reason whereof a great part of Mankind are subject to bondage; against all
which, this is an everlasting Spring of Consolation to us, that the time is
coming when we shall have other sort of Bodies, freed from that burden of
Corruption which we now groan under, and from all those Miseries and
Inconveniences which Flesh and Blood are now subject to. For the time will
come, when these vile Bodies, which we now wear, shall be changed, and
fashioned like to the glorious Body of the Son of God; and when they shall be
raised at the last day, they shall not be raised such as we laid them down,
Vile and Corrruptible; but Immortal and Incorruptible: for the same Power which
has raised them up to Life, shall likewise change them, and put a glory upon
them like to that of the glorified Body of our Lord; and when this glorious
change is made, when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal
has put on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory; and when this last enemy is perfectly
subdued, we shall be set above all the Frailties and Dangers, all the
Temptations and Sufferings of this mortal state; there will then be no fleshly
lusts and brutish Passions to War against the Soul; no law in our members to
rise up in Rebellion against the law of our minds; no diseases to torment us,
no danger of Death to terrify us; all the Motions and Passions of our outward
Man shall then be perfectly subject to the Reason of our Minds, and our Bodies
shall partake of the Immortality of our Souls. How should this Consideration
bear us up under all the Evils of Life and the fears of Death, that the
Resurrection will be a perfect Cure of all our Infirmities and Diseases, and an
effectual Remedy of all the Evils that we now labor under; and that it is but
a very little while that we shall be troubled with these Frail, and Mortal, and
Vile Bodies, which shall shortly be laid in the dust, and when they are raised
again, shall become Spiritual, Incorruptible, and Glorious!

And if our Bodies shall undergo so happy a change, what Happiness may we
imagine shall then be conferred upon our Souls, that so much better and nobler
part of our selves! As the Apostle reasons in another Case, Does God take care
of Oxen? Has he this Consideration of our Bodies, which are but the brutish
part of the Man? What regard will he then have to his own Image, that spark of
Divinity which is for ever to reside in these Bodies? If upon the account of
our Souls, and for their sakes, our Bodies shall become Incorruptible,
Spiritual and Glorious; then certainly our Souls shall be endued with far more
Excellent and Divine Qualities: if our Bodies shall in some degree partake of
the Perfection of our Souls in their Spiritual and Immortal Nature; to what a
pitch of Perfection shall our Souls be raised and advanced! even to an equality
with Angels, and to some kind of participation of the Divine Nature and
Perfection, so far as a Creature is capable of them.

II. The Comparison which is here in the Text, and which I have largely
explained, between the manifest Inconveniences of a Sinful and Vicious Course,
and the manifold Advantages of an Holy and Virtuous Life, is a plain direction
to us which of these two to choose. So that I may make the same appeal that
Moses does, after that he had at large declared the Blessings promised to the
Obedience of God's Laws, and the Curse denounced against the Violation and
Transgression of them, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call Heaven and Earth to record against
you this day, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing;
therefore choose life, that you may be happy in Life and Death, and after Death
to all Eternity. I know every one is ready to choose Happiness, and to say with
Balaam, Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like
his: but if we do in good earnest desire the End, we must take the Way that
leads to it; we must become the Servants of God, and have our fruit unto
holiness, if ever we expect, that the end shall be everlasting life.

SERMON IX. Sermon. 8.
The Nature and Necessity of holy Resolution. The First Sermon on this Text.
JOB XXXIV.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.


THESE words are the words of Elihu, one of Job's Friends, and the only one who
is not reproved for his Discourse with Job, and who was probably the Author of
this ancient and most eloquent History of the sufferings and patience of Job,
and of the end which the Lord made with him; Vol. 8.
and they contain in them a Description of the temper and behavior of a true
Penitent. Surely it is meet, etc.

In which words we have the Two essential parts of a true Repentance.

First, An humble Acknowledgment and Confession of our Sins to God, Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement.

Secondly, A firm Purpose and Resolution of amendment and forsaking of Sin for
the future, I will not offend any more; if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.

First, An humble Acknowledgment and Confession of our Sins to God; Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, that is, have sinned and
been justly punished for it, and am now convinced of the Evil of Sin, and
resolved to leave it; I have born chastisement, I will offend no more.

Of this First part of Repentance, viz. An humble Confession of our Sins to
God, with great Shame and Sorrow for them, and a through Conviction of the Evil
and Danger of a sinful Course, I have already treated at large. In these
Repentance must begin, but it must not end in them: for a penitent Confession
of our Sins to God, and a Conviction of the evil of them, signifies nothing,
unless it bring us to a Resolution of amendment, that is, of leaving our Sins,
and betaking our selves to a better Course: And this I intend, by God's
assistance, to speak to now, as being the

Second Part of a true Repentance here described in the Text, viz. A firm
Purpose and Resolution of amendment and forsaking of Sin for the future; and to
express it the more strongly and emphatically, and to show the firmness of the
Resolution, it is repeated again; I will not offend any more; and then in the
next verse, If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. And this is so
necessary a part of Repentance, that herein the very essence and formal Nature
of Repentance does consist, viz. in the firm and sincere Purpose and Resolution
of a better Course.

In the handling of this Argument, I shall do these Six things.

I. I shall show what Resolution is in general.

II. What is the special Object of this kind of Resolution.

III. What is employed in a sincere Resolution of leaving our Sins and returning
to God.

IV. I shall show that in this Resolution of Amendment, the very essence and
formal Nature of Repentance does consist.

V. I shall offer some Considerations to convince men, both of the necessity
and fitness of this Resolution, and of keeping steadfastly to it. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more.

VI. I shall add some brief directions concerning the managing and maintaining
of this holy and necessary Resolution.

I. What Resolution in general is. It is a fixed Determination of the Will about
any thing, either to do it, or not to do it, as upon due deliberation we have
judged and concluded it to be necessary or convenient to be done, or not to be
done by us: And this supposes three things.

1. Resolution supposes a precedent deliberation of the Mind about the thing
to be resolved upon. For no prudent Man does determine or resolve upon any
thing, till he have considered the thing, and weighed it well with himself, and
have fully debated the necessity and expedience of it; what Advantage he shall
have by the doing of it, and what danger and inconvenience will certainly or
very probably redound to him by the neglect and omission of it. For
peremptorily to determine and resolve upon any thing, before a Man have done
this, is not properly Resolution; but precipitancy and rashness.

2. Resolution supposes some Judgment past upon the thing, after a Man has
thus deliberated about it; that he is satisfied in his Mind one way or other
concerning it, that his Understanding is convinced either that it is necessary
and convenient for him to do it, or that it is not; and this is sometimes
called Resolution, but is not that Resolution which immediately determines a
man to action. This Judgment of the necessity and fitness of the thing, is not
the Resolution of the Will, but of the Understanding; for it does not signify
that a Man has fully determined to do the thing, but that he has determined
with himself that it is reasonable to be done, and that he is no longer in
doubt and suspense whether it be best for him to do it or not, but is in his
Mind resolved and satisfied one way or other. And these are two very different
things; to be resolved in one's Judgment, that is, to be convinced that a thing
is fit and necessary to be done; and to be resolved to set upon the doing of
it; for many men are thus convinced of the fitness and necessity of the thing,
who yet have not the heart, cannot bring themselves to a firm and fixed
Resolution to set upon the doing of it. So that an act of the Judgment, must go
before the Resolution of the Will: for as he is rash that resolves to do a
thing before he has deliberated about it; so he is blind and wilful that
resolves to do a thing before his Judgment be satisfied, whether it be best for
him to do it or not.

3. If the matter be of considerable moment and consequence, Resolution
supposes some motion of the Affections; which is a kind of Biass upon the
Will, a certain Propension and Inclination that a Man feels in himself, either
urging him to do a thing, or withdrawing him from it. Deliberation and Judgment
they direct a Man what to do, or leave undone; the Affections excite and
quicken a Man to take some Resolution in the matter, that is, to do suitably to
the Judgment his Mind has past upon the thing. For instance; A great sinner
reflects upon his Life, and considers what he has done, what the Course is
that he lives in, and what the issue and consequence of it will probably or
certainly be, whether it will make him happy or miserable in the conclusion;
and debating the Matter calmly and soberly with himself, he is satisfied and
convinced of the Evil and Danger of a wicked Life, and consequently that it is
best for him to resolve upon a better Course, that is, to repent. Now these
thoughts must needs awaken in him fearful apprehensions of the wrath of
Almighty God, which is due to him for his Sins and hangs over him, and which he
is every moment in danger of, if he goes on in his Evil Course. These thoughts
are apt likewise to fill him with Shame and Confusion, at the remembrance of
his horrible Ingratitude to God his Maker, his best Friend and greatest
Benefactor, and of his desperate Folly in provoking Omnipotent Justice against
himself; whereupon he is heartily grieved and troubled for what he has done;
and these Affections of Fear and Shame and Sorrow being once up, they come with
great violence upon the Will, and urge the Man to a speedy Resolution of
changing his Course, and leaving the Way he is in, which he is fully convinced
is so Evil and Dangerous, and of betaking himself to another Course, which he
is fully satisfied will be much more for his Safety and Advantage.

So that Resolution in general, is a fixed Determination of the Will; that is,
such a Determination as is not only for the present free from all wavering and
doubting, but such as cannot prudently be altered, so long as the reason
remains. For the Man who upon full Deliberation and Conviction of his Mind
resolves upon any thing, cannot without the imputation of sickleness and
inconstancy quit that Resolution, so long as he has the same Reason which he
had when he took it up, and is still satisfied that the Reason is good. For
instance; The Man who has taken up a Resolution to be Sober, because of the
ugliness and unreasonableness of Drunkenness, and the temporal Inconveniences
and Eternal Damnation which that Sin exposes a Man to; if these Reasons be
true and good, can never prudently alter the Resolution which he has taken,
and return to that Sin again.

II. Let us consider what is the special Object or Matter of this Resolution,
wherein the formal Nature of Repentance does consist, what it is that a Man
when he repents resolves upon; and that I told you is to leave his Sin, and to
return to God and his Duty; and this is the Resolution which the Penitent here
described in the Text takes up, I will not offend any more. That which I see
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. He resolves
against all known Sin, I will not offend any more; and if through Ignorance he
had sinned and done contrary to his Duty, he desires to be better instructed,
that he may not offend again in the like kind, That which I see not, teach thou
me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

So that the true Penitent resolves upon these two things.

1. To forsake his Sin. And 2. To return to God and his Duty.
1. To forsake his Sin: and this implies the quitting of his sinful Course
whatever it had been; and that not only by abstaining from the outward act and
practice of every Sin, but by endeavoring to crucify and subdue the inward
Affection and Inclination to it.

And it implies farther, the utter forsaking of Sin; for Repentance is not only
a Resolution to abstain from Sin for the present, but never to return to it
again. Thus Ephraim when he repented of his Idolatry, he utterly renounced it,
saying, What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14.8. He that truly
repents, is resolved to break off his sinful Course, and to abandon those Lusts
and Vices which he was formerly addicted to, and lived in.

2. The true Penitent resolves likewise to return to God and his Duty: he does
not stay in the negative part of Religion, he does not only resolve not to
commit any Sin, but not to neglect or omit any thing that he knows to be his
Duty; and if he has been ignorant of any part of his Duty, he is willing to
know it, that he may do it; he is not only determined to forsake his Sin, which
will make him miserable, but to return to God, who alone can make him happy: he
is now resolved to love God, and to serve him as much as he hated and
dishonored him before; and will now be as diligent to perform and practice all
the Duties and Parts of Religion, as he was negligent of them before, and as
ready to do all the good he can to all men in any kind, as he was careless of
these things before: these in general are the things which a true Penitent
resolves upon. I proceed to the

III. Thing I proposed to consider, namely what is employed in a sincere
Resolution of leaving our Sins, and returning to God and our Duty. And this
holy Resolution, if it be through and sincere, does imply in it these three
things.

1. That it be Universal.

2. That it be a Resolution of the Means as well as of the End.

3. That it presently come to effect, and be speedily and without delay put in
Execution.

1. A sincere Resolution of amendment must be universal: a Resolution to
forsake all Sin, and to return to our whole Duty, and every part of it; such a
Resolution as that of holy David, to hate every false way, and to have respect
to all God's Commandments.

This Resolution must be universal in respect of the whole Man, and with regard
to all our Actions: in respect of the whole Man; for we must resolve not only
to abstain from the outward Action of Sin, but this Resolution must have its
effect upon our inward Man, and reach our very hearts and thoughts; it must
restrain our inclinations, and mortify our lusts and corrupt affections, and
renew us in the very spirit of our minds, as the Apostle expresses it.

And it must be universal, in respect of all our Actions. For this is not the
Resolution of a sincere Penitent, to abstain only from gross and notorious,
from scandalous and open Sins; but likewise to refrain from the Commission of
those Sins which are small in the esteem of men, and not branded with a Mark of
public Infamy and Reproach; to forbear Sin in secret, and when no Eye of Man
sees us and takes notice of us. This is not a sincere Resolution, to resolve to
practice the Duties and Virtues of Religion in public, and to neglect them in
private; to resolve to perform the Duties of the first Table, and to pass by
those of the second; to resolve to serve God, and to take a liberty to defraud
and cozen men; to honor our Father which is in Heaven, and to injure and hate
our Brethren upon Earth; to love our Neighbor, and to hate our Enemy, as the
Jews did of old time; to resolve against Swearing, and to allow our selves the
liberty to speak falsely, and to break our Word; to flee from Superstition, and
to run into Faction; to abhor Idols, and to commit Sacrilege; to resolve to be
devout at Church, and deceitful in our Shops; to be very scrupulous about
lesser matters, and to be very zealous about indifferent things; to tithe mint
and anise and cummin, and to omit the weightier matters of the Law, Mercy and
Fidelity and Justice; to be very rigid in matters of Faith and Opinion, but
loose in Life and Practice.

No; the Resolution of a sincere Penitent must be universal and uniform: it
must extend alike to the forbearing of all Sin, and the exercise of every Grace
and Virtue, and to the due Practice and Performance of every part of our Duty.
The true Penitent must resolve for the future to abstain from all Sin, to be
holy in all manner of Conversation, and to abound in all the fruits of
righteousness, which by Jesus Christ are to the praise and glory of God. For if
a Man do truly repent of his wicked Life, there is the very same Reason why he
should resolve against all Sin, as why he should resolve against any; why he
should observe all the Commandments of God, as why he should keep any one of
them. For as St. James reasons concerning him that wilfully breaks any one
Commandment of God, that he is guilty of all, and breaks the whole Law; because
the Authority of God is equally stamped upon all his Laws, and is violated and
contemned by the wilful transgression of any one of them; For he that has
said, thou shall not kill, has likewise said, thou shall not commit adultery,
and thou shall not steal: so he that resolves against any one Sin, or upon
Performance of any one part of his Duty, ought for the very same reason to make
his Resolution universal; because one Sin is Evil and Provoking to God, as well
as another; and the Performance of one part of our Duty good and pleasing to
him, as well as another, and there is no difference. So that he that resolves
against any Sin, upon wise and reasonable gounds, because of the Evil of it,
and the danger of the wrath of God to which it exposes us, ought for the same
reason to resolve against all Sin; because it is damnable to commit adultery,
and to steal, as well as to kill; and that Resolution against Sin, which is not
universal, it is a plain Case that it is not true and sincere, and that it was
not taken up out of the sense of the intrinsical evil of Sin, and the danger of
it in respect of God and the Judgment of another World; (for this Reason holds
against every Sin, and remains always the same) but that it was taken up upon
some inferior Consideration, either because of the Shame and Infamy of it among
men, or because of some other temporal inconvenience, which if the Man could be
secured against, he would presently break his Resolution, and return to the
Commission of that Sin, with as much freedom as any other.

2. A sincere Resolution implies a Resolution of the Means as well as of the
End. He that is truly and honestly resolved against any Sin, is likewise
resolved to avoid as much as is possible the Occasions and Temptations which
may lead or draw him to that Sin; or if they happen to present themselves to
him, he is resolved to stand upon his Guard and to resist them. In like manner
he that sincerely resolves upon doing his Duty in any kind, must resolve upon
the Means that are requisite and necessary to the due Discharge and Performance
of that Duty. As he that resolves against that needless and useless Sin of
Swearing in common Conversation, must resolve also to set a guard before the
door of his lips, seeing it is certain that it requires great care and
attention, at least for some competent time, to get rid of a habit.

When David resolved not to offend with his Tongue, he resolved at the same
time to be very watchful over himself, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to
my ways, that I offend not with my Tongue: I will keep my mouth as with a
bridle, while the wicked is before me. For a Man to resolve against any Sin or
Vice, and yet to involve himself continually in the occasions, and to run
himself into the Company and Temptation which do naturally, and will almost
necessarily lead and betray him into those Sins, is a plain evidence of
insincerity. This I take for a certain rule, that whatever can reasonably move
a Man to resolve upon any End, will, if his Resolution be sincere and honest,
determine him every whit as strongly to use all those Means which are necessary
in order to that end. But of this I have spoken elsewhere.

3. A sincere Resolution of leaving our Sins, and returning to God and our
Duty, does imply the present time, and that we are to resolve speedily and
without delay to put this Resolution in practice; that we are peremptorily
determined not to go one step farther in the ways of Sin, not to neglect any
Duty that God requires of us, not for one moment; but immediately and forthwith
to set upon the practice of it, so soon as occasion and opportunity is offered
to us. And the Reason of this is evident; Because the very same Considerations
that prevail upon any Man to take up this Resolution of amendment, and changing
the Course of his Life, are every whit as prevalent to engage him to put this
Resolution presently in practice and execution.

I deny not, but a Man may resolve upon a thing for the future, and when the
time comes, may execute his Resolution, and this Resolution may for all that be
very sincere and real, though it was delayed to a certain time, because he did
not see Reason to resolve to do the thing sooner: But it cannot be so in this
Case of Repentance; because there can no good Reason be imagined, why a Man
should resolve seven years hence to change his Course, and break off his sinful
Life, but the very same Reason will hold as strongly, why he should do it
presently and without delay; and over and besides this, there are a great many
and powerful Reasons and Considerations, why he should rather put this good
Resolution in present Execution, than put it off and defer it to any farther
time whatsoever.

What is it that puts thee upon this Resolution of leaving thy Sins, and urges
thee to do it at all? Art thou resolved to leave Sin, because it is so great an
Evil? Why it is so for the present; the Evil of it is intrinsical to it, and
cleaves to the very Nature of it, and is never to be separated from it: so that
this is a present Reason, and as strong against it now, as ever it will be
hereafter: nay it is stronger at present; because if it be so great an Evil,
the sooner we leave it, the better.

Or do thou resolve to forsake Sin, because thou art apprehensive of the
danger and mischief of it, that it will expose thee to the wrath of God, and to
the endless and intolerable Misery of another World? Why this Reason likewise
makes much more for the present leaving of it; because the longer thou
continuest in a sinful and impenitent state, the greater is thy danger, and the
greater Penalty thou will most certainly incur; by delaying to put this good
Resolution in Practice, thou do increase and multiply the Causes of thy Fear.
For hereby thou provokest God more, and every day do incense his wrath more
and more against thee; thou preparest more and more fuel for everlasting
burnings, and treasurest up for thy self more wrath, against the day of wrath,
and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Nay thou do not only
increase and aggravate; but thou do hereby hasten thine own Misery and Ruin,
and take the most effectual Course that is possible, to bring thine own
Fears, and the Vengeance of Almighty God, so much the sooner upon thee. For
nothing provokes God to take a speedier course with sinners, and does more
quicken the pace of his Judgments, than wilful continuance in Sin.

And yet farther; If thy Resolution be valuable and considerable to thee, thou
take the most effectual course in the World to frustrate and defeat it. Thou
art fully resolved to leave thy Sins hereafter, and thou think thou have
Reason for it: but by continuing in them for the present, thou provokest the
Justice of almighty God to cut thee off, before thy Resolution has taken
effect.

Again; Do thou resolve to leave thy Sins one time or other, because thereby
thou hopest to put thy self into a Capacity of Pardon and Mercy, and of Eternal
Life and Happiness? Why this Reason should move thee to do the thing as soon as
is possible; because the sooner thou forsakest thy Sins, thou have the greater
hope of finding Mercy and Forgiveness with God; and the sooner thou beginnest a
Holy Course, and the longer thou continuest therein, thou have Reason to expect
a greater and more ample Reward. Thou can not by holding off, hope to bring
down Pardon and Mercy to lower Rates, and to obtain these hereafter upon easier
Terms: no; the Terms and Conditions of God's Mercy are already fixed and
established, so as never to be altered.

So that whatever Reason thou can possibly allege for taking up this
Resolution, it is every whit as forcible and powerful to persuade thee to put
it speedily in Execution.

And then there is this Reason besides, and that a very considerable one, why
thou should immediately put this Resolution in practice, and not delay it
for a moment. Thou may at present do it much more certainly, and much more
easily. Much more certainly; because thou art surer of the present time, than
thou can be of the future. The present is in thy Power: but not one moment
more. And thou may at present do it more easily; for the longer thou
continuest in Sin, thy Resolution against it will still grow weaker, and the
habit of Sin continually stronger. Thou will every day be more enslaved by the
Power of thy Lusts, and thy heart will every day be more hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. All the change that time makes, will still be for the
worse, and more to thy disadvantage. Sin will be as pleasant to thee hereafter,
and thou more loath to leave it, than at present. Sin was never mortified by
Age. It will every day have more strength to bind thee and hold thee fast, and
thou will every day have less to break loose from it. For by every Sin thou
do commit, thou addest a new degree to the strength and force of it; and so
much strength as thou addest to it, so much thou take from thy self, and so
much thou losest of thine own Power and Liberty. For a Man and his Lusts are
like Nature and a Disease: so much strength as the Disease gains, Nature
loses, and the Man is hereby doubly weakened: for he does not only lose so much
of his own strength; but the Enemy gets it.

Nay thou do hereby likewise forfeit that auxiliary strength and assistance
which the Grace of God is ready to afford to men, his restraining and his
preventing Grace. For as a Man goes on in Sin, and advances in an evil Course,
the Grace of God draws off by degrees, and his Holy Spirit does insensibly
leave him: and when a sinner is come to this, his best Resolutions will vanish
like the morning cloud, and the early dew, which passes away.

So that it cannot be a true and sincere Resolution of leaving our Sins, if it
do not take place, and have not its effect presently. For there is no Man that
takes up a Resolution, upon weighty and considerable Reasons, of doing any
thing; but if the Reasons upon which he takes it up urge him to do the thing at
present, he will presently set about it: and that Man is not resolved to do a
thing, whatever he may pretend, who has most Reason to do it at present, and
may best do it now, and yet delays it.

And thus I have opened to you the Nature of this holy Resolution of leaving
our Sins, and returning to God and our Duty; and have shown what is necessarily
employed in such a Resolution, if it be sincere and in good earnest; That it be
Universal; and that it be a Resolution of the Means, as well as of the End; and
that it presently take place and be put in Execution. And these are three the
best Signs and Marks that I know of, whereby a Man may try and examine the
truth and sincerity of that Resolution of Amendment, which we call Repentance.
If it be against all Sin, and have an equal regard to every part of our Duty;
if when we resolve upon the End, that is to avoid Sin, and to perform our Duty,
we are equally resolved upon the Means that are necessary to those Ends; if the
Resolution we have taken up commence presently, and from that day forward be
duly executed and put in practice, then is our Repentance and Resolution of
Amendment sincere: but if there be a defect in any of these, our Resolution is
not as it ought to be.

SERMON X. Ser. 10.
The Nature and Necessity of holy Resolution. The Second Sermon on this Text.
JOB XXXIV.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.


THESE words are the Description of the temper and behavior of a true
Penitent, and do contain in them the two essential parts of a true Repentance.

Vol. 8.
First, An humble Acknowledgment and Confession of Sin.

Secondly, A firm Purpose and Resolution of amendment and forsaking our Sins
for the future.

And this latter is so necessary a part of Repentance, that herein the very
Essence and formal Nature of Repentance does consist. In handling of this
Argument, I proposed to consider,

I. What Resolution in general is.

II. What is the special Object or Matter of this kind of Resolution.

III. What is employed in a sincere Resolution of leaving our Sins, and
returning to God and our Duty.

IV. To show that in this Resolution of amendment, the very Essence and formal
Nature of Repentance does consist.

V. To offer some Considerations to convince men of the necessity and fitness
of this Resolution, and of keeping steadfast to it.

VI. To add some Directions concerning the managing and maintaining this holy
Resolution. The three first I have spoken to, I now proceed to the

IV. To show that in this Resolution the very Essence and formal Nature of
Repentance does consist. A Man may do many reasonable Actions, without an
explicit Resolution. In things that are more easy and natural to us, Judgment
and Resolution are all one; it is all one to judge a thing fit to be done, and
to resolve to do it. But in matters of difficulty, when a Man is to strive
against the Stream, and to oppose strong Habits that have taken deep root,
there is nothing to be done without an explicit Resolution. No Man makes any
remarkable change in his Life, so as to cross his Inclinations and Custom,
without an express Resolution. For though a Man's Judgment be never so much
convinced of the reasonableness and necessity of such a change; yet unless a
Man's Spirit be fortified and fixed by Resolution, the power of Custom, and the
violence of his own Inclinations will carry him against his Judgment. Now there
is no change of a Man's Life can be imagined, wherein a Man offers greater
violence to inveterate Habits, and to the strong Propensions of his present
temper, than in this of Repentance. So that among all the Actions of a Man's
Life, there is none that does more necessarily require an express Purpose, than
Repentance does.

And that herein Repentance does chiefly consist, I shall endeavor to make
evident from Scripture, and from the common apprehensions of Mankind concerning
Repentance.

The Scripture, besides the several descriptions of Repentance, uses two words
to express it to us, (...) and (...). The former properly signifies the inward
trouble and displeasure which men conceive against themselves, for having done
amiss; which if it be (...), a godly sorrow, it works in us (...), as St.
Paul calls it, a Repentance not to be repented of, that is, such a change of
our Minds, which as we shall have no Cause to be troubled at, so no Reason to
alter afterward. And what is this, but a firm, steadfast, and unalterable
Resolution?

The Scripture likewise uses several Phrases of the like importance, to
describe Repentance by; as forsakeing and turning from sin, and conversion and
turning to God. Forsaking and turning from sin. Hence it is called Repentance
from dead works, Heb. 6.1. and turning to God, Acts 26.20. I have showed to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, that is, from the worship of
Idols, to the true God. And we have both these together in the description
which the Prophet gives of Repentance, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
ways, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord.
Now this change begins in the sinners Resolution of doing this; and the
unrighteous Man's forsaking his thoughts, is nothing else but changing the
purpose of his Mind, and resolving upon a better Course. And thus Lactantius
describes it: Agere autem poenitentiam nihil aliud est, quam affirmare and
profiteri se non amplius peccaturum. To repent is nothing else, but for a Man
to declare and profess that he will sin no more. This is Repentance before men.
And Repentance before God, is a Resolution answerable to this Profession. And
elsewhere says the same Author, The Greeks do most fully express Repentance by
the word (...), because he that repents recovers his mind from his former
folly, and is troubled at it, and confirmat animam suam ad rectius vivendum,
and confirms his mind for a better Course. And how is this done but by
Resolution?

And that this is the natural and true notion of Repentance appears, in that
the Heathens did consent and agree in it. Gellius gives this description of it.
Poenitere tum dicere solemus, cum quae ipsi fecimus, ea nobis post incipiunt
displicere, sententiamque in iis nostram demutamus. We are said then to repent,
when those things which we have done begin afterward to displease us, and we
change our Resolution about them. And so likewise one of the Philosophers
describes it; Repentance is the beginning of Philosophy, a flying from foolish
words and actions, (...), and the first preparation of a life not to be
repented of.

It is true indeed, Repentance supposes the entire change of our Lives and
Actions, and a continued state, as the proper consequence of it: but Repentance
is but the beginning of this change, which takes its rise from the Purpose and
Resolution of our Minds; and if it be sincere and firm, it will certainly have
this effect, to change our Lives; and if it be not so, it is not Repentance.
For though in the Nature of the thing it be possible, that a Man may sincerely
resolve upon a thing, and yet let fall his Resolution afterward, before it
come into Act: yet in the Phrase of Scripture, nothing is called Repentance,
but such a Resolution as takes effect, so soon as there is opportunity for it.
If we change our Resolution, and repent of our Repentance, this is not that
which St. Paul calls Repentance unto Salvation. So that no Man that reads and
considers the Bible, can impose upon himself so grossly, as to conceit himself a
true Penitent, and consequently to be in a state of Salvation, who has been
troubled for his Sins, and has taken up a Resolution to leave them, if he do
not pursue this Resolution, and act according to it.

V. I shall in the next place propound some Arguments and Considerations to
persuade men to this holy Resolution, and then to keep them firm and steadfast
to it, so as never to change it after they have once taken it up.

First, I shall propound some Arguments to persuade men to take up this
Resolution; and they are these.

1. Consider that this Resolution of Repentance, is nothing but what, under the
influence of God's Grace and holy Spirit, which are never wanting to the
sincere endeavors of men, is in your Power. And it is necessary to premise
this; for unless this be cleared, all the other Arguments that I can use will
signify nothing. For nothing in the World could be more vain, than to take a
great deal of pains to persuade men to do a thing which they cannot do, to
entreat them to attempt an Impossibility, and to urge and solicit them with
all earnestness and importunity to do that which is absolutely and altogether
out of their Power. All the Commands of God; and the Exhortations of his Word,
and all the Promises and Threatenings, whereby these Commands and Exhortations
are enforced, do plainly suppose, either that it is in our Power to do the
thing which God Commands or Exhorts us to; or else, if it be not (which I grant
it is not) that God is ready by his Grace and Strength, if we be not wanting to
our selves, to assist and enable us to those Ends and Purposes. For the Gospel
supposes a Power going along with it, and that the holy Spirit of God works
upon the Minds of Men, to quicken and excite and assist them to their Duty. And
if it were not so, the Exhortations of Preachers would be nothing else, but a
cruel and bitter mocking of sinners, and an Ironical insulting over the misery
and weakness of poor Creatures; and for Ministers to Preach, or People to hear
Sermons, upon other Terms, would be the vainest expense of time, and the idlest
thing we do all the week; and all our Disswasives from Sin, and Exhortations to
Holiness and a good Life, and vehement Persuasions of men to strive to get to
Heaven and to escape Hell, would be just as if one should urge a blind Man, by
many Reasons and Arguments taken from the Advantages of Sight, and the Comfort
of that Sense, and the Beauty of external Objects, by all means to open his
Eyes, and to behold the delights of Nature, to see his way, and to look to his
steps, and should upbraid him, and be very angry with him for not doing so.
Why, if Resolution be absolutely impossible to us, and a thing wholly out of
our Power, it is just the same Case. But then we ought to deal plainly and
openly with men, and to tell them, that what we so earnestly persuade them to,
is that which we certainly know they cannot do. So that it is necessary, if I
intend that the following Considerations should do any good, to assure men,
that it is not impossible for them to make a Resolution of leaving their Sins,
and returning to God.

It is a Power which every Man is naturally invested withal, to Consider, and
Judge, and Choose. To Consider, that is, to weigh and compair things together.
To Judge, that is, to determine which is best. And to Choose, that is, to
resolve to do it or not. And there is nothing more evident and more universally
acknowledged in temporal Cases, and in the Affairs and Concernments of this
Life. In these matters Resolution is a thing ordinary and of frequent practice;
it is the Principle of all great and considerable Actions. Men resolve to be
great in this World, and by Virtue of this Resolution, when they have once
taken it up, what industry will they not use! what hazards will they not run in
the pursuit of their Ambitious Designs! Difficulties and Dangers do rather whet
their Courage, and set an edge upon their Spirits. Men resolve to be rich; the
Apostle speaks of some that will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. They that will be rich: and
though this be but a low and mean Design, yet these Persons, by Virtue of this
Resolution, will toil and take prodigious pains in it.

And as to Spiritual things, every Man has the same Power radically, that is,
he has the Faculties of Understanding and Will; but these are obstructed and
hindered in their exercise, and strongly biased a contrary way by the Power of
Evil Inclinations and Habits; so that as to the exercise of this Power, and the
effect of it in Spiritual things, men are in a sort as much disabled, as if
they were destitute of it. For it is in effect all one, to have no Understanding
at all to consider things that are Spiritual, as to have the Understanding
blinded by an invincible prejudice; to have no Liberty as to Spiritual things,
as to have the Will strongly biased against them. For a Man that has this
prejudice upon his Understanding, and this bias upon his Will, it is to all
intents and purposes as if he were destitute of these Faculties. But then we
are not to Understand this Impotency to be absolutely natural, but accidental;
not to be in the first Frame and Constitution of our Souls, but to have happened
upon the depravation of Nature. It is not a want of natural Faculties, but the
binding of them up and hindering their Operations to certain purposes. This
Impotency proceeds from the Power of evil Habits. And thus the Scripture
expresses it, and compares an Impotency arising from bad Habits and Customs to
a natural Impossibility; nothing coming nearer to Nature, than a powerful
Custom. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may
ye also, that are accustomed to do evil, learn to do well.

But now God by the Gospel has designed the Recovery of Mankind from the
slavery of Sin, and the Power of their Lusts; and therefore, as by the death of
Christ he has provided a way to remove the guilt of Sin, so by the Spirit of
Christ he furnishes us with sufficient Power to destroy the dominion of Sin. I
say sufficient, if we be not wanting to our selves, but be workers together
with God, and be as diligent to work out our own salvation, as he is ready to
work in us both to will and to do.

So that when we persuade men to repent and change their Lives, and to resolve
upon a better Course, we do not exhort them to any thing that is absolutely out
of their Power; but to what they may do, though not of themselves yet by the
Grace of God, which is always ready to assist them, unless by their former
gross neglects and long obstinacy in an evil Course, they have provoked God to
withdraw his Grace from them. So that though considering our own strength
abstractedly, and separately from the Grace of God, these things be not in our
Power; yet the Grace of God puts them into our Power.

And this is so far from derogating from the Grace of God, that it is highly to
the Praise of it. For if the Grace of God make us able to repent and resolve
upon a new Life, he that asserts this does not attribute his Repentance to
himself, but to the Grace of God: nay he that says that God's Grace excites,
and is ready to assist men to do what God Commands, represents God immensely
more good and gracious, than he that says that God Commands men to do that
which by their natural Power they cannot do, and will condemn them for not
doing it, and yet denies them that Grace which is necessary to the doing of it.

Let this then be established as a necessary Consideration to prevent
discouragement, that to resolve upon the change of our Lives, is that which by
the Grace of God we are enabled to do, if we will. Resolution is no strange and
extraordinary thing; it is one of the most common Acts that belongs to us as we
are men; but we do not ordinarily apply it to the best purposes. It is not so
ordinary for men to resolve to be good, as to be rich and great; not so common
for men to resolve against Sin, as to resolve against Poverty and Suffering. It
is not so usual for men to resolve to keep a good Conscience, as to keep a good
Place. Indeed our corrupt Nature is much more opposite to this holy kind of
Resolution. But then to balance and answer this, God has promised greater and
more immediate assistance to us in this case, than in any other. There is a
general blessing and common assistance promised to Resolution and Diligence
about temporal things; and God's Providence does often advance such Persons to
riches and honor. The diligent hand, with God's blessing, makes rich, as
Solomon tell us, Prove. 10.4. and 22, 19. See thou (says he) a Man diligent in
business? He shall stand before Princes, he shall not stand before mean
Persons. Now diligence is the effect of a great and vigorous Resolution. But
there is a special and extraordinary blessing and assistance* that attends the
Resolution and Endeavor of a holy Life. God has not promised to strengthen
men with all might in the way to Riches and Honors, and to assist the
ambitious and covetous designers of this World, with a mighty and glorious
Power, such as raised up Jesus from the Dead: but this he has promised to
those, who with a firm Purpose and Resolution do engage in the ways of
Religion. Let us then shake off our sloth and listlesness, and in that strength
and assistance which God offers, let us resolve to leave our Sins, and to amend
our Lives.

2. Consider what it is that you are to resolve upon; to leave your Sins, and
to return to God and Goodness. So that the things I am persuading you to
resolve upon, are the strongest Reasons that can be for such a Resolution. Sin
is such a thing, that there can be no better Argument to make men resolve
against it, than to consider what it is, and to think seriously of the Nature
and Consequence of it. And God and Goodness are so amiable and desirable, that
the very proposal of these Objects has invitations and allurements enough to
inflame our desires after them, and to make us rush into the embraces of them.
If we would but enter into the serious Consideration of them, we should soon be
resolved in our Minds about them.

Do but consider a little what Sin is. It is the shame and blemish of thy
Nature, the reproach and disgrace of thy Understanding and Reason, the great
deformity and disease of thy Soul, and the eternal Enemy of thy Rest and Peace.
It is thy Shackles and thy Fetters, the Tyrant that oppresses thee and
restrains thee of thy Liberty, and Condemns thee to the basest Slavery and the
vilest Drudgery. It is the unnatural and violent state of thy Soul, the Worm
that perpetually gnaws thy Conscience, the cause of all thy Fears and Troubles,
and of all the Evils and Miseries, all the Mischiefs and Disorders that are in
the World; it is the Foundation and Fuel of Hell; it is that which puts thee
out of the Possession and Enjoyment of thy self, which does alienate and
separate thee from God the Fountain of Bliss and Happiness, which provokes him
to be thine Enemy, and lays thee open every moment to the fierce revenge of his
Justice, and if thou do persist and continue in it, will finally sink and
oppress thee under the insupportable weight of his wrath, and make thee so
weary of thy self, that thou shall wish a thousand times that thou had never
been; and will render thee so perfectly miserable, that thou would esteem it
a great Happiness to exchange thy Condition with the most wretched and forlorn
Person that ever lived upon Earth, to be perpetually upon a Rack, and to lie
down for ever under the rage of all the most violent Diseases and Pains that
ever afflicted Mankind. Sin is all this which I have described, and will
certainly bring upon thee all those Evils and Mischiefs which I have mentioned,
and make thee far more miserable than I am able to express, or thou to
conceive. And art thou not yet resolved to leave it? Shall I need to use any
other Arguments to set thee against it, and to take thee off from the Love and
Practice of it, than this Representation which I have now made of the horrible
Nature and Consequences of it?

And then consider on the other Hand, what it is that I am persuading thee to
turn to; to thy God and Duty. And would not this be a blessed change indeed! To
leave the greatest Evil, and to turn to the chief Good! For this Resolution of
returning to God, is nothing else but a Resolution to be wise and happy, and to
put thy self into the Possession of that which is a greater good, if it is
possible, than Sin is an Evil, and will render thee more happy, than Sin can
make thee miserable. Did thou but think what God is, and what he will be to
thee, if thou will return to him, how kindly he will receive thee after all thy
wanderings from him days without number, thou would soon take up the
Resolution of the Prodigal, and say, I will arise and go to my Father.

And consider likewise what it is to return to thy Duty. It is nothing else but
to do what becomes thee, and what is suitable to the Original Frame of thy
Nature, and to the truest dictates of thy Reason and Conscience, and what is
not more thy Duty, than it is thy Interest and thy Happiness. For that which
God requires of us, is to be righteous and holy and good, that is, to be like
God himself, who is the Pattern of all Perfection and Happiness. It is to have
our Lives conformed to his Will, which is always perfect holiness and goodness,
a state of Peace and Tranquillity, and the very temper and disposition of
Happiness. It is that which is a principal and most essential Ingredient into
the Felicity of the Divine Nature, and without which God would not be what he
is, but a deformed and imperfect and miserable Being.

And if this be a true Representation which I have made to you, of Sin and Vice
on the one Hand, and of God and Goodness on the other, what can be more
powerful than the serious Consideration of it, to engage us to a speedy
Resolution of leaving our Sins, and of turning and cleaving to the Lord with
full purpose of heart? After this we cannot but conclude with the Penitent in
the Text; Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more:
That which I see not, teach thou me: and if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.

3. Consider how unreasonable it is to be unresolved in a Case of so great
moment and concernment. There is no greater Argument of a Man's weakness, than
Irresolution in matters of mighty consequence, when both the Importance of the
thing, and Exigency of present circumstances require a speedy Resolution. We
should account it a strange folly, for a Man to be unresolved in the clearest
and plainest matters that concern his temporal welfare and safety. If a Man
could not determine himself whether he should eat or starve; if he were
dangerously sick, and could not determine whether he should take Physic or
Die; or if one that were in Prison, could not resolve himself whether he should
accept of Liberty, and be contented to be released; or if a fair Estate were
offered to him, he should desire seven years time to consider whether he should
take it or not; this would be so absurd in the common affairs of Life, that a
Man would be thought infatuated, that should be doubtful and unresolved in
cases so plain, and of such pressing concernment. If a Man were under the
Sentence and Condemnation of the Law, and liable to be executed upon the least
intimation of the Prince's Pleasure, and a Pardon were graciously offered to
him, with this intimation, that this would probably be the last offer of Mercy
that ever would be made to him; one would think that in this Case a Man should
soon be determined what to do, or rather that he should not need to deliberate
at all about it; because there is no danger of rashness in making haste to save
his Life.

And yet the Case of a sinner is of far greater importance, and much more
depends upon it, infinitely more than any temporal Concernment whatsoever can
amount to, even our Happiness or Misery to all Eternity. And can there be any
difficulty, for a Man to be resolved what is to be done in such a Case? No Case
surely in the World can be plainer than this; Whether a Man should leave his
Sins, and return to God and his Duty, or not, that is, whether a Man should
choose to be happy or miserable, unspeakably and everlastingly happy, or
extremely and eternally miserable.

And the circumstances and exigences of our Case do call for a speedy and
peremptory Resolution in this matter. The Sentence of the Law is already past,
and God may execute it upon thee every moment, and it is great Mercy and
Forbearance not to do it. Thy Life is uncertain, and thou art liable every
minute to be snatched away and hurried out of this World. However at the best,
thou have but a little time to resolve in; Death and Judgment and Eternity
cannot be far off, and for ought thou know they may be even at the door.
Thou art upon the matter just ready to be seized upon by Death, to be summoned
to Judgment: And to be swallowed up of Eternity: And is it not yet time
think thou to resolve? Would thou have yet a little longer time to
deliberate, whether thou should repent and forsake thy Sins, or not? If
there were difficulty in the Case, or if there were no danger in the delay; if
thou could gain time, or any thing else, by suspending thy Resolution; there
were then some Reason why thou should not make a sudden Determination. But
thou can pretend none of these. It is evident at first sight, what is best to
be done, and nothing can make it plainer. It is not a matter so clear and out
of Controversy, that Riches are better than Poverty, and Ease better than
Pain, and Life more desirable than Death; as it is, that it is better to break
off our Sins, than to continue in the Practice of them; to be reconciled to
God, than to go on to provoke him; to be Holy and Virtuous, than to be Wicked
and Vicious; to be Heirs of eternal Glory, than to be Vessels of wrath fitted
for Destruction.

And there is infinite danger in these delays. For if thy Soul be any thing to
thee, thou venturest that; if thou have any tenderness and regard for thy
eternal Interest, thou runnest the hazard of that; if Heaven and Hell be any
thing to thee, thou incurrest the danger of losing the one, and falling into
the other.

And thou gainest nothing by continuing unresolved. If Death and Judgment would
tarry thy leisure, and wait till thou had brought thy thoughts to some issue,
and were resolved what to do, it were something: but thy Irresolution in this
matter will be so far from keeping back Death and Judgment, that it will both
hasten and aggravate them, both make them to come the sooner, and to be the
heavier when they come: because thou abusest the goodness of God, and despisest
his patience and long-suffering, which should lead thee and draw thee on to
Repentance, and not keep thee back. Hereby thou encouragest thy self in thy
lewd and riotous courses, and, because thy Lord delayeth his coming, art the
more negligent and extravagant. Hear what doom our Lord pronounces upon such
slothful and wicked servants, Luke 12.46. The Lord of that servant will come in
a day when he looks not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and
will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.
None so like to be surprised, and to be severely handled by the Justice of God,
as those that trifle with his Patience.

4. Consider how much Resolution would tend to the settling of our Minds, and
making our Lives comfortable. There is nothing that perplexeth and disquieteth
a Man more, than to be unresolved in the great and important Concernments of
his Life. What anxiety and confusion is there in our Spirits, whilst we are
doubtful and undetermined about such matters? How are we divided and
distracted, when our Reason and Judgment direct us one way; and our Lusts and
Affections biass us to the contrary? When we are convinced and satisfied what
is best for us; and yet are disaffected to our own Interest. Such a Man is all
the while self-condemned, and acts with the perpetual regret of his Reason and
Conscience; and when ever he reflects upon himself, he is offended and angry
with himself, his Life and all his Actions are uneasy and displeasing to him;
and there is no way for this Man to be at peace, but to put an end to this
conflict one way or other, either by conquering his Reason or his Will. The
former is very difficult, nothing being harder than for a sinner to lay his
Conscience asleep, after it is once thoroughly awakened; he may charm it for a
while, but every little occasion will rouse it again, and renew his Trouble; so
that though a Man may have some Truce with his Conscience, yet he can never come
to a firm and settled Peace this way: but if by a vigorous Resolution a Man
would but Conquer his Will, his Mind would be at rest, and there would be a
present calm in his Spirit. And why should we be such enemies to our own Peace,
and to the Comfort and Contentment of our Lives, as not to take this course,
and thereby rid our selves at once of that, which really and at the bottom is
the ground of all the trouble and disquiet of our Lives?

SERMON XI. Ser. 11.
The Nature and Necessity of holy Resolution. The Third Sermon on this Text.
JOB XXXIV.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.


THESE words are a Description of the temper and behavior of a true Penitent,
his Confession of Sins, and, Resolution of Amendment. Concerning Resolution I
have shown what it is in general: What is the special Object or Matter of this
kind of Resolution: Vol. 8.
What is employed in a sincere Resolution of leaving our Sins, and returning to
God and our Duty: That in this Resolution the very Essence and formal Nature of
Repentance does consist: And have offered some Considerations, to convince men
of the necessity and fitness of this Resolution, and to keep them steadfast to
it. As,

1. That this Resolution is nothing but what under the influence of God's Grace
is in our Power.

2. The things themselves, which we are to resolve upon, are the strongest
Arguments that can be for such a Resolution.

3. How unreasonable it is for men to be unresolved in a Case of so great
moment.

4. How much this Resolution will tend to the settling of our Minds, and making
our Lives Comfortable. I proceed to the Considerations which remain.

5. Then be pleased to consider, that a strong and vigorous Resolution would
make the whole Work of Religion easy to us, it would conquer all difficulties
which attend a Holy and Religious Course of Life, especially at our first
entrance into it: Because Resolution brings our Minds to a Point, and unites
all the strength and force of our Souls in one great Design, and makes us
vigorous and firm, courageous and constant in the Prosecution of it; and
without this it is impossible to hold out long, and to resist the strong
Propensions and Inclinations of our corrupt Nature, which, if we be not firmly
resolved, will return and by degrees gain upon us; it will be impossible to
break through Temptations, and to gainsay the importunity of them; when the
Devil and the World solicit us, we shall not be able to say them nay, but shall
be apt to yield to them.

There are many, who have had faint wishes and cold desires, and half purposes
of leading a new and better Life: but having not taken up a firm Resolution in
the Case, having not determined themselves by a severe purpose, a little thing
sways them, and brings them back to their former Course; it is no hard matter to
divert them and engage them another way; they are shaken with every wind of
Temptation, every little blast of Opposition and Persecution turns them back,
and carries them to the ways of Sin: whereas Resolution fixes a Man's Spirit,
and makes it most steadfast and unmovable, and sets him upon a Rock, which, when
the winds blow, and the rain falls, and the floods come, abides firm against
all impressions.

If I would give the most probable and useful advice to engage and continue a
Man in a good Course, I would commend to him a deliberate and firm Resolution.
David proved this way with very happy success, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn
(says he) and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. This
was a security to him against all assaults, and nothing could turn him from his
Course afterward; not the dangers he was exposed to, v. 109. My soul is
continually in my hand, yet do I not forget thy Law; not the snares of wicked
men that were laid for him, v. 110. The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I
erred not from thy precepts. By virtue of this Resolution he could rise up in
defiance of all those that would have tempted him to any sinful action, v. 115.
Depart from me ye evil doers: for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

When a Man is thus resolved upon a holy Course, he is not easily diverted from
it, and is able to resist the importunity and flattery of Temptations, and to
say to them, as men are wont to do, when they are fully and firmly resolved
upon any thing; Let me alone, I am not to be moved, it is in vain to urge me, I
am resolved to the contrary. Thus stiff and resolute men can be in other Cases,
where there is not near that Cause and Reason for it: and if we would but take
up a generous Resolution to break off our Sins, and to live better Lives, this
would be the way to conquer that listlesness and unwillingness, which hinders
us from engaging in a good Course, and is the cause of so many lame excuses and
unreasonable delays. It is the want of Resolution, and the weakness of our
Resolutions, which is the true Reason why we are not more equal and constant
and uniform in the ways of Religion; but are religious only by fits and starts,
in a heat, and during some present Trouble and Conviction of Mind. The double
minded Man is unstable, says St. James, in all his ways. When a Man is of
several Minds, he is easily moved one way or other.

6. And lastly, Consider the infinite danger of remaining unresolved. The evil
day may overtake you, while you are deliberating whether you should avoid it or
not. A state of Sin is liable to so many hazards, has so many dangers
continually threatening it, and hanging over it, that it is the most imprudent
thing in the World to linger in it. It is like Lot's staying in Sodom, when the
Lord was going to destroy it, when Fire and Brimstone were just ready to be
rained down from Heaven upon it. Whilst men are lingering in a sinful state, if
the Lord be not merciful to them, they will be consumed. Therefore it concerns
thee Sinner, to determine thy self speedily, and to make haste out of this
dangerous Condition, to escape for thy Life, lest some evil overtake thee, and
lest Death finding thee unresolved, determine thy case for thee, and put it out
of all doubt, and past all remedy.

How many have been cut off in their Irresolution? And because they would not
determine what to do, God has concluded their case for them, and sworn in his
wrath, that they should not enter into his rest. It may be thou promisest thy
self the space of many years to resolve in: Thou fool, this night thy soul may
be required of thee, and whilst thou art unresolved what to do, God is
resolving what to do with thee, and putting a Period to his Patience and long
expectation of thy Repentance: and thou know not how soon God may do this,
and make an immutable Determination concerning thee. And woe unto thee, when God
has resolved thus.

Suppose thou should be snatched out of the World, and hurried before the
dreadful Tribunal of God, in this doubtful and unresolved state. And this is
possible enough; because thou have no certain tenure of thy Life, thou art at
no time secured from the stroke of Death: Nay it is probable enough; because
thou art every moment liable to ten thousand accidents, any one of which may
snap in sunder the thread of thy Life. And suppose this should happen to thee,
what do thou imagine would become of thee? Would not thou then wish a
thousand times, that thou had resolved in time? How glad would thou then
be, that it were possible for thee to retrieve and call back but one of those
days without number, which thou have so vainly trifled away, that thou might
resolve upon the things of thy peace: but thou would not do it in that thy
day, which God afforded thee to this purpose; thou have let the opportunity
slip out of thy hands, and it will never be in thy Power again, but the things
of thy peace will be for ever hid from thine eyes.

Why will thou then be so foolish, as to run thy self upon the evident hazard
of losing Heaven, and being miserable for ever? Why will thou make work for a
sadder and longer Repentance, than that which thou do now so carefully
decline? This was the case of the foolish Virgins in the Parable, Matthew. 25.
who made account to be ready to meet the Bridegroom at his coming, but took no
care in time to get Oil into their Lamps. They thought the Bridegroom would
tarry yet a while longer, and therefore they slumbered and slept in great
security: but at midnight, when the cry was made, Behold the Bridegroom
comes; then they arose, and in a great hurry and confusion went about trimming
their Lamps; they were resolved then, they would have begged or bought Oil, and
would have been at any pains and cost for it: but then it was too late; for the
door was suddenly shut against them, and no importunity could prevail to have
it opened to them.

Can thou be contented to have the Door shut against thee, and when thou
shall cry, Lord open unto me, to have him return this answer, Depart from me, I
know thee not? If thou can not; resolve to prevent this in time.

Did thou but see, and know, and feel, what the miserable do in Hell, thou
could not linger thus, thou could not continue so long unresolved? Why the
time will come, when thou will reflect severely upon thy self, and say, That I
should ever be so stupid and sottish, to be unresolved in a matter of such
infinite concernment to me! How often was I admonished and convinced of the
necessity of changing my course? How many inward Motions had I to that purpose?
How often did my own Reason and Conscience, and the holy Spirit of God, by his
frequent and friendly suggestions, put me upon this? How often was I just upon
the brink of resolving? I resolved to resolve; but still I delayed it till
Death seized upon me unresolved: and now the opportunity is lost, and never to
be recovered again. I would not in time resolve to be wise and happy: and now
by the Sentence of the just and unchangeable God, it is resolved that I must be
miserable to all Eternity.

How should these Considerations quicken us, who have yet these opportunities
in our Hands; which those those who neglected and trifled them away would now
purchase at any rate! I say how should these Considerations which I have
proposed, move us to take up a present Resolution in the matter! Consider these
things, Sinner, and lay them seriously to Heart, and say to thy self, Fool that
I have been, to be unresolved so long; not to determine my self in a matter of
such mighty consequence; to continue so long in suspense, whether I had best go
to Heaven or Hell, and which was most advisable to be happy or miserable for
ever! Blessed be God that has been pleased to exercise so much Patience and
Long-suffering toward me, that has spared me so long, when he might have
taken me away, and cut me off unresolved. My Soul lies at stake, and for ought
I know all Eternity depends upon my present and speedy Resolution. And now by
God's Grace I will not delay one moment more, I will hang no longer between
Heaven and Hell. I shall now in the

Second place, offer some Considerations to persuade those that have taken up
this good Resolution, to pursue it, and to promote it to Practice and
Execution, and to keep firm and steadfast to it. And to this end, be pleased to
consider these three things,

1. What an Argument it is of vanity and inconstancy, to change this
Resolution, whilst the Reason of it stands good and is not changed. I suppose
that thou were once resolved to leave thy Sins, and to return to God and thy
Duty. Why do thou not pursue this Resolution? Why do thou not persist in
it? Surely there appeared to thee some Reason why thou did take it up; and if
the Reason remain, and appear still the same to thee that it did, How comes it
to pass that thou have altered thy Mind, and changed thy Purpose? Either the
Case is the same it was, when thou tookest up this Resolution; or it is not. If
it be altered, then thou have Reason to change thy Resolution: if it be not,
thou have the same Reason to continue in it, that thou had to take it up.
Show then, if thou can, wherein it is changed. Were thou mistaken before
about the Nature of Sin, and the pernicious consequences of it; or about the
Nature of God and Goodness? Have thou any thing now to plead for Sin, which
thou did not know or consider before? Art thou now satisfied that Sin is not
so evil and unreasonable a thing, as thou did once apprehend, or that it does
not threaten thee with so much danger as thou did fear? Has God altered his
opinion of it, or is he become more favorable to it than he was? Have thou
received any news lately from Heaven by any good Hands, that God has reverst
his threatenings against Sin, or that he has adjourned the Judgment of the
World, sine die, without any set time? That he has set the Devils at Liberty,
and releast them from their Chains of darkness, and has quenched and put out
the fire of Hell? Or art thou satisfied that there is no such Being as God in
the World, or that he is not so good as thou did apprehend him to be, or that
he will not reward those that diligently serve him? Have thou found upon Trial,
that Holiness and Virtue are but empty Names, and that there is nothing in
them? That there is not that Pleasure and Peace in keeping the Commandments of
God, which thou were told of? I am sure thou can not with Reason pretend any
thing of all this. Thy Reason and Conscience and Experience cannot speak one
word on the behalf of Sin, or give any Testemony against God and his holy ways.
And if the Case be the same it was, nothing but thine own vanity and
fickleness, or some worse Reason, could move thee to alter thy purpose.

2. Let it be farther considered, That if we be not constant to our Resolution,
all we have done is lost. If thou repentest of thy Repentance, it will not
prove a Repentance to Salvation. As good to have stayed in Sodom, as to look
back after thou art come out of it. Thus God tells us by the Prophet Ezekiel.
33.12, 13. Therefore thou son of Man, say unto the children of thy People, The
righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
transgression; neither shall the righteous be able to live in the day that he
sins. When I say to the righteous, He shall surely live: if he trust to his
own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered: but for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall die for it. So
that whatever we have done in the Work of Repentance, what Resolutions soever
we have taken up; if afterward we give over and let them fall, all that we
have done is lost, and will come to nothing.

3. Let us consider in the last place, that if we be not constant to our
Resolution, we shall not only lose all that we have done, but we shall thereby
render our Condition much worse. Remember Lot's Wife, who, after she was
escaped out of Sodom, looked back, and was made a particular and lasting
monument of God's wrath and displeasure; which seems to be meant by that
expression of her being turned into a Pillar of Salt, that is, a lasting
monument. Prove. 14.14. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own
ways. Shall be filled with his own ways; this expression does signify a most
heavy and dreadful curse upon those, who fall off from their good Purpose and
Resolution, that they shall have Sorrow and Trouble enough upon it. For so
likewise Prove. 1.26, 27. where God threatens wilful and obstinate Sinners with
the heaviest Judgments, that he would laugh at their calamity, and mock when
their fear comes, when their fear comes as desolation, and their destruction as
a whirlwind, and fear and anguish comes upon them; he adds, as the sum of all
other Judgments, that they shall eat the fruit of their own ways, and be filled
with their own devices. Heb. 10.38. But if any Man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him; which words are a (...) and signify a great deal more
than seems to be expressed, My soul shall have no pleasure in him, that is, let
such an one expect the effects of God's fiercest wrath and displeasure. For so
the Hebrews are wont to express things that are great and unspeakable; when
they cannot sufficiently set them forth, by saying less, they say more. So
Psalm. 5.4. Where it is said, Thou art not a God that have pleasure in
wickedness, the Psalmist means, and would have us to understand it so, that God
is so far from taking any Pleasure in the Sins of men, that he bears the most
violent hatred and displeasure against them. So when the Apostle here says, If
any Man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, he means, that it is
not to be expressed how God will deal with such Persons, and how severely his
Justice will handle them. To the same purpose is that Declaration, 2 Pet. 2.20,
21. For if after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For
it had been better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them. The condition of all impenitent sinners is very sad; but of Apostates
much worse: not only because the Sins which they commit afterward are much
greater, receiving a new aggravation, which the Sins of those who are simply
impenitent are not capable of; but likewise, because such Persons are usually
more wicked afterward. For they that break loose from severe Purposes and
Resolutions of a better Course, do by this very thing in a great measure fear
and conquer their Consciences; and then no wonder if afterward they give up
themselves to commit all iniquity with greediness. When after long abstinence
men return to Sin again, their Lusts are more fierce and violent; like a Man
who, after long fasting, returns to his meat with a more raging appetite. This
our Savior sets forth to us in the Parable of the unclean Spirit's returning
again and taking possession of the Man, after he had left him, Matthew. 12.43,
44, 45. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry
places, seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will return into my
House from whence I came out: And when he is come, he finds it empty, swept,
and garnisht. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other Spirits more
wicked than himself; and the end of that Man is worse than his beginning. The
Moral of which is, that when a Man has once left his Sins, if afterward he
entertain thoughts of returning to them again, Sin will return upon him with
redoubled force and strength, and his Heart will be but so much the more
prepared and disposed for the entertaining of more and greater Vices, and his
leaving his Sins for a time will be but like a running back, that he may leap
with greater violence into Hell and Destruction.

Besides that such Persons do the greatest injury to God and the holy ways of
Religion, that can be, by forsaking them after they have owned and approved
them. For it will not be so much regarded, what wicked men, who have always
been so, talk against God and Religion; because they do not talk from
Experience, but speak evil of the things which they know not: whereas those who
forsake the ways of Religion after they have once engaged in them, do disparage
Religion more effectually, and reproach it with greater Advantage; because they
pretend to speak from the Experience they have had of it; they have tried both
the ways of Sin, and the ways of Religion, and after Experience of both, they
return to Sin again; which, what is it but to Proclaim to the World, that the
ways of Sin and Vice are rather to be chosen than the ways of Holiness and
Virtue; that the Devil is a better Master than God, and that a sinful and
wicked Life yields more Pleasure and greater Advantages, than are to be had in
keeping the Commandments of God? And this must needs be a high Provocation, and
a heavy Aggravation of our Ruin. Let these Considerations prevail with us, to
pursue this holy Resolution, after we have taken it up, and to persist in it.
There remains only tho

VI. And last particular which I proposed to be spoken to, viz. To add some
directions for the maintaining and making good of this Resolution of Repentance
and Amendment; and they shall be these three.

1. Let us do all in the strength of God, considering our necessary and
essential dependence upon him, and that without him and the assistance of his
Grace we can do nothing. We are not (as the Apostle tells us) sufficient of our
selves, as of our selves, that is, without the assistance of God's holy Spirit,
to think any thing that is good; much less to resolve upon it. It is God that
works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, that is, of his own
goodness, as the same Apostle speaks, Phil. 2.13. It is God that upholds us in
Being, and from whom we have all our Power as to natural Actions: but as to
spiritual things, considering the great Corruption and Depravation of Humane
Nature, we stand in need of a more especial and immediate assistance.

If we know any thing of our selves, we cannot but know what foolish and
ignorant Creatures we are, how weak and impotent, how averse and opposite to
any thing that is good. And therefore it is wise counsel in all Cases, but
chiefly in spiritual Matters, which Solomon gives Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the
Lord with all thine Heart, and l^an not to thine own understanding. Acknowledge
him in all thy ways: and he shall direct thy steps. Let us then address our
selves to God, in the words of the holy Prophet, Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know
that the way of Man is not in himself, and that it is not in Man that walks,
to direct his steps. And let us beg of him, that he would consider our Case,
commiserate our weakness, and pity our impotency, and that he would join his
strength to us, and grant us the assistance of his Grace and holy Spirit, to
put us upon sincere Resolutions of a new Life, and to keep us constant and
steadfast to them; to open the Eyes of our Minds, and to turn us from darkness
to light, and from the Power of Satan and our Lusts, unto God; that we may
repent and turn to God, and do works meet for Repentance, that so we may
receive forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified
through faith that is in Christ.

And for our Encouragement in this matter, God has bid us to apply our selves
to him, and he has promised not to be wanting to us, in words as express and
universal as can well be devised, Jam. 1.6. If any Man lack wisdom, let him ask
it of God, who gives to all liberally and upbraideth no Man: but let him ask
in Faith, nothing wavering, that is, not doubting but that God is both able and
willing to give what he asks. And Luke 11.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. I say unto you,
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks,
finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. If a Son shall ask bread
of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish,
will he for a fish give him a Serpent? Or if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer
him a Scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? To encourage our Faith, our Savior uses such an Argument as may
give us the greatest assurance. We are commonly confident, that our earthly
Parents will not deny us those things, that are good and necessary for us, though
they may be otherwise evil: how much more then shall our heavenly Father, who
is essentially and infinitely good, give his holy Spirit to us? And if this be
not enough, St. Matthew uses a larger expression, How much more shall your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him? If there be any thing
that is good, and we stand in need of it, and earnestly pray to God for it, we
may be confident that he will give it us.

2. We ought to be very watchful over our selves, considering our weakness and
wavering and instability and fickleness, the treachery and deceitfulness of our
own Hearts, and the malice of Satan. It will be a great while before the Habits
of Sin be so weakened and subdued, as that we shall have no Propension to return
to them again; so that our Hearts will be often endeavoring to return to their
former posture, and like a deceitful Bow, which is not firmly strong, to start
back. And besides the deceitfulness of Sin and our own Hearts, the Devil is
very malicious, and his malice will make him vigilant to watch all Advantages
against us; and his great design will be to shake our Resolution; for if that
stand, he knows his Kingdom will fall, and therefore he raises all his
Batteries against this Fort, and labors by all means to undermine it, and
nothing will be matter of greater Triumph to him, than to gain a Person that
was revolted from him, and resolved to leave his Service. If therefore thou
expectest God's Grace and Assistance to keep thee steadfast to thy Resolution,
do not neglect thy self, but keep thy Heart with all diligence, and watch
carefully over thy self: for because God works in us both to will and to do,
therefore he expects that we should work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling, lest by our own carelessness and neglect we should miscarry.

3. Let us frequently renew and reinforce our Resolutions, more especially when
we think of coming to the Sacrament, and approaching the holy Table of the
Lord. Nothing is more apt to beget in us good Resolutions, and to strengthen
them, than to consider the dreadful Sufferings of the Son of God for our Sins,
which are so lively set forth and represented to us in this holy Sacrament,
which as it is on God's part, a Seal and Confirmation of his Grace and Love to
us, so on our parts, it ought to be a solemn Ratification of our Covenant with
God, to depart from iniquity, and to walk before him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our Lives.

SERMON XII. Ser. 12.
The Nature and Necessity of Restitution. The First Sermon on this Text.
LUKE XIX.8, 9. And if I have taken any thing from any Man by false accusation,
I restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to
this House.


ONE particular and eminent Fruit of true Repentance, is the making of
Restitution and Satisfaction to those whom we have injured. As for God, we can
make no Satisfaction and Compensation to him, for the injuries we have done him
by our Sins; Vol. 8.
all that we can do in respect of God, is to confess our Sins to him, to make
acknowledgment of our Miscarriages, to be heartily trroubled for what we have
done, and not to do the like for the future. But for Injuries done to men, we
may in many Cases make Reparation and Satisfaction. And this, as it is one of
the best signs and evidences of a true Repentance; so it is one of the most
proper and genuine effects of it: for this is as much as in us lies, to undo
what we have done, and to unsin our Sins.

But, because the practice of this Duty does so interfere with the Interest of
men, and consequently it will be very difficult to convince men of their Duty
in this particular, and to persuade them to it; therefore I design to handle
this particular Fruit and Effect of a true Repentance by it self, from these
words, which contain in them,

I. The Fruit and Effect of Zacheus his Conversion and Repentance; If I have
taken any thing from any Man, I restore him fourfold.

II. The Declaration which our Savior makes hereupon, of the truth of his
Repentance and Conversion, and the happy state he was thereby put into. And
Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to this House, for as much as
he also is the Son of Abraham; as if he had said, By these Fruits and Effects
it appears, that this is a Repentance to Salvation; and this Man whom you look
upon as a sinner and a heathen, may by better right call Abraham Father, than
any of you formal Pharisees and Jews, who glory so much in being the children
of Abraham.

I. The Fruit and Effect of Zacheus's Conversion and Repentance; If, etc.

This Zacheus, as you find at the 2d. verse, was Chief of the Publicans, which
was an Office of great Odium and Infamy among the Jews, they being the
Collectors of the Tribute which the Roman Emperor, under whose Power the Jews
then were, did exact from them. And because these Publicans farmed this Tribute
of the Emperor at a certain Rent, they made a gain out of it to themselves, by
exacting and requiring more of the People than was due upon that account; so
that their calling was very infamous, upon three accounts.

1. Because they were the Instruments of oppressing their Countrymen; for so
they looked upon the Tax they paid to the Romans, as a great oppression.

2. Because they were forced by the Necessity of their calling to have familiar
Conversation with Heathens, whom they looked upon as sinners. Hence the Phrase
used by the Apostle, of Sinners of the Gentiles. And hence likewise probably it
is, that Publicans and Sinners, Publicans and Heathen, are joined several times
together, because of the occasions of frequent Converse which the Publicans had
with Heathens.

3. But principally they were odious, because of the common injustice and
oppression, which they used in the management of their Calling, by fraud and
violence extorting more than was due, to inhance the profit of their Places.
Hence it is, that this sort of Officers have been generally branded, and
reckoned among the worst sort of men. So he in the Comedy, (...), all Publicans
are Rapacious or Robbers. And this is most probably the Sin which Zacheus here
repents of, and in regard to which he promises Restitution, (...), And if I
have taken any thing from any Man by false accusation; so we render the words
in our Translation: but the word (...) signifies more generally, If I have been
injurious to any one, if I have wronged any Man, as appears by the constant use
of this word by the LXX, who by this word do translate the most general Hebrew
words, which signify any kind of Injury or Oppression, either by fraud or
violence or calumny. So that there is no Reason here to restrain it, to
wronging men by false accusation: for Zacheus his Sin being in all probability
extorting more than was due, this might as easily be done many other ways, as
by false accusation. And that this was the common Sin of the Publicans, appears
by the Counsel which John the Baptist gives them, Luke 3.12, 13. Then came also
the Publicans to be Baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? And
he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is appointed you; that is, do
not by fraud or violence extort from any Man, any more than the Tribute which
is laid upon him.

So that Zacheus here promises, that if he had been injurious to any Man in
his Office, by extorting more than was due, he would restore to him fourfold.
And if Zacheus calculated his Estate right, and intended to reserve any part of
it to himself, which is but reasonable to suppose; it could be no very great
part of his Estate which was injuriously got; and I am afraid a far smaller
proportion than many are guilty of, who yet pass for very honest men in
comparison of the Publicans. The Text says, he was a rich Man. Suppose he was
worth ten or twelve thousand Pounds; half he gives to the Poor; That was well
got, or else his whole Estate could not have made fourfold Restitution for it.
Suppose he reserved a thousand or two to himself, then at the rate of restoring
fourfold, not above a thousand can be injuriously got, that is about a Penny in
the Shilling. I am afraid that now adays there are few such moderate
Oppressors: nay, it is possible the proportion of his Estate injuriously got
might be much less: more it could not easily be. But whatever it was, he does
not plead that by way of excuse for himself; he freely confesses he had sinned
in this kind, and offers Restitution to the utmost, much more than the Law did
require in such Cases.

II. You have the Declaration our Savior makes hereupon, of the truth of his
Repentance and Conversion, and the happy state he was thereby put into, This
day is Salvation come to this House.

The Observation I shall make from hence is this, That Restitution and
Satisfaction for the Injuries we have done to others, is a proper and genuine
Effect of true Repentance. I know the Text only speaks of Restitution in Case
of Oppression and Exaction: but because there is the same Reason why
Restitution should be made for all other Injuries, I think I may without any
force or violence to my Text, very well make it the Foundation of a more
general Discourse concerning Restitution.

In the handling of this, I shall,

First, Open to you the Nature of this Duty.

Secondly, Confirm the truth of the Proposition, by showing the Necessity of it.

Thirdly, Endeavor to persuade men to the discharge of this Necessary Duty.

First. For the opening the Nature of this Duty, I will consider,

I. The Act.

II. The Latitude or Extent of the Object, as I may call it, or the Matter
about which it is conversant.

III. The Manner how it is to be done.

IV. The Measure of it.

V. The Persons who are bound to make Restitution; and to whom it is to be made.

VI. The time in which it is to be done.

VII. The Order of doing it, where more are injured, and Restitution cannot be
made at once to all.

I. For the Act. Restitution is nothing else but the making Reparation or
Satisfaction to another, for the Injuries we have done him. It is to restore a
Man to the good Condition, from which, contrary to Right and to our Duty, we
have removed him. Restitution is only done in Case of Injury. Another Man may
be damaged and prejudiced by us many ways, and we not be bound to make
Restitution; because there are many Cases, wherein a Man deserves the prejudice
we do to him. As when we are Instruments of inflicting upon a Man the
Punishment which the Law does Sentence him to. And there are many Cases wherein
we may be prejudicial to others, and cannot help it. As a Man that is sick of a
Contagious Disease, may infect others that are about him: but he is not
injurious to them; because it is not his fault, but his infelicity.

II. For the Latitude and Extent of the Object, as I may call it, or the matter
about which it is Conversant. It extends to all kind of Injuries, which may be
reduced to these two Heads, either we injure a Person with or without his
consent.

1. Some Injuries are done to Persons with their Consent. Such are most of
those Injuries which are done to the Souls of men, when we command, or counsel,
or encourage them to Sin, or draw them in by our Example. For the Maxim Volenti
non fit injuria, There Is no injury done to a Man that is willing, is not so to
be understood, as that a Man may not in some sort consent to his own wrong: for
absolute freedom and willingness supposes that a Man is wholly left to
himself, and that he understands fully what he does. And in this Sense no Man
Sins willingly, that is, perfectly knowing and actually considering what he
does; and Commands, and Persuasion, and Example are a kind of Violence: but
none of these hinder, but that a Man in these Cases may sufficiently consent to
what he does. But yet he is not so perfectly free, as to excuse him that draws
him into Sin by these ways. So likewise when a Man refuses to do that which is
his Duty without a Reward; for instance, to do Justice to another; he is
injurious in so doing: but yet not altogether without the consent of him whom
he injures.

2. Injuries are done to Persons without their consent. And these, though are not
always the greatest Michiefs, yet they are the greatest Injuries. And these
Injuries are done either by fraud and cunning, or by violence and oppression;
either by overreaching another Man in Wit, or over-bearing him by Power. And
these usually either respect the Bodies of men, or their Estates, or their good
Name. The Bodies of men. He that maims another, or does him any other Injury in
his Limbs or Health, either by fraud or force, is bound, so far as he is able,
to make Reparation for the Injury. Or they respect the Estates of men. If by
cunning, or by violence, or by false Testimony or Accusation, thou have
hindered a Man of any Benefit, which otherwise would have come to him, thou art
bound to Restitution. If by thy Power or Interest, by thy knowledge in the Law,
or skill in Business, thou have directly and avowedly helped and assisted
another to do Injustice to his Neighbor, thou art bound to Restitution; though
not as the principal, yet as the accessory. If thou have overreached thy
Brother in any Contract, making Advantage of his ignorance or unskilfulness; if
thou have made a gain of his Necessity; if thou have by thy Power and Interest,
or by any more violent and forcible way detained his Right, or taken away that
which was his; thou art bound to make Reparation for these Injuries, to restore
that which thou have borrowed, to return the pledge which thou have wrongfully
kept, to release unconscionable Forfeitures, to pay debts, to make satisfaction
for frauds and cheats, to take off all unjust invasions and surprizals of
Estates: yea though the fraud be such that thou art not liable to make
satisfaction by any Humane Law, yet thou art as much bound to it in Conscience
to God and thy Duty, as if thou had stolen it, or taken it by violence from
thy Neighbor. For in truth and reality, fraud is as great an Injury as
violence, although Humane Laws cannot take Cognizance of it, so as to relieve
every Man that is overreached in a Bargain: nay of the two it is worse; for
whenever thou decievest a Man in this kind, thou do not only wrong him in
Point of Estate, but thou abusest his Understanding.

And so likewise in respect of a Man's Fame and Reputation. If thou have hurt
any Man's good Name by slander or calumny, by false witness, by rendering him
ridiculous, or any other way; thou art bound to give such Satisfaction as the
thing is capable of; or if there be any other Injury which I have not
mentioned, thou art obliged to make Reparation for it.

III. As to the manner how Restitution is to be made.

1. Thou art bound to do it voluntarily, and of thy own accord; though the Person
injured do not know, who it was that did him the Injury, though he do not seek
Reparation by Law. When a Man is forced by Law to make Restitution, it is not a
Virtue, but Necessity; this is not a Fruit of Repentance and a good Mind, but
of good Law. And that thou do not do it, unless the Law compel thee to it, is
an Argument thou would not have done it, if thou could have avoided it. And
though the thing be done, yet thou have not done it, but the Law; and unless thou
heartily repent of thy Crime, the Injury still lies at thy Door, and in God's
account thou art as guilty as if no Restitution had been made. Not that thou
art bound in this Case to make new Restitution over again; but thou art bound
to bewail thy neglect, that thou did not do it voluntarily and without the
compulsion of the Law.

2. Thou must do it in kind, if the thing be capable of it, and the injured
Party demand it. Thou must restore the very thing which thou had deprived thy
Neighbor of, if it be such a thing as can be restored, and be still in thy
Power; unless he voluntarily accept of some other thing in exchange.

3. If thou can not restore it in kind, thou art bound to restore it in
value, in something that is as good. As for spiritual Injuries done to the
Souls of men, we are bound to make such Reparation and Compensation as we can.
Those whom we have drawn into Sin, and engaged in wicked Courses, by our
influence and example, or by neglect of our Duty toward them, we are so far,
as becomes the Relation we stand in to them, to make acknowledgement of our
fault, to endeavor by our Instruction and Counsel to reclaim them from those
Sins which we led them into, and to recover them out of the snare of the Devil;
and should never be at rest till we have done as much or more for the
furtherance of their Salvation, and helping them forwards toward Heaven, as we
did contribute before to their Ruin and Destruction. If we have violated any
ones Chastity, we are bound to Marry them, if it was done upon that Condition,
and if they require it: thou art bound to keep and maintain those Children
which are the Fruit of thy Lust, and to make Reparation to the Person whom thou
have injured, by Dowry or otherwise.

If thou have defrauded and injured any Man in his good Name, thou art obliged
to make him a Compensation, by acknowledgment of thy fault, by a studious
vindication of him, and by doing him honor and repairing his Credit in all
fitting ways. And if the Injury be irreparable (as it frequently happens, that
we can hardly so effectually vindicate a Man, as we can defame him; and it is
seldom seen that those wounds which are given to men's Reputation are perfectly
healed) I say if the injury be irreparable, especially if it prove really
prejudicial to a Man in his Calling and Civil Interest; if no other
Satisfaction will be accepted, it is to be made in Money, which, Solomon says,
answers all things; and the rather, because the Reason and Equity of humane
Laws has thought fit to assign this way of Satisfaction in many Cases upon
Actions of Scandal and Defamation. And whatever the Law would give in any Case,
if it could be proved, that is the least we are bound in Conscience to do, when
we are guilty to our selves, though the Law cannot take hold of us.

So likewise, if thou have wounded a Man, thou art bound to pay the Cure, to
repair to him and his Relations the Disability for his Calling and his way of
Livelihood and Subsistence, which he has contracted by thy injury. And so for
false Imprisonment, the real Detriment which comes to him by it, is to be made
amends for: and so in all other Cases, the injured Person is, so far as is
possible, to be restored to the good Condition in which he was before the
Injury.

IV. As to the Measure and Proportion of the Restitution we are to make.
Zacheus here offers fourfold, which was much beyond what any Law required in
like Cases. The Measure of Restitution by the Judicial Law of the Jews, did
very much vary according to the kind and degree of the injury. In some Cases a
Man was only bound to simple Restitution; but then he was to do it to the full,
Exodus 22.5, 6. And so if that which is another Man's be delivered unto his
Neighbor to keep, and be stolen from him, he is to make Restitution thereof,
Ver. 12. And so if a Man borrow ought of his Neighbor, and it be hurt or die,
the owner thereof not being with it, he shall surely make it good, Ver. 14. But
for all manner of trespasses by way of theft, whether it be for Ox, for Ass,
for Sheep, for Raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another
challenges to be his, He whom the Judge shall condemn, shall pay double to his
Neighbor, Ver. 9. that is, if it be of a living Creature, if the theft be
found in his Hands alive, whether it be Ox or Ass, or Sheep, he shall restore
double, Ver. 4. But if a Man did steal an Ox or a Sheep, and did kill it or
sell it, he was to restore five Oxen for an Ox, and four Sheep for a Sheep. And
thus we find David judged upon Nathan's Parable of the Rich Man, who had taken
the Poor Man's only Lamb, and killed and dressed it for a Traveller that came to
him, 2 Samuel 12.6. He shall restore the Lamb fourfold. Now the Reason of this
seems to be partly because of the advantage and usefulness of those Creatures
above any oother; and partly because when they were once killed or alienated, a
Man could not without great trouble and difficulty make Discovery, which hazard
of not discovering seems to be accounted for in the Restitution: but if a Man
did voluntarily offer Restitution, before he was prosecuted, for any thing that
was taken by violence, or unjustly detained from his Neighbor, then he was
only to restore the principal, and to add a fifth part thereto, and to offer up
an Offering to the Lord, and so his atonement was made, Levit. 6.1. etc.

So that the highest proportion was a fourth or fifth part, and that only in
the particular Case of Sheep or Oxen stolen away, and killed or alienated
afterward. Indeed Solomon speaks of a sevenfold Restitution, Prove. 6.31. Where
he says, If a thief be found, he shall restore sevenfold, even all the
substance of his House; where seven is only a number of Perfection, and the
meaning is, he shall make perfect and full Restitution according to the Law, so
far as his Substance or Estate will reach.

So that it seems Zacheus in restoring fourfold did outdo the utmost severity
of the Law; which in Case of fraud and oppression was but double, if demanded;
if voluntarily offered, was the principal and a fifth part added: but to
testify the truth of his Repentance, and his hearty Sorrow for the injuries he
had done, he punishes himself beyond what the Law would have done.

I do not say that this Example binds as to this measure and proportion: nay, I
do not say we are bound to the proportions of the Law; for that only concerned
the Nation of the Jews: but although we be free from the Letter of the Law, yet
we are tied to the Equity of it. As to the substance of the Duty of
Restitution, we are bound to that by the Law of Nature. As to the Measure and
Proportion, the Equity of the Judicial Law in its Proportions, and of Zacheus
his Example, ought to be considerable to us.

But to speak more particularly concerning the Measures and Proportions of
Restitution, I shall lay down these Propositions.

1. Where Restitution can be made in Kind, or the Injury can be certainly
valued, we are to restore the thing, or the value.

2. We are bound to restore the thing, with the natural increase of it, that
is, to satisfy for the loss sustained in the mean time, and the gain hindered.

3. Where the thing cannot be restored, and the value of it is not certain, we
are to give reasonable Satisfaction, that is, according to a middle estimation;
not the highest, nor the lowest of things of the kind. The injured Person can
demand no more, and strict Justice requires no more. But it is safe for him
that has done the injury, rather to exceed than to fall short.

4. We are at least to give by way of Restitution what the Law would give; for
that is generally equal, and in most Cases rather favorable than rigorous.

5. A Man is not only bound to Restitution for the injury which he did, but for
all that directy follows upon his injurious Act, though it were beyond his
intention. For the first injury being wilful, thou art presumed to will all
that which directly followed upon it; according to that rule, Involuntarium
ortum ex voluntario censetur pro voluntario. We are presumed to will that which
follows upon a voluntary action, though we did not intend it. For instance, if a
Man maliciously and knowingly set fire upon another Man's House, though he
intended only an injury to that particular Person, yet if a wind come and drive
the fire to his Neighbors at some distance, though he did not intend this, yet
because the first Act was unlawful, he is liable to satisfy for all the direct
consequences of it. If a Man wound another without any intention of killing
him, and the wound prove Mortal, though there was no probability that Death would
ensue upon it, the Man is bound, because the first Act was injurious, to make
Reparation to his Relations for the damage they sustain by his Death; and if
they did depend solely upon him, who died by such injury, thou art bound to
maintain them.

6. Because those who have lived in a Trade and Course of Injustice, can hardly
remember all the particular injuries they have done, so as to make exact
Satisfaction for them, it will not be amiss over and besides to give something
to the Poor. So Zacheus does here, Half of my Estate I give to the Poor, and if
I have taken any thing, etc.

V. The Persons who are concerned in Restitution. And here I shall consider,

First, The Persons who are bound to make Restitution.

Secondly, The Persons to whom it is to be made.

First, The Persons who are bound to make Restitution. In general, they who
have done the injury, or they who come into their stead, so as in Law or Equity
the Injury devolves and descends upon them. But for the clearer stating of
this, I shall lay down several Propositions, which may serve to resolve a great
many Cases, that may be put concerning Persons obliged to make Restitution.

1. If the Injury be done solely by one, without Accomplices and Partakers in the
Crime, he alone is responsible, and wholly bound to make Satisfaction; I mean,
he only is bound so long as he lives, but if the injury descend as a burden
upon the Estate, then he who enjoys the Estate becomes bound to make
Satisfaction; as I shall show afterward.

2. If the Injury was done by more, who did all equally concur to the doing of
it, they are all equally bound to make Satisfaction; and they are bound to
concur together to that Purpose; and in Case of such concurrence, every one is
not bound to satisfy for the whole, but pro rata part, for his share;
provided they do among them make full Satisfaction.

3. If all will not concur, those that are willing are bound among them to make
Reparation for the Injury: nay, if all the rest refuse to join with thee in it,
thou art bound in solidum to make full Reparation so far as thou art able;
because every one was guilty of the whole Injury. For instance, if four men
conspire together to cheat a Man, or to rob him, any one of these, if the rest
refuse, is bound to make entire Satisfaction; yea, though he was only partaker in
the Benefit; because, as I said before, he is guilty of the whole Injury.

4. If the Injury be done by more, who do unequally concur to the doing of it,
he that is Principal is chiefly and principally bound to make Satisfaction: and
here I do not take Principal, strictly in the Sense of the Law, but in the
Sense of Equity; not for him always who is the more immediate cause of the
Injury, but for him who was the greatest cause, and by whose influence chiefly
it was procured and done: but if the principal will not, the Accessories and
Instruments are bound, at least for their share, and according to the
proportion of the Hand they had in it. But if the Principal do satisfy in the
name, and upon the account of the rest, then the Accessories are free from any
Obligation to Restitution, and are only bound to Repentance.

5. If the Injury devolve upon another, by descending as a burden upon the
Estate, he who enjoys the Estate is bound to make Satisfaction. And when
Injuries do thus descend as Burdens and Encumbrances upon Estates, and when
not, the Civil Laws of the place where we live must determine: but then where
my Case falls within the compass of the Law, I am bound voluntarily to satisfy
without the Compulsion of the Law. For instance, If an Estate fall to me
charged with a debt, which has been unjustly detained, I am bound voluntarily
to discharge the debt, so soon as it appears to me, before I am compelled
thereto by the Law.

6. As for Personal Injuries which do not lie as Burdens upon the Estate, nor
do by the Law descend upon the Son or Heir, though in strict Justice a Man be not
bound to make Compensation for them, for that would be endless, and infinitum
in lege repudiatur, No Law can take notice of that which is infinite and
endless; for quae exitum non habent habentur pro impossibilibus, Those things
which have no end, to which no bounds can be set, are esteemed among things
impossible, to which no Man can be obliged: but though in strict Justice the Heir
be not bound to make Reparation, for the Personal injuries of him whom he
succeeds in the Estate, yet in many Cases it is equitable, and generous, and
christian, for such Persons to make some kind of Reparation for palpable and
notorious Injuries. For instance, If I be Heir to an Estate, part of which I
know certainly was injuriously gotten, it is not only Christian, but Prudent,
to make Satisfaction in the Case to the party injured, if certainly known; if
not, to give it to the Poor; for by this means I may take out the Moth, which
was bred by injustice in the Estate, and rub off the Rust, that sticks to the
Gold and Silver, which was got by oppression or fraud, and so free the
remaining part of the Estate from that secret and Divine Nemesis which attends
it and follows it. And for the same Reason, it is very Noble and Christian, for
the Son and Heir of an unjust Father, to make some Reparation for his Father's
injuries by Restitution, if the thing be capable of it: if not, by doing all
good Offices to the injured Persons, which is some kind of Compensation. And in
this Case the Obligation is greater, because by this means a Man does not only
do what in him lies, to cut off the curse, which by his Father's oppression and
injustice is entailed upon the Family and Estate: but likewise, because a Son
ought much more to be concerned for his Father, than any other Person, and to
consult the Honor and Reputation both of him and his own Family; and the
Reparation which the Son makes, is in some sort the Father's Act, because he
succeeds him and comes into his stead.

Secondly, As to the Persons to whom Satisfaction is is to be made. For the
Resolution of those Cases which may fall under this Head, I shall lay down
these Propositions.

1. If the injured Person be certainly known, and be alive and extant, the
Satisfaction is to be made to him.

2. If he be not alive, or which is all one, not to be found or come at,
Satisfaction is to be made to his nearest Relations, his Wife, or Children, or
Brothers, or other nearest Kindred. The Reason is, because Satisfaction being
due, and I having no right to keep that which I have injuriously gotten, if I
cannot restore it to the Party himself, I ought in all Reason to place it
there, where I may most reasonably presume the Party injured would have
bestowed his Estate, and this part of it among the rest, had he been possessor
of it. And by the same Reason that I am bound thus to restore the part of his
Estate which I have injuriously taken or detained from him, I am likewise
obliged to give Satisfaction to the same Person for any other injury: for to
whomsoever I would pay a debt due to one that is deceased, to the same Person I
ought to give Satisfaction for other injuries, by which a debt is, though not
formally, yet virtually contracted.

3. If the Party injured be not certainly known, or have no near Relations
known to me, in that Case I think it very advisable to give so much to the
Poor, or to some Charitable use: or if the Party injured be not capable of
proper Satisfaction, as sometimes it is a Community and Body of men that we
have injured, in this Case it is proper to repair the injuries to Communities
or Bodies of men, by equivalent good Offices, or by some public good Work,
which may be of common Benefit and Advantage. This is the Fifth thing I
proposed to speak to, the Persons concerned in Restitution; both the Persons
who are bound to make Restitution, and the Persons to whom it is to be made. Of
the rest hereafter.

SERMON XIII. Ser. 13.
The Nature and Necessity of Restitution. The Second Sermon on this Text.
LUKE XIX.8, 9. And if I have taken any thing from any Man by false accusation,
I restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to
this House.


IN speaking to these words, I proposed to consider,

First, The Nature of this Duty of Restitution.

Secondly, To show the Necessity of it.

Thirdly, To persuade men to the discharge of it.

In treating of the Nature of Restitution, Vol. 8.
I have considered,

I. The Act.

II. The Extent of it.

III. The Manner how it is to be performed.

IV. The Measure of it.

V. The Persons who are to make Restitution; and the Persons to whom
Restitution is to be made. I now proceed to consider,

VI. The time when Restitution is to be made. In these Cases a Man is not tied
up to an instant, not just to the present time, unless the Case be such, that
he can never do it, if he do not do it then. As if a Man lie upon his
Deathbed, that is a Case that admits of no delay, a Man should hasten
Restitution, as he would do the making of his Will, and the disposal of his
Estate; lest if he do not do it presently, he lose his opportunity of doing it
for ever: but ordinarily, a Man is not so strictly tied up to moments, and to
the present time. It is, sufficient that a Man be for the present resolved to
do it, so soon as morally he can, so soon as he would do other Actions of great
moment and concernment. And to this purpose the Text gives us an excellent
Pattern; Zacheus, the same day he repented, took up this Resolution, and to
oblige himself effectually to put it in Execution, he publicly declares it,
and before all the People offers to make Restitution to all whom he had injured.

Therefore take heed of all unnecessary delays in these matters: for though God
would accept of a firm and sincere Resolution in this Case, if a Person thus
resolved should, before he could bring his Resolution to effect, happen to be
cut off by Death, or be otherwise rendered incapable of doing it, I say, though
God would accept such a Resolution as this; yet he will not interpret that to
be a sincere Resolution, which a Man is negligent to put in Practice: for every
neglect of putting our Resolution in Practice, is a degree of quitting and
altering it; and he who did not do what he was resolved to do, when he had an
opportunity and ability of doing it, is justly presumed to have let fall his
Resolution.

Therefore let no Man presume upon his good Intention and Resolution in this
kind; for they are only acceptable to God, so far as they are sincere and real;
and they are only so far sincere and real, as the Man that makes them, is ready
to put them in Execution, so soon as morally he can. And if thou carelessly and
supinely trifle away thy opportunities in this kind, God may likewise deprive
thee of an opportunity for ever. For all the while thou wilfully neglectest to
make Restitution, thou art guilty of the injury; and there are hardly two Sins
that cry louder to God for a quick and speedy revenge, than Injustice and
Oppression, Deceit and Fraud. God many times takes such Causes into his more
immediate cognizance, 2 Thessalonians. 4.4. Let no Man deceive or go beyond his Brother
in any thing: for God is the revenger of such. And David tells us, that God in
a peculiar manner abhors the Blood-thirsty and deceitful Man; and threatens
that he shall not live out half his days. And God by the Prophet, Mal. 3.5.
tells us, that He will be a swift witness against the oppressors. And if God be
so swift to take vengeance upon such Persons, surely then they are concerned to
be very quick and speedy in making Satisfaction for their injuries and
oppressions, lest Divine Vengeance prevent them, and instead of making
Reparation to men, they be called upon to make Satisfaction to the Justice of
God; and you know who has said it, that It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

You therefore that have hitherto neglected this Duty, delay it no longer; by
all means discharge your Consciences of this Burden, before you come to lie
upon a Deathbed. Then the Consciences of the worst of men begin to work, like
a Stomach oppressed and surcharged with meat; and then they are willing for their
ease to vomit up those Estates, which they have devoured by fraud and
injustice; then they begin to consider the difficulty of being saved, and to
fear that it will be impossible for them ever to enter in at the strait Gate,
thus laden with the spoils of violence and deceit; even those that have the
hardest and most seared Consciences, will be touched with the Sense of such
great Sins at such a time: but do not thou defer this work to that time, for
these two Reasons.

1. Because it cannot be so acceptable to God, to make Restitution at such a
time, as when thou art in health and in hopes of longer life. To give a Man his
own, when thou can enjoy it and use it no longer, this is next to detaining
of it.

2. Because in all probability the Restitution which is then made will not
prove so effectual. What thou do thy self, that thou art sure is done: but
what thou leavest to be done by thy Executors, and chargest upon them, thou art
not sure will be done; ten to one but if they can find out any trick and
evasion in Law, either to delay or avoid the doing of it, it shall either never
be done, or very slowly. This is the sixth thing, the time when Restitution is
to be made.

But before I leave this Head, there is one Case very proper to be considered,
which relates to this Circumstance of Time, and that is concerning injuries of
a very ancient date; that is, how far this Duty of Restitution is to look
backward, and whether it does not expire by tr^ct of time? For answer to this,
I shall lay down these Proportions.

1. At what distance of time soever the Law would in the Case make Reparation
and give Satisfaction, we are undoubtedly bound in Conscience voluntarily to
give it. I deliver this generally; because, though it be possible some Civil Laws
may be in some Cases unreasonable in this matter, yet they are our best Rule
and Guide; and, speaking generally and for the most part, they are as equitable
as the Reason of Man could devise. Not that we are to tie our selves strictly
to the Law, so as not to go farther, if Reason and Equity require; for, as
Seneca says, Parum est ad legem bonum esse, It is no great argument of
goodness, to be just as good as the Law requires. Therefore I think it will
very well become a good Man, in many Cases, rather to be better than the Law,
than to keep strictly to it.

2. In Cases where the Law has not determined the time, we may do well to
observe a proportion to what the Law has determined in other Cases, which come
nearest our own Case.

3. When the injury is so old, that the right which the injured Person had to
Reparation is reasonably presumed to be quitted and forsaken, then the
Obligation to Satisfaction cease and expires. The Reason is plain, because
every Man may recede from his own Right, and give it up to another; and where a
Man may reasonably be presumed to have parted with his right to another, the
Obligation to Restitution cease and the right of claiming it. Now when a
thing begins, haberi pro derelicto, that is, when a right may reasonably be
presumed to be quitted and forsaken, cannot in general be determined: but this
must be estimated according to the importance of the right and thing in
Controversy, as whether it be more or less considerable; and according to the
Reason and Determination of Laws about things of this Nature. To illustrate
this Rule by instances. The Saxons, Danes, and Normans, did at several times
invade and conquer this Nation, and conquered it we will suppose unjustly, and
consequently did hold and possess that which truly belonged to others, contrary
to right; and several of the Posterity of each of these do probably to this day
hold what was then injuriously gotten; I say, in this Case, the Obligation to
Satisfaction and Restitution is long since expired, and the Original Title,
which those who were dispossessed had, is reasonably presumed to be long since
quitted and forsaken; and that for very wise Reasons in Law and Government;
because it would confound and unsettle all Estates, if every thing, the
Original Title whereof is naught, were to be restored; and it is but equal to
presume, that all Mankind are so reasonable, as to quit their right in such
Cases, rather than to cause endless disturbances, and to have the guilt of
Injustice everlastingly perpetuated. And though it be a rule in Civil Law, that
Vitiosum initio, tractu temporis non convalescit, A Title originally bad can
never by time be made just; it is only true thus far, that time in it self does
not alter the Nature of things: but considering the necessities of the World,
and the infinite difficulties of retrieving an ancient Right, and the
inconveniences and disturbances that would thereby redound to Humane Society,
it is better that an injury should be perpetuated, than that a great
inconvenience should come by endeavoring to redress it; so that although
considering a thing simply in it self, an injury is so far from being lessened
or nulled by tract of time, that it is increased, and the longer it continues,
the greater it is; yet by accident, and in compliance with the necessity of
things, length of time may give a right to that which was at first injuriously
possessed. Judge. 11.26. Thus Jephthah reasons with the King of Ammon, who had
made War for recovery of an ancient Right, as he supposed. And though the
instances I have given of the unjust Conquest of a Nation be great and public;
yet the same is to be determined proportionably in less and particular Cases.
And thus I have done with the sixth thing.

VII. And lastly, As to the order of Restitution. When we have injured a great
many, and are not able to make Restitution to all at once, our best Prudence
and Discretion must govern us herein. Because no certain Rule can be given,
which will reach all Cases, I will only say this in general, that it is
reasonable first to make Reparation for the oldest and greatest injuries; and
ceteris paribus, if all other Considerations be equal, to consider those first,
who are most necessitous, and if there be any other special Reason and
Obligation arising from the Nature of the injury, or the Circumstances of the
Person injured, to have regard to them. I come now in the

Second place, To confirm the truth of the Proposition, That to make
Restitution and Satisfaction to those whom we have injured, is a proper and
necessary Fruit of a true Repentance. And this will appear, if we consider
these two things.

I. Our Obligation to this Duty. II. The Nature of Repentance.
I. Our Obligation to this Duty. Upon the same account that we are obliged to
Repentance, we are obliged to Restitution; and both these Obligations arise
from natural Equity and Justice. All Sin is an injury done; and though Repentance
be not strictly Satisfaction, yet it is the best we can make; and he is unjust,
who having done an injury, does not make the best Reparation he can. But now
there are some Sins, in which, besides the injury that is done to God by them,
upon the general account, as they are Sins and Violations of his Laws, there is
likewise a particular injury done to men; and such are all those, the effect
whereof redounds to the prejudice of other men: such are fraud and oppression,
and all other Sins whereby others are injured. So that in these kinds of Sins,
there are two things considerable, the irregularity and viciousness of the Act,
and the evil Effects of it upon other men: the former respects the Law, and
calls for Sorrow and Repentance for our Violation of it; the latter respects
the Person that is injured, and calls for Satisfaction and Restitution. So that
our Obligation to Restitution is founded in the immutable and indispensable Law
of Nature, which is To do that to another, which we would have another do to
us. We would have no Man be injurious to us, or if he have been so, we would
have him make Satisfaction and Reparation to us of the injury he has done; and
we take it grievously from him, if he do not. Now nothing is more just and
equitable, than that we should do that to others, which we in the like Case
would expect from them: for the very same obligation that lies upon others
toward us, does lie upon us in regard to others.

II. This will yet further appear, if we consider the Nature of Repentance,
which is to be sorry for what we have done, and not to do the like for the
future. Now if thou be sorry for what thou have done, thou wishest with all thy
heart thou had not done it; and if thou do so, thou will undo, as much as
in thee lies, what thou have done. Now the best way to undo an injury, is to
make Reparation for it; and till we do this, we continue in the Sin. For if it
was a Sin, to do the injury at first, it is the same continued, not to make
Satisfaction; and we do not cease to commit the Sin, so long as we detain that,
which is another's Right. Nothing but Restitution can stop the progress of Sin:
for if it be a Sin to take that which is another Man's from him by fraud or
violence, it is the same continued and virtually repeated, to detain and keep
it from him; and nothing more contrary to Repentance, than to continue in the
Sin thou pretendest to repent of. For how art thou sorry for doing of it, if
thou continuest to do it; if thou will go on to do it and do it again? How do
thou hate thy Sin, if thou enjoy the Benefit and reap the Advantage of it? If
thou do this, it is an Argument thou love the Sin still: for thou did
never love it for it self, but for the Profit of it, and so long as thou
retainest that, thou can not be quit of the Sin. Thou hold fast thy Sin,
so long as thou refusest to make Satisfaction for it; and Repentance without
Restitution differs as much from true Repentance, as continuance in Sin does
from the forsaking of it. Si res aliena non redditur, non agitur poenitentia,
sed fingitur; so St. Augustine; If we do not restore that, which we have
injuriously detained from another, our Repentance is not real, but feigned and
hypocritical, and will not be effectual to the obtaining of our Pardon. It Is a
very common, but a true and terrible saying, Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum, No Remission without Restitution. If we will inherit the
Profit and Advantage of Sin, we cannot think it unreasonable or unjust that we
should inherit the Punishment of it.

When the Scripture speaks of Repentance, it frequently mentions Restitution as
a proper Fruit and Effect of it, and as a necessary and indispensable Condition
of Pardon and Life. Ezekiel. 33.14, 15, 16. Again, when I say unto the wicked,
Thou shall surely die: if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and
right; if the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, etc. As
if he had said, when I denounce Death and Destruction to the wicked, there is
but this one way to escape it, and that is by Repentance; but then take notice,
what a Repentance it is, that will avail to this end; it is not a bewailing our
selves, and lamenting over our Sins, but a forsaking of them and returning to
our Duty; If we turn from our sin, and do that which is lawful and right. For
instance, if he have been guilty of Injustice and Oppression; if he leave his
Course, and deal justly and righteously with his Neighbor, and not only so,
but he also make Restitution for the injury he has done, and restore what he
has unjustly detain and taken away; If he restore the pledge, and give again
that he has robbed, and do no Injustice for the future, but walk in the
Statutes of Life, without committing iniquity, upon these Terms and no other he
shall live, he shall not die. Yea the very light of Nature could suggest. thus
much to the People of Nineveh, that there was no hope, without this Fruit of
Repentance, of appeasing God's wrath. Therefore the King and the Princes, after
all the external solemnity of fasting, and sackeloth, and crying mightily, they
decree that Every one should turn from the evil of his ways, and from the
violence that was in their Hands, ut rapina manus vacuefaciat, and rapta
restituat, sine quo non est vera poenitentia; so Grot. upon the place, That he
empty his hands of the spoils of rapine and oppression, that is, that he make
Restitution, without which there can be no Repentance: And upon their doing
this, it is said, that God spared them, Ver. 10. And God saw their works, that
they turned from their evil ways. It Is not said, that he saw their fasting and
sackcloth, but He saw their works, the real Fruits and Effects of their
Repentance; and upon this it was that God repented of the evil he said, he
would do to them, and he did it not. And elsewhere we find, that God speaks
with great Indignation of the most solemn Repentance, which is not accompanied
with this Fruit, Isa. 58.3, 4, 5, 6. The People tell God how they had fasted
and afflicted their Soul, and made their voice to be heard on high: but God
despises all this, because it was not accompanied with this Fruit of
Repentance, Is it such a fast as I have chosen? etc. There is so much of
natural Justice and Equity in Restitution, and it is so proper a Fruit of
Repentance, that as Grotius observes, it is not only the Doctrine of the Jews
and Christians, but of Heathens and Mahumetans, that the Repentance which does
not produce this Fruit is feigned, and will never avail with God for Pardon and
Mercy. Thus much for Confirmation of this Doctrine.

The third and last thing I proposed was to persuade to the Practice of this
Duty; and this may serve by way of Application of the Doctrine of Restitution.
The use we should make of it is.

First, To persuade men to the Practice of this difficult Duty. I doubt not but
the Arguments I have used are sufficient to convince us of the Equity and
Necessity of Restitution; but what Arguments shall I use to persuade to the
Practice and Exercise of it? When we press men to their Duty, though we have some
Advantages on our side, yet we have also great disadvantages. We have this
Advantage, that we have the Reason and Consciences of men on our side: but then
we have this disadvantage, that we have to contend either with the Lusts or
Interests of men, or both: now that these are usually more powerful, is
evident, in that the Lusts and Interests of men do so frequently bias and draw
them to do things contrary to Reason and Conscience. When we persuade men to be
just, and to make Restitution to those whom they have injured, it is true we
have not to contend with the Lusts of men, with any corrupt and vicious
Inclination of Nature. There are some Sins that have their rise from men's
natural Tempers, as Passion and Lust, and those sensual vices that abound in
the World: but there is nothing in any Man's natural Temper and Disposition that
inclines him to be unjust, no Man's Complexion does particularly dispose him to
lie or steal, to defraud his Neighbor, or detain his Right from him; it is
only the Interests of men that prompt them to these Sins; and they are upon
this account the more inexcusable, because no Man is inclined to these Sins
from particular Temper and Constitution; so that an unjust Man is in ordinary
Cases and circumstances a greater Sinner, than a Drunkard or a Lustful Man,
because no Man can pretend to be hurried away by the strong Propension and
Inclination of his Nature, to cheat his Brother: but although when we persuade
men to be just, we have not the Lusts of Men to contend withal, yet we have
another powerful Adversary, and that is the Interests of men, which is one of
the Chief Rulers and Governors of this World; so that when we press men to
Restitution, we touch them in their Interest, which is a very touchy and tender
thing; when we tell them that without Restitution no Man can repent and be
saved, they think this to be a very hard saying, and they know not how to bear
it.

But certainly it has all the Reason and Equity in the World on its side. If
it be so hard for them to restore that which is another Man's, is it not much
harder for him whom thou have injured, to lose that which is his own? Make it
thine own Case; would thou not think it much harder to have thy right
detained from thee by another, than for another to part with that which is not
his own?

But I am sensible how little it is, that Reason will sway with men against
their Interest; therefore the best Argument that I can use will be to satisfy
men, that upon a true and just account, it is not so much their Interest, to
retain what they have unjustly got, as to make Restitution. And this I shall do
by showing men, that to make Restitution is their true Interest, both in
respect of themselves, and of their Posterity.

I. In respect of themselves. It is better both in respect of our present
Condition in this World, and of our future State.

1. In respect of our present Condition in this World, and that both in respect
of our outward Estate, and our inward Peace and Tranquillity.

(1.) In respect of our outward Estate. If we have any belief of the Providence
of God, that his Blessing can prosper an Estate, and his Curse consume it and
make it moulder away, we cannot but judge it highly our Interest, to clear our
Estates of Injustice by Restitution; and by this means to free them from God's
Curse. For if any of our Estate be unjustly gotten, it is enough to draw down
God's Curse upon all that we have; it is like a moth in our Estate, which will
insensibly consume it; it is like a secret Poison, which will diffuse it self
through the whole; like a little Land in Capite, which brings the whole Estate
into Wardship.

Hear how God threatens to blast Estates unjustly gotten, Job 20.12, etc.
concluding with these words, This is the portion of a wicked Man, that is, of
an unjust Man, Jer. 17.11. As a Partridge sits on Eggs, and hatcheth them
not, so he that gets Riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Men many times live to see the
folly of their Injustice and Oppression, and their Estates wither away before
their Eyes, and by the just revenge of God, they are deprived of them in the
midst of their days. So that the best way to fix an Estate, and to secure it to
our selves, is by Restitution to free it from God's Curse; and when we have
done that, how much soever we may diminish our Estate by it, we may look upon
our selves as having a better Estate than we had; better, because we have God's
Blessing with that which remains. If we believe the Bible, we cannot doubt of
this. The Spirit of God tells us this from the Observation of the wisest men,
Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous Man has, is better than the riches of
many wicked. Prove. 16.8. Better is a little with righteousness, than great
Revenues without Right.

(2.) In respect of inward Peace and Tranquillity, it is highly our Interest to
make Restitution. No man can enjoy an Estate, that does not enjoy himself; and
nothing puts a Man more out of the Possession of himself, than an unquiet
Conscience; and there are no kind of Sins lie heavier upon a Man's Conscience,
than those of Injustice; because they are committed against the clearest
natural Light, and there is the least natural Temptation to them. They have
these two great Aggravations, that they are Sins most against knowledge, and
have most of Will in them. There needs no Revelation to convince men of Sins of
Injustice and Oppression; every Man has those Principles born with him, which
will sufficiently acquaint him, that he ought not to be Injurious to another.
There Is nothing that relates to our Duty, that a Man can know with greater
certainty than this, that Injustice is a Sin. And as it is a Sin most against
knowledge, so it has most of Will in it. Men are hurried away to other Sins by
the strong and violent Propensions of their Nature: but no Man is inclined by
his Temper and Constitution, to Fraud and Oppression; and the less there is of
Nature in any Sin, there is the less of Necessity, and consequently it is the
more voluntary. Now the greater the Aggravations of any Sin are, the greater is
the guilt; and the greater the guilt is, the more unquiet our Consciences will
be: so that if thou have any regard to the Interest of thine own Peace, if that
be considerable to thee, which to wise men is the most valuable thing in the
World, do not for a little wealth continue in those Sins, which will create
perpetual disturbance to thee, and imbitter all the Pleasures of thy Life. Hear
how Job describes the Condition of the wicked oppressors in the place before
cited, Job. 20.12, etc. He shall not rejoice in them, because he has
oppressed, because he has violently taken away a House which he builded not,
surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, that is, he shall have no
inward Peace and Contentment in the midst of all his outward Enjoyments; but
his ill-gotten Estate will work in his Conscience, and gripe him, as if a Man
had taken down Poison into his Belly.

2. But chiefly, In respect of our future Estate in another World, it is every
Man's Interest to make Restitution. Without Repentance we are ruined for ever,
and without Restitution no Repentance. No unrighteous Man has any inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ. If thou continue in thy fraud and oppression, and
carry these Sins with thee into another World, they will hang as a Millstone
about thy Neck, and sink thee into eternal Ruin. He that wrongeth his Brother
hates him, and he that hates his Brother is a murderer, and ye know that no
murderer has eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. Romans 1.18. The wrath of
God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungoldliness and unrighteousness of
men. So that if it be men's Interest to escape the wrath of God, it concerns us
to make Reparation for those Injuries which will expose us to it. That is a
dreadful Text, James 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for
your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your
garments moth-eaten: Your Gold and Silver is cankered, and the rust of them
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye
have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold! the Hire of the
laborers which have reaped down your Fields, which is of you kept back by
fraud, cries; and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the
ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Do not by detaining the treasures of wickedness,
treasure up to your selves wrath against the day of wrath: do not make your
selves Miserable for ever, that you may be Rich for a little while: do not for
a little Silver and Gold, forfeit the eternal inheritance, which was not
purchased with corruptible things, but with the precious Blood of the Son of
God: And if this Consideration, which is the weightiest in the World, will not
prevail with men, I can only say with the Angel, Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust,
let him be unjust still, let him continue in his Injustice at his Peril, and
remember what is added at the 12th verse, Behold! I come quickly, and my reward
is with me, to give to every Man according as his work shall be.

II. In respect of our Children and Posterity, it is greatly our interest to
make Restitution. God many times suffers an Estate got by oppression to prosper
for a little while: but there is a curse attends it, which descends upon the
Estate like an encumbrance; and Parents many times, when they think they entail
an Estate, they entail Poverty upon their Children. Job 20.10. speaking of the
Children of the Oppressor, he says, His Children shall seek to please the
Poor, and his hands shall restore their Goods. And Job 21.19. God lays up his
iniquity for his Children. Thou layest up Riches for thy Children; and God lays
up thine iniquity and Injustice for them, the Curse that belongs to them. Hab.
2.9, 10, 11. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness, or gains an evil
gain to his House, etc. Thou thoughtest to raise thy Family by those ways; but
thou have consulted shame to thy House. No such effectual way to Ruin thy
Family, as Injustice and Oppression. As then you would not transmit a Curse to
your Children, and devolve Misery upon your Family, free your Estates from the
burden and weight of what is other men's, lest by God's just Judgment and secret
Providence, that little which you injuriously detain from others, carry away
your whole Estate to them and their Family. God's Providence many times makes
abundant Restitution, when we will not.

Having now endeavored to satisfy men, that it is their truest Interest, to
make Restitution for the injuries they have done to others, it remains only
that I should answer an Objection or two, which men are apt to make against
this Duty.

First, Men say they are ashamed to do it. Ans. It is not matter of shame, but
of Praise and Commendation. But it may be thou will say, It is matter of shame
to have injured another, and this is the way to lay open thy shame. Indeed if
the injury were public, the Restitution ought to be so too, as the only way to
take off the shame of the injury. For thy Restitution does not in this Case
publish thy shame, but thy honesty: but if the injury was private, thou may
preserve thy own Credit, by concealing thy self, and provided thou do the thing
effectually, thou may be as prudent, as to the manner of doing it, as thou
please.

Secondly, Another Objection is the prejudice it will be to men's Estates. But
this I have answered already, by showing that it is more their Interest to make
Restitution, than to continue in the Sin. I shall only add, that, as our
Savior reasons in another Case, It is profitable for thee, that one of thy
members should perish, rather than that thy whole Body should be cast into
Hell: it is true likewise here, it is profitable for thee, that thou should go
a Beggar to Heaven, rather than that thou should go to Hell, laden with the
spoils and Guilt of Rapine and Injustice.

Thirdly, The last Objection that I shall mention, is dissability to make
Restitution. This indeed is something; where nothing is to be had, every Man
must lose his Right: but then remember, that there must be a hearty Repentance
for the Sin; and thy Sorrow must be so much greater, by how much thy ability to
make Restitution is less; and there must be a willing Mind, a firm Purpose and
Resolution of doing it, when God shall enable thee, and diligent endeavors to
that purpose. Under the Law those who were not able to make Restitutution, were
sold for six years, if their service did not make Reparation in less time. It Is
true indeed, the moderation of the Gospel does not suffer Christians to deal so
hardly with one another: but if the Gospel remit of this rigor, and do not
allow Christians to challange it, we should voluntarily do in effect that which
they were forced to, that is, we should use our best endeavors and diligence
to put our selves into a Condition of making Satisfaction; and we should not
look upon any thing beyond the necessary conveniences of Life, as our own, till
we have done it; unless the Party injured will recede from his Right, in whole
or in part. For though the impossibility of the thing do discharge us for the
present, yet the Obligation still lies upon us to do it, so soon as we are able.

And here it will be proper to consider the Case of those, who have compounded
with their Creditors for a small part, whether they be in Conscience and Equity
released from the whole debt. I am loath to lay unnecessary Burdens upon men's
Consciences, therefore I am very tender in resolving such Cases: but I ought to
have a more tender care of the Souls of men, than of their Estates: therefore
to deal plainly, and to discharge my Conscience in this matter, I think such
Persons do, notwithstanding the Composition, stand obliged in Equity and
Conscience for the whole debt, and are bound to discharge it, so soon as they
can with tolerable Convenience. My Reason is, because, though they be discharged
in Law, yet the Law does not intend to take off the Obligation of Conscience or
Equity, which they are under; but leaves that as it found it. Thus the Case
stands; men who are in a way of Trade are engaged by the necessities of their
calling, to venture a great part of their Estate in other men's Hands, and by
this means become liable many times to be undone without their own fault;
therefore it is usual, when any Man in a way of Trade becomes disabled, for the
Creditors to make such a Composition with him, as his Estate will bear, and
upon this Composition to give him a full discharge, so as that they cannot
afterward by Law require of him the remainder of their debt. Now though this be
a favor to the debtor, yet it is principally intended for the benefit of the
Creditor; because it being his Act, it is to be presumed, that he intended it
as much as may be, for his own Advantage; and so it is, for the Creditor has
as much Satisfaction at present as can be had, and the debtor is hereby left in
a capacity of recovering himself again by his industry and diligence, which
could not be, if he were not fully discharged; for if he were still liable for
the rest, he would continually be obnoxious to Imprisonment, which would render
him incapable of following his calling; or if he were at liberty, he could have
no Credit to enable him to do any thing in his calling; for who would trust a
Man with any thing, who is liable every moment to have it taken from him? So
that the Reason of this plenary discharge is this, that men, who are otherwise
hopeful, and in a fair probability of recovering themselves, may not be
rendered incapable of getting an Estate afterward, whereby they may support
themselves, and discharge their debts. Now this discharge being given in order
to these ends, it cannot be imagined that it should be intended to defeat them;
but it is in all Reason to be supposed, that the Creditors did not intend to
take off the Obligation of Equity and Conscience, only to put the Man into a
Condition of doing something toward the enabling him to discharge his debt. So
that unless it were expressed at the Composition, that the Creditor would never
expect more from him, upon account of Equity and Conscience, but did freely
forgive him the rest, the contrary whereof is usually done, I say, unless it
were thus expressed, there is no Reason, why the Creditor's favor in making a
Composition should be abused to his prejudice, and why a legal discharge, given
him on purpose for this Reason among others, to put him into a capacity of
recovering himself and giving full Satisfaction, should be so interpreted, as
to extinguish the equitable right of the Creditor to the remainder of his debt.

The Second Use of this Doctrine of Restitution should be by way of prevention,
that men would take heed of being injurious, and so take away the occasion of
Restitution, and free themselves from the Temptation of not performing so
difficult and so unwelcome a Duty. It is much easier of the two, not to cozen
or oppress thy Neighbor, than after thou have done it, it will be to bring thy
self to make Restitution: therefore we should be very careful, not to be
injurious to any one in any kind; neither immediately by our selves, nor by
aiding and assisting others, by our Power and Interest, or skill in the Law, or
by any other way, to do injustice.

SERMON XIV. Ser. 14.
The Usefulness of Consideration, in order to Repentance.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!


THIS Chapter is called Moses his Song, in which he briefly recounts the
various Providence of God toward the People of Israel, and the froward
Carriage of that People toward him.

First, He puts them in mind how God had chosen them for his peculiar People,
and had by a signal Care and Providence conducted them all that tedious
Journey, for the space of forty years in the Wilderness, Vol. 8.
till he had brought them to the promised Land, which they had now begun to
take Possession of.

And then he foretells, how they would behave themselves after all this mercy
and kindness God had shown to them, ver. 15. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, and
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation.
Upon this he tells them, God would be extremely displeased with them, and would
multiply his Judgments upon them, ver. 19, 20. When the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters; And
he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: for
they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no Faith. And ver. 23.
I will heap mischief upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them. And then
enumerates the particular Judgments which he would send upon them: nay, he
declares he would have utterly consumed them, but that he was loath to give
occasion of so much Triumph to his and their Enemies, ver. 26, 27. I said, I
would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease
from among men; were it not, that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their
adversary should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say our hand
is high, and the Lord has not done all this. And he adds the Reason of all
this severity; because they were so very stupid and inconsiderate, ver. 28. For
they are a Nation void of Counsel, neither is there any Understanding in them.

And in the conclusion of all, he represents God as it were breaking out into
this vehement and affectionate Wish, O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

O that they were wise, that they understood this. What is that? This may refer
to all that went before, O that they were wise to consider what God had done
for them, and what they had done against him, and what he will do against them,
if they continue or renew their former Provocations! O that they were but duly
apprehensive of this, and would lay it seriously to heart!

But from what follows, it seems more particularly to refer to those particular
Judgments, which God had threatened them withal, and which would certainly befall
them, if they still continued in their disobedience. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! That is,
the sad consequences of these their Provocations, that by the Consideration
thereof, they might prevent all those Evils and Calamities, by turning from
those Sins which would unavoidably bring them upon them.

From the words thus explained, I shall observe these four things.

I. That God does really and heartily desire the Happiness of men, and to
prevent their Misery and Ruin. For the very design of these words is to express
this to us, and it is done in a very vehement, and, as I may say, passionate
manner.

II. That it is a great point of wisdom to consider seriously the last Issue
and Consequence of our Actions, whither they tend, and what will follow upon
them. And therefore wisdom is here described by the Consideration of our latter
end.

III. That this is an excellent means to prevent that Misery, which will
otherwise befall us. And this is necessarily employed in this wish, that if they
would but consider these things, they might be prevented.

IV. That the want of this Consideration is the great cause of men's Ruin. And
this is likewise employed in the words, that one great reason of men's Ruin is,
because they are not so wise, as to consider the fatal Issue and Consequence of
a sinful Course. I shall speak briefly to each of these.

I. That God does really and heartily desire the Happiness of men, and to
prevent their Misery and Ruin. To express this to us, God does put on the
vehemence of a Humane Passion, O that they were wise, etc. The Laws of God are
a clear evidence of this; because the observance of them tends to our
Happiness. There is no good Prince makes Laws with any other design, than to
promote the public Welfare and Happiness of his People: and with much more
Reason may we imagine, that the infinite good God does by all his Laws design
the Happiness of his Creatures. And the Exhortations of Scripture, by which he
enforces his Laws, are yet a greater evidence how earnestly he desires the
Happiness of his Creatures. For it shows that he is concerned for us, when he
uses so many Arguments to persuade us to our Duty, and when he expostulates so
vehemently with us for our neglect of it, saying to Sinners, Turn ye, turn ye,
why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ye will not come unto me, that ye might
have life, says our Blessed Savior, with great trouble to see men so
obstinately set against their own Happiness; and again, How often would I have
gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would
not. And to satisfy us yet farther, that it is his real desire, by our
obedience to his Laws, to prevent our Ruin, God does frequently in Scripture
put on the Passions of men, and use all sorts of vehement expressions to this
purpose, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in them, that they would
fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their Children for ever! And Psalm. 81.13. O that my People had
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have subdued
their enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversaries. Jer. 13.27. O
Israel! Will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? And to name but one
Text more, when our blessed Savior wept over Jerusalem, how passionately does
he wish, that She had known in that her day, the things which belonged to her
Peace!

And if after all this, we can doubt whether the faithful God means as he says,
he has for our farther assurance, and to put the matter out of all doubt,
confirmed his word by an Oath, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
ways and live. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evils ways; for why will ye die, O
House of Israel? So that if words can be any Declaration of a hearty and
sincere desire, we have no Reason to doubt, but that God does really desire the
Happiness of men, and would gladly prevent their Ruin and Destruction.

If any now ask, why then are not all men Happy? Why do they not escape Ruin
and Destruction? And particularly why the People of Israel, for whom God here
makes this wish, did not escape those Judgments which were threatened; the
Prophet shall answer for me, Hos. 13.9. O Israel! thou have destroyed thy self.
And David, Psalm. 81.11. My people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would
none of me. And our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have
gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would
not! And John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. You see
what account the Scripture plainly gives of this matter; it rests upon the
wills of men, and God has not thought fit to force Happiness upon men, and to
make them wise and good whether they will or no. He presents men with such
Motives, and offers such Arguments to their Consideration, as are fit to
prevail with reasonable men, and is ready to afford them all necessary
assistance, if they be not wanting to themselves: but if they will not be wise
and consideder, if they will stand out against all the Arguments that God can
offer, if they will receive the grace of God in vain, and resist his blessed
Sptrit, and reject the counsel of God against themselves, God has not in this
Case engaged himself to provide any remedy against the obstinacy and
perverseness of men, but their Destruction is of themselves, and their blood
shall be upon their own Heads. And there is no nicety and intricacy in this
matter; but if men will consider Scripture and Reason impartially, they will
find this to be the plain Resolution of the Case.

So that no Man has Reason to charge either his Fault, or his Punishment upon
God; he is free from the Blood of all Men; he sincerely desires our Happiness:
but we wilfully ruin our selves; and when he tells us, that He desires not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live;
that He would have all men to be saved, and to come to the know-of the truth,
that He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance, he plainly means as he says, and does not speak to us with any
reserve, or dark distinction between his secret and revealed Will, he does not
decree one thing, and declare another.

And if this be so, no Man has reason to be discouraged from attempting and
endeavoring his own Happiness, upon a jealousy and surmise that God has by
any fatal decree put a Bar to it from all eternity: for if he had absolutely
resolved to make the greatest part of Mankind miserable, without any respect to
their Actions in this World, he would never have said, that He desires that all
should be saved; he would not have exhorted all men to work out their own
Salvation; had he taken up any such Resolution, he would have declared it to
all the World: for he has Power enough in his Hands, to do what he pleases,
and none can resist his Will; so that he did not need to have dissembled the
matter, and to have pretended a desire to save men, when de was resolved to
ruin them.

This is the First, that God does really and heartily desire the Happiness of
men, and to prevent their Misery and Ruin. I proceed to the

II. That it is a great part of wisdom to consider seriously the last Issue and
Consequence of our Actions, and whither the Course of Life which we lead does
tend, and what will follow upon it. And therefore Wisdom is here explained by
Consideration, O that they were wise, that they would consider their latter
end! that is, what will befall them hereafter, what will be the Issue and
Consequence of all the Sins and Provocations which they are guilty of.

And this is a principal Point and Property of wisdom, to look forward, and not
only to consider the present Pleasure and Advantage of any Action, but the
future Consequence of it: and there is no greater Agument of an imprudent Man,
than to gratify himself for the present in the doing of a thing, which will
turn to his greater prejudice afterward; especially if the future
Inconvenience be great and intolerable, as it is in the Case we are speaking
of. For eternal Happiness or Misery depends upon the Actions of this present
Life, and according as we behave our selves in this World, it will go well or
ill with us for ever; so that this is a matter of vast importance, and deserves
our most serious thoughts; and in matters of mighty consequence, a wise Man
will take all things into Consideration, and look before him as far as he can.
And indeed this is the Reason why things of great moment are said to be things
of Consequence, because great things depend and are likely to follow upon them:
and then surely that is the greatest concernment, upon which not only the
Happiness of this present Life, but our Happiness to all eternity does depend;
and if the good and bad Actions of this Life be of that consequence to us, it
is fit every Man should consider what he does, and whither the Course of Life
he is engaged or about to engage in, will lead him at last. For this is true
wisdom, to look to the end of things, and to think seriously before hand, what
is likely to be the event of such an Action, of such a Course of Life: if we
serve God faithfully and do his Will, what will be the consequence of that to
us in this World, and the other: and on the other hand, if we live wickedly,
and allow our selves in any unlawful and vicious Practice, what will be the end
of that Course.

And to any Man that consults the Law of his own Nature, or the will of God
revealed in Scripture, nothing can be plainer than what will be the end of
these several ways. God has plainly told us, and our own Consciences will tell
us the same, that If we do well, we shall be accepted of God, and rewarded by
him: but if we do ill, the end of these things is Death; that indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish will be upon every soul of Man that does evil;
but honor and glory and peace to every Man that does good, in the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel.

So that God has given us a plain prospect of the different Issues of a
virtuous and a wicked Life, and there wants nothing but Consideration to make
us to attend to these things, and to lay them seriously to heart. For while men
are inconsiderate, they go on stupidly in an evil way, and are not sensible of
the danger of their present Course, because they do not attend to the
consequence of it: but when their Eyes are once opened by Consideration, they
cannot but be sadly apprehensive of the mischief they are running themselves
upon. If men would take but a serious and impartial view of their Lives and
Actions, if they would consider the tendency of a sinful Course, and whither it
will bring them at last; if the vicious and dissolute Man would but look about
him, and consider how many have been ruined in that very way that he is in, how
many lie slain and wounded in it; that it is the way to Hell, and leads down to
the Chambers of Death; the serious thought of this could not but check him in
his Course, and make him resolve upon a better Life. If men were wise, they
would consider the consequence of their Actions, and upon Consideration would
resolve upon that which they are convinced is best. I proceed to the

III. Thing I propounded, which was, that Consideration of the consequence of
our Actions, is an excellent means to prevent the mischiefs, which otherwise we
should run into. And this is necessarily employed in the wish here in the Text,
that if we would but consider these things, they might be prevented. For how
can any Man, who has any love or regard for himself, any tenderness for his
own Interest and Happiness, see Hell and Destruction before him, which, if he
hold on in his evil Course, will certainly swallow him up, and yet venture to
go on in his Sins? Can any Man that plainly beholds Misery hastening toward him
like an armed Man, and Destruction coming upon him as a whirlwind, think
himself unconcerned to prevent it and fly from it? The most dull and stupid
Creatures will start back upon the sight of present danger. Balaam's Ass, when
she saw the Angel of the Lord standing in the way, with his Sword drawn ready
to smite her, starts aside, and could not be urged on. Now God has given us,
not only Sense to apprehend a present evil, but Reason and Consideration to
look before us, and to discover dangers at a distance, to apprehend them as
certainly, and with as clear a Conviction of the reality of them, as if they
threatened us the next moment: and will any considerate Man, who has calculated
the dangerous events of Sin, and the dreadful effects of God's wrath upon
sinners, go on to provoke the Lord to jealousy, as if he were stronger than
he? It is not to be imagined, but that if men would seriously consider what Sin
is, and what shall be the sad Portion of sinners hereafter, they would resolve
upon a better Course. Would any Man live in the Lusts of the flesh and of
intemperance, or out of Covetousness defraud or oppress his Neighbor, did he
seriously consider, that God is the avenger of such; and that because of these
things the wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience.

I should have great hopes of men's Repentance and Reformation, if they could
but once be brought to Consideration: for in most men it is not so much a
positive disbelief of the Truth, as inadvertency and want of Consideration,
that makes them to go on so securely in a sinful Course. Would but men consider
what Sin is, and what will be the fearful consequence of it, probably in this
World, but most certainly in the other, they could not choose but fly from it
as the greatest evil in the World.

And to show what Power and Influence Consideration will probably have to bring
men to Repentance, and a change of their Lives, I remember to have some where
met with a very remarkable story, of one that had a Son that took bad Courses,
and would not be reclaimed by all the good Counsel his Father could give him;
at last coming to his Father, who lay upon his Deathbed, to beg his Blessing,
his Father instead of upbraiding him with his bad Life and undutiful Carriage
toward him, spoke kindly to him, and told him he had but one thing to desire of
him, That every day he would retire and spend one quarter of an hour alone by
himself; which he promised his Father faithfully to do, and made it good: after
a while it grew tedious to him, to spend even so little time in such bad and
uneasy Company, and he began to bethink himself, for what Reason his Father
should so earnestly desire of him to do so odd a thing for his sake, and his
mind presently suggested to him, that it was to enforce him to Consideration;
wisely judging that if by any means he could but bring him to that, he would
soon reform his Life and become a new Man. And the thing had its desired
effect; for after a very little Consideration, he took up a firm Resolution to
change the Course of his Life, and was true to it all his days. I cannot answer
for the truth of the Story, but for the Moral of it I will; namely, that
Consideration is one of the best and most likely means in the World, to bring a
bad Man to a better Mind. I now come to the

IV. And last particular, namely, that the want of this Consideration is one of
the greatest Causes of men's Ruin. And this likewise is employed in the Text; and
the Reason why God does so vehemently desire that men would be wise and
consider, is because so many are ruined and undone for want of it. This is the
desperate folly of Mankind, that they seldom think seriously of the Consequence
of their Actions, and least of all of such as are of greatest Concernment to
them, and have the chief influence upon their eternal Condition. They do not
consider what Mischief and Inconvenience a wicked Life may plunge them into in
this World, what Trouble and Disturbance it may give them when they come to
die, what Horror and Confusion it may fill them withal when they are leaving
this World, and passing into Eternity, and what intolerable Misery and Torment
it may bring upon them to all Eternity. Did men ponder and lay to heart Death
and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, and would they but let their thoughts dwell upon
these things, it is not credible that the generality of men could lead such
profane and impious, such lewd and dissolute, such secure and careless Lives as
they do.

Would but a Man frequently entertain his Mind with such thoughts as these; I
must shortly die and leave this World, and then all the Pleasures and
Enjoyments of it will be to me as if they had never been, only that the
remembrance of them, and the ill use I have made of them, will be very bitter
and grievous to me; after all Death will transmit me out of this World, into a
quite different State and Scene of things, into the presence of that great and
terrible, that inflexible and impartial Judge, who will render to every Man
according to his works, and then all the evils which I have done in this Life,
will rise up in Judgment against me, and fill me with everlasting Confusion, in
that great assembly of Men and Angels, will banish me from the presence of God,
and all the Happiness which flows from it, and procure a dreadful sentence of
unspeakable Misery and Torment to be past upon me, which I can never get
reverst, nor yet ever be able to stand under the weight of it: if men would but
enter into the serious Consideration of these things, and pursue these thoughts
to some Issue and Conclusion, they would take up other Resolutions; and I
verily believe, that the want of this has ruined more than even infidelity it
self. And this I take to be the meaning of that question in the Psalmist, Have
all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? that is, no Consideration; intimating
that if they had, they would do better.

All that now remains, is to persuade men to apply their hearts to this piece
of wisdom, to look before them, and to think seriously of the Consequence of
their Actions, what will be the final Issue of that Course of Life they are
engaged in; and if they continue in it, what will become of them hereafter,
what will become of them for ever.

And here I might apply this Text, as God here does to the People of Israel, to
the public Condition of this Nation, which is not so very unlike to that of
the People of Israel: for God seems to have chosen this Nation for his more
peculiar People, and has exercised a very particular Providence toward us, in
conducting us through that Wilderness of Confusion, in which we have been
wandering for the space of above forty years, and when things were come to the
last extremity, and we seemed to stand upon the very brink of Ruin, Then (as it
is said of the People of Israel, ver. 36. of this Chapter) God repented himself
for his servants, when he saw that their Power was gone, that is, that they
were utterly unable to help themselves, and to work their own deliverance. And
it may be said of us, as Moses does of that People, Chap. 33.29. Happy art
thou, O Israel, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is
the Sword of thy excellency! Never did any Nation struggle with, and get
through so many and so great difficulties, as we have several times done.

And I fear we have behaved our selves toward God, not much better than the
People of Israel did, but like Jesurun, after many deliverances and great
mercies, have waxed fat and kicked, have forsaken the God that made us, and
little esteemed the Rock of our Salvation, by which we have provoked the Lord
to jealousy, and have as it were forced him to multiply his Judgments, and to
spend his arrows upon us, and to hide his face from us, to see what our end
will be; so that we have Reason to fear, that God would have brought utter Ruin
and Destruction upon us, and scattered us into corners, and made the
remembrance of us to have ceased from among men, had he not feared the wrath of
the enemy, and lest the adversaries should have behaved themselves strangely,
and lest they should say Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this;
that is, lest they should ascribe this just vengeance of God upon a sinful and
unthankful Nation, to the goodness and righteousness of their own Cause, and to
the favor and assistance of the Idols and false Gods whom they worshipped, to
the Patronage and Aid of the Virgin Mary and the Saints, to whom, contrary to
the Will and Command of the true God, they had offered up so many Prayers and
Vows, and paid the greatest part of their Religious worship: but the Lord has
shown himself greater than all Gods, and in the things wherein they dealt
proudly, that he is above them: for our Rock is not as their Rock, even our
enemies themselves being Judges.

And we have been too like the People of Israel in other respects also, so
sickle and inconstant, that after great deliverances we are apt presently to
murmur and be discontented, to grow sick of our own Happiness, and to turn back
in our hearts into Egypt; so that God may complain of us, as he does of his
People Israel, that nothing that he could do, would bring them to Consideration
and make them better, neither his mercies nor his Judgments. Isa. 1.2, 3. Hear,
O Heavens! and give ear, O Earth! For the Lord has spoken; I have nourished
and brought up Children, but they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: but Israel does not know, my People does
not consider. And so likewise he complains, that his Judgments had no effect
upon them, ver. 5. Why should ye be smitten any more? Ye will revolt more and
more. Well therefore may it be said of us, as it was of them in the Verse
before the Text, They are a Nation void of knowledge, neither is there any
understanding in them. And the wish that follows in the Text, is as seasonable
for us as it was for them, O that they were wise, that they uaderstood this,
that they would consider their latter end!

And by parity of Reason, this may likewise be applied to particular Persons,
and to persuade every one of us to a serious Consideration, of the final Issue
and Consequence of our Actions. I will only offer these two Arguments.

I. That Consideration is the proper Act of reasonable Creatures, and that
whereby we show our selves men. So the Prophet intimates, Isa. 46.8. Remember
this, and show your selves men; bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors!
that is, consider it well, think of it again and again, ye that run on so
furiously in a sinful Course, what the end and issue of these things will be.
If ye do not do this, you do not show your selves men, you do not act like
reasonable Creatures, to whom it is peculiar to propose to themselves some end
and design of their Actions; but rather like Brute Creatures, which have no
understanding, and act only by a natural instinct, without any Consideration of
the end of their Actions, or of the means conducing to it.

II. Whether we consider it or not, our latter end will come; and all those
dismal Consequences of a sinful Course, which God has so plainly threatened,
and our own Consciences do so much dread, will certainly overtake us at last;
and we cannot, by not thinking of these things, ever prevent or avoid them.
Death will come, and after that the Judgment, and an irreversible Doom will
pass upon us, according to all the evil that we have done, and all the good
that we have neglected to do in this Life, under the heavy weight and pressure
whereof we must lie groaning, and bewailing our selves to everlasting Ages.

God now exercises his Mercy and Patience and Long-suffering toward us, in
expectation of our amendment; he reprieves us on purpose that we may repent,
and in hopes that we will at last consider and grow wiser; for he is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance: but if
we will trifle away this day of God's Grace and Patience, if we will not
consider and bethink our selves, there is another day that will certainly come,
That great and terrible Day of the Lord, in which the Heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

Seeing then all these things shall be, let us consider seriously what manner
of Persons we ought to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, waiting for
and hastening unto the coming of the Day of God. To whom be glory now and for
ever.

SERMON XV. Ser. 15.
The Danger of Impenitence, where the Gospel is preached.
MATTHEW. XI.21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of Judgment, than for you.


AFter our Blessed Savior had instructed, and sent forth his Disciples, he
himself went abroad to preach unto the Cities of Israel; particularly he spent
much time in the Cities of Galilee, Chorazin, and Bethsaida, Vol. 8.
and Capernaum, Preaching the Gospel to them, and working many and great
Miracles among them; but with little or no success, which was the cause of his
denouncing this terrible woe against them, ver. 20. Then began he to upbraid
the Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented
not. Woe unto thee Chorazin, etc.

In which words our Savior declares the sad and miserable Condition of those
two Cities, Chorazin and Bethsaida, which had neglected such an opportunity,
and resisted and withstood such means of Repentance, as would have effectually
reclaimed the most wicked Cities and People that can be instanced in in any
Age, Tire and Sidon and Sodom; and therefore he tells them, that their
Condition was much worse, and that they should fall under a heavier Sentence at
the day of Judgment, than the People of those Cities, whom they had always
looked upon as the greatest sinners that ever were in the World. This is the
plain meaning of the words in general; but yet there are some difficulties in
them, which I shall endeavor to clear, and then proceed to raise such
Observations from them, as may be instructive and useful to us.

The Difficulties are these.

I. What Repentance is here spoken of; whether an external Repentance in show
and appearance only, or an inward and real and sincere Repentance.

II. In what Sense it is said, that Tire and Sidon would have repented.

III. What is meant by their would have repented long ago.

IV. How this assertion of our Savior's, that Miracles would have converted
Tire and Sidon, is reconcilable with that other saying of his, Luke 16.31. in
the Parable of the rich Man and Lazarus, that those who believed not Moses and
the Prophets, neither would they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

I. What Repentance is here spoken of; whether a mere external and Hypocritical
Repentance in show and appearance only, or an inward and real and sincere
Repentance.

The Reason of this doubt depends upon the different Theories of Divines, about
the sufficiency of Grace accompanying the outward Means of Repentance, and
whether an irresistible degree of God's Grace be necessary to Repentance: for
they who deny sufficient Grace to accompany the outward Means of Repentance,
and assert an irresistible degree of God's Grace necessary to Repentance, are
forced to say, that our Savior here speaks of a mere External Repentance:
because if he spoke of an inward and sincere Repentance, then it must be
granted, that sufficient inward grace did accompany the Miracles that were
wrought in Chorazin and Bethsaida, to bring men to Repentance; because what was
afforded to them, would have brought Tire and Sidon to Repentance. And that
which would have effected a thing, cannot be denied to be sufficient; so that
unless our Savior here speaks of a mere External Repentance, either the
outward Means of Repentance, as Preaching and Miracles, must be granted to be
sufficient to bring men to Repentance, without the inward Operation of God's
Grace upon the Minds of Men; or else a sufficient degree of God's Grace must be
acknowledged to accompany the outward Means of Repentance. Again, if an
irresistible degree of Grace be necessary to true Repentance, it is plain,
Chorazin and Bethsaida had it not, because they did not repent; and yet without
this Tire and Sidon could not have sincerely repented; therefore our Savior
here must speak of a mere External Repentance. Thus some argue, as they do
likewise concerning the Repentance of Nineveh, making that also to be merely
External, because they are loath to allow true Repentance to Heathens.

But it seems very plain, that our Savior does speak of an inward and true and
sincere Repentance; and therefore the Doctrines that will not admit this, are
not true. For our Savior speaks of the same kind of Repentance, that he
upbraided them with the want of in the verse before the Text. Then began he to
upbraid the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they
repented not, that is because they were not brought to a sincere Repentance by
his Preaching, which was confirmed by such great Miracles. It Is true indeed, he
mentions the outward signs and expressions of Repentance, when he says They
would have repented in sackcloth and ashes; but not as excluding inward and
real Repentance, but supposing it, as is evident from what is said in the next
Verse, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of Judgment,
than for you: for though an external and hypocritical Repentance, may prevail
with God to put off temporal Judgments, yet surely it will be but a very small,
if any mitigation of our Condemnation at the day of Judgment: so that the
Repentance here spoken of cannot, without great violence to the scope and
design of our Savior's Argument, be understood only of an external show and
appearance of Repentance.

II. The next difficulty to be cleared, is, in what Sense it is here said, that
if the mighty works which were done by our Savior among the Jews, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented.

Some to avoid the inconvenience which they apprehend to be in the more strict
and literal Sense of the words, look upon them as Hyperbolical, as we say Such
a thing would move a Stone, or the like, when we would express something to be
very sad and grievous; so here to aggravate the Impenitence of the Jews, our
Savior says, that they resisted those Means of Repentance, which one would
think should almost have prevailed upon the greatest and most obdurate Sinners
that ever were; but not intending to affirm any such thing.

But there is no color for this, if we consider that our Savior Reasons from
the Supposition of such a thing, that therefore the Case of Tire and Sidon
would really be more tolerable at the day of Judgment than theirs; because they
would have repented, but the Jews did not.

Others perhaps understand the words too strictly, as if our Savior had spoken
according to what he certainly foreknew would have happened to the People of Tire
and Sidon, if such Miracles had been wrought among them. And no doubt but in
that Case God did certainly know what they would have done: but yet I should
rather choose to undestand the words as spoken popularly, according to what in
all humane appearance and probability would have happened, if such External Means
of Repentance, accompanied with an ordinary Grace of God, had been afforded to
them of Tire and Sidon. And thus the old Latin Interpreter seems to have
understood the next words, If the mighty works which have been done in thee,
had been done in Sodom, (...), forte mansissent, it would perhaps have remained
to this day, in all likelihood it had continued till now. Much the same with
that passage of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.5, 6. Thou art not sent to a People of a
strange Speech, and of a hard Language, but to the House of Israel: Surely had
I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee, that is, in all
probability they would, there is little doubt to be made of the contrary. And
this is sufficient Foundation for our Savior's reasoning afterward, that it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment than for
them. And if we may judge what they would have done before, by what they did
afterward, there is more than probability for it: for we read in the 21 st
Chapter of the Acts, ver. 3. and ver. 27. that the Inhabitants of Tire and
Sidon received the Gospel, and kindly entertained St. Paul, when the Jews
rejected them both. The

III. Thing to be cleared, is, What is meant by long ago; They would have
repented long ago.

Some understand this, as if our Savior had said, they would not have stood
out so long against so much Preaching and so many Miracles; but would at first
have repented, long before our Savior gave over Chorazin and Bethsaida, for
obstinate and incorrigible Sinners; they would not only have repented at last,
but much sooner and without so much ado.

But this does not seem to be the meaning of the words; but our Savior seems
to refer to those ancient Times long ago, when the Prophets denounced Judgments
against Tire and Sidon, particularly the Prophet Ezekiel, and to say, that if
in those days the Preaching of that Prophet had been accompanied with such
Miracles as our Savior wrought in the Cities of Galilee, Tire and Sidon would
in those days have repented.

The last and greatest difficulty of all is, How this assertion of our Savior,
that Miracles would have converted Tire and Sidon, is reconcilable with that
Discourse of our Savior's, Luke 16. in the Parable of the rich Man and
Lazarus, that Those who would not believe Moses and the Prophets, would not
have been persuaded, though one had rose from the dead.

The true answer to which difficulty in short is this; That when our Savior
says, If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead, he does not hereby weaken the force of
Miracles, or their aptness to convince men and bring them to Repentance, but
rather confirm it; because Moses and the Prophets had the attestation of many
and great Miracles, and therefore there was no Reason to think, that they who
would not believe the Writings and Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, which
had the Confirmation of so many Miracles, and was owned by themselves to have
so, should be wrought upon by one particular Miracle, The coming of one from
the dead, and speaking unto them: or however this might move and astonish them
for the present, yet it was not likely that the Grace of God should concur with
such an extraordinary Means, to render it effectual to their Conversion and
Repentance, who had wilfully despised and obstinately rejected that which had a
much greater Confirmation, than the Discourse of a Man risen from the dead, and
was appointed by God for the ordinary and standing Means of bringing men to
Repentance. So that our Savior might with Reason enough pronounce that Tire
and Sidon, who never had a standing Revelation of God to bring them to
Repentance, nor had rejected it, would upon Miracles extraordinarily wrought
among them have Repented; and yet deny it elsewhere to be likely, that they who
rejected a standing Revelation of God confirmed by Miracles, which called them
to Repentance, would probably be brought to Repentance by a particular Miracle;
or that God should afford his Grace to make it effectual for their Repentance
and Salvation.

The words being thus cleared, I come now to raise such Observations from them,
as may be instructive and useful to us.

I. I observe from this Discourse of our Savior, that Miracles are of great
force and efficacy to bring men to Repentance.

This our Savior's Discourse here supposes; otherwise their Impenitence had
not been so Criminal and Inexcusable upon that account, That such mighty works
had been done among them, as would probably have prevailed upon some of the
worst People that had been in the World; for such were the Inhabitants of Tire
and Sidon, guilty of great Covetousness and Fraud, Pride and Luxury, the usual
Sins of Places of great Traffic and Commerce; and such to be sure was Sodom;
and yet our Savior tells us, that the Miracles which he had wrought in the
Cities of Israel, would in all probability have brought those great Sinners to
Repentance; namely, by bringing them to Faith, and convincing them of the Truth
and Divinity of that Doctrine, which he preached unto them, and which contains
such powerful Arguments to Repentance and Amendment of Life.

II. I observe likewise from our Savior's Discourse, that God is not always
obliged to work Miracles for the Conversion of Sinners. It is great goodness in
him to afford sufficient Means of Repentance to men, as he did to Tire and
Sidon, in calling them to Repentance by his Prophet; though such Miracles were
not wrought among them, as God thought fit to accompany our Savior's Preaching
withal.

This I observe, to prevent a kind of bold and saucy Objection, which some
would perhaps be apt to make; If Tire and Sidon would have Repented, had such
Miracles been wrought among them, as our Savior wrought in Chorazin and
Bethsaida, why were they not wrought, that they might have Repented? To which
it is sufficient Answer to say, That God is not obliged to do all that is
possible to be done, to reclaim men from their Sins; he is not obliged to
overpower their Wills, and to work irresistibly upon their Minds, which he can
easily do; he is not obliged to work Miracles for every particular Man's
Conviction; nor where he vouchsafes to do this, is he obliged always to work
the greatest and most convincing Miracles; his Goodness will not suffer him to
omit what is necessary and sufficient to bring men to Repentance and Happiness,
nay beyond this he many times does more; but it is sufficient to vindicate the
Justice and Goodness of God, that he is not wanting to us, in affording the
Means necessary to reclaim us from our Sins, and to bring us to goodness. That
which is properly our part, is to make use of those Means which God affords us
to become better, and not to prescribe to him how much he should do for us; to
be thankful that he has done so much, and not to find fault with him for
having done no more.

III. I observe farther from our Savior's Discourse, That the External Means
of Repentance which God affords to men, do suppose an Inward Grace of God
accompanying them, sufficiently enabling men to repent, if it be not their own
fault; I say a sufficient Grace of God accompanying the outward Means of
Repentance, till by our wilful and obstinate neglect and resistance and
opposition of this Grace, we provoke God to withdraw it from the Means, or else
to withdraw both the Grace and the Means from us: otherwise Impenitence after
such external Means afforded, would be no new and special fault. For if the
concurrence of God's Grace with the outward Means be necessary to work
Repentance, then the Impenitence of those to whom this Grace is not afforded,
which yet is necessary to Repentance, is neither any new Sin, nor any new
Aggravation of their former Impenitence. For no Man can imagine that the just
God will charge men with new guilt, and increase their Condemnation, for
remaining impenitent in such Circumstances, in which it is impossible for them
to repent.

IV. I observe from this Discourse of our Savior's, That an Irresistible
degree of Grace is not necessary to Repentance, nor commonly afforded to those
who do repent. God may where he pleases, without injury to any Man, overpower
his Will, and stop him in his Course, and hinder him from making himself
miserable, and by an Irresistible Light convince him of his Error and the Evil
of his ways, and bring him to a better Mind: but this God seldom does; and when
he does it, it is very probable it is not so much for their own sakes, as to
make them Instruments of good to others. Thus by a secret but over-powering
influence he overruled the Disciples to follow our Savior, and to leave their
Callings and Relations, and all their temporal Concernments to do it. But one
of the most remarkable Examples of this extraordinary Grace of God, is St.
Paul, who was violently stopped in his Course of persecuting the Christians, and
convinced of his Sin, and brought over to Christianity, in a very extraordinary
and forcible manner. And of this miraculous and extraordinary Conversion, God
himself gives this account, That he was a chosen Vessel unto him, to bear his
name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel, Acts 9.15. And
St. Paul tells us, Gal. 1.15, 16. That for this end God had separated him from
his Mother's womb, and called him by his Grace, and revealed his Son to him in
that extraordinary manner, that he might preach him among the Heathen.

But generally God does not bring men thus to Repentance; nor is it necessary
he should. For if an irresistible degree of Grace were always necessary to
bring men to Repentance, there could be no difference between the Impenitence
of Chorazin and Bethsaida, and of Tire and Sidon. For according to this
Doctrine of the Necessity of Irresistible Grace to the Conversion of every Man,
it is evident, that Tire and Sidon neither could, nor would have repented,
without an irresistible degree of God's Grace accompanying the outward Means of
Repentance which he afforded to them; because such a degree of Grace is
necessary to Repentance, and without it, it is impossible for any Man to
repent. But then it is as plain on the contrary, that if Chorazin and Bethsaida
had had the same irresistible degree of God's Grace, together with the outward
Means of Repentance afforded to them, that they would have repented as
certainly as Tire and Sidon. Where then is the Reason of upbraiding the
Impenitence of the one, more than of the other? Where the Aggravation of the
one's Guilt above the other? Where the Justice of punishing the Impenitence of
Chorazin and Bethsaida, more than theirs of Tire and Sidon? For upon this
supposition, they must either have repented both alike, or have been both
equally Impenitent. The sum of what I have said is this, That if no Man does,
nor can repent, without such a degree of God's Grace as cannot be resisted, no
Man's Repentance is commendable, nor is one Man's Impenitence more blameable
than another; Chorazin and Bethsaida can be in no more fault for continuing
Impenitent, than Tire and Sidon were. For either this irresistible Grace is
afforded to men or not: if it be, their Repentance is necessary, and they
cannot help it; if it be not, their Repentance is impossible, and consequently
their Impenitence is necessary, and they cannot help it neither.

V. I observe from the main scope of our Savior's Discourse, That the Sins and
Impenitence of men receive their Aggravation, and consequently shall have their
Punishment, proportionable to the Opportunities and Means of Repentance, which
those Persons have enjoyed and neglected.

For what is here said of Miracles, is by equality of Reason likewise true of
all other Advantages and Means of Repentance and Salvation. The Reason why
Miracles will be such an Aggravation of the Condemdemnation of men is, because
they are so proper and powerful a Means to convince men of the Truth and
Divinity of that Doctrine which calls them to Repentance. So that all those
Means which God affords to us, of the Knowledge of our Duty, of Conviction of
the Evil and Danger of a sinful Course, are so many helps and Motives to
Repentance, and consequently will prove so many Aggravations of our Sin and
Punishment, if we continue impenitent. The

VI. And last Observation, and which naturally follows from the former, is
this, That the Case of those who are impenitent under the Gospel, is of all
others the most dangerous, and their Damnation shall be heaviest and most
severe.

And this brings the Case of these Cities here in the Text home to our selves.
For in truth there is no material difference between the Case of Chorazin and
Bethsaida and Capernaum, and of our selves in this City and Nation, who enjoy
the clear Light of the Gospel, with all the freedom, and all the Advantages
that any People ever did. The Mercies of God to this Nation have been very
great, especially in bringing us out of that darkness and superstition, which
covered this Western part of the World; in rescuing us from that great
Corruption and Degeneracy of the Christian Religion which prevailed among us,
by so early and so regular a Reformation; and in continuing so long this great
Blessing to us. The Judgments of God have been likewise very great upon us for
our Sins; God has manifested himself by terrible things in righteousness; our
Eyes have seen many and dismal Calamities in the space of a few years, which
call lowdly upon us to repent and turn to God. God has afforded us the most
effectual Means of Repentance, and has taken the most effectual Course of
bringing us to it. And though our Blessed Savior do not speak to us in Person,
nor do we at this day see Miracles wrought among us, as the Jews did; yet we
have the Doctrine which our Blessed Savior preached, faithfully transmitted to
us, and a credible Relation of the Miracles wrought for the Confirmation of
that Doctrine, and many other Arguments to persuade us of the Truth of it,
which those to whom our Savior spoke had not, nor could not then have, taken
from the accomplishing of our Savior's Predictions, after his Death; the
speedy Propagation and wonderful success of this Doctrine in the World, by weak
and inconsiderable Means, against all the Power and Opposition of the World;
the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Dispersion of the Jewish Nation,
according to our Savior's Prophecy; besides many more that might be
mentioned. And which is a mighty Advantage to us, we are free from those
Prejudices against the Person of our Savior and his Doctrine, which the Jews,
by the reverence which they bore to their Rulers and Teachers, were generally
possessed withal; we are brought up in the belief of it, and have drunk it in by
Education; and if we believe it, as we all profess to do, we have all the
Obligation and all the Arguments to Repentance, which the Jews could possibly
have from the Miracles which they saw; for they were Means of Repentance to
them, no otherwise than as they brought them to the belief of our Savior's
Doctrine, which called them to Repentance.

So that if we continue impenitent, the same woe is denounced against us, that
is against Chorazin and Bethsaida; and we may be said with Capernaum, to be
lifted up to Heaven, by the Enjoyment of the most excellent Means and
Advantages of Salvation, that any People ever did, which if we neglect, and
still continue wicked and impenitent under them, we may justly fear, that with
them we shall be thrown down to Hell, and have our place in the lowest part of
that dismal Dungeon, and in the very Center of that fiery Furnace.

Never was there greater cause to upbraid the impenitence of any People, than
of us, considering the Means and Opportunities which we enjoy; and never had
any greater reason to fear a severer Doom, than we have. Impenitence in a
Heathen is a great Sin; else how should God judge the World? But God takes no
notice of that, in comparison of the Impenitence of Christians, who enjoy the
Gospel, and are convinced of the Truth, and upon the greatest reason in the
World profess to believe it. We Christians have all the Obligations to
Repentance, that Reason and Revelation, Nature and Grace can lay upon us. Art
thou convinced that thou have sinned, and done that which is contrary to thy
Duty, and thereby provoked the Wrath of God, and incensed his Justice against
thee? As thou art a Man, and upon the stock of Natural Principles, thou art
obliged to Repentance. The same Light of Reason which discovers to thee the
Errors of thy Life, and challenges thee for thy Impiety and Intemperance, for
thy Injustice and Oppression, for thy Pride and Passion; the same Natural
Conscience, which accuses thee of any Miscarriages, does oblige thee to be
sorry for it, to turn from thy evil ways, and to break off thy Sins by
Repentance.For nothing can be more unreasonable, than for a Man to know a
fault, and yet not think himself bound to be sorry for it; to be convinced of
the evil of his ways, and not to think himself obliged by that very Conviction,
to turn from it and forsake it. If there be any such thing as a natural Law
written in Men's Hearts, which the Apostle tells us the Heathens had, it is
impossible to imagine, but that the Law which obliges Men not to transgress,
should oblige them to Repentance in case of Transgression. And this every Man
in the World is bound to, though he had never seen the Bible, nor heard of the
name of Christ. And the Revelation of the Gospel does not supersede this
Obligation, but adds new Strength and Force to it; and by how much this Duty of
Repentance is more clearly revealed by our Blessed Savior in the Gospel, by
how much the Arguments which the Gospel uses to persuade Men, and encourage
them to Repentance, are greater and more powerful; by so much is the
Impenitence of those who live under the Gospel the more inexcusable.

Had we only some faint hopes of God's Mercy, a doubtful Opinion and weak
Persuasion of the Rewards and Punishments of another World; yet we have a Law
within us, which upon the probability of these Considerations would oblige us
to Repentance. Indeed if Men were assured upon good grounds, that there would
be no future Rewards and Punishments; then the sanction of the Law were gone,
and it would lose its force and Obligation: or if we did despair of the Mercy
of God, and had good Reason to think Repentance impossible, or that it would do
us no good; in that case there would be no sufficient Motive and Argument to
Repentance: for no Man can return to his Duty, without returning to the love of
God and Goodness; and no man can return to the love of God, who believes that
he bears an implacable hatred against him, and is resolved to make him
miserable for ever. During this Persuasion no Man can repent. And this seems to
be the reason, why the Devils continue impenitent.

But the Heathens were not without hopes of God's Mercy, and upon those small
hopes which they had they encouraged themselves into Repentance; as you may see
in the instance of the Ninevites, Let them turn every one from his evil ways,
and from the violence that is in his hands. Who can tell, if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Jonah 3.8, 9.
But if we, who have the clearest Discoveries, and the highest Assurance of
this, who profess to believe that God has declared himself placable to all
Mankind, that he is in Christ reconciling the World to himself, and that upon
our Repentance he will not impute our Sins to us; if we, to whom the wrath of
God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
Men, and to whom Life and Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel, if
after all this, we still go on in any impenitent Course, what shall we be able
to plead in excuse of our selves at that great day? The men of Nineveh shall
rise up in Judgment against such an impenitent Generation, and Condemn it;
because they repented upon the Terror of lighter threatenings, and upon the
Encouragement of weaker hops.

And therefore it concerns us, who call our selves Christians, and enjoy the
clear Revelation of the Gospel, to look about us, and take heed how we continue
in an Evil Course. For if we remain impenitent, after all the Arguments which
the Gospel, superadded to the Light of Nature, affords to us to bring us to
Repentance, it shall not only be more tolerable for the men of Nineveh, but for
Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah, the most wicked and impenitent
Heathens, at the day of Judgment, than for us. For because we have stronger
Arguments, and more powerful Encouragements to Repentance, than they had, if we
do not repent, we shall meet with a heavier Doom, and a fiercer Damnation. The
Heathen World had many excuses to plead for themselves, which we have not. The
times of that ignorance God winked at: but now commands all men every where to
repent; because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the World
in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Chiswell.
SCRIPTORVM ECCLESIASTICORVM, Historia Literaria facili and perspicua methodo
digesta, in 2 Vol. Fol. Authore GVL. CAVE, S. T. P. -- His Primitive
Christianity. 5th Edit. 8o. -- His Dissertation concerning the Government of
the Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans and Patriarchs. 8o. Archbishop
Tenison's Conference with Pulton the Jesuit. -- His nine Sermons on several
Occasions. Eight Volumes of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons; Published from the
Originals by Dr. Barker. -- Vol. 1 st. of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith
and Profession of the True Ruligion. 3 d Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Vol. 2 d
Of the Presence of the Messiah, the Glory of the Second Temple. Of Christ Jesus
the only Mediator. Of the Nature, Office, and Employment of good Angels. Of the
Reputation of good men after Death, etc. The 2 d Edition Corrected. 1700. --
Vol. 3 d Of the Sin and Danger of adding to the Doctrine of the Gospel. Honesty
the best Preservative against Dangerous Mistakes in Religion. The Nature and
Evil of Covetousness. The Wisdom of Religion, etc. The 2 d Edition Corrected.
1700. -- Vol. 4 th Of Natural and Instituted Religion, etc. Second Edition
Corrected. 1700 -- Vol. 5 th Proving Jesus to be the Messiah, etc. Second
Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Volumes 6 th and 7 th. Upon the Attributes of God.
Second Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Volume 8 th. Of Repentance. Ten Sermons on
several Occasions, by Bishop Patrick. -- His Hearts Ease, or Remedy against all
Troubles. The 7 th Edition. 1699. -- His Commentary on Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, and Numbers, in Four Volumes. -- His Commentary on Duteronomy, 1700.
Valentine's Private Devotions. The 26 th Edition. 1699. Wharton's Sermons in
Lambeth-Chappel, in 2 Vol. 8o. With his Life. The Second Edition. 1700. Dr.
Conant's Sermons, in Two Vol. 8o. Published by Bishop Williams. Dr. Wake of
Preparation for Death. The 6 th Edition. 1699. Dr. Fryer's Nine Years Travels
into India and Persia, Illustrated with Copper Plates. Fol. School. Bishop
Williams, Of the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the Common Prayer. With
several other Discourses. Mr. Tulley's Discourse of the Government of the
Thoughts. The 3 d Edition 12o 1699. The Life of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of
Canterbury, in which there is a particular Relation of many Remarkable Passages
in the Reigns of Henry V. and VI. Kings of England: Written in Latin by Arthur
Duck, L. L. D. Chancellor of the Diocese of London, and Advocate of the Court
of Honor; Now made English, and a Table of Contents annexed. 8o 1699. The
Judgment of the Ancient Jewish Church against the Unitarians, in the
Controversy upon the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of our Blessed Savior.
With a Table of Matters, and a Table of Texts of Scriptures occasionally
explained, by Peter Alix, D. D. Short Memo^^^s of Thomas Lord Fairfax, Written
by himself. Published, 1699. The Life of John Whitgift Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the times of Queen Elizabeth and King James I. Written by Sir
Geo. Paul, Comptroler of his Grace's Household. To which is annexed a Treatise
entitled, Conspiracy for pretended Reformation, Written in the Year 1591. By
Richard Cousin, L. L. D. Dean of the Arches, and Official Principal to
Archbishop Whitgift. 8o. 1699. An Exposition of the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, by Dr. Burnet Bishop of Sarum. Fol. 1700. -- His Sermon to the
Societies for Reformation of Manners. March 25. 1700. A Practical Discourse of
Religious Assemblies; By Dr. William Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's. The 3d.
Edition. 1700. A Treatise concerning the Causes of the present Corruption of
Christians, and the Remedies thereof. 1700.
In the Press.
The Fourth and Last Part of Mr. RVSHWORTH's Historical Collections. Containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the beginning of the Year 1645.
(where the Third Part ended) to the Death of King Charles the First, 1684.
Impartially Related: Setting forth only Matter of Fact in Order of Time,
without Observation or Reflection. Fitted for the Press in his Lifetime. To
which will be added, Exact Alphabetical Tables.

