Sixteen Sermons, Preached on Several Subjects and Occasions: VIZ. The Presence
of the Messiah the Glory of the Second Temple. Christ Jesus the Only Mediator
betwixt God and Men. The Nature, Office and Employment of Good Angels. The
Reputation of Good Men after Death. The Duty of Imitating Primitive Teachers
and Patterns of Christianity. The Encouragement to suffer for Christ, and the
Danger of Denying him. The Blessedness of Good Men after Death. The Vanities
and Wickedness of honoring dead Saints, and Persecuting the Living. The Danger
of Zeal without Knowledge. The Best Men liable to the Worst Temptations from
mistaken Zealots. The Duty and Reason of Praying for Governors. The Love of God
to Men in the Incarnation of Christ.


By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The SECOND VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D.D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCC.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The Presence of the Messiah, the Glory of the Second Temple.
Preached on Christmas Day.

Haggai II. 6, 7, 8, 9. FOR thus says the Lord of hosts, yet once, it is a
little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land: And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The
silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. The glory of
this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts;
and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. page 1.

SERMON II. Christ Jesus the only Mediator between God and Men. Preached on the
Feast of the Annuntiation, 1691.

1 Timothy II. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men,
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all. p. 37.

SERMON III, IV. Christ Jesus the only Mediator between God and Men.

1 Timothy II. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men,
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all. p. 63, 87.

SERMON V. The General and Effectual Publication of the Gospel by the Apostles.
Preached on Ascension-Day. 1688.

Mark XVI. 19, 20. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received
up into Heaven, and sat on the right Hand of God. And they went forth, and
preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with
Signs following. p. 117.

SERMON VI. The Nature, Office, and Employment of Good Angels. Preached on the
Feast of St. Michael.

Heb. I. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation? p. 153.

SERMON VII. The Reputation of Good Men after Death. Preached on St. Luke's-Day.

Psalm. CXII. 6. The latter part of the Verse. The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance. p. 193

SERMON VIII. The Duty of imitating the Primitive Teachers, and Patterns of
Christianity. Preached on All Saints Day, 1684.

Heb. XIII. 7. The latter Part of the Verse. Whose faith follow, considering
the end of their conversation.

The whole Verse runs thus, Remember them which have the Rule over you, who
have spoken unto you the word of God; whose faith follow, considering the end
of their conversation. p. 221

SERMON IX. The Encouragement to suffer for Christ; and the Danger of denying
him. Preached on All Saints Day.

2 Timothy II. 11, 12. It is a faithful saying; For if we be dead with him, we
shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. If we
deny him, he also will deny us. p. 249

Two SERMONS X, XI. The Blessedness of Good Men after Death. Both Preached on
All Saints Day.

Rev. XIV. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them. p. 305

SERMON XII. The Vanities and Wickedness of honoring dead Saints and
Persecuting the Living. Preached on All Saints Day.

Luke XI. 49, 50, 51. Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them
Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute. That the
blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may
be required of this generation; from the blood of Abel, unto the blood of
Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple: Verily I say unto
you, it shall be required of this generation. p. 331.

SERMON XIII. The Danger of Zeal, without Knowledge. Preached on November 5.
1682.

Romans X. 2. I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God; but not according
to knowledge. p. 353

SERMON XIV. The best Men liable to the worst Treatment, from mistaken Zealots.
Preached November 5. 1686.

John XVI. 2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: Yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. p. 383

SERMON XV. The Duty and Reason of Praying for Governors. Preached on the 29th
of May, 1693.

1 Timothy II, 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings,
and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty. p. 413

SERMON XVI. The Love of God to Men, in the Incarnation of Christ. Preached in
the Chapel at Lambeth-House on Christmas Day, 1691.

1 John XIV. 9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
p. 445


Haggai II. 6, 7, 8, 9. For thus says the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a
little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land: And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The
silver is mine and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. The glory of this
latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts; and
in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts.


THE Author of this Prophecy was the first of the three Prophets, which God
sent to the People of Israel after the Captivity; VOL. II.
and this Prophecy contains several Messages from God, to the Princes, and
Elders, and People of Israel, in which he reproves their slackness and
negligence in the building of the Temple, and encourages them thereto, by the
promise of his assistance, and tells them, that however in respect of the
magnificence of the Building, and the rich Ornaments of it, it should be
incomparably short of Solomon's Temple, (which some that were then alive had
seen in its glory) yet in other respects, it should far excel it; for the time
would come, that this second Temple should be graced with the Presence of the
Messiah, which would be a greater Glory to it, than all the Riches of Solomon's
Temple.

And this is fully expressed in the words which I have read unto you, Thus says
the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land: And I will shake all
nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house
with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
says the Lord of hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than
of the former, says the Lord of hosts; and in this place will I give peace,
says the Lord of hosts.

Now, that it is some very great thing which is here foretold and promised, for
the Honor of this second Temple, no Man can doubt, that considers in what a
solemn manner it is here expressed; this great and glorious Title, the Lord of
hosts, being no less than five several times used within the compass of these
four Verses; the like Instance whereto is not, perhaps, in the whole Bible:
Thus says the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake
the heavens, and the earth, verse 6. And I will fill this house with glory,
says the Lord of hosts, verse 7. The silver is mine and the gold is mine,
says the Lord of hosts, ver. 8. And twice ver. 9. The glory of this latter
house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts; and in this
place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. So that by the solemn manner
of expressing of it, we may imagine, that it is some very great thing which is
spoken of, and such as the like had never been before; and such was the
incarnation and coming of the Messiah.

I know that the Modern Jews will by no means have this Text to be understood
of the Messiah, and not without cause; for he that is spoken of in the Text,
was to come into the second Temple, which has now been destroyed above 1600
Years ago; and they do not believe the Messiah to be yet come; and therefore
whatever shift they make, they must interpret this Text, of some other Person
than the Messiah: But then it is plain for what Reason they do so, it being
evident from their own Talmud, that the Ancient Jews did understand of the
Messiah; but being hardened in their Unbelief, they pervert all those Texts
whereby they might be convinced, that Jesus our Blessed Savior was the True
Messiah.

And indeed, whoever carefully considers the several Expressions and
Circumstances of this Prediction, cannot understand it of any other. To make
this Evident, I shall explain the several Expressions in the Text, Thus says
the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while. Yet a little while, so it is
in the Hebrew. Yet once more, so the LXX render it, and so it is quoted from
the LXX in the New Testament, Heb. 12.26. and this Sense the Hebrew word may
likewise bear, and our Translation of the Text takes them both in, Yet once, it
is a little while.

If we take the Words in the first Sense, Yet a little while, they signify,
that God was then beginning those Changes in the World, which were to precede
and make way for the coming of the Messiah. This indeed was not till about Four
Hundred Years after; but a great while before that time God began those Changes
in the World, which were to prepare the way for his coming; and considering the
long time which was past from the first promise made to Abraham, Four Hundred
Years in comparison of that may seem but a little while. But I rather choose
the latter Sense of this Phrase, Yet once more; because the Hebrew will bear
it, and because it is so quoted in the New Testament; as if the Prophet had
said, That God had before done a great thing in the World, and accompanied with
great Miracles; viz. The giving of the Law by Moses, which was attended with
great Commotions, both in Egypt, by bringing the People of Israel out from
thence with a mighty hand, and by destroying the Nations before them, whose
Land God gave them for a Possession; but now he would do one greater thing
more, the sending of the Messiah, and the planting of his Religion in the
World; in order whereunto there should be much greater, and more universal
Commotions and Changes in the World, and more and greater Miracles wrought; Yet
once more, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land, and I will shake all nations. From which Words the Apostle to the
Hebrews argues the abolishing of the Jewish Dispensation, and the bringing in
of another that should be unalterable, Heb. 12.27, And this Word, Yet once
more, (says the Apostle) signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, that those things which cannot be shaken way remain. And this I shall
have occasion to explain more fully in the following parts of this discourse.

Yet once more I will shake the heavens and the earth, etc. For the
understanding whereof, we are to consider, That the Hebrews have no one Word
whereby to express the World, and therefore they do it by an enumeration of the
principal Parts of it. So Genesis 1. when Moses would express the Creation of the
World, he says, In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And so
St. Peter, when he would express the Revolution of all things, after the
universal Conflagration of the World, calls it, a new heaven and a new earth, 2
Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens, and
a new earth; that is, a new World, a quite other Frame and State of things,
than that which we now see. And so the Prophet here in the Text to express the
great Commotions and Changes that should be in the World before the coming of
the Messiah, says, that God will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea,
and the dry land; that is, he would cause great Revolutions in the World; there
should be great Wars and Confusions, and the Empires of the World should pass
from one Hand to another. And thus we find this very expression interpreted,
ver. 21, 22. of this Chapter, I will shake the heavens and the earth, and I
will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the
kingdoms of the nations. And to show that by shaking the heavens and the earth,
is meant great Changes in the World, and as it were an universal Commotion of
it, he adds in the Text, by way of farther Explication, and I will shake all
nations.

And then it follows, and the desire of all nations shall come. This we (as the
ancient Jews also did) take to be a plain Character and Description of the
Messiah, he is the desire of all nations; he whom all Nations had reason to
desire, because of those great Blessings and Benefits which he was to bring to
the World. Thus Interpreters generally understand these Words, and it is very
true the Messiah was so: But this does not seem to be the true importance of
this phrase; for the Hebrew Word signifies Expectation as well as Desire, and
so I should rather choose to render it, the Expectation of all Nations shall
come; which signifies, that about the time of the coming of the Messiah, not
only the Jews, but other Nations, should be in a general Expectation of some
great Prince then to appear; which was most eminently accomplished in our
Blessed Savior, as I shall show by and by.

And I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts, speaking of
the Second Temple, which was then in building, which though it fell very much
short of Solomon's, in point of State and Magnificence; yet by being honored
with the Presence of the Messiah, it should be much more Glorious than
Solomon's Temple. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of
hosts; not that God wanted the command of Gold and Silver, to have made the
Second Temple equal to Solomon's in outward Glory and Splendor; he could
easily have made it so in that respect; and Josephus tells us, that not long
before the time of our Savior's coming, Herod had built and beautified it to
that degree, that in some respects it excelled Solomon's; and of this some
understand the next words, The glory of this latter house shall be greater than
of the former; namely, that this was accomplished in that Beauty and
Magnificence which was added to it, when it was re-edified by Herod the Great:
But however that be this, is certain, that it was much more Glorious in another
respect, namely, that it entertained the Messiah the great Expectation and
Blessing of all Nations

And in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. Some understand
this, of that Universal Peace which was throughout the World, when our Savior
was born in the Reign of Augustus Caesar. Others with great probability
interpret this of the Messiah himself, who is called here by the name of Peace;
and so some of the ancient Jews understood it; in this place will I give peace,
that is, the Messiah. For the Hebrew Word signifies all kind of Happiness, and
so it includes all those Blessings and Benefits, that Happiness and Salvation
which the Messiah brought to the World. And this will appear very probable, if
we consider, how frequently in Scripture this Title is given to the Messiah.
Isai. 9.6. he is called the Prince of peace; and Zach. 9.10. it is said of him,
that he should speak peace to the nations; and the Apostle to the Hebrews,
parallels him with Melchisedech in this Particular, that he was King of Salem,
that is, King of Peace; and which is very little different from this, he is
frequently in Scripture called Salvation, which signifies the Happiness of
being rescued and delivered from all kind of Evil; as Peace signifies all kind
of Good, Isai. 49.6. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my Salvation to the end of the earth: And Luke 2.30. when Simeon
had our Blessed Savior in his Arms, when he was first brought into the Temple,
he calls him the Salvation of God; Mine Eyes (says he to God) have seen thy
salvation; and John 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews, that is, the Messiah was to
be of that Nation. But which is more express, Christ is called our peace, Ephesians.
2.14. nay, he is expressly called peace, or the peace, Micah 5.5. and this man
(speaking of the Messiah) shall be the peace, that is, one of his Names or
Titles shall be peace. So that I make little doubt, but that in this Expression
in the Text, of giving peace, is meant, giving the Messiah; and that this is
rendered as the Reason, why the Glory of the Second Temple should be greater
than of the First, because in that place the Messiah should appear, and
remarkably show himself. God could have given this Second Temple, if he had
thought fit, as much outward Glory and Beauty as that of Solomon's Building;
for silver and gold are his, and all the Riches of the World are at his
Command; but he chose to put a far greater Honor upon it than that of Silver
and Gold, and to make it much more Glorious in another respect, the glory of
this latter house shall be greater than of the former; because in this place I
will give the Messiah the peace, and Happiness, and Salvation of Mankind, and
incomparably the greatest Blessing that ever was given to the World.

The Words being thus explained, it will now be more easy to show, how the
several parts of this Prediction do agree to our Blessed Savior, and to no
other.

I. That there should be great Changes and Commotions in the World before his
coming; I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land,
and I will shake all nations; and then he should come. II. That about the time
of his coming, the World should be in a general Expectation of him; and the
expectation of all nations shall come. III. That he should come during the
continuance of the Second Temple; for it was his coming that should fill that
House with Glory, and in that place the Messiah, who is called Peace, is
promised to be given; and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of
hosts. IV. That this coming of the Messiah should be the last dispensation of
God for the Salvation of Men, and consequently should be perpetual and
unalterable; yet once more, and I will shake the heavens and the earth; yet
once more, from whence the Apostle to the Hebrews argues, that the Gospel
should be a perpetual and unalterable dispensation. Of these I shall speak
severally, and as briefly as I can.
I. Here is a Prediction of great Changes and Commotions in the World, before
the coming of the Messiah; thus says the Lord of hosts, I will shake the
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all
nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; plainly signifying hereby,
that before the coming of the Messiah (who is here called the desire and
expectation of all nations) there should be very great Commotions and Changes
in the World, that the Empire of the World should be overturned; for so I have
told you, that this Expression of shaking the heavens and the earth is
explained, verse 21. of this Chapter, I will shake the heavens and the earth,
and will overthrow the throne of kingdoms. And this was fulfilled in a most
remarkable manner, between the time of this Prophecy, and the coming of our
Blessed Savior, during which time, (though it was but four hundred Years)
there happened great Commotions, and much more considerable Revolutions, in the
great Kingdoms of the World, than had done in above two thousand Years before,
and in almost One thousand seven hundred Years since; so that it is no wonder,
that the Prediction of these things is by God himself expressed in so very solemn
a manner, as I observed before.

At the time of this Prophecy, the Empire of the World was newly translated
from the Assyrians to the Medes and Persians; and not long after, the Grecians
under Alexander the Great quite overthrew the Persian Empire, and that by as
sudden a Change as was ever perhaps made in the World, possessing themselves by
so swift and speedy a Conquest of a great part of the then known World, as if
to pass through it, and to conquer it, had been all one.

After the death of Alexander, the Empire of the Grecians was shared among his
great Captains, whom the Romans by degrees conquered, besides a great many
other Kingdoms which Alexander never saw, and some of them perhaps had never
heard of. At last the Empire of the World, in all its greatness and Glory, was
possessed by Augustus, in whose time our Blessed Savior was born.

So that here were mighty Commotions in the World, wonderful Changes of
Kingdoms and Empires, before the coming of the Messiah; far greater, and of
much larger extent, than those that, were in Egypt and Palestine, at the
bringing of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and the giving of the Law from
Mount Sinai. And these did not only go before the coming of the Messiah, but
they made way for the more easy propagating of his Doctrine and Religion; for
the Grecians, and especially the Romans, settled their Conquests in such a
manner, as in a good measure to propagate their Language among the Nations
which they conquered; and particularly the Romans did make the Ways for Travel
and Commerce much more easy and commodious than ever they were before, by
employing their Armies, when they had no other Work, to make Highways, for the
convenience of Passage from the Station of one Legion to another; the Benefit
and effect whereof we in England enjoy to this day; (a Pattern to all Princes
and States that have necessary occasion for Armies, how to employ them;) And
this very thing proved afterward a mighty Advantage for the more easy and
speedy spreading of Christianity in the World.

II. Another part of this Prophecy is, That about the time of the coming of the
Messiah, the World should be in a general expectation of him; and the
Expectation of all Nations shall come: And I doubt not but this Character of
the Messiah is taken out of that famous Prophecy concerning him, Genesis 49.10.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come, (and by Shiloh the
ancient Jews generally understood the Messiah) and to him shall the gathering
of the people be; or as it is rendered by the Septuagint, and several other
Translations, and he shall be the Expectation of the Nations. In allusion to
which ancient Prophecy concerning him, he is here in the Text called, the
Expectation of all Nations; and so by the Prophet Malachi, chap. 3. ver. 1. and
the Lord whom ye expect, or look for, shall suddenly come into his temple. Now
this part of the Prediction in the Text, was most eminently fulfilled in our
Blessed Savior. For about the time of his coming, the Jews were in a general
expectation of him, as appears not only from that ancient and general Tradition
of theirs, from the School of Elias, that at the end of the second two thousand
years of the World, the Messiah should come; (and our Blessed Savior's coming
did accordingly happen at that time;) but likewise from that particular
Computation of the Jewish Doctors, not long before our Savior's coming, who,
upon a solemn debate of the matter, did determine that the Messiah would come
within fifty Years. And this is farther confirmed, from the great Jealousy
which Herod had concerning a King of the Jews, that was expected to be born
about that time; and from that remarkable Testimony in Josephus, who tells us,
That the Jews rebelled against the Romans, being encouraged thereto by a famous
Prophecy in their Scriptures, that about that time a great Prince should be
born among them, that should rule the World: And Josephus flattered Vespasian
so far, as to make him believe that he was the Man; and thereupon persuaded him
to destroy the Line of David, out of which, the Tradition was, that the Messiah
should spring; as if the Accomplishment of a Divine Prediction could be
hindered by any Human endeavor.

And this was not only the generl Expectation of the Jews about that time, but
of a great Part of the World; as appears from those Two famous Testimonies of
Two of the most Eminent Roman Historians, Suetonius and Tacitus. The words of
Suetonius are these, Percrebuerat Orient toto vetus and constans opinio, esse
in fatis, ut Judaea profecti rerum potirentur: There was an ancient and general
Opinion, famous throughout all the Eastern Parts, that the Fates had
determined, that there should come out of Judea those that should govern the
World; and he adds what I quoted before out of Josephus, Id Judaei ad se
trehentes rebellarunt; that the Jews taking this to themselves, did thereupon
rebel. Now it is very remarkable, that the very words of this Tradition, seem
to be a verbal Translation of that Prophecy in Micah, That out of Judah should
come the Governor: Vt Judpaea profecti reruni potirentur. The other Testimony
is out of Tacitus; and his Words are these, ( lib. 21) Pluribus persuasio
inerat antiquis Sacerdotum libris contineri, eo ipso tempore fore, ut
valesceret Oriens; profectique Judaea rerum potirentur: A great many (says he)
were possessed with a Persuasion that it was contained in the ancient Books of
the Priests, that at that very time the East should prevail, and that they who
should govern the World, were to come out of Judea. By the ancient Books of the
Priests, he in all probability means, the ancient Prophecies of Scripture; for
the last Expression is the same with that of Suetonius taken out of the Prophet
Micah; and the other, that the East should prevail, does plainly refer to that
Title given to the Messiah by the Prophet Zachary, chap. 6.12. where he is
called, The Man whose name is (...), which signifies Oriens and Germen, both
the East and a Branch; our Translation has it, the Man whose name is the
Branch; but it might as well be rendered, the Man whose name is the East. Thus
you see this Character of our Savior in this Prophecy most literally
fulfilled, that he was the Expectation of all Nations. I proceed to the

III. Circumstance of this Prediction, That he who is here foretold, should
come during the continuance of this second Temple; because it was his Presence,
that should fill that house with glory; and it was in that place that the
Messiah, who is called the Peace, is promised to be given; and in this place
will I give Peace, says the Lord of Hosts. And this is likewise most expressly
foretold by the Prophet Malachi, chap. 3.1. Behold, I will send my Messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye look for, shall
suddenly come into his temple; even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye
delight in, behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts: And accordingly
Jesus our Blessed Savior came during the second Temple; he was presented there
by his Parents, and owned by Simeon for the Messiah; he Disputed there, and
Taught frequently there, and by his Presence filled that house with glory. For
that the Son of God Taught publicly there, was a greater Honor to it, than
all the Silver and Gold of Solomon's Temple.

And not long after his death (according to his express Prediction) this second
Temple was destroyed to the Ground; so that not one stone of it was left upon
another. And when some Hundred of Years after, it was attempted to be Rebuilt
Three several times, the last whereof was by Julian the Apostate, in opposition
to Christianity, and to our Savior's Prediction; Fire came out of the
Foundation, and destroyed the Workmen; so that they desisted in great Terror,
and durst never attempt it afterward. And this not only the Christian Writers
of that Age in great numbers do testify, but Ammianus Marcellinus (a Heathen
Historian who lived in that time) does also give us a very particular Account
of this memorable matter. So that if by the Expectation of the Nations be here
meant the Messiah, (as I have plainly shown) then he is long since come, and
was no other than Jesus our Blessed Savior, who, according to this Prophecy,
was to fill the second Temple with glory; which has now been demolished above
One thousand six hundred Years ago, and the Rebuilding whereof has been so
often and so remarkably hindered from Heaven. The Consideration of all which
were sufficient to convince the Jews of their vain Expectation of a Messiah yet
to come; were they not so obstinately rooted and fixed in their Infidelity.
There remains now the

IV. And Last Circumstance of this Prophecy, viz. That the coming of the
Messiah was to be the last Dispensation of God, for the Salvation of Men; and
consequently was to be perpetual and unchangeable: Yet once more, and I will
shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land: And I will
shake all nations, and the Expectation of all nations shall come. Yet once
more; from which Words, the Apostle to the Hebrews argues the Perpetuity of the
Gospel, and that it was the Dispensation which should never be changed, Heb.
12.27. And this word, Yet once more, signifies, the removing of those things
which are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain. And then it follows, Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which
cannot be moved, etc. It was usual with the Jews to describe the times of the
Gospel, by the Kingdom of the Messiah; and accordingly the Apostle here calls
the Dispensation of the Gospel, a kingdom which cannot he moved: In opposition
to the Law, which was an imperfect and alterable Dispensation. For this is
plainly the scope of the Apostle's reasoning; namely, to convince the Jews,
that they were now under a more gracious and perfect Dispensation than that of
the Law, ver. 18. Ye are not come unto the mount, that might be touched, and
that burned with fire; meaning Mount Sinai, which was a sensible literal
Mountain, a mountain that might be touched, in opposition to the mystical and
spiritual Mount Sion; by which the Dispensation of the Gospel is described:
Which by the way prevents the Objection of its being called the Mountain that
might be touched, when it was forbidden to be touched upon pain of Death; Ye
are not come to the Mount that might be touched; that is, I am not now speaking
of a literal and sensible Mountain, such as was Mount Sinai, from whence the
Law was given; but of that Spiritual and Heavenly Dispensation of the Gospel,
which was typified by Mount Sion and by Jerusalem; but ye are come to mount
Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to Jesus
the Mediator of the new Covenant. And then he cautions them to take heed how
they reject him that came from Heaven, to make this last Revelation of God to
the World; which because of the clearness and perfection of it, should never
need to receive any change, ver. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks;
for if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, (viz. Moses, who
delivered the Law from Mount Sinai) much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven: whose voice then shook the earth,
(alluding to the Earthquake at the giving of the Law) but now he has promised,
saying, Yet once more, I shake not the earth only; but also heaven; that is,
the whole World, in order to the coming of the Messiah, and the planting of the
Gospel in the World; and then he argues from the Words once more, that the
former Dispensation should be removed, to make way for that which should
perpetually remain.

And indeed there is no need of any farther. Revelation after this; nor of any
change of that Religion which was brought from Heaven by the Son of God;
because of the Perfection of it, and its fitness to Reform the World, and to
recover Mankind out of their lapsed and degenerate Condition, and to bring them
to Happiness; both by the Purity of its Doctrine, and the Power of its
Arguments to work upon the Minds of Men, by the clear discovery of the mighty
Rewards and Punishments of another World.

And now the proper Inference from all this Discourse, is the very same with
that which the Apostle makes, from the Consideration of the Perfection and
Excellency of this Revelation, which God had made to the World by his Son. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks: for how shall we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from Heaven? And at the 28th. Verse of that Chapter,
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; that is,
Let us Live as becomes those to whom God has made so clear and perfect a
Revelation of his Will. We have all the Advantages of the Divine Revelation
which the World ever had, and the last and most perfect that the World ever
shall have: We have not only Moses and the Prophets, but that Doctrine which
the Son of God came down from Heaven on purpose to declare to the World. God
has vouchsafed to us that clear and complete Revelation of his Will, which he
denied to many Prophets and righteous men; who desired to see the things which
we see, but could not see them; and to hear the things which we hear, but could
not hear them. There were good Men in the World under those imperfect
Revelations which God made to them; but we have far greater Advantages, and
more powerful Arguments to be Good than ever they had. And as we ought
thankfully to acknowledge these blessed Advantages; so ought we likewise, with
the greatest Care and Diligence, to improve them.

And now how does the serious Consideration of this Condemn all Impenitent
Sinners under the Gospel, who will not be reclaimed from their Sins and
persuaded to Goodness, by all that God can do; by the most plain Declaration of
his Will to the World, by the most perfect Precepts and Directions for a good
Life; by the most encouraging Promises to Obedience, and by the most severe
Threatenings of an Eternal and Unutterable Ruin, in case of disobedience; by the
wrath of God, revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men; by the Terrors of the great day, and the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; by
the wonderful and amazing Condescension of the Son of God, appearing in our
Nature; by his merciful undertaking for the Redemption of lost and sinful Man;
by his cruel Sufferings for our Sins, and by the kindest Offers of Pardon and
Reconciliation in his Blood, and by the glorious hopes of Eternal Life!

What could God have done more for us, than he has done? What greater
concernment could he show for our Salvation, than to send his own son, his only
son, to seek and save us? And what greater demonstration could he give of his
Love to us, than to give the Son of his Love to die for us? This is the last
Effort that the Divine Mercy and Goodness will make upon Mankind. So the
Apostle tells us in the beginning of this Epistle, chap. 1.1. that God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers, by
the Prophets, has in these last days, spoken to us by his Son: And if we will
not hear him, he will speak no more; after this it is not to be expected that
he should make any farther Attempts for our recovery, he can send no greater
and dearer Person to us, than his own Son. If we despise him; whom will we
Reverence? If we reject him, and the great Salvation which he brings and offers
to us; we have all the reason in the World to believe that our case is
desperate, and that we shall die in our sins. This was the Condemnation of the
Jews, that they did not receive and believe on him whom God had sent. And if we
who profess to believe on him, and to receive his Doctrine, be found
disobedient to it, in our Lives, we have reason to fear, that our Condemnation
shall be far heavier than theirs: For since the appearance of the Son of God
for the Salvation of men, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, especially against those who detain the
truth of God in unrighteousness; that is, against those who entertain the Light
of God's Truth in their Minds, but do not suffer it to have its proper Effect
and Influence upon their Hearts and Lives; and make that a Prisoner, which
would make them free. So our Lord tells us, that the truth shall make us free;
but if after we have received the knowledge of the truth, we are still the
servants of sin; our Condemnation is much worse, than if the Son of God had
never come: For the Christian Religion has done nothing; if it do not take men
off from their Sins, and teach them to live well.

Especially at this time when we are celebrating the coming of the Son of God,
to destroy the works of the Devil, we should take great heed, that we be not
found guilty of any Impiety and Wickedness; because this is directly contrary
to the main Design of the grace of God, which brings Salvation, and has
appeared to all men, (and the appearance whereof we do at this time
commemorate) for That teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly and righteously and godlily in this present world: And we
cannot gratify the Devil more, than by showing our selves more diligent than
ordinary to uphold his Works, at this very time, when the Son of God was
manifested on purpose to dissolve them: We cannot possibly choose a worse, a
more improper Season to sin in, than when we are Celebrating the Birth of the
Blessed Jesus, who came to save us from our sins. This is, as if a sick Man,
for joy that a Famous Physician is come to his House, should run into all
manner of Excess, and so do all he can to inflame his Disease, and make his
case desperate. Not but that our inward Joy may lawfully be accompanied with
all outward innocent Expressions of it: but we cannot be truly thankful, if we
allow our selves at this time in any thing contrary to the Purity and Sobriety
of the Gospel. It is matter of just and sad complaint, being of great scandal
to our Savior, and his holy Religion, that such irregular and extravagant
things are at this time commonly cone by many, who call themselves Christians;
and done under a pretense of doing Honor to the Memory of Christ's Birth; as
if, because the Son of God was at this time made Man, it were fit for Men to
make themselves Beasts.

If we would honor him indeed, we must take care that our Joy do not
degenerate into Sin and Sensuality, and that we do not express it by Lewdness
and Luxury, by Intemperance and Excess, by prodigal Gaming, and profuse wasting
of our Estates, as the manner of some is; as if we intended literally to
requite our Savior, who being rich, for our sakes became poor. This is a way
of parting with houses and land, and becoming poor for his sake, for which he
will never thank, nor reward us. This is not to commemorate the Coming of our
Savior; but to contradict it, and openly to declare that we will uphold the
Works of the Devil, in despite of the Son of God, who came to destroy them. It
is for all the World like that lewd and senseless piece of Loyalty, too much in
fashion some Years ago, of being Drunk for the King. Good God! that ever it
should pass for a piece of Religion among Christians, to run into all manner of
excess for Twelve days together, in honor of our Savior! A greater
Aggravation of Sin cannot easily be imagined, than to abuse the Memory of the
greatest Blessing that ever was, Christ coming into the World to take away sin,
into an opportunity of committing it; this is to represent the Son of God as a
Patron of Sin and Licentiousness, and to treat him more contumeliously than the
Jews did, who bowed the Knee to him and mocked him, and called him King and
spat upon him; and, under a pretense of rejoicing for his Birth, to crucify to
our selves afresh the Lord of life and glory; and to put him to an open shame.

I will conclude all with the Apostle's Exhortation, Romans 13.12, 13, 14. Let us
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor, of Light. Let us
walk decently as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christy, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Now to our most gracious and merciful God, the great Friend and Lover of
Souls, who regarded us in our low and lost Condition, and cast an Eye of pity
upon us, when we were in our Blood, and no other Eye pityed us, and when we had
lost and ruined our selves, was pleased in tender compassion to Mankind, to
send his only begotten Son into the World, to seek and save us, and by the
Purity of his Doctrine, and the Pattern of his Life, and the Sacrifice of his
Death, to purchase Eternal Life for us, and to direct and lead us in the way to
it: And to him also, the Blessed Savior and Redeemer of Mankind, who came down
from Heaven, that he might carry us thither, and took Human Nature upon him,
that we thereby might be made Partakers of a Divine Nature; and humbled himself
to Death, even the Death of the Cross, that he might exalt us to Glory and
Honor, and whilst we were bitter Enemies to him, gave such a Demonstration of
his Love to us, as never any Man did to his best Friend: Unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb that was slain, to God, even our Father, and
to our Lord Jesus Christ, the first begotten from the dead, and the Prince of
the kings of the Earth, to him who has loved us, Sermon. II.
and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and has made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and honor, dominion and
power, now and for ever. Amen.

SERMON II. Christ Jesus, the only Mediator between God and Men. Preached at
St. Peter's Cornhill, ON THE Feast of the Annunciation, 1691.
1 Timothy II. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all.


THESE Words contain in them these four Propositions, three of them express,
and the fourth of them sufficiently employed in the Text.

I. That there is one God. VOL. II.
II. That there is one Mediator between God and men; Christ Jesus. III. That he
gave himself a ransom for all. IV. That the Mediation or Intercession of Jesus
Christ, is founded in the Redemption of Mankind. For this seems to be the
Reason why it is added, that he gave himself a ransom for all, to signify to
us, that because he gave himself a ransom for all, therefore he interceeds for
all. In virtue of that Sacrifice which he offered to God for the Salvation of
Men, he offers up our Prayers to God; and therefore it is acceptable to him,
that we should pray for all men. This seems to be the true connection of the
Apostle's Discourse, and the force of his Reasoning, about our putting up
public Prayers for all men.
I have in a former Discourse handled the first of these. See a Sermon
concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature, Printed in the year, 1693.
I proceed now to the

II. That there is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. One
Mediator, that is, But one; for the expression is the very same concerning one
God, and one Mediator; and therefore if the Apostle when he says, there is one
God, certainly means that there is but one God; it is equally certain, that
when he says, there is one Mediator between God and men, he means, there is but
one Mediator, viz. Christ Jesus. He is the only Mediator between God and Men.

In the handling of this Argument, I shall proceed in this Method.





3. That it is likewise evident from the Nature and Reason of the thing it
self, That there is but one Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us,

Lastly, I shall endeavor to show, how contrary to the Doctrine of the
Christian Religion, concerning one Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us,
the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome in this matter is, in their
Invocation of Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and making use of
their Mediation and Intercession with God for Sinners; as likewise how contrary
it is to the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Christian Church: And then
I shall answer their several Pretenses for this Doctrine and Practice; and show
that this Practice is not only needless, but useless and unprofitable; and not
only so, but very dangerous and impious.

First, I shall endeavor to show, That God has appointed but one Mediator, or
Advocate, or Intercessor in Heaven for us, in whose Name, and by whose
Intercession we are to offer up all our Prayers and Services to God.

Besides that it is expressly said here in the Text, there is but one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, and that the Scripture no where
mentions any other: I say, besides this, we are constantly directed to offer up
our Prayers and Thanksgivings, and to perform all Acts of Worship in his Name,
and no other; and with a Promise, that the Prayers and Services, which we offer
in his Name, will be graciously answered and accepted: John 14.13, 14.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do; that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. And
Chapter 16.23, 24. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing: verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name; ask and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be be full. In that day; that is, when I have left the World, and am
gone to my Father as he explains it at the 28th verse, In that day ye shall ask
me nothing; but whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you. That is, You shall not need to address your Prayers to me, but to my
Father in my Name. And ver. 26, 27. At that day ye shall ask in my name; that
is, from the time that I am ascended into Heaven, ye shall put up all your
Prayers and Requests to God, in my Name; and I say not unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you: for the Father, himself loves you; that is, I need
not tell you (though I shall certainly do it) that I will interceed with the
Father for you; for he of himself is kindly disposed and affected toward you,
for my sake; The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved we.

St. Paul likewise commands Christians to perform all Acts of Religious Worship
in the Name of Christ; Col. 3.16, 17. Singing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord, and whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. And this Precept of
addressing all our Prayers and Thanksgivings to God, by Jesus Christ, as the
only Mediator between God and us, is the more remarkable, because it is given
in opposition to the Worshipping of God by any other Mediators and Intercessors
in Heaven for us; and to that Superstition which had begun so early to prevail
among some Christians at Calosse and Laodicea, of Worshipping God by the
Mediation and Intercession of Angels, against which he had cautioned in the
former Chapter, Ver. 18, 19. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, not holding the head.
Intimating, that for Christians to address themselves to God, by any other
Mediator, but Jesus Christ only, was a defection from Christ the Head, and High
Priest of our Profession. And that this is the Apostle's meaning, Theodoret
assures us, in his Comment upon this Place, where he tells us, That some who
maintained an observance of the Law, together with the Gospel, asserted also,
That Angels were to be worshipped; saying, That the Law was given by them. And
this Custom, he tells us, remained a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia, and that
upon this account it was, that the Synod of Laodicea in Phrygia (about the
middle of the 4th Century) forbad Christians by a Law, to pray to Angels. And
yet more expressly in his Comment upon those Words, Chap. 3. Ver. 17. Whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God and the Father by him. For because, (says he) they (meaning those of whom
St. Paul warns the Colossians to beware) because they did command men to
worship Angels, he enjoins the contrary; that they should adorn both their
words and actions with the memory (or mention) of the name of Christ their
Lord: And send ye up (says he) thanksgiving to God and the Father by him, and
not by the Angels. And then he makes mention of the Canon of the Synod of
Laodicea, which, (says he) in pursuance of this Rule, and being desirous to
cure that old Disease, made it a Law, that none should pray unto Angels, nor
forsake the Lord Jesus Christ. It seems then that some Relics of that Impious
Custom, of praying to Angels, which Theodoret here calls, That old Disease, had
continued from St. Paul's time, to the Council of Laodicea, which was the
occasion of that severe Canon then made about that matter; the very Words
whereof I will set down, because they are remarkable; viz. That Christians
ought not to forsake the Church of God, and go away from it, and to invocate
Angels, and to make Conventicles, all which are forbidden. If any therefore be
found giving himself to this secret Idolatry, let him be Anathema; because he
has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and is gone over to
Idolatry. What shall be said to them, who do not only secretly, and in their
Private Devotions, but in the Public Assemblies of Christians, and in the most
Public Offices of their Church, invocate Angels, and pray to them? So that it
was praying to Angels (or making use of them as Mediators and Intercessors with
God for us) which St Paul here reproves so severely in the Colossians, as a
Defection from Christ and the Christian Religion.

And indeed, considering how frequently the Scripture speaks of Christ, as our
only way to God, and by whom alone we have access to the throne of grace, we
cannot doubt, but that God has constituted him our only Mediator and
Intercessor, by whom we are to address all our Requests to God, John 14.6.
Jesus there says unto Thomas, I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man
comes to the Father but by me. I am the way, the truth, and the life; that is,
the true and living way to the Father (which the Apostle calls a new and living
way, Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore boldnenss to enter into the holieft by
the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us.)
No man comes to the Father but by me; that is, we can have no access to God by
Prayer, or by any other Acts of Religious Worship, but by him. So St. Paul
tells us, Ephesians. 2.18. For through him (speaking of Christ) we both have an
access by one Spirit unto the Father. We both, that is, both Jews and Gentiles.
Under the Law the Jews had access to God by their High Priest, who interceeded
with God, and offered up Prayers in behalf of the People. The Gentiles, they
addressed themselves to God by innumerable Mediators, by Angels, and the Souls
of their departed Heroes, which were the Pagan Saints. Instead of all these,
God has appointed one Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us, Jesus the Son
of God, and by him all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles, have access by one
Spirit unto the Father.

And we have no need of any other, as the Apostle to the Hebrews reasons, Chap.
7.24, 25. But this person (speaking of Christ) because he continues for ever,
has an unchangeable Priesthood, (...), a Priesthood which does not pass from
one to another, as the Priesthood under the Law did, when upon the Death of one
High Priest, another succeeded in his Place; but our High Priest under the
Gospel, since he abides for ever, is able to save to the utmost all those that
come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. So that
Jesus Christ is an All-sufficient Mediator, and able to carry on and accomplish
the Work of our Salvation from first to last: And as we do not find, that God
has appointed any other; so we are sure, that there needs no other, since he
is able to save to the utmost all those that come to God by him, and that he
lives for ever to make intercession for us.

Secondly, I proceed now, in the Second place, to show, That this Doctrine or
Principle of one Mediator between God and men, is most agreeable to one main
end and design of the Christian Religion, and of our Savior's coming into the
World, which was to destroy Idolatry out of the World; which St. John calls the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy, (...), that he might dissolve or demolish the works of
the Devil; by which St. John does more especially mean the idolatrous worship
of the Heathen, which consisted in the multitude of their Gods, and the bloody
and barbarous Rites and Sacrifices, whereby they Worshipped them; and likewise
in the multitude of their Mediators between the Gods and Men, who were also
esteemed by them an inferior sort of Deities. Both these kinds of Idolatry had
strangely prevailed, and overrun the World, before the appearance of our Lord
and Savior, who came on purpose to deliver Mankind from the horrible
Superstition and Slavery of the Worship of false Gods, to pull down this
Kingdom of the Devil, and to demolish that Fabric which he had been so long a
rearing, and to beat him out of those strong holds, which he thought had been
impregnable.

God indeed gave some check to these, many Ages before, and not long after
their first appearance, by the Jewish Religion, which was on purpose
introduced, and confirmed, and established by so many and such mighty Miracles,
to preserve and keep alive in the World the primitive Tradition and Belief of
the One true God; and likewise to be (as it were) some Shadow and rude Draught
of that more perfect Dispensation of the Christian Religion, which by one
Sacrifice once offered, and by one Mediator between God and men, was to put an
end to the infinite Superstitions of the Heathen Worship, and all the bloody
and barbarous Rites of it, and likewise to the Idolatry they were guilty of, in
the Worship of their inferior Deities, whom they looked upon as a middle sort
of Powers between the Gods and Men, and therefore addressed themselves to them,
as Mediators between the Superior and Heavenly Gods, and Men here on Earth.
This was plainly one of the great designs of the Christian Religion; and
therefore it concerns Christians to understand it, and to be very careful, that
they do not suffer themselves to be deluded by any specious Pretenses
whatsoever, to bring these things back again into the Christian Religion, for
the ruin and extirpation whereof, it was purposely designed and intended.

And this seems plainly to be the meaning of that Caution, wherewith St. John
concludes his Catholic or General Epistle, namely, That Christians should be
very careful, that they were not carried back again into the Heathen Idolatry,
by the confident Pretenses of the Gnostick, Heretics to higher Degrees of
Knowledge and. Illumination, than other Christians had; that is, by their
pretending to be the Infallible Church, and the only true and genuine
Christians. For it is against this Sect, that this Epistle is plainer designed,
which St. John thus concludes, Chap. 5. from Ver. 18. to the end; We know that
whosoever is born of God sins not; meaning that he does not commit the Sin
unto death, which he had spoken of just before, viz. Apostasy from Christianity
to the Heathen Idolatry, or that which was very like it) whosoever is born of
God does not commit this sin, but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself,
and that wicked one touches him not; that is, he preserves himself from the
Contagion of Idolatry, into which the Devil was so busy to seduce Mankind. And
we know that we are of God; that is, do belong to the true God, and are
Worshippers of him: And the whole world lies in Wickedness, (...), is in the
power, or under the dominion of that wicked One; that is, the greatest part of
Mankind was sunk into Idolatry, and the Worship of the Devil. And we know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know
him that is true. We know, that is, we Christians are better Taught by the
Christian Religion, to acknowledge and worship the only true God: And we are in
him that is true, in or by his Son Jesus Christ; that is, we Worship the only
true God, by his Son Jesus Christ. And then he concludes, Little Children, keep
your selves from Idols; Intimating hereby, that the Worshipping of any other,
besides this only true God, and by any other Mediator than Jesus Christ, is
Idolatry.

There were indeed two very ancient and common Notions, both amongst Jews and
Gentiles, of the Original whereof it is hard to give any certain account; only
this is certain, that they did prevail very early, and did very generally
possess Mankind; And they were these; First, That God was not to be appeased
toward Sinners, merely upon their Repentance, without the Death and Suffering
of some other in their stead; and that God would accept of this vicarious
Punishment and Suffering, instead of the Death of the Sinner himself. And this
seems to have given the Original to the Sacrifices of Living Creatures, to
appease the Wrath of God toward Sinners, which in process of time, as the
Worship of false Gods prevailed in the World, did proceed to that Degree of
Superstition and barbarous Inhumanity, that by the instigation of the Devil,
Men offered up the Blood of their Children, and Sacrificed their Sons and
Daughters to their Idols and false Gods. Secondly, Another common Notion, which
had likewise possessed Mankind, was, That God was not to be immediately
approached by sinful Men; but that their Prayers were to be offered up to the
Deity, by certain Mediators and Intercessors, that were to procure for them the
Favor of the Gods, and the gracious Answer and Acceptance of their Prayers.
And this was the Original of that other sort of Heathen Idolatry, which
consisted in the Worship of their Demons and Heroes, that is of Angels and
Souls departed, viz. of such eminent Persons, as had been great Benefactors to
Mankind, and for their worthy Deeds upon Earth were Canonized and translated
into the number of their Inferior Gods. By these, as the chief Courtiers and
Favorites of Heaven, they addressed their Prayers and Supplications to the
Superior Gods.

Now with these Notions which had generally possessed Mankind (how imperfect
soever) God was pleased to comply so far, as in the Frame of the Jewish
Religion (which was designed for a Type of the more perfect Institution of the
Christian Religion, and a Preparation for it) I say, God was pleased to comply
so far with these Notions, as to appoint Sacrifices to be slain and offered up
for the Sinner; and likewise an High Priest, that once a year should enter into
the Holy of Holies, with the Blood of Sacrifices that were offered up for the
People, to make Expiation for them, and in virtue of that Blood, should
interceed for the People, as the Apostle to the Hebrews does declare at large,
And when God sent his Son in the fullness of time, he was pleased likewise, in
the dispensation of the Gospel, (that perfect institution which was never to be
altered) to have so much regard to these common Notions, and Apprehensions of
Mankind, as to provide for the supply of those two great Wants, which they
seemed always to have labored under, and concerning which they were at so
great a loss, viz. an effectual expiatory Sacrifice for Sins upon Earth, and a
powerful Mediator and Intercessor with God in Heaven: And both these by the
same Person, Jesus Christ, who appeared in the end of the World, to take away
sin by the sacrifice of himself; and in the Merit and Virtue of that Sacrifice,
appearing in Heaven in the Presence of God for us, is become a perpetual
Advocate, and a most powerful Intercessor with God in Heaven for us. So that
instead of the endless Sacrifices of the Jewish Religion, which were
ineffectual to the real Expiation of Sin, and only Types and Shadows of the
true expiatory Sacrifice; and instead of the bloody and inhumane Sacrifices of
the Heathen Idolatry; the Son of God has by one Sacrifice for Sin once
offered, perfected for ever them that are sanctified, and obtained eternal
Redemption for us. And instead of the Mediation of Angels, and the Souls of
their departed Heroes, which the Heathen made use of to offer up their Prayers
to the Gods; We have one Mediator between God and Men, appointed by God
himself, Jesus the Son of God, who in our Nature is ascended into Heaven, to
appear in the presence of God for us. And who so fit to be our Patron and
Advocate, as he who was our Sacrifice and Propitiation?

Thus the Method of our Redemption, as it was by the Wisdom of God admirably
suited to the common Apprehensions of Mankind, concerning the necessity of a
Sacrifice to make Expiation of Sin, and of a Mediator to intercede with God for
Sinners; so was it likewise excellently fitted, not only to put an end to the
Jewish Sacrifices, but likewise to abolish the barbarous Sacrifices and Rites
of the Heathen Idolatry, and to cashier that infinite number of Mediators and
Intercessors, by whom they addressed their Prayers to the Deity; and instead of
all this, to introduce a more reasonable and spiritual Worship, more agreeable
to the Nature and Perfections of God, and the Reason of Mankind; which was one
of the main and principal Designs of the Christian Religion: And therefore to
bring in any other Mediators, to intercede in Heaven for us (whether Angels or
Saints) and by them to offer up our Prayers to God, is directly contrary to the
Design of the Christian Religion.

Thirdly, It is likewise evident from the Nature and Reason of the thing it
self, that there is but one Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven, who offers up
our Prayers to God, and that there can be no more. Because under the Gospel
there being but one High Priest, and but one Sacrifice once offered for Sin,
and Intercession for Sinners being founded in the Merit and Virtue of the
Sacrifice, by which Expiation for Sin is made, there can be no other Mediator
of Intercession, but he who has made Expiation of Sin, by a Sacrifice offered
to God for that purpose; and this Jesus Christ only has done. He is both our
High Priest, and our Sacrifice; and therefore he only, in the Merit and Virtue
of that Sacrifice, which he offered upon Earth, can intercede in Heaven for us,
and offer up our Prayers to God. Others may pray to God for us; as our Brethren
upon Earth do, and perhaps the Angels and Saints in Heaven; but none of these
can offer up our Prayers to God, and procure the acceptance of them; for that
can only be done in Virtue of a Sacrifice first offered, and by him that
offered it; this being the peculiar Office and Qualification of a Mediator or
Intercessor, properly so called.

It is the plain Design of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, to prove
that Christ is our only Mediator in Heaven, in Virtue of that Sacrifice for
Sin, which he offered upon Earth; and that he alone appears in the Presence of
God for us, to present our Requests to him, and obtain a gracious Answer of
them; and he shows at large, how this was particularly typified by the Jewish
High Priest, who upon the great day of Expiation, after the Sacrifice was slain
without, entered alone into the Holy of Holies, with the Blood of the
Sacrifices, in Virtue whereof he made Intercession for the People. Answerable
to this, Jesus the High Priest of our Profession, offered himself a Sacrifice
for the Sins of Men, and in virtue of that Sacrifice is entered into the High
Place not made with Hands, that is, into Heaven it self, there to appear in the
Presence of God for us, where he lives for ever to make intercession for us, in
Virtue of that Eternal Redemption, which he has obtained for us, by the Price
of his Blood, as the Apostle declares in several Chapters of that Epistle. So
that this Intercession being founded in the Merit of a Sacrifice, which he
alone offered, he is of necessity, the only Mediator between God and Men.

And for this Reason it is, that the Mediation and Intercession of Christ, is
so frequently in Scripture mentioned together with the Expiation which he made
for the Sins of Men, or, (which is the same,) with the price which he paid for
the Redemption of Mankind; because the one is founded in the other, and depends
upon it. So we find, 1 John 2.1, 2. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our
Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World. And here
likewise in the Text, There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all; therefore the only Mediator between
God and men; because he only gave himself a Ransom for all men. The Efficacy
and Prevalency of his Mediation, being founded in the Merit and Virtue of the
Ransom of his Blood.

And the force of these Texts, and the reasoning from them, is not to be
avoided and turned off, by distinguishing between a Mediator of Redemption and
of Intercession, and by saying, that it is true, that Christ is the only
Mediator of Redemption, but there may be many Mediators of Intercession; For if
the Force of his being Advocate or Intercessor be founded in the Virtue of his
Ransom and Propitiation (as I have plainly shown, to the Conviction of any that
are not strongly prejudiced, and that will read and consider what the Scripture
says in this matter without Prepossession,) then it is plain, that none can be
a proper Mediator of Intercession, but he that paid the Price of our
Redemption: So that the Mediator of our Redemption, and our Mediator of
intercession, must of necessity be one and the same Person; and none can appear
in the Quality of our Advocate with the Father, but he only who is the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World.

I should now have proceeded to

Fourth thing I proposed in the handling of this Argument, namely, To show how
contrary to this Doctrine of the Christian Religion, concerning one only
Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us, the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church of Rome is in this matter; namely, in their Invocation of Angels, and
the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and flying to their Help and making use of
their Mediation and Intercession with God for Sinners: As likewise how contrary
all this is to the Doctrine and Pratice of the Christian Church, for several of
the first Ages of it. And then I should have answered their chief Pretenses and
Excuses for these things, and showed that this Practice of theirs is not only
needless (being no where commanded by God) but useless also, and unprofitable;
and not only so, but very dangerous and impious, being contrary to the
Christian Religion, and highly derogating from the Virtue and Merit of Christ's
Sacrifice, and from the Honor of the only Mediator between God and Men. But of
this another time.

SERMON III. Christ Jesus, the only Mediator between God and Men.
The Second Sermon on 1 Timothy II. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all.


IN these Words are four Propositions; three expressed, and the fourth implied.

I. That there is one God. II. That there is one Mediator between God and men;
Christ Jesus. III. That he gave himself a ransom for all. VOL. II.
IV. That the Mediation or Intercession of Jesus Christ, is founded in his
Redemption of Mankind: That because he gave himself a Ransom for all men,
therefore he, and he only, is qualified to intercede for all Men, in Virtue of
that Sacrifice which he offered for the Salvation of all Mankind.
The Second of these I spoke to the last time, and endeavored to show,

but one Mediator, or Advocate, or Intercessor in Heaven for us; by whose
Mediation we are to offer up all our Prayers and Services to God.

one Mediator is most agreeable to one main End and Design of the Christian
Religion, and of our Savior's coming into the World, which was, to destroy
Idolatry.

viz. because Intercession for Sinners is founded in the Merit of that
Sacrifice, by which Expiation of Sin is made) there can be no other Mediator of
Intercession, Sermon. III.
but he who has made Expiation for Sin, by a Sacrifice offered to God for that
purpose; and this Jesus Christ only has done. Thus far I have gone: I proceed
now to

Fourth thing which I proposed in the handling of this Argument, namely, to
show how contrary to this Doctrine of the Christian Religion, concerning one
only Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us, the Doctrine and the Practice
of the Church of Rome is in this matter; namely, in their Invocation of Angels,
and the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and flying to their help, and making
use of their Mediation and Intercession with God for Sinners.

And that I may proceed more distinctly in this Argument, I shall handle it
under these particular Heads.

First, I shall endeavor to show, That the Doctrine and Practice of the Church
of Rome in this matter, is contrary to the Doctrine of the Christian an
Religion, concerning one only Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us.

Secondly, That it is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Christian
Church, for several of the first Ages of it.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to answer their chief Pretenses and Excuses for
this Doctrine and Practice.

Fourthly, to show that this Doctrine and Practice of theirs is not only
needless, being no where commanded by God, but useless also, and unprofitable.

Fifthly, And not only so, but very dangerous and impious; because contrary to
the Christian Religion, and greatly derogating from the Virtue and Merit of
Christ's Sacrafice, and from the Honor of the only Mediator between God and
Men.

First, I shall endeavor to show, that the Doctrine and Practice of the Church
of Rome in this Matter, is contrary to the Doctrine of the Christian Religion
concerning one only Mediator and Intercessor in Heaven for us; namely in their
Invocation of Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and flying to
their Help, and making use of their Mediation and Intercession with God for
Sinners.

That Jesus Christ is our only Mediator and Intercessor with God in Heaven, by
whom we have access to God in any Action of Religious Worship, and that all our
Prayers and Services are to be offered up to God only by him, and in his Name
and Mediation, and no other, I have plainly showed from Scripture, and proved
it by an invincible Argument, taken likewise from Scripture; namely, because
the Efficacy and Prevalency of his Mediation and Intercession is founded in the
Virtue and Merit of his Sacrifice; and that he is therefore the only Mediator
between God and Men, because he only gave himself a Ransom for all; he is
therefore our only Advocate with the Father, because he only is the
propitiation for our Sins, and for the Sins of the whole World.

I have showed likewise, that the Scripture excludes Angels from being our
Mediators with God, from the main Scope and Design of the Epistle to the
Colossians; and much more are the Saints departed excluded from this Office,
being inferior to the Angels, not only in the Dignity and Excellency of their
Beings, but very probably in the Degree of their Knowledge.

In short, Prayer is a proper act of Religious Worship, and therefore peculiar
to God alone; and we are commanded to Worship the Lord our God, and to serve
him only: And no where in Scripture are we directed to address our Prayers and
Supplications and Thanksgivings to any but God alone, and only in the Name and
Mediation of Jesus Christ. Our Blessed Savior himself has taught us, to put
up all our Prayers to God our heavenly Father, Luke 11.2. when you pray, say,
Our Father which art in Heaven. Which plainly shows, to whom all our Prayers
are to be addressed; and unless we can call an Angel or the Blessed Virgin, or
a Saint, Our Father, we can pray to none of them. And elsewhere he as plainly
directs us, by whom we are to apply our selves to God, and in whose Name and
Mediation we are to put up all our Requests to him, John 14.6. I am the Way,
and the Truth, and the Life; no man comes unto the Father, but by me: And then
it follows, Ver. 13, 14. And whatsoever you shall ask in my name, that will I
do; that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in
my name, I will do it. Nothing is clearer in the whole Bible, than one Mediator
between God and Men, Christ Jesus, and that he is our only Advocate and
Intercessor with God in Heaven for us.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, That the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church of Rome in this matter, is contrary to that of the Christian Church, for
several of the first Ages of it.

As for the Ages of the Apostles, it has been already proved out of their
Writings. That it was not practiced in the three first Ages, we have the
Acknowledgment of Cardinal Perron, and others of their learned Writers; and
they give a very remarkable Reason for it; namely, Because the Worship and
Invocation of Saints and Angels, and addressing our Prayers to God by them,
might have seemed to have given Countenance to the Heathen Idolatry. From
whence I cannot forbear, by the way, to make these two Observations. 1. That
the Invocation of Saints and Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, and addressing our
selves to God by their Mediation, was not in those Primitive Ages esteemed a
Duty of the Christian Religion; because, if it had, it could not have been
omitted for fear of the Scandal consequent upon it: And if it was not a Duty
then, By what Authority or Law, can it be made so since? 2. That this Practice
is very liable to the Suspicion of Idolatry; and surely every Christian cannot
but think it fit; that the Church of Christ should, like a chaste Spouse, not
only be free from the Crime, but from all Suspicion of Idolatry.

And for the next Ages after the Apostles, nothing is plainer, than that both
their Doctrine and Practice were contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the
present Church of Rome in this Matter. The most ancient Fathers of the
Christian Church do constanly define Prayer, to be an address to God; and
therefore it cannot be made to any but God only: And after the rise of
Arianism, they argued for the Divinity of Christ, against the Arians, from our
Praying to him; which Argument were of no force, if Prayers might be made to
any but God; and this was in the beginning of the Fourth Age.

And we no where find any mention of those Distinctions, of Gods by Nature, and
Gods by Participation (as Bellarmin calls the Angels and Saints) or of a
supreme and inferior Religious Worship; or of a Mediator of Redemption, and a
Mediator of Intercession; which are so commonly made use of by the Church of
Rome in this Controversy.

And, which is as considerable as any of the rest, the ancient Fathers were
generally of Opinion, that the Saints were not admitted to the Beatifick
Vision, till after the Day of Judgment; and this is acknowledged by the most
Learned of the Church of Rome. But this very Opinion, takes away the Foundation
of Praying to Saints; because the Church of Rome grounds it upon their Reigning
with Christ in Heaven, and upon the Light and Knowledge which is communicated
to them in the Beatifick Vision; and if so, then they who believed the Saints
not yet to be admitted to this Vision, could have no Reason or Ground to pray
to them.

And Lastly, The ancient Church prayed for Saints departed, and for the Blessed
Virgin her self; and therefore could not pray to them, as Intercessors for them
in Heaven, for whom they themselves interceeded upon Earth. And therefore the
Church of Rome, in compliance with the change which they have made in their
Doctrine, have changed the Missal in that Point, and instead of praying for St.
Leo (one of their Popes) as they were wont to do in their ancient Missal, in
this form, Grant, O Lord, that this Oblation may be profitable to the Soul of
thy Servant Leo; the Collect is now changed in the present Roman Missal into
this Form, Grant, O Lord, that by the Intercession of Blessed Leo, this
Offering may be profitable to us. And (as the Gloss upon the Canon Law
observes) this change was made in their Missal upon very good Reason; because
anciently they prayed for Leo, but now they pray to him; which is an ingenuous
Acknowledgement, that both the Doctrine and Practice of their Church are
plainly changed, from what they anciently were in this matter.

What the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome are in this matter, all
the World sees, and they themselves are so ashamed of them, that of late all
their endeavors have been, to represent them otherwise than in truth they are,
and to obtrude upon us a new Popery, which they think themselves better able to
defend than the old; which yet they have not shown, that they are so well able
to do; and therefore now, instead of defending the true Doctrines and Practices
of their own Church, they would fain mince and disguise them, and change them
into something that comes nearer to the Protestant Doctrine in those Points: As
if they had no way to defend their own Doctrines, but by seeming to desert
them, and by bringing them as near to ours as possibly they can.

But take them, as they have mollified them and pared them, to render them more
plausible and tenable; that which still remains of them, I mean the solemn
Invocation of Saints and Angels, as Mediators and Intercessors with God in
Heaven for us, is plainly contrary both to the Doctrine and Practice of the
Primitive Ages of Christianity.

As for the Age of the Apostles, I have already shown it; and the matter is as
clear for several of the next following Ages, as I shall briefly show, from a
few very plain Testimonies.

In the Age next to the Apostles, we have an Epistle of one of the Seven
Churches, (I mean the Church of Smyrna) in which, in Vindication of themselves
from that Calumny which was raised against them by the Jews, among the Heathen,
That if they permitted the Christians to have the body of the martyred
Polycarp, they would leave Christ, to worship Polycarp; I say, in vindication
of themselves from this Calumny, they declare themselves thus, Not knowing (say
they) that we can neither leave Christ, who suffered for the Salvation of the
World of those that are saved, nor Worship any other; or, (as it is in the old
Latin Translation) nor offer up the Supplication of Prayer to any other Person;
for as for Jesus Christ, we adore him, as being the Son of God; but as for the
Martyrs, we love them, as the Disciples and Imitators of the Lord. So that they
plainly exclude the Saints from any sort of Religious Worship, of which Prayer
or Invocation was always esteemed a very considerable part.

Ireneus likewise tells us, ( l. 2.) That the Church does nothing (speaking of
the Miracles which were wrought) by the Invocatin of Angels, nor by
Enchantment, nor by any other wicked Arts; but by Prayers to the Lord who made
all things, and by calling on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here all
invocation of Angels, and by the same or greater Reason, of the Saints, is
excluded. And Clemens Alexandrinus delivers it as the Doctrine of the Church;
That since there is but one good God, therefore both we and the Angels pray to
him, both for the giving, and the continuance of good things.

In the next Age, Origin is so full and express in this matter, that it is not
possible for any Protestant to speak more positively and clearly, l. 8 cont.
Celsum, where he does on set purpose declare and vindicate the Christian
Doctrine and Practice in this matter; We worship (says he) the one only God,
and his one only Son, and Word, and Image, with our utmost Supplications and
Honors, bringing our Prayers to the God of all things, through his only
begotten Son; And afterward, Away (says he) with Celsus his Counsel, that says,
we must pray to Demons (or Angels) for we must pray only to God who is above
all; we must pray to the only Begotten and first Born of every Creature, and we
must beseech him to offer up our Prayers which we make to him, to his God and
our God: and again, (speaking of Angels) As for the Favor of others (if that
be to be regarded) we know, that Thousands of Thousands stand before him, and
Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand minister unto him; these are our Brethren and
Friends, who when they see us imitating their Piety toward God, work together
to the Salvation of those who call upon God, and pray as they ought to do, that
is, to God only; and ( l. 5.) where Celsus urges him with this, That the
Scriptures call Angels Gods, he tells him, that the Scriptures do not call the
Angels Gods, with any Design to require us to worship and adore them instead of
God, who are Ministering Spirits, and bring Messages, and Blessings down to us
from God; for (says he) all Supplication, and Prayer, and Intercession, and
giving of Thanks, must be sent up to God, who is above all, by the High Priest,
who is above all Angels, and is the living Word and God. And though Angels be
only here mentioned, yet by the same Reason, all other Creatures are excluded,
from being the Objects of our Religious Worship and Invocation, or, Mediators
of Intercession with God for us; because all Supplication and Prayer, and
Intercession, and Thanksgiving, must be sent up to God by our High Priest, who
is the living Word and God. Let us then also (as he goes on) make Supplication
to the Word himself, and Intercession, and giving of Thanks, and Prayer: But to
Invocate Angels is not reasonable; since we do not comprehend the Knowledge of
them, which is above us; and if we could comprehend the Knowledge of them,
which is wonderful and secret, this very Knowledge which declares to us their
Nature and Office, would not allow us to presume to pray to any other, but to
the God who is Lord over all, and abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior
the Son of God. Where he gives Two plain Reasons, why we ought to Pray only to
God, and to offer up our Prayers only by the Mediation of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God and our Savior: First, Because he only is Lord over all, and therefore
the Worship of Prayer is to be given to him only. And then, Secondly, Because
we have no need of any other Patron and Benefactor, or of any other Mediator
and Advocate, he is abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior the Son of
God.

In the same Age Novatian, in his Book concerning the Trinity, makes use of
this argument, to prove the Divinity of Christ; because he hears our Prayers,
when we call upon him. If Christ (says he) be only a Man, how can he be present
every where to those that call upon him? since this is not the Nature of Man,
but of God, to be able to be present every where? If Christ be only a Man, why
do we in our Prayers call upon him as Mediator; since prayer to a Man is deemed
ineffectual to help or save us? If Christ be only a Man, why do we put our hope
in him; since Hope in Man is accursed in Scripture?

In the IVth. Century, the Apostolical Constitutions, under the Name of Clemens
Romanus (but undoubtedly written in that Age) give us a pregnant negative
Testimony in this matter; for though a great many of the public Prayers are
there set down at large, yet they are all directed to God alone, and not the
least Intimation there of any Prayer made to the Angels, or Saints, or even to
the Virgin Mary; nor of their Intercession or Aid; which now makes so great a
part of the Public Devotions of the Church of Rome.

Athanasius, in his Fourth Oration against the Arians, proves the Unity of the
Father and the Son, from 1 These. 3.11. Now God himself, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, direct our way unto you. From whence he argues thus, One would not pray
to receive any thing from the Father and the Angels, or from any other
Creature; nor would one say, God and the Angels give thee this; but one would
pray to receive any thing from the Father and the Son, because of their Unity
and Uniform Gift; for all things that are given by the Father, are given by the
Son, and there is nothing which the Father does not work by the Son; and then
concludes, that it does not belong to any, but to God alone, to Bless and grant
Deliverances. This I take to be a very remarkable Testimony against the Church
of Rome, who in their Public Offices join the Blessed Virgin with God, and our
Savior, in the same Breath, and sometimes put her before her Son; Let Mary and
her Son bless us; as it is in the Office of the Blessed Virgin; in direct
contradiction to what I just now cited out of Athanasius: and nothing so common
in their Mouths, as Jesu Maria, Jesus and Mary; nothing more frequent in their
most eminent Writers, than to join them together in their Doxologies and
Thanksgivings. Glory to God, and the Blessed Virgin, and to Jesus Christ, says
Gregory de Valentia. And Bellarmin himself concludes his Disputations
concerning the Worship of Saints; in these Words, Praise be to God, and to the
Blessed Virgin Mother Mary; likewise to Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of the
Eternal Father, be Praise and Glory. And in the very Roman Missal it self, they
make confession of their Sins to God Almighty, and the Blessed Virgin Mary, to
St. Michael the Archangel, and to all the Saints. And in their Absolution, they
join together the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Merits of the
Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints, for the Remission of Sins. And is not
this the very thing which Athanasius does so severely condemn?

I have mentioned before the Council of Laodicea, which about the middle of
this Century condemns the Worship of Angels, and Praying to them, as downright
Idolatry: And toward the end of this Fourth Age, and in the beginning of the
Fifth, when it is pretended that praying to Saints did begin (though it was
rather by way of Apostrophe and Rhetorical Address, than of formal Invocation)
there are express Testimonies against it of the most eminent Fathers of that
time. I will instance but in Three, Epiphanius, St. Chrysostom, and St.
Augustine.

Epiphanius, in his Confutation of the Heresy of the Collyridians (which he
calls the Heresy of the Women, because they first began the Worship of the
Virgin Mary) declares most expressly against the Worship of any Creature
whatsoever; For neither (says he) is Elias to be worshipped, though he is
reckoned among the living (meaning that he was taken up into Heaven, Body and
Soul) nor John, nor any other of the Saints: And as for the Virgin Mary, he
particularly adds, that if God will not have us to worship the Angels, how much
more would he not have us to worship her that was born of Anna? And concludes,
let Mary be had in Honor; but let the Lord be worshipped.

St. Chrysostom, in a long Discourse, persuades Men to address their Prayers
immediately to God, and not as we address our selves to great Men by their
Officers and Favorites; and tells us, that there is no need of such
Intercessors with God, who is not so ready to grant our Petitions, when we
entreat him by others, as when we pray to him our selves.

Lastly, St. Augustine, because the Scripture pronounces him accursed, that
puteth his trust in Man; from thence he argues, that therefore we ought not to
ask of any other, but of our Lord God, either the Grace to do well, or the
Reward of it. The contrary to which I am sure is done in several of the Public
Prayers used in the Church of Rome. And, l. 12. de Civ. Dei, he expressly tells
us, that the Names of the Martyrs were recited in their Prayers at the Altar;
but they were not invocated by the Priest, who did celebrate Divine Service.
And in the Third Council of Carthage (which was in St. Augustin's time) it is
enjoined (Can. 33.) that all Prayers that were made at the Altar, should be
directed to the Father. Which how it is observed in the Church of Rome, we all
know.

To conclude this matter, it cannot be made appear, that there were any Prayers
to Saints, in the Public Offices of the Church, till toward the end of the
Eighth Century. For in the Year 754. the Invocation of Saints was condemned by
a Council of 338 Bishops at Constantinople, as is acknowledged by the Second
Council of Nice, which first established this Superstition, in the Year 787;
and this very Council was condemned Seven Years after, in a Council at
Frankfort, and declared void, and to be no otherwise esteemed of, than the
Council of Ariminum.

Thus you see, when this Doctrine and Practice, so contrary to the Doctrine and
Practice of a great many of the first Ages of the Christian Church, was first
established, namely, at the same time with the Worship of Images, and when the
first Foundation of Transubstantiation was laid; which as they began at the
same time, so they are very fit to go together.

I should now have proceeded to the next thing which I proposed, namely, to
answer the chief Pretenses which are made for this Doctrine and Practice. But
of That in the following Discourse.

SERMON IV. Christ Jesus, the only Mediator between God and Men.
The Third Sermon on 1 Timothy II. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all.


IN the Two former Discourses upon this Text, I have treated on the Second
Proposition I laid down from the Words; viz. That there is but one Mediator
between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. In treating on this Proposition, I
showed,

First, That it is agreeable to Scripture.

Secondly, VOL. II.
That it is agreeable to one great End and Design of the Christian Religion,
and of our Savior's coming into the World, which was to destroy Idolatry out
of it.

Thirdly, That from the Nature and Reason of the thing, there can be but one
Mediator or Intercessor in Heaven with God for Sinners; and that he can be no
other than Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, I showed how contrary to this Doctrine, the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of Rome is, in their Invocation of Angels and the Blessed Virgin,
and the Saints, and making use of their Mediation and Intercession with God for
Sinners.

This I endeavored to do, by showing, 1st. How contrary this is to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures. 2ly. How contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church, for several of the first Ages of it. And thus far I have gone.

I proceed now in the 3d. Place, to answer the chief Pretenses and Excuses
which are made by those of the Church of Rome, Sermon. IV.
for this Doctrine and Practice.

As, 1. That they only say, that it is lawful to Pray to Angels and Saints; but
do not enjoin and require it. To this I answer Two things.

(1.) In saying that it is lawful to Pray to Saints and Angels (if they went no
farther) they say, that which they can never make good; because Prayer is an
Act of Religious Worship, and peculiar and proper to God only, and therefore
cannot be given to any Creature, Angel, or Saint. This I have proved from
Scripture, where our Savior commands us, when we pray, to say, Our Father
which art in Heaven; that is, to direct and address our Prayers to God only.
And St. Paul likewise forbids the worshipping Angels by invocating of them, and
making use of them as Mediators between God and us, in his Epistle to the
Colossians: which Theodoret expressly interprets concerning the Invocation of
Angels, and applying our selves to them, as Mediators and Intercessors with God
in Heaven for us. And the Council of Laodicea declares this Practice to be
Idolatry. Besides that the ancient Fathers of the Christian Church, for above
Three Hundred Years, never spoke of praying to any, but God only; and do
expressly condemn the Invocation of Angels, much more of the Saints, who are
Inferior to them; and therefore they always define Prayer to be an Address to
God, a Conversing and Discoursing with God; which would be a false Definition
of Prayer, if it were lawful to pray to any but to God only. All which
considered, one may justly wonder at the Confidence of some Men, who would have
it taken for granted, without any Proof, that the Invocation of Saints and
Angels is Lawful.

(2.) If it were true, that it is lawful to pray to Angels and Saints; it is
not true, that the Church of Rome does only declare it to be lawful, but does
not require and enjoin it; as some of their late Writers pretend.

With what Face can this be said, when there are so many Prayers to Angels and
Saints, and especially to the Blessed Virgin, in the Public Offices of their
Church, in which all are supposed to join, as much as in the Prayers which are
put up to God by the Priest? It Is true indeed, the People understand neither;
but they are present at both, and join in both alike; that is, as much as Men
can be said to join in that which they do not understand; as that Church
supposes People may do and receive great Edification also, by joining with the
Priest, in a Service which they do not understand. But, how they can be edified
by what they do not understand, I must confess my self as little able to
understand, as they do their Prayers. But whether they understand them, or not,
it is certain that if the People have any part in the Public Prayers of the
Church, they are bound to pray to Angels and Saints.

And if the Creed of Pope Pius IV. framed by Virtue of an Order of the Council
of Trent, be of any Authority with them; one of the Articles of it is, that I
do firmly hold, that the Saints, which Reign together with Christ, are to be
worshipped and invocated, and that they do offer up Prayers to God for us. And
this Creed all the Governors of Cathedrals and Superior Churches, and all who
hold any Dignity, or Benefice with Cure of Souls from them, are bound solemnly
to make Profession of, and Swear to, and carefully to cause it to be Held and
Taught, and Preached by all that are under their Charge; so that they are to
Teach the People, that the Saints which reign together with Christ, are to be
worshipped and prayed to. And therefore unless People are not bound to do that,
which they are to be Taught it is their Duty to do, they are by Virtue of this
Article, required to worship and pray to Saints. And if the Publicly Office of
their Church be the Public Worship; and Pope Pius his Creed, the Public Faith
of the Romish Church, no Man can be either of the Faith, or in the Communion of
that Church, who does not only hold it Lawful, but his Duty, to worship the
Saints in Heaven, and to pray to them, and accordingly does join in the Worship
of them, and Prayers to them, as much as in any other part of Divine Service.

2. Another Pretense for this Doctrine and Practice, is, that the Saints in
Heaven do pray for us; and what is this but to be Mediators and Intercessors
with God for us? And if so, why may not we pray to them, to intercede with God
for us? To this I answer four things.

(1.) We do not deny that the Saints in Heaven pray for us that are here upon
Earth, because they may do so for any thing we know; but that they do so, is
more than can be proved, either by clear Testimony of Scripture, or by any
convincing Argument from Reason, and therefore no Doctrine or Practice can be
safely grounded upon it,

(2.) Though it were certain, that the Saints in Heaven do pray for us; yet they
are not Mediators and Intercessors properly so called: For all Intercession
strictly and properly so called, is in Virtue of a Sacrifice offered by him
that intercedes; and therefore he only by whom Expiation of Sin is made upon
Earth, can be properly an Intercessor with God in Heaven; but this, no Angel or
Saint has done, or can do.

And (as I have showed in some of the former Discourses) it is the plain scope
of a great part of the Epistle to the Hebrews to prove this very thing, that
under the Gospel we have an High Priest that lives for ever, and appears in the
Presence of God for us, in the Virtue of that Blood which he shed, and that
Sacrifice which he offered upon the Cross for the Expiation of Sin: And that by
this High Priest only we have Access with Freedom and Confidence to the Throne
of Grace, and by him do offer up all our Prayers and Thanksgivings, and all
other Acts of Religious Worship to God: And this the Apostle shows was typified
in an imperfect Manner, by the Jewish High Priest under the Law, who was but
one, and none but he only could enter into the Holy of Holies, with the Blood
of the Sacrifices, that were slain and burnt without, by which Blood he made an
Atonement, and Interceded for the People; and though every Priest might pray
for the People, and the People for one another, which is a kind of
Intercession; yet that peculiar kind of Intercession, which was performed by
the High Priest, in the Holy of Holies, in virtue of the Sacrifice that was
slain without, could not be made, but by the High Priest only. By all which was
typified our High Priest under the Gospel who only has made Expiation of Sin,
by the Sacrifice of himself, and is entered into Heaven, to appear in the
Presence of God for us, where he lives for ever, to make Intercession for us,
in virtue of that Blood which was shed for the Expiation of Sin, and which can
only be presented to God, by him that shed it. And this is properly
Intercession, like that of the High Priest under the Law for the People of
Israel; and this kind of Intercession can be made by none in Heaven for us, but
only by the High Priest of our Profession, Jesus the Son of God, and by none
else can we offer up our Prayers and Services to God, and consequently we
cannot address our selves to any other, Angels or Saints, as Mediators with God
for us.

(3.) Supposing it certain, that the Saints do pray for us; yet we may not
address solemn Prayer to them to pray for us, because Prayer and solemn
Invocation is a part of that Religious Worship which is peculiar to God.

(4.) Supposing it not only certain that the Saints in Heaven do pray for us,
but likewise that they might be proper Mediators and Intercessors with God for
us; yet we ought not to pray to them, because they cannot hear us, as I shall
have occassion to show fully by and by.

3. Another of their Pretenses or Excuses for this Practice, is, that praying
to Saints to pray for us, is no more than what we do to good Men upon Earth,
when we desire them to pray for us. So the late Expounder of the Catholic
Faith, namely the Bishop of Meaux, tells us, that they pray to the Saints in
Heaven, in the same order of Brotherly society, with which we entreat our
Brethren upon Earth to pray for us.

But that this is not a true Representation either of their Doctrine or
Practice in this matter, will appear by these following Considerations.

(1.) That they pray to the Angels and Saints in Heaven, with the same solemn
Circumstances of Religious Worship, that they pray to God himself, in the same
place, and in the same humble Posture, and in the same Religious Offices and
Services, in which they pray to God; which surely is never done by any to their
Brethren upon Earth.

(2.) That in their Prayers and Thanksgivings, they join the Angels and the
Blessed Virgin arid the Saints together with God and Christ, as if (to use
their own Phrase) it were in the same order of Brotherly Society, and as if
they were all equally the Objects of our Invocation and Praise; of which in my
last Discourse, I gave several plain Instances; but this also is never done to
our Brethren upon Earth.

(3.) That in the Creed of Pope Pius IV. it is expressly said, that the Saints
which reign together with Christ, are to be Worshipped and invocated; but this
surely they will not allow to be done to our Brethren upon Earth. And the
Council of Trent does expressly ground the Worship and Invocation of Saints,
upon their reigning with Christ in Heaven; and therefore this Worship and
Invocation of Saints must necessarily be something more, than according to the
same order of brotherly Society, with which we entreat our Brethren upon Earth
to pray for us: Otherwise the Reason given by the Council of their reigning
with Christ in Heaven, would be frivolous; if the same thing may be done to our
Brethren upon Earth.

(4.) In the Public Offices of their Church, they do not only pray to the
Saints to pray for them, but they direct their Prayers and Thanksgivings
immediately to them, for all those Blessings and Benefits which they ask of
God, and thank him for. Of which innumerable Examples might be given out of
their Public Offices; particularly in the Office of the Blessed Virgin, they
pray to the Angels thus; Deliver us we beseech you by your command from all our
Sins.

And the words of the Decree of the Council of Trent [ ad eorum orationes,
opem, auxiliumque confugere, to flee to their Prayers, aid, and help] unless we
will make them a mere tautology, must of necessity signify something more than
begging of them to pray for us. And indeed those words of their aid and help,
seem to be added one purpose to give countenance to those direct Prayers which
are made to the Saints, for all Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, and which
still remain without any Change in their Public Offices; and unless we will
understand them contrary to the plain and obvious Sense, of those Prayers, they
must signify something more than Praying to the Saints to pray for us.

It Is true indeed, that the Catechism which was framed by order of the Council
of Trent, for the Explaining of their Doctrines, makes the difference between
their Prayers to God, and to the Saints, to lie in this, that we say to God,
Have mercy one us, or hear our Prayers; but to the Saints, Pray for us. But I
have shown before, that this is not the constant Form of Praying to Saints, but
that frequently they make direct Addresses to them for their help and aid. And
this the Compilers of the Catechism were sensible of, and therefore they add,
although it be Lawful in another manner to ask of the Saints themselves, that
they would have mercy on us; because they are very merciful. And is not God so
too? And then where is the difference between their Prayers to God, and to the
Saints? If it neither lie in the Matter of them, nor in the Form, nor in the
Reason of them; if we pray to them for the same thing, and in the same Form,
have mercy on us, and our Prayers to them be grounded upon the same Reason,
that our Prayers to God are, namely because they are merciful; where then is
the difference between them?

4. I will mention but one Pretense more, which is, that by Praying to the
Saints in Heaven, they do not make them Gods; and therefore there can be no
Suspicion or danger of Idolatry inthe case.

To this I shall answer Two things.

(1.) That praying to them in all places, and at all times, and for all sorts
of Blessings, does suppose them to have the incommunicable Perfections of the
Divine Nature imparted to them, or inherent in them, namely his Omnipotence,
and Omniscience, and Immense Presence; and to whatever Being we ascribe these
Perefections, Sermon. V.
in so doing we make it God; for Prayer to God is no otherwise an
acknowledgment of his Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Immense Presence, than as
we do in all places, and at all times, pray to him for all things; and so they
do to the Saints, and that not only with vocal but with mental Prayer, which
the Council of Trent allows, and in so doing, necessarily supposes them to
know our hearts, directly contrary to the Reason which Solomon gives, why we
should put up all our Prayers and Supplications to God, (1 Kings 3.39.) for
thou, even thou, only know the hearts of all the Children of Men.

(2.) Bellarmine is so sensible of the dint of this Argument, that he is forced
to acknowledge the Saints which reign with Christ in Heaven to be Gods by
participation, (that is, a sort of inferior Gods, as the Heathen supposed
their Mediators to be) and that therefore we may fly to their Aid and Help, as
well as to their Intercession and Prayers. And is this also to pray to the
Saints in Heaven, in the same Order of Brotherly Society, with which we entreat
our Brethren upon Earth to pray for us? This methinks is great Familiarity, to
treat Gods by Participation, just in the same manner as we do our Brethren upon
Earth. Certainly either Bellarmine has raised the Saints in Heaven too high,
when he makes them Gods by participation; or the Bishop of Meaux has sunk them
too low, when he thinks they are to be treated and addressed to, in the same Rank
of Brotherly Society, with mortal Men here upon Earth.

One cannot but think the Decree of the Council of Trent to be very obscure and
ambiguous, when it can admit of Two so very different Explications. If the
infallible Judge of Controversies can speak no plainer; I think we had even
best stick to the Bible, and hear what God says in his Word, and endeavor to
understand it as well as we can.

I proceed now to the Fourth thing which I proposed, namely, to show that this
Practice of theirs, of Addressing our selves to Angels and Saints, and making
use of their Mediation, to offer up our Prayers and Thanksgivings to God is not
only Needless, being no where commanded by God; but Useless also, and
unprofitable.

They are so far from pretending, that it is commanded by God, that several of
their later Writers would fain make us believe that it is not enjoined by their
Councils; but only declared to be lawful, or at most, but recommended as
profitable. Nor is there any Example of praying to Saints, either in the Old or
New Testament: Not in the Old, (as they of the Church of Rome confess) because
the Saints were not then admitted into Heaven; nor in the New, for fear of
scandalizing the Jews, and of making the Gentiles think they proposed new Gods,
and new Mediators to them, instead of the old; which are the Reasons given by
their own Writers.

And it is Needless likewise; because the Mediation of Jesus Christ alone is
sufficient for us, and more than the Intercession of Millions of Saints and
Angels. He alone is able to save to the utmost all those that come to God by
him, as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks. Has not he made a clear and full
Promise to us, that whatever we ask in his Name, shall be granted us? And have
we any Reason to doubt, either of his Inclination and good will, or of his
Power and Interest to do us good? What need then is there to sue for the
Favor, or to take in the Assistance of any other, even of those who are
thought to be most powerful, and the chief Ministers and Favorites in that
Heavenly Court? After such an Assurance that my Business will be effectually
done there, by that great Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous;
why should I apply my self to St. Peter, though he be said to keep the Keys of
Heaven; or to Michael the Archangel, though he be the chief of the Ministering
Spirits; or to the Blessed Virgin her self, notwithstanding those glorious
Titles of the Queen of Heaven, and the Mother of Mercy, which they of the
Church of Rome, are pleased to bestow upon her, and without her consent, and as
may reasonably be presumed, against her will?

I will put a Case, which may help to render this matter a little more plain
and sensible to us, so as every Man may be able to judge of it. Suppose a King
should constitute his Son, the great Master of Requests; with this express
Declaration and Assurance, that all Petitions that were addressed to him by his
Son, should be graciously received and answered; in this case, though every Man
might use his own Discretion, at his own Peril, and take what course he
pleased, yet I should most certainly prefer all any Petitions to the King, in
the way which he had so plainly directed, and should trouble never a Courtier
of them all with my Business; for fear the King should think, that I did either
distrust his Royal Word, or despise his Son, by my soliciting the Aid and Help
of every little Courtier, after I had put my Petition into the Hands of this
great Master of Requests.

And now I will not distrust any of your Understandings so far as to make the
Application. I will only add, that it is an Eternal Rule of Truth, and which
never fails in any Case, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora,
it is in vain to attempt that by more Ways and Means, which may as well and as
effectually be done by one; because this would be perfect loss of time and
pains: And therefore they who would send us so far about, as to trouble all the
Saints and Angels in Heaven with our Petitions, when they cannot deny but that
our great Mediator is alone sufficient; do seem to me to send us upon a very
sleeveless Errand: So that if with all their Skill in Fencing, they could
defend this Practice from being Unlawful, yet this one thing is a sufficient
Objection in Reason against it, that it is perfectly Needless.

Or if we could imagine any need of this; all Addresses to them must be vain
and unprofitable, if they do not know our Wants, and hear out Prayers that are
put up to them; which St. Augustine thought they do not know and hear, Fatendum
est (says he, L. De Cura pro mortuis) nescire quidem mortuos, quid hic agatur;
it must be acknowledged, that the Dead are ignorant of what is done here. This
was his Opinion; but we are certain that they cannot know our Wants, nor hear
our Prayers at all Times and in all Places; unless they can either be present
every where, which no Finite Being can be; or else God be pleased in some
Supernatural way to communicate to them the Knowledge of our Wants, and of the
Prayers which we put up to them; which we can never know that he does, unless
he have communicated to us, that he is pleased to do so, of which the Scripture
no where gives us the least intimation.

But because they pretend, that the Scripture gives us some hints of this, I
shall briefly examine what they say about this Matter.

I. That the Angels know our Condition here below, because they are said to
rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner; and therefore the Saints do likewise
know our Condition, because they shall be like the Angels. But this is not said
of them till after the Resurrection, when we shall have no Occasion to pray to
them. Besides that it may well enough be supposed, that God may reveal both to
the Angels and Saints in Heaven, the Conversion of a Sinner, because it may
contribute to the Increase of their Joy and Happiness: But will it hence
follow, that God reveals to them all other Circumstances of our Condition, our
Dangers and Temptations and Troubles, our Sins and our Sufferings, the
Knowledge whereof would no ways contribute to the Increase of their Happiness?
And yet in order to their Intercession with God for us, their Knowledge of
these things would be most beneficial to us.

II. Because the rich Man was concerned in Hell for the Salvation of his
Relations on Earth, they argue that it is much more probable, that the Saints
in Heaven are concerned for us, and are ready to pray for us, and therefore it
is very credible, that some way or other, they have the Knowledge of our
Condition and Wants, though we cannot certainly tell what that particular way
is.

To which I answer.

(1.) That it is a known Rule amongst all Divines, that no certain Argument can
be drawn from the Circumstances of a Parable, but only from the main Scope and
Intention of it; nor is it so likely that the wicked in Hell should have any
share in that, which St. Paul tells us, is the great Virtue of the Saints in
Heaven, I mean Charity; and if they have it not, then no Argument can be drawn
from it. Some of their Commentators think, that this Motion of the rich Man to
Abraham concerning his Brethren, did not proceed from Charity to them, but to
himself; lest his Torment and Punishment should be increased by their coming to
Hell, by the means of the ill Example which he had given them, when he was upon
Earth: And Cardinal Cajetan thinks that he was concerned for his Brethren out
of Pride and Ambition, and because it would be for the Honor of his Family, to
have some of them in that Glory (so far above any thing in this World) which he
saw Abraham and Lazarus possessed of. This is a Reason, which I confess I should
not have thought on; and yet perhaps it might be likely enough to enter into
the Mind of a Cardinal. And I cannot but observe by the way, that this Petition
or Request, which the rich Man in Hell made to Abraham, is the only Instance we
meet with in Scripture, of any thing like a Prayer that was put up to any of
the Saints in Heaven.

Well! But suppose that the rich Man in Hell had this Charity for his Brethren
and we will easily agree, that the Saints in Heaven have much more Charity, not
only for their Kindred, but for all Men here upon Earth; let us now consider
the particular way and manner which the great Divines of the Church of Rome (I
mean the Schoolmen, who cannot be content to be ignorant of any thing) do
assign of the Knowledge which the Saints in Heaven have of the Condition and
Wants of men here below.

They tell us that they know all our Prayers and Wants in the Glass of the
Deity, or Trinity; which Metaphor of the Glass of the Deity, or Trinity, if it
have any meaning, it must be this, that the Saints in Heaven beholding the Face
of God or the Divine Essence, in which the Knowledge of all things is
contained, they may in that Glass see all things that God knows: But then they
spoil all this fine Speculation again, by telling us, that this Glass does not
necessarily represent to them all that Knowledge which is in the Divine Mind;
but that it is a kind of voluntary Glass, in which the Saints are only
permitted to see so much as God pleases; but how much that is, they cannot
tell us. Which amounts to no more than this; that the Saints in Heaven know as
much of our Condition here upon Earth, as God is pleased to reveal to them: And
if this be all, it is as good a Reason why we should pray to good men in the
East or West Indies, to pray for us and help us, because they also know as much
of our Necessities and Prayers, as God thinks fit to reveal to them.

But if the Saints must have a Revelation from God of our Prayers, before that
they know that we pray to them; then the shortest and surest way both, is to
pray to God, and not to them; or however (as Bellarmine confesses) it were
very fit to pray to God, before every Prayer we make to the Saints, that he
would be pleased to reveal that Prayer to them, that upon this Signal and
Notice given them by God, they may betake themselves to pray to God for us. But
unless it were very clear from Scripture, that God had appointed this Method,
it is in Reason such a way about, as no Man would take that could help it: And
it seems to me to as little purpose; for why should not a Man think God as
ready to grant him all his other Requests, without the Mediation and
Intercession of Saints, as this one Request of revealing our Prayers and Wants
to them? And if this way be not thought so convenient, I know but one more, and
that is, to pray to the Saints to go to God, and beg of him, that he would be
pleased to reveal to them our Spplications and Wants, that they may know what
to pray to him for in our behalf; which is just such a wise course, as if a Man
should write a Letter to his Friend that cannot read, and in a Postscript
desire him, that as soon as he has received it, he would carry it to one that
can read, and entreat him to read it to him. Sermon. VI.
So that which way soever we put the Case, what course soever we take in this
Matter, it will be so far from seeming Reasonable, that we shall have much ado,
and must handle the business very tenderly, to hinder it from appearing very
Ridiculous.

Thus I have examined their chief Pretenses from Scripture, for the
Countenancing this Doctrine and Practice, and have shown how little, or rather
nothing at all is there to be found for it; and That alone is Reason enough
against it, though there were nothing in Scripture against it, that there is
nothing in Scripture for it: But I have already produced clear Proof out of the
New Testament against it. And because they think the least show and probability
from Scripture, a good Argument on their side, I will offer them a probable
Argument out of the Old Testament, upon which though I will lay no absolute
stress, yet I believe it would puzzle them, upon their Principles, to give a
clear Answer to it; and it is from 2 Kings 2.9. where Elijah, just before he
was taken up into Heaven, says to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before
I be taken away from thee; thereby intimating (as one would think) that then
was the last Opportunity of asking any thing of him: But if Elijah had
understood the Matter right (as the Church of Rome does now) he should rather
have directed him, to have prayed to him when he was in Heaven, where he would
have a more powerful Interest, and be in a better Capacity to do him a
Kindness. For the Reason the Church of Rome gives, why they did not pray to the
Saints under the Old Testament (namely because they were not then admitted into
Heaven) will not hold in the Case of Elijah, who was taken up into Heaven Body
and Soul, and consequently in as good Circumstances to be prayed to, as any of
the Saints and Martyrs that have gone to Heaven since.

I should now have proceeded, in the Fifth and last place, to have shown, That
this Practice is not only Needless and Useless, but very Dangerous and Impious;
because contrary to the Christian Religion, and greatly derogating from the
Merit and Virtue of Christ's Sacrifice, and from the Honor of the only
Mediator between God and Men, Christ Jesus. And indeed, how can we apply our
selves to any other Mediators and Intercessors with God in Heaven for us,
without a gross and apparent Contempt of the High Priest of our Profession,
Jesus the Son of God? As if we either distrusted his Kindness and Affection, or
his Power and Interest in Heaven, to obtain at God's hand all those Blessings
which we stand in need of. The Apostle to the Hebrews tells us expressly, that
he is able to save to the utmost all those that come to God by him; that is,
who address their Prayers and Supplications to God in his Name and Mediation.
But if we will choose other Mediators for our selves, of whom we are not sure
that they can either hear or help us, we may fall short of that Salvation,
which the Apostle tells us we are secure of by the Mediation of Jesus Christ;
for he is able, etc.

But this has been shown so abundantly in the former part of this Discourse,
and is so clearly consequent from the whole, that I shall here conclude my
Discourse upon the Second Proposition I laid down from the words of my Text,
viz. That there is but one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus.

As to the Third Proposition contained in the Text, viz. That this one
Mediator, Jesus Christ, gave himself a Ransom for all, I have treated on that
Subject particularly, on another A Sermon concerning the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ. Printed in the year, 1693.
Occasion.

And as to the Fourth and last Proposition, viz. That the Mediation or
Intercession of Jesus Christ is founded in his Redemption of Mankind; and
because he gave himself a Ransom for all, therefore He and He only is qualified
to Intercede for all men, in virtue of that Sacrifice which he offered for the
Salvation of Mankind, I judge nothing more needful to be added, to what has
fallen in concerning that Subject, in my handling the Second Proposition, in
this and the two former Sermons.

SERMON V. The general and Effectual Publication of the Gospel by the Apostles.
Preached on Ascension-Day. 1688.
Mark XVI. 19, 20. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received
up into Heaven, and sat on the right Hand of God. And they went forth, and
preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with
Signs following.


IN these Words you have these Two great Points of Christian Doctrine.

I. Our Savior's Ascension into Heaven, and Exaltation at the right hand of
God; VOL. II.
he was received up into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.

II. The Effect or Consequence of his Ascension and Exaltation, which was the
general and effectual Publication of the Gospel; they went forth, and preached
every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs
following. And both these are very proper for this Day; but I shall at this
time handle the latter Point, namely, the Effect op Consequence of our
Savior's Ascension into Heaven, and Exaltation at the right hand of God; they
went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and
confirming the Word with signs following.

And these Words contain two things in them.

I. The general Publication of the Gospel, by the Apostles; they went forth and
preached every where. II. The Reason of the great Efficacy and Success of it;
namely, the Divine and Miraculous Power, which accompanied the Preaching of it;
Sermon. V.
the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the Word with signs following.
I. The general Publication of the Gospel by the Apostles; they went forth, and
Preached every where. And indeed the Industry of the Apostles, and the other
Disciples, in publishing the Gospel, was almost incredible. What Pains did they
take? what Hazards did they run? what Difficulties and Discouragements did they
contend withal in this work? and yet their Success was greater than their
Industry, and beyond all Humane Expectation: As will appear, if we consider
these Five things.

1. The vast Spreading of the Gospel in so short a space. 2. The wonderful
Power and Efficacy of it, upon the Lives and Manners of Men. 3. The Weakness
and Meanness of the Instruments, that were employed in this great Work. 4. The
powerful Opposition that was raised against it. 5. The great Discouragements to
the Embracing the Profession of it. I shall speak briefly to each of these.
1. The vast Spreading of the Gospel in so short a space. This is represented,
Rev. 14.6. by an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, and preaching the
Everlasting Gospel to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. No
sooner was the Doctrine of the Christian Religion published, and made known to
the World, but it was readily embraced by great numbers, almost in all places
where it came. And indeed so it was foretold, in the Prophecies of the Old
Testament. Genesis 49.10. That when Shiloh (that is the Messiah) should come, to
him should the gathering of the people be: And Isa. 2.2. That in the last days
the mountains of the house of the Lord should be established in the top of the
mountain, and be exalted above the hills, and that all nations should flow unto
it. Isa. 60.8. the Prophet speaking of Men's ready submission to the Gospel, and
the great number of those that should come in upon the Preaching of it, they
are said, to fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to the windows.

So quick and strange a Progress did this new Doctrine and Religion make in the
World, that in the space of about 30 Years, after our Savior's Death, it was
not only diffused through the greatest part of the Roman Empire, but had
reached as far as Parthia and India. In which we see our Savior's Prediction
fully verified, that before the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Gospel should be
Preached in all the World, Math. 24.14. This gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the
end come. But this is not all: Men were not only brought in to the Profession
of the Gospel; but,

2. This Doctrine had likewise a wonderful Power and Efficacy upon the Lives
and Manners of Men. The generality of those that entertained the Gospel, were
obedient to it in word and deed, as the Apostle tells us, concerning the
Gentiles that were converted to Christianity, Romans 15.18. Upon the change of
their Religion, followed also the change of their Manners, and of their former
course of Life. They that took upon them the Profession of Christianity, did
thenceforth not walk as other Gentiles did, in the lusts of the flesh, and
according to the vicious course of the world; but did put off, concerning their
former conversation, the old man, which was corrupt, according to deceitful
lusts; and were renewed in the spirit of their mind, and did put on the new
man, which after God was created in righteousness and true holiness. So strange
an Effect had the Gospel upon the Lives of the generality of the Professors of
it, that I remember Tertullian, in his Apology to the Roman Emperor and Senate,
challenges them to instance in any one, that bore the Title of Christian, that
was condemned as a Thief, or a Murderer, or a Sacrilegious Person, or that was
guilty of any of those gross Enormities, for which so many Pagans were every
day made Examples of Public Justice, and Punished and Executed among them.

And this certainly was a very admirable and hapy Effect, which the Gospel had
upon Men, to work so great and sudden a Change in the Lives of those who
entertained this Doctrine, to take them quite off from those vicious Practices,
which they had been brought up in and accustomed to; to change their Spirits,
and the temper of their Minds; and of lewd and dishonest, to make them sober
and just, and holy in all manner of Conversation; of proud and fierce,
contentious and passionate, malicious and revengeful, to make them humble and
meek, kind and tenderhearted, peaceable and charitable.

And that the Primitive Christians were generally good Men, and of virtuous
Lives, is credible, because their Religion did teach and oblige them to be
such; which though it be not effectual now, to make all the Professors of* it
such, as it requires they should be; yet it was a very forcible Argument then,
in the Circumstances in which the Primitive Christians were: For Christianity
was a hated and persecuted Profession: No Man could then have any inducement to
embrace it, unless he were resolved to practice it, and live according to the
Rules of it; for it offered Men no Rewards and Advantages in this World; but on
the contrary threatened Men with the greatest Temporal Inconveniences and
Sufferings; and it promised no Happiness to Men in the other World upon any
other terms, than of denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and of living
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

And besides this Consideration, we have the best Testimony in the World of
their Unblameable Lives; viz. the Testimony of their professed Enemies, who did
not persecute them for any personal Crimes, which they charged particular
Persons withal, but only for their Religion, acknowledging them otherwise to be
very innocent and good People. Particulary Pliny, in his Letter to Trajan the
Emperor (who had given him in Charge, to make particular Enquiry concerning the
Christians) gives this honorable Report of them, That there was no fault to be
found in them, besides their obstinate refusal to Sacrifice to the Gods; that
at their Religious Meetings it was an essential part of their Worship to oblige
themselves by a solemn Sacrament, against Murder, and Theft, and Adultery, and
all manner of Wickedness and Vice. No Christian Historian could have given a
better Character of them, than this Heathen Writer does. But,

3. The Success of the Gospel will appear, yet more strange, if we consider the
Weakness and Meanness of the Instruments that were employed in this great Work.
A company of plain and illiterate Men, most of them destitute of the advantages
of Education, went forth upon this great Design, weak and unarmed, unassisted
by any worldy interest, having no Secular Force and Power on their side, to
give countenance and authority to them; and this not only at their first
setting out, but they remained under these Disadvantages for three Ages
together.

The first Publishers of the Christian Religion offered Violence to no Man, did
not go about to compel any by Force to entertain the Doctrine which they
Preached, and to list themselves of their number; they were not attended with
Legions of armed Men, to dispose Men for the reception of their Doctrine, by
Plunder and Free Quarter, by Violence and Tortures; this Modern Method of
Conversion was not then thought of; nor did they go about to tempt and allure
Men to their Way, by the Promises of Temporal Rewards, and by the Hopes of
Riches and Honors; nor did they use any artificial insinuations of Wit and
Eloquence, to gain upon the Minds of Men, and steal their Doctrines into them;
but delivered themselves with the greatest plainness and simplicity; and
without any studied Ornaments of Speech, or fine Arts of Persuasion, declared
plainly to them, the Doctrine and Miracles, the Life, and Death, and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, promising Life and Immortality to them that did
believe and obey his Doctrine, and threatening Eternal Woe and Misery in another
World, to the despisers of it.

And yet these contemptible Instruments, notwithstanding all these
disadvantages, did their work effectually, and, by the Power of God going along
with them, gained numbers every day to their Religion, and in a short space,
drew the world after them.

Nor did they only win over the Common People, but also several Persons
considerable for their Dignity, and Eminent for their Learning, who afterward
became zealous Assertors of Christianity, and were not ashamed to be Instructed
in the Saving Knowledge of the Gospel, by such mean and unlearned Persons as
the Apostles were; for they saw something in them more Divine, and which
carried with it a greater Power and Persuasion, than Humane Learning and
Eloquence.

4. We will consider the mighty Opposition that was raised against the Gospel.
At its first appearance it could not be otherwise, but that it must meet with a
great deal of difficulty and opposition, from the Lusts and Vices of Men, which
it did so plainly and so severely declare against, and likewise from the
Prejudices of Men that had been brought up in a contrary Religion; no Prejudice
being so strong, as that which is founded in Education; and of all Prejudices
of Education, none so obstinate and hard to be removed, as those about
Religion, yea, though they be never so absurd and unreasonable. Has a Nation
changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? Men are very hardly brought off from
the Religion which they have been brought up in, how little Ground and Reason
soever there be for it; the being trained up in it, and having a reverence for
it implanted in them in their tender Years, supplies all other defects.

Had Men been free and indifferent in Religion, when Christianity first
appeared in the World, and had they not had their Minds prepossest with other
apprehensions of God and Religion, and been inured to Rites and Superstitions
of a quite different Nature from the Christian Religion; or had they at that
time been weary of the Superstitions of their Idolatrous Worship, and been
enquiring after a better way of Religion; then indeed the Christian Religion
had appeared with great advantage, and would in all probability have been
entertained with a readiness of Mind proportionable to the Reasonableness of
it. But this was not the Case: When the Doctrine of the Gospel was first
Published in the World, the whole World, both Jews and Gentiles, were violently
prejudiced against it, and fixed in their several Religions.

The Jews indeed in former times had been very prone to relinquish the Worship
of the True God, and to fall into the Heathen Idolatry: But after God had
Punished them severely for that Sin, by a long Captivity, they continued ever
after, very strict and firm to the Worship of the True God; and never were they
more tenacious of their Religion and Law, than at that very time when our
Savior appeared in the World: And though He was foretold in their Law, and
most particularly described, in the authentic Books of their Religion, the
Prophets of the Old Testament; yet by reason of certain groundless Traditions,
which they had received from the Interpreters of their Law, That their Messiah
was to be a great Temporal Prince, they conceived an invincible Prejudice
against our Savior, upon account of the Mean Circumstances in which he
appeared; and upon this Prejudice they rejected him, and put him to death, and
persecuted his Followers: And though their Religion was much nearer to the
Christian, than any of the Heathen Idolatries; yet upon this account, of our
Savior's Mean Appearance, they were much more averse to the Entertainment of
it, than the grossest Idolaters among the Nations.

Not but that their Prejudice also was very great; the common People being
strongly addicted to the Idolatry and Superstitions of their several Countries;
and the Wiser, and more Learned (whom they called their Philosophers) were so
puffed up, with a conceit of their own Knowledge and Eloquence, that they
despised the rudeness and simplicity of the Apostles, and looked upon their
Doctrine of a Crucified Savior, as ridiculous, and the Story of his
Resurrection from the dead, as absurd and impossible. So St. Paul tells us,
that the Cross of Christ was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness.

But besides the Opposition which the Gospel met withal, from the Lusts and
Prejudices of Men, the Powers of the World did likewise strongly combine
against it. Among the Jews, the Chief Priests and Rulers did, with all their
force and malice, endeavor to stifle it in the birth, and to suppress it in
its first rise; and several of the Roman Emperors, who were then the great
Governors of the World, engaged all their Authority, and their whole Strength,
for the extirpation of it, and raised such a storm of Persecution against it,
as swept away greater numbers of Mankind, than any Famine or Plague or War that
ever was in the Roman Empire: And yet this Religion bore up against all this
Opposition, and make its way through all the Resistance, that the Lusts and
Prejudices of Men, armed with the Power and Authority of the whole World, could
make against it. And this brings me to the

5. and last Consideration I mentioned, the great discouragement that was given
to the Entrance of this Religion.

There was nothing left to invite and engage Men to it, but the Consideration
of another World; for all the Evils of this World threatened every one that took
the Profession of Christianity upon him. Whoever was known to be a Christian,
was liable to Reproach and Ruin, to cruel Mockings and Scourgings, to
Banishment, or Imprisonment and Confiscation of Estate; but these were slight
and tolerable Evils, in comparison of others that were commonly inflicted upon
them; they were condemned to the Mines, and to the Lions, and all imaginable
Cruelties were exercised upon them; the most exquisite Torments that could be
devised, and Death in all its fearful shapes was presented to them, to deter
Men from embracing this Religion, and to tempt them to quit it: And yet they
persisted in the Profession of their Religion, and for the sake of it, did not
only take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, but the most barbarous usage of
their Persons, and demeaned themselves not only with Patience and Courage, but
with Exultation and Triumph, under those Tortures which no Man can hear or read
of, without horror: And they did not only bear up thus manfully, for one brunt;
but when these violent Persecutions were renewed and repeated upon them,
Christianity supported it self under all these daunting Discouragements for
almost Three hundred Years, and held out, till the very Malice of their
Persecutors was out of breath, and their Cruelty had tired it self.

Nay it did not only support it self, under all these Oppositions, but grew and
prospered, and the Blood of Martyrs became the Seed of the Church, and
Christians sprang up faster, than any Persecution could mow them down: For Men
by Degrees became curious to enquire into the Cause of such Sufferings, and the
Reason of so much Constancy and Patience under them; and upon enquiry were
satisfied, and became Christians themselves; and many times their very
Persecutors were ready to Sacrifice their Lives the next Day, for that very
Cause, for which but the Day before, they had put others to Death.

And it cannot here be reasonably Objected, that Christians yielded up
themselves to all these Sufferings, upon the same Account that some brave
Spirits among the Heathen, laid down their Lives for their Country; namely, out
of a desire of Fame, and to perpetuate their Names in After-ages; this, I say,
cannot reasonably be said in this Case; because these Sufferers, were not the
great and ambitious Spirits, the Flower and Select Part of Mankind, but the
Common People, and many of them of the tenderer Sex and Age, who have usually a
greater Sense of Pain than of Glory; and yet so were they animated by their
Religion, and Transported beyond themselves, as not only to submit, but many
times to offer themselves to those Sufferings, by declaring themselves to be
Christians, when no Man accused them, and when they knew they should die, for
making that Profession; so that it is harder to justify their forwardness to
Suffer, than the sincerity of their Sufferings. Besides, that nothing could be
more foolish and unreasonable, than for Men to hope to get a Name by Suffering
in a Crowd, and to be particularly remembered to Posterity, when they dyed in
such multitudes, that no Man knew the Names of the greatest part of the
Sufferers.

You see then how strongly the Gospel prevailed, how soon this new Religion
overran the World, how suddenly it subdued the Spirits, and changed the
Manners of Men; and by what mean and despicable Instruments, to all humane
appearance, this great Work was done; and how in despite of all Opposition and
Discouragements, it was carried on. Can any one of the false Religions of the
World pretend to have been propagated and established in such a manner, merely
by their own force, and the Evidence and Power of Truth upon the Minds of Men;
and to have born up and sustained themselves so long under such fierce
Assaults, as Christanity has done?

As for the Religion of Mahomet, it is famously known to have been planted by
force at first, and to have been maintained in the World, by the same violent
means. So that great Impostor openly declares, that he came not to plant his
Religion by Miracles, but the Sword.

And as for the Idolatries of the Heathen, they came in upon the World by
insensible degrees, and did not oppose the Corruptions of Men, but grew out of
them; and being suited to the vicious Temper and Disposition of Mankind, they
easily gained upon their Ignorance and Superstition, by Custom and Example.
They were just such a Corruption of Natural Religion, in such times of darkness
and ignorance, and by such insensible steps, as there has been since, of the
Christian Religion in some Parts of the World, which we all know. But no sooner
did the Light of the Gospel shine out upon the World, but the Idolatry and
Superstition of the Heathen fell before it, like Dagon before the Ark of God;
and though it had the Power of the World, and Countenance of Authority on its
side, yet it was not able to maintain its ground; and no sooner was that Prop
taken away, which was the only support of it, but it presently sunk and
vanished; it was not driven out of the World by Violence and Persecution, but
upon the breaking in of so great a Light, it silently withdrew, as being
ashamed of it self: And when afterward the Emperor Julian endeavored to
retrieve it, by his Wit and Authority, and used all imaginable Arts and
Stratagems, to suppress and extinguish Christianity, he was able to effect
neither; for the Christian Religion kept its ground, and Paganism, after it had
made a little Blaze, died with him.

Now to what Cause shall we ascribe this wonderful Success, and Prevalency of
the Gospel in the World? There can but these Two be imagined; the Excellency of
the Christian Religion, and the Power and Presence of the Divine Spirit
accompanying it.

1. The Excellency of the Christian Religion; which both in respect of the
goodness of its Precepts, and the assurance of its Rewards, has plainly the
advantage of any Religion, that ever yet appeared in the World. And this is a
great Advantage indeed: But by this alone it could never have been able to have
broken through all that mighty Opposition and Resistance, which was made
against it; and therefore that it might be able to encounter this with Success,

2. God was pleased to accompany the first Preaching of it, with a mighty and
sensible Presence and Power of his Spirit. And this brings me to the

Second Part of the Text, the Reason of the wonderful Efficacy and Success,
which the Apostles had, in the Preaching of the Gospel; the Lord wrought with
them, and confirmed the Word with signs following. Which words express to us
that Miraculous Power of the Holy Ghost, which accompanied the first Preaching
of the Gospel; by which I do not intend to exclude the inward Operation of
God's Holy Spirit upon the Minds of Men secretly moving and inclining those to
whom the Gospel was Preached, to embrace and entertain it; which the Scripture
elsewhere speaks frequently of, and may possibly be intended in the first of
these Expressions, the Lord working with them; and the latter may only be meant
of the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, with regard to which, God is said to
confirm the Word with signs following, or accompanying it. But I rather think
they are both intended to express the same thing, and that the latter is only
added by way of explication of the former, to show more particularly, how the
Lord wrought with them; namely, by giving Confirmation to their Doctrine, by
those miraculous Gifts and Powers of the Spirit, which they were endowed
withal; the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs
following; that is, with those Miracles, which accompanied the first Preaching
of the Gospel. For these words do plainly refer to the Promise of the Spirit at
the 17th verse; and these signs shall follow them that believe; which is the
Reason why they are here called signs following; that is, Miracles which
accompanied the Word that was Preached.

And that this is the full meaning of this Text, will appear by comparing it
with one or two more, Romans 15.18, 19. where St. Paul speaking of the things
which Christ had wrought by him, to make the Gentiles obedient to the Gospel,
he says, they were done through mighty signs and wonders, by the Power of the
Spirit of God; which is the same with that which is said here in the Text, of
the Lord's working with the Apostles, and confirming the Word, with signs
following. So likewise, Heb. 2.3, 4. the Apostle there tells us, that the
Gospel which was first spoken by the Lord, was confirmed by them that heard
him, God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. So that the great Confirmation,
which is said here to be given to the Gospel, was by the Miraculous Gifts of
the Spirit, which were poured forth upon the Apostles and Primitive Christians.

In speaking of which, I shall briefly do these Two things.

I. Give an account of the Nature of these Gifts, and of the Use and End to
which they served: And then show in the II. Place, how the Gospel was Confirmed
by them.
I. For the Nature of these Gifts, and the Use and End to which they were
designed.

They are those Miraculous Powers which by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
the day of Pentecost, the Apostles were endowed withal, to qualify them to
Publish the Gospel, with more speed and success. Such was the Gift of speaking
diverse Languages, and the Gift of Interpreting things spoken in diverse
Languages; (And these Two Gifts were not necessarily united in the same Person,
for the Apostle tells us, that some had the one, and some the others;) the Gift
of Prophecy and foretelling things to come, which was always a sign of a Person
Divinely Inspired; the Miraculous Powers of Healing Diseases, of Raising the
Dead, and of Casting out Devils; a Power of inflicting Corporal Diseases, and
Punishments, upon scandalous and obstinate Christians, who would not submit to
the Apostles Authority and Government; which is in Scripture called, a
delivering up to Satan, for the destruction, or tormenting of the Body, that
the Soul may be saved; nay, in some cases, this Power extended to the
inflicting of Death it self, as in the case of Ananias and Saphira.

Not that all these Miraculous Powers, were given to every one of the Apostles,
or that they could exercise them at all times; some were bestowed upon one, and
some upon another, according to God's good pleasure, and as was most expedient
for the Use and Benefit of the Church, and most subservient to those Ends for
which God gave them; only we find that all the Apostles had the Gift of
Tongues; and that the Power of Casting out Devils, in the name of Christ, was
common to every Christian, and continued in the Church for a long time after
the other Gifts were ceased; as Tertul. Arnob. and Min. Felix do testify, even
of their own times.

But, II. I shall briefly show how the Gospel was Confirmed by these Miraculous
Gifts.

Now besides the particular Uses and Ends of those Miraculous Gifts (as the
Gift of Tongues, did evidently serve for the more speedy Planting and
Propagating of the Christian Religion in the World; and the Power of inflicting
Corporeal Punishments, in a Miraculous manner, upon Scandalous and Disobedient
Christians, did maintain the Power and Authority of the Apostles, and was
instead of an ordinary Magistratical Power, which Christians were destitute of,
whilst the Roman Empire continued Heathen;) I say, besides the particular Ends
and Uses of all these Miraculous Gifts, they did all in general, as they were
Miracles, serve for the Confirmation of the Gospel.

The Apostles delivered the Doctrine of Christ, and were Witnesses of his
Resurrection from the dead, as the great Miracle, whereby his Doctrine was
confirmed; now there was all the Reason in the World to believe them, whom God
was pleased to give such a Testimony from Heaven; for who could make any doubt
of the Truth of Their Testimony, concerning the Resurrection of Christ who were
enabled to raise others from the dead, and by many other wonderful things which
they did, gave such clear Testimony, that God was with them?

Never had any Religion fewer worldly Advantages to recommend it, and so little
temporal Countenance and Assistance to carry it on; but what it wanted from
Men, it had from God; for he gave witness to it with signs and wonders, and
diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost. God seems on purpose to have
stripped it of all Secular Advantages, that the Christian Religion might be
perfectly free from all suspicion of Worldly Interest and Design, and that it
might not owe its Establishment in the World, to the Wisdom and Contrivance of
Men, but to the Arm and Power of God.

The Inferences I shall at present make from this Discourse shall be these.

I. To give us Satisfaction of the Truth and Divinity of the Doctrine of the
Christian Religion, which has had so eminent a Confirmation given to it from
Heaven, and did at its first setting out so strangely prevail in the World,
against all Humane Probability; not by might, nor by power; but by the spirit
of the Lord.

No man can well suppose a Religion in Circumstances of greater Disadvantage,
and upon all Humane Accounts, more unlikely to sustain and bear up it self,
than the Christian Religion was. The first Appearance of it was so mean, and
its Beginnings so small, that no Man but would have thought it would presently
have come to nothing; and no other account can be given of the strange Success
and Prevalency of it, but that it was of God, and therefore it could not be
overthrown.

II. This Discourse may likewise satisfy us of the Reason why this Miraculous
Power, which accompanied the Gospel at first, is now ceased; because there is
not the like Reason and Necessity for it, which there was at first.

It was highly Necessary then, to introduce the Christian Religion into the
World, and to be a sensible Evidence to Men of the Divinity of that new
Doctrine, which was Preached to them: but now that the Gospel is generally
entertained, there is not the same Reason, why this Miraculous Power should
still be continued. Acquisito fine, cessant media ad finem, when the End is
once obtained, the Means cease; and the Wise God, who is never wanting in what
is Necessary, does not use to be lavish in that which is Superfluous. Now that
the Christian Religion has got firm footing in the World; God leaves it to be
propagated and advanced, by its own Rational Force upon the Minds of Men: now
that the Prejudices of Education in a Contrary Religion are removed, and the
Powers of the World are reconciled to Christianity; there is no need of such
violent and extraordinary Means for the continuance of it: now that it stands
upon equal Advantages with other Religions; God has left it to be carried on,
in more humane and ordinary ways, and such as are more level and accommodate to
the Nature of Man.

That Miracles are long since ceased, is acknowledged by the Fathers, who lived
an Age or two after the ceasing of them; particularly by St. Chrysostom, who
gives the same Reason for it, which I have just now assigned. But the Church of
Rome would still bear us in hand, that this Miraculous Power does still
continue in their Church, and according to Bellarmine, must always continue;
because he makes it an inseparable Property and Mark of the True Church.

But we pretend to no such Power, nor have we any Reason so to do; because all
the Doctrines of our Religion, are the Ancient Doctrines of Christianity,
delivered by our Savior, and by his Apostles published to the World; and these
are sufficiently confirmed already, by the Miracles which our Savior and his
Apostles wrought in the Primitive Times of Christianity. But the Church of Rome
has great Occasion and Need of New Miracles, to confirm their New Doctrines;
and therefore as they have Reason, they usually apply them to the Confirmation
of their New Doctrines; some to confirm Purgatory, and to give countenance to
Indulgences; others to encourage the Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and the
Saints; others to confirm that which all the Miracles in the World are not
sufficient to confirm, I mean the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which,
because it overthrows the certainty of Sense, is in the Nature of it peculiarly
incapable of being confirmed by a Miracle.

III. and Lastly, The Consideration of what has been said does justly upbraid
us, that this Religion, which was so powerful at first, and has such
Characters of Divinity upon it, coming down to us confirmed by so many
Miracles, should yet have so little Effect upon most of us who call our selves
Christians.

We have all the Advantages of the Christian Religion, having been educated and
brought up in it; and yet it has less Effect upon us, than it had upon those
whose Minds were prejudiced, and whose Manners were depraved, by the Principles
of a false Religion: for those who were reduced from Paganism to Christianity,
did on the sudden become better Men, and were more Holy and Virtuous in their
Lives; than the greatest part of us, who have been instructed and trained up
all our lives in the Doctrine of Christianity.

The true Reason of which is, that many of us are Christians, upon the same
account, that they were at first Heathens; because it was the Religion of their
Country, and they were born and bred up in it: but Christianity was the
Religion of their Choice, and there were no Motives to persuade them to the
Profession of that Religion, but what were as powerful to oblige them to the
Practice of it. Let us also be Christians, not only by Custom, but by Choice;
and then we shall live according to our Religion.

He that takes up a Religion, for any other Reason, than to obey and practice
it, does not choose a Religion, but only counterfeits the Choice of it. We have
beyond Comparison the best and most reasonable Religion in the World, a
Religion that has the greatest Evidence of its Truth, that contains the best
Precepts, and gives men the greatest Assurance of a future Happiness, and
directs them to the surest Way of attaining it: Now the better our Religion is,
the worse are we, if we be not made good by it. The Philosophy of the Heathen,
made some virtuous; and there were many eminent Saints under the Imperfection
of the Jewish Institution. What Degrees then of Holiness and Virtue may be
expected from us, upon whom the Glorious Light of the Gospel shines so
brightly?

I will conclude all, with the Words of the Apostle, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward: How shall we escape; if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to
his own will?

SERMON VI. The Nature, Office, and Employment of Good Angels.
Preached on the Feast of St. Michael.
HEB. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation?


THis is spoken of Good Angels, whose Existence, as well as that of Evil
Spirits, the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, do every where take
for granted, no less than they do the Being of God, and the Immortality of the
Soul. And well they may, since they are all founded upon the general Consent of
all Ages, VOL. II.
derived down to us from the first Spring and Original of Mankind; of which
general Consent and Tradition, it is one of the hardest things in the World, to
assign any good Reason, if the Things themselves were not true. Therefore I
shall not go about to force my way into this Argument concerning the Existence
of Spirits, and Beings distinct from Matter, by dint of dispute, (which perhaps
would neither be so proper, nor so profitable for this Assembly) but shall take
the thing as I find it received by a general Consent of Mankind. And so the
Books of Divine Revelation do: Nor was there Reason to proceed in any other
method, than to suppose these things, and take them for granted, as generally
assented to by Mankind, without either asserting them for new Discoveries, or
attempting to prove what was so universally believed. The Scriptures indeed
have more particularly declared the Nature of these Spirits, as also their
Order and Employment; as in the words which I have read to you, where the
Office and Employment of Good Angels is more particularly discovered; Sermon. VI.
Are they not all (says the Text) ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
for them who shall be heirs of salvation?

The Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews having had occasion, in comparing
the two Dispensations of the Law and the Gospel, to speak of the Angels, by
whose Ministry the Law was given, did not think fit to entertain those to whom
he wrote, with any nice and curious Speculations (for School Divinity was not
then in fashion) about the Nature and Order of Angels; but tells us, what it
concerns us more to know, namely, what their Office and Employment is in regard
to us. Concerning their Nature, he only tell us, that they are Spirits; as to
their Office and Employment, he says in general, that they are Ministering
Spirits, that is, that they stand before God to attend upon him, ready to
receive his Commands, and to execute his Pleasure; more particularly, that they
are upon occasion appointed and sent forth by God to minister on the behalf,
and to do good Offices for them that shall be heirs of salvation. Which last
words are a description of pious and good Men, such as had sincerely embraced
the Christian Religion, and were thereby become the Children of God, and Heirs
of Eternal Salvation. So that these words are a brief Summary of the Doctrine
of Good Angels, and of what the Scripture has thought fit to reveal to us
concerning them: Which may be referred to these Three Heads.

First, Their Nature; Are they not Spirits?

Secondly, Their general Office and Employment; Are they not Ministering Spirits?

Thirdly, Their special Office and Employment, in regard to good Men; they are
sent forth to minister for them (that is, in their behalf, and for their
benefit) who shall be heirs of salvation.

And this is as much as is necessary for us to know concerning them; and all
this is very agreeable to the general Apprehension of Mankind; but the
Scripture has very much cleared and confirmed to us, that which was more
obscure and less certain before. I shall briefly explain and illustrate these
Three Heads, and then draw some useful Inferences from the whole.

First, For their Nature; they are Spirits. This is universally agreed by all
that acknowledge such an Order of Beings, that they are Spirits: But whether
they are pure Spirits, divested of Matter, and all kind of corporeal Vehicle
(as the Philosophers term it) has been a great Controversy, but I think of no
great Moment and Consequence. Not only the ancient Philosophers, but some of
the ancient Christian Fathers, did believe Angels to be clothed with some kind
of Bodies, consisting of the purest and finest Matter; which they call
Aetherial. And this Opinion seems to be grounded upon a pious Belief, that it
is the peculiar Excellency and Prerogative of the Divine Nature, to be a pure
and simple Spirit, wholly separate from Matter: But the more current Opinion of
the Christian Church (especially of later times) has been, that Angels are
mere and pure Spirits, without any thing that is Material and Corporeal
belonging to them; but yet so, that they have a Power to assume thin and airy
Bodies, and can when they please appear in Humane Shape, as they are frequently
in Scripture said to have done. And this seems most agreeable to the Scripture
Account of them; though I think it is no necessary Article of Faith, either to
believe that they are clothed with some kind of Bodies, or that they are
wholly divested of Matter.

But however this be, they are described in Scripture to be endowed with great
Excellencies and Perfections; they are said to excel in strength, Psalm.
103.20. and in Knowledge and Wisdom. Hence are those Expressions of being as an
Angel of God, to discern good and bad. 2 Samuel 14.17. Wise, according to the
wisdom of an Angel, v. 20. To be of great Activity and Swiftness in their
Motions; hence it is that they are represented in Scripture, as full of wings:
and to excel in purity and holiness; hence is that Title given them in
Scripture, of the Holy Angels. This is the Sum of what the Scripture has in
several places delivered to us, concerning the Nature and Properties of good
Angels; and beyond this, all our Kowledge of them is mere Conjecture and
Uncertainty; and the nice Speculations concerning them, idle and wanton
Curiosities. Indeed the Scripture gives sufficient intimation of several Ranks
and Orders among them, by calling Michael an Archangel, and Chief Prince, and
by distingushing them by the names of Principalities, and Powers, and Thrones,
and Dominions: But what the difference of these Names import, though some have
attempted to explain, yet I do not find that they have discovered any thing to
us, besides their own Ignorance and Arogance, in pretending to be wise above
what is written; intruding into those things which they have not seen, being
vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds; as the Apostle censures some in his time.

Secondly, We have here their general Office and Employment; they are
ministering Spirits; they are (as I may say) domestic Servants, and constant
Attendants upon that great and glorious King, whose Throne is in the Heavens,
and whose Kingdom rules over all; they stand continually before him, to behold
his face, expecting his Commands, and in a constant readiness to do his Will.
For though the Omnipotence of God, and his perfect Power of acting be such, that
he can do all things immediately by himself, whatever he pleases in Heaven and
in Earth; can govern the World, and steer the Affairs of it, and turn them
which way he thinks best, by the least nod and beck of his Will, without any
Instruments or Ministers of his Pleasure; yet his Wisdom and Goodness has
thought fit to honor his Creatures, especially this higher and more perfect
Rank of Beings, with his Commands, and to make them, according to their several
Degrees and Capacities, the ordinary Ministers of his Affairs, in the Rule and
Government of this inferior World; and this not for his own ease (for to
Infinite Power nothing can be difficult or troublesome) but for their happiness;
and he therefore employs them in his Work and Service, that they may be capable
of his Favor and Rewards.

And that the Angels of God are the great Ministers of his Providence here in
the World, has not only been the constant Tradition of all Ages; but is very
frequently and plainly asserted in Scripture. In the Old Testament we often
read that God employed his Angels to be the Messengers of his Will and Pleasure
to Men; and to carry good Tidings and comfortable News to them upon several
Occasions: As to Abraham, to foretell the miraculous Birth of his Son Isaac; and
afterward to rescue him from being sacrificed: To Jacob, when he was so afraid
of his Brother Esau: To Manoah and his Wife, to foretell the Birth of Sampson,
the great Deliverer of Israel from the Philistines: And upon that great
Occasion of bringing the People of Israel out of Egypt, and conducting them
through the Wilderness, he sent a great and mighty Angel (called the Angel of
his Presence) to go before them, and guide them in their way: And the Apostle
tells us, that the Law was delivered to them upon Mount Sinai by the
Disposition of Angels.

On the other hand, God frequently made them the Messengers of his Wrath, and
Instruments of his Vengeance. Thus he sent them to foretell, and to execute that
terrible Destruction upon Sodom and Gomorrah. And he sent a Destroying Angel to
brandish his Sword in a visible manner over Jerusalem, and to smite them with
the Pestilence, for David's Sin in Numbering the People. And by the Ministry of
an Angel he slew in the Camp of the Assyrians in one Night, an Hundred and
eighty five thousand. And Acts 12.23. it is said, that the Angel of the Lord
smote Herod, for receiving the blasphemous Acclamations of the People.

Nay, the Angels shall be the Instruments and Executioners of God's Vengeance
upon the Wicked, at the Judgment of the great Day. So the Judge himself tells
us, Matthew. 13.49, 50. So shall it be at the End of the World; the Angels shall
come forth and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into
the furnace of fire; there shall he wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

And that particular Angels do preside over Empires and Kingdoms, and sway the
weighty Affairs of them; and by a secret and invisible Hand manage and bring
about great Changes and Revolutions, both Jews and Christians have collected
with great Probability and Consent from Daniel 10. where there is mention made
of the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstanding the Angel that was sent to
Daniel, and of Michael a Chief Prince assisting him. And of this Ministry of
Angels, in the Government of Kingdoms, Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, as of a
thing out of all Controversy. I proceed to the

Third Thing, which I principally intended, and seems to be chiefly designed in
the Text; and this is the special Office and Employment of good Angels, in
regard to good Men; and for this the Apostle expressly tells us, that they are
sent forth to minister for them (that is, in their behalf, and for their
benefit), who shall be heirs of Salvation. In which Words there are Three
things very considerable for our Instruction and Comfort.

1. Their particular Designation and Appointment for this Employment, expressed
in these Words, sent forth, (...), as if they were particularly Commissioned
and Appointed by God for this very End. God himself does superintend all
Affairs, and by his particular Designation and Command, the Angels do fulfill
his Word, and execute the Pleasure of his good Will toward us. Hence it is so
frequently said in Scripture, that God sent his Angel to such or such a Person,
for such or such Purposes. 2. You have here the general End of their
Employment; for good Men; they are sent forth on our Behalf, and for our
Benefit; to take Care of us and protect us, to succor and comfort, to direct
and assist, to rescue and deliver us. 3. Here is the more special End of their
Employment, in regard to good Men, intended in those words; for them who shall
be heirs of Salvation; Hereby signifying, that the Angels are employed about
good Men, with Regard more particularly to their Eternal Happiness, and for the
Conducting and furthering of the great Affair of their Everlasting Salvation.
This certainly is our greatest Concernment; and therefore they have a more
particular Charge and Care of us in Regard to this.
It was a common Opinion among the Heathen, and a constant and firmly believed
Tradition among the Jews, (the Sadducees only excepted, who did not believe
there was Angels or Spirits) that every Man (at least every good Man) had a
Guardian Angel appointed him by God, to take a special Care of him and his
Concernments, both Spiritual and Temporal; to guard him from Dangers, to direct
and prosper him in his Way, and to comfort and deliver him in his Affliction
and Distress. And therefore we find among the Jewish Prayers, used by them at
this day, a particular Prayer, wherein they request of God, to Command the
Angels who have the Care of Humane Affairs, to help and assist, to preserve and
deliver them. But especially they believed Good Angels, in their Attendance
upon Good Men, to be very active and diligent to incline them to good, and to
encourage them therein, by holy Motions and Suggestions, by secret Comforts and
Assistances, and by opposing Evil Spirits, and defending us against their
Assaults, and by countermining their malicious Designs and Attempts upon us.
And accordingly we find, that the best Men among the Jews did steadfastly
believe, if not the particular Guardianship of Angels, and that every Good Man
had his particular Angel assigned to him by God, to take the particular Charge
of him; yet the common Ministry of Good Angels, about Good Men; and their more
especial care of particular Persons, upon particular and great Occasions, to
protect them from Temporal Evils, and to promote and prosper their Temporal
Affairs and Concernments.

Of this Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and the Friend of God, was most
firmly persuaded (at least in Matters of great Moment and Concernment to us) as
appears by his Discourse with his Steward, when he was sending him to treat of
a Match for his Son, Genesis 24.40. The Lord (says he) before whom I walk, will
send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy way. And David the Man after God's
own heart, does more than once declare his confident Belief of the watchful
Care and Ministry of Angels about good Men. Psalm. 34. and 7. The Angel of the
Lord encampeth about them that fear him, and delivers them. And Psalm. 91.11,
12. speaking of the good Man, who puts his Trust and Confidence in God, he
tells him for his Comfort and Security, that the holy Angels hare a particular
charge of him, to preserve him from all the Mischiefs and Dangers to which he
is exposed; he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.

So that according to the Persuasion of those two excellent Persons, and of
greatest Renown for Piety in all the Old Testament, very much of the Safety and
the Success of good Men, even in their Temporal Concernments, is to be ascribed
to the vigilant Care and Protection of good Angels. And though this be seldom
visible and sensible to us, yet we have great Reason, upon so great
Testimonies, to assent to the truth of it. And there is no Reason I think to
doubt, but that God's Care extends now to Christians, as well as it did to the
Jews; and that the Angels have as much Kindness for us, as they had for the
Jews; and there is no Reason to think, that the Angels are now either dead or
idle.

Our Savior tells us, that they cannot dye; and our Reason tells us that a
pure Spirit is an active Principle; and the Scripture represents Angels as all
flame and wings. Evil Spirits are believed by Christians to be as active now,
to all purposes of harm and mischief, as ever: And why should any Man imagine,
that Good Spirits are not as intent and busy to do good? The Apostle (I am
sure) tells us in the Text, that the Angels in common, (all of them) do employ
their Service about us, and wait to do good Offices to us; are they not all
(says he) ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be
heirs of Salvation?

And our Savior, Matthew. 18.10. seems to approve and confirm the Tradition of
the Jews, concerning particular Guardian Angels belonging to every one that
believed in him; that is, to every Christian; Take heed (says he) that ye
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in Heaven, their
Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven. And this seems
likewise to have been a received Opinion among the first Christians; for we
find, Acts 12.15. that when Peter was miraculously released out of Prison by an
Angel, and came to the House where the Christians were assembled to pray for
him, and one told them, that Peter was at the door, they said it was his Angel;
thinking that he himself was fast in Prison: For which saying there could be no
Reason, had there not been a current Opinion among them of Guardian Angels.

And because the Providence of God is more peculiarly concerned, in conducting
Men to Eternal Happiness; it is very credible, that God should more especially
Ordain the Ministry of Angels about good Men, for the furtherance of their
Salvation. And so the Apostle tells us in the Text; are they not all ministering
Spirits, sent forth to minister for them; that shall be heirs of salvation? Nay
our Savior, in that remarkable place I mentioned before, Matt. 18.10. seems to
intimate, that Angels of a higher Rank and Quality, are assigned Guardians and
Guides to those that believed on him; but I say unto you, that in Heaven, their
Angels do always behold the face of my Father, which is in Heaven: An Allusion
to the manner of earthly Kings, upon whom not all the Servants, but the Chief
of their Nobility do more immediately attend, and stand continually in their
Presence; for to behold the face of the King, and to stand in his Presence, are
Phrases used in Scripture to signify immediate Attendance upon his Person. So
that by this manner of Expression, our Savior does most significantly
intimate, in what Esteem good Men are with God, whose Care and Protection he
commits to the Chief of the Angels, to those who are nearest to him, and in
highest Favor and Honor with him; as if he had said, their Angels are not of
the ordinary Rank, but such as are admitted to a more immediate Attendance upon
the great King and Governor of the World.

And no doubt it is for no mean End, that such high and glorious Spirits are
employed about us; it is chiefly for the furtherance of our Salvation; for the
purchasing whereof, the Son of God himself ( whom all the Angels of Heaven
worship) came down from Heaven, and appeared and suffered in our Nature, that
we may one day be made like to the Angels, and dwell where they are, and may
continually behold the face of our Father which is in Heaven, as they do. And
in order to this End, it is very probable, that Good Angels are ready to do
good Offices, just contrary to those of Evil Spirits; that is, to employ their
best Diligence and endeavor for the Salvation of Men; and that they are very
sedulous and officious to restrain and pull them back from Sin, and to excite
and solicit them to that which is Good; and, in a Word, to do all they can to
help forward the Repentance and Conversion of Sinners. And this may reasonably
be collected from that Passage of our Savior, Luke 15.10. where he tells us,
That there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one Sinner that
repents. And if they be so glad of the Repentance of a Sinner; we may easily
imagine how forward they are, to further and promote so good a Work. And when
Sinners are brought to Repentance; we have no Reason to doubt, but that the
Angels are as ready to assist their Progress in Goodness.

It has been a general, and I think not ill-grounded Opinion, both of the Jews
and Heathens, that good Angels are more especially present with us, and
observant of us, and assistant to us, in the performance of all Acts of
Religion; that they are particularly present at our Prayers; and therefore the
Jews speak of a particular Angel for this purpose, whom they call the Angel of
Prayer; that they observe our Vows, and our breach or performance of them. So
Solomon seems to intimate, Eccles. 5.4, 6. When thou vowest a Vow unto God,
defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have
vowed. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; that is, do not entangle
thy Life with a rash Vow, which the frailty of Humane Nature may make thee
afterward to break; neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an error;
that is, do not in the Presence of the Angel who attends upon thee, and
observes thee, betray thine own error and rashness. This I take to be the
meaning of this difficult passage, Let not thy mouth cause thy flesh to sin;
neither say thou before the Angel that it was an error.

But the Angels are yet more particularly present in the Places and at the
Times of God's Public Worship. The placing of the Cherubims in the Holy of
Holies, seems to signify the Presence of the Angels in our most Religious
Addresses to God. And Plutarch says, That the Angels are the Overseers of
Divine Service. And therefore we ought to behave our selves with all Modesty,
Reverence, and Decency in the Worship of God, out of regard to the Angels, who
are there present, and observe our Carriage and Behavior. And to this the
Apostle plainly has respect in that place, which by Interpreters has been
thought so difficult, 1 Corinthians. 11.10. where he says, That, for this Cause, in
the Assemblies of Christians for the Worship of God, the Woman ought to have a
Vail upon her head, in token of subjection to her Husband, because of the
Angels; that is, to be decently and modestly Attired in the Church, because of
the presence of the holy Angels; before whom we should compose our selves to
the greatest external Gravity and Reverence, which the Angels behold and
observe, but cannot penetrate into the inward Devotion of our Minds, which God
only can do; and therefore with regard to him who sees our Hearts, we should
more particularly compose our Minds, to the greatest Sincerity and Seriousness
our Devotion. Which I would to God we would all duly consider, all the while we
are exercised in the Worship of God, who chiefly regards our Hearts. But we
ought likewise to be very careful of our external Behavior, with a particular
regard to the Angels, who are present there, to see and observe the outward
Decency and Reverence of our Carriage and Deportment: Of which we are very
careful in the Presence even of an Earthly Prince when he either speaks to us,
or we make any Address to him. And surely much more ought we to be so, when we
are in the immediate Presence of God, and of his holy Angels, every one of whom
is a much greater Prince, and of greater Power, than any of the Princes of this
World. But how little is this considered, (I speak to our shame) and by how few
among us!

And as Angels are helpful to good Men, in working out their Salvation,
throughout the course of their Lives; so at the Hour of Death, they stand by
them, to comfort them and assist them in that needful and dismal time, in that
last and great Conflict of frail Mortality with Death and the Powers of
Darkness; to receive their expiring Spirits into their Charge, and to conduct
them safely into the Mansions of the Blessed. And to this purpose also the Jews
had a Tradition; that the Angels wait upon good Men at their Death, to convey
their Souls into Paradise: Which is very much countenanced by our Savior, in
the Parable of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke 16.22. where it is said, that
when Lazarus died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

Nay, that the Angels have some Charge and Care of the Bodies of good Men after
death, may not improbably be gathered from that Passage m St. Jude, v. 9. where
Michael the Archangel is said to have contended with the Devil, about the Body
of Moses. What the ground of this Controversy betwixt them was, may be most
probably explained, by a passage, Deuteronomy. 34.6. where it is said, that God took
particular care (probably by an Angel) concerning the burying so Moses in a
certain Valley; and it is added, but no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this
day. The Devil it seems had a fair Prospect of laying a Foundation for
Idolatry, in the Worship of Moses after his death; if he could have gotten the
disposal of his Body, to have buried it in some known and public place. And no
doubt, it would hare gratified him not a little, to have made him, who was so
declared an Enemy to Idolatry all his life, an occasion of it, after his death.
But this God thought fit to prevent, in pity to the People of Israel, whom he
saw upon all occasion so prone to Idolatry; and for that Reason committed it to
the Charge of Michael the Archangel, to bury his Body secretly; and this was
the thing which Michael the Archangel contended with the Devil about.

But before I pass from this, I cannot but take notice of one memorable
Circumstance in this Contest, mentioned likewise by St. Jude, in these words,
yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about
the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation. His Duty
restrained him from it, and probably his Descretion too: As he durst not offend
God, in doing a thing so much beneath the Dignity and Perfection of his Nature;
so he could not but think, that the Devil would have been too hard for him at
railing; a thing to which as the Angels have no disposition, so I believe that
they have no talent, no faculty at it. The cool Consideration whereof should
make all Men, especially those who call themselves Divines, and especially in
Controversies about Religion, ashamed and afraid of this manner of disputing;
since Michael the Archangel, even when he disputed with the Devil, durst not
bring against him a railing accusation.

But to proceed. This we are sure of, that the Angels shall be the great
Ministers and Instruments of the Resurrection of our Bodies, and the reunion of
them to our Souls. For so our Blessed Savior has told us, Matt. 24.30, 31.
That when the Son of man shall come in the clouds of Heaven, with power and
great glory; he shall send his Angels to gather the Elect, from the four winds,
from one end of Heaven to the other.

Thus I have as briefly as I could, and so far as the Scripture has gone
before us, to give us light in this matter, endeavored to show the several
Ways wherein good Angels do Minister in behalf of t hem who shall be Heirs of
Salvation. All that now remains, is to draw some Inferences from this
discourse, and so I shall conclude.

First, what has been said upon this Argument, and so abundantly proved from
Scripture, may serve to establish us in the Belief of this Truth, and to awaken
us to a due Consideration of it. That the Angels are invisible to us, and that
we are seldom sensible of their Presence, and the good Offices they do us, is
no sufficient Reason against the Truth and Reality, of the Thing; if by other
Arguments we are convinced of it. For by the same Reason we may almost as well
call in Question the Existance of God, and of our own Souls; neither of which
do fall under the notice of our Senses; and yet by other Arguments we are
sufficiently convinced of them both. So in this case, the general Consent and
Tradition of Mankind, concerning the Existence of Angels, and their Ministry
about us, especially being confirmed to us, by clear and express Testimony of
holy Scripture, ought to be abundant Evidence to us; when we consider that so
general a Consent must have a proportionable Cause; which can be no other, but
a general Tradition grounded at first upon Revelation, and derived down to all
succeeding Ages, from the first Spring and Original of Mankind; and since
confirmed by manifold Revelations of God, both in the Old and New Testament.

But yet I am sensible, that all this is no Conviction to the perverse and
contentious. Men will not believe even the Evidence of Sense it self, when they
are strongly prepossessed and prejudiced to the contrary: For do we not see
great numbers of Men, even so many as have the face to call themselves the
Catholic Church, that can make a shift, when they have a mind, either to
believe or disbelieve things contrary to the plainest Evidence of their Senses?
All that I shall say further about this matter, is, that this Doctrine of
Angels is not a peculiar Doctrine either of the Jewish or Christian Religion,
but the general Doctrine of all Religions that ever were; and therefore cannot
be objected against by any but the Atheists.

And yet after all, I know not whence it comes to pass, that this great Truth,
which is so comfortable to Mankind, is so very little considered by us. Perhaps
the Corruption of so great a part of the Christian Church, in the point of the
Worship of Angels, may have run us so far into the other extreme, as scarcely
to acknowledge any Benefit we receive by them. But surely we may believe they
do us good, without any Obligation to pray to them; and may own them as the
Ministers of God's Providence, without making them the Objects of our Worship.

I confess it seems to me a very odd thing, that the Power of the Devil, and
his Influence upon Men, and the particular Vigilance and Activity of Evil
Spirits to tempt us to Sin, should be so readily owned, and so sensibly talked
of among Christians; and yet the Assistance of good Angels should be so little
taken notice of, and considered by us. The Scripture speaks plainly of both,
and the Reasons for believing both are equal: For God forbid but that good
Angels should be as officious and forward to do us good, as the Devil and his
Angels are malicious and busy to do us Mischief. And indeed it would be very
hard with Mankind, if we had not as much Reason to Hope for the Assistance and
Protection of good Spirits, as we have cause to Fear the Malice and Fury of the
bad. Good Angels are certainly as Powerful, and have as strong a Propension and
Inclination to do good, as the Devil has to do harm; and the Number of good
Angels is probably much greater, than of Evil Spirits. The biggest Number that
are used in Scripture, are applied to good Angels. Dan. 7.10. it is said of the
Angels about God's Throne, that thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him. And Revelations 5.11. the number
of them is said to be, ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, chapter 12.22. calls them an innumerable
company of Angels.

What then should be the Reason, that Men should be so apt to own the Snares
and Temptations, which the Devil lays before us, in all our ways; but take so
little notice of the Attendance and good Offices, done to us by good Spirits? I
can imagine but these Two Reasons, and I am sorry I can find no better; That we
are more mindful of Injuries than of Benefits: and are glad to take in others
for the excuse of our Faults; but are loath any should come in for a share in
the Good that is done by us. And yet methinks it should be a very comfortable
Consideration to us, against the Enmity and Cunning of the Devil and his
Angels; that the Holy Angels of God are as Intent and Industrious to do us
good, and to help forward our Salvation, as Evil Spirits can be to work our
ruin, and destroy us.

Secondly, We should with great thankfulness acknowledge the great Goodness of
God to us, who takes such Care of us, as to appoint his Angels, and to give
them particular Commission and Charge concerning us, to protect and assist us
in all our ways, and especially to promote the great Concernment of our Eternal
Happiness: And that not only some particular and inferior Spirits, but the
Chief Ministers of this great King of the World, those that stand in his
Presence, and behold his face; and not a few of these, but the whole Order of
them are employed about us. So the Apostle seems to say, by the Question which
he puts in the Text, Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister? That is, all, at one time or other. And though they be principally
appointed to minister to us in order to our Salvation; yet we have no Reason to
doubt, but God imploys them many times for our Temporal Safety, and makes use
of them more especially in those great Revolutions, in which his Cause and
Religion are more immediately concerned.

In such a Case, it is not at all incredible, that God should give his Angels a
particular Charge, concerning those that fight his Battles; to pitch about
their Camps, and secretly to assist them against their Enemies, and to ward
off, and put by many dangerous blows and thrusts, which are made at them; and
wonderfully to preserve them, when the Instruments of death fly about them, and
do execution on every side of them. To what can we ascribe such and so many
remarkable Deliverances of a Person upon whom so much depends; but either to
the immediate hand of God, or to the Ministry of Angels? And where God is
provided so abundantly, with such powerful Beings and Ministers of his Will;
though they may be invisible to us, yet there is great Reason to believe, that
he very seldom works without them.

And now what an astonishing Regard is this, which the great God is pleased to
have for the Sons of Men, that he should make the whole Creation serviceable to
us; not only the visible Creation, for the support of our Bodies, and the
diversion of our Minds; but even the noblest of all his Creatures, the great
and glorious Inhabitants of the invisible World, mightily surpassing us mortal
Men, in the simplicity and purity of their Nature, in the quickness and
largeness of their Understandings, and in their Power and Vigor of Acting; I
say, that God should give these excellent and glorious Beings the Charge over
us, and send them forth to Minister to us, for the Safeguard of our Persons,
for the success of our Affairs, and for the Security and Furtherance of our
eternal Salvation! Lord, what is man that thou art thus mindful of him; that
when thou made him lower than the Angels, thou should yet make the Angels
to minister unto him!

Thirdly, If the Angels have particular Charge of good Men, we should take heed
how we despise, or be any way injurious to them: For how despicable so ever
they may appear to us, they are certainly very dear to God; since he deems them
so considerable, is to employ his Chief Ministers about them, and to commit the
Charge of them to those, who by their Office do more immediately attend upon
himself. This is our Savior's own Argument, Matthew. 18. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, their Angels do
continually behold the face of your Father, which is in Heaven. With how much
Contempt soever we may look upon a poor good Man; he has Friends and Patrons
of a higher sort, than any of the Princes of this World.

Fourthly, If God appointed Angels to be Ministering Spirits on our behalf; we
may thence very reasonably conclude, that God did not intend, that we should
worship them. This seems to be a clear Consequence, if the Reasoning of the
Angel in the Revelation be good; where he forbids St. John to worship him;
because he was his fellow servant. Yea the Consequence seems to be yet stronger
from the Text; that if they be not only Fellow Servants but do in some sort
minister unto us; then we are not to worship them.

And yet this Practice is openly avowed in the Church of Rome; though it be
reproved so very severely by the Apostle, as an Apostasy from Christianity,
Colos. 2.18, 19. Let no man (says he) deceive you, in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels; not holding the head; as if it were a Renouncing of
Christ, out of a pretended Humility, to make use of other Mediators besides him
to the Father. And notwithstanding also that the Angel in the Revelation does
so vehemently forbid it, (...), by no means, upon no terms do it; and he
forbids it for such a Reason, as makes it for ever unlawful; namely, that we
ought not to worship those, who serve and worship God together, with us; Do it
not, says the Angel, I am thy fellow Servant; worship thou God. In which words,
he plainly directs us to the sole and proper Object of our Worship.

Bellarmine, the great Champion of the Popish Cause, never used more gross and
apparent shuffling, than in Answer to this Text. He says first, why are we
reproved for doing what St. John did? To which the Answer is very easy;
because St. John himself was reproved by an Angel, for doing what he did. And
now that his Question is answered, one might methinks ask him a cross Question
or two. Why do the Church of Rome presume to do that, which an Angel does so
expressly forbid to be done? Or was it fit for St. John to worship one, who
(according to Bellarmine) was so ignorant in the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, as to reprove him for doing his Duty? As is evident from his Second
crafty Answer to this Text, That St. John did well to give due Worship to the
Angel: And yet it is plain from this Text, that the Angel did not think the
Worship which St. John gave to him, to be his due.

It is very hard to imagine, but that a Man of Bellarmine's Understanding, did
intend to give up the Cause, in his Answers to this Text: But if he was in
earnest, then the Matter is brought to this plain and short issue; Whether it
be fitter for us to believe a Cardinal of Rome, or an Angel of God?

Lastly, We should imitate the holy Angel, by endeavoring to serve God as they
do, in ministering to the Good of others. Whilst we are in the Body, in this
state of infirmity and imperfection; though we cannot serve God with the same
Activity and Vigor that the blessed Angels do, yet we may in the same
Sincerity, and with the same true Pleasure and Delight.

And we should learn also of them, to condescend to the meanest Services, for
the good of others. If the Angels, who are no ways allied to us, and do so much
excel us, in the Dignity and Perfection of their Nature, (for though David says,
that God made man little lower than the Angels; his meaning is, that he made
him next below the Angels in the Rank of Beings; but yet very distant from them
in Perfection) I say if those glorious Creatures, who are the Chief of the Ways
and Works of God, do not think much to humble themselves to be Ministers on our
behalf; shall we be so proud, as to think much to stoop to the lowest Offices,
to serve one another?

You see, my Brethren, what is the constant Work and Employment of the Blessed
Spirits above; to do good to Men, especially in order to their Eternal
Happiness; and this is the highest degree of Charity, and Charity is the
highest Perfection of Men and Angels: So that to employ our selves, with all
our Minds, and with all our Might, to help forward the Salvation of others, is
to be Good Angels (I had almost said to be a kind of Gods) to Men.

I hope that we all of us do hope one day to be like the Angels, in the Purity
and Perfection of their Nature. So our Savior has told us, that at the
Resurrection, we shall be like the Angels: Now as they are the Patterns of our
Hope and Happiness; so let us make them the Examples, of our Duty and
Obedience; according as our Savior has taught us to pray, that God's will may
be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven; that is, that we may serve; God, and do
his Will here on Earth, (so far as the Infirmity of our Nature and of our
present state will admit) with the same Readiness and Diligence, with the same
Cheerfulness and Zeal, that the holy and Blessed Angels do in Heaven. And let
us aspire continually in our minds, after that Blessed Time, when we shall be
free from Sin and Sorrow, from Affliction and Pain, from Diseases and Deaths;
when we shall serve God without Distraction, and do his Will without weariness,
and shall be for ever with the Lord, amidst an innumerable company of Angels,
and the Spirits of just men made perfect.

Finally, Let us bless God, as for all the visible Effects of his merciful
Providence toward us, so likewise for the invisible Aids and Protection of his
holy Angels; many times probably vouchsafed to us, when we are but little aware
of it. But above all, let us, bless him for his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who
was made a little lower than the Angels, that is, a Mortal Man; that by the
Suffering of death for our sakes, he might be clothed with glory and honor,
according to the working of that mighty power which God wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places, far above all Principalities and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to
come. To him O Father, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory,
Dominion and Power, both now and for ever. Amen.

SERMON VII. The Reputation of Good Men, after Death.
Preached on St. Luke's Day.
Psalm. CXII. 6. The latter Part of the Verse. The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.


AS the Desire and Hope of Immortality, which is implanted in Humane Nature, is
some Evidence of the Thing; so likewise that Natural Desire which is in Men, to
have a Good Name perpetuated, and to be remembered, and mentioned with honor,
VOL. II.
when they are dead and gone, is a sign, that there is in Humane Nature some
Presage of a Life after Death; in which they hope, among other Rewards of
well-doing, to meet with this also, to be well spoken of to Posterity: And tho
probably we should not know the Good that is said of us, when we are dead, yet
it is an encouragement to Virtue, to be secured of it beforehand; and to find
by Experience, that they who have done their part well in this life, go off
with Applause; and that the Memory of their Good Actions is preserved and
transmited to Posterity.

And among the many Advantages of Piety and Virtue, this is not altogether
inconsiderable, that it reflects an Honor upon our Memory after death; which
is a thing much more valuable, than to have our Bodies preserved from
Putrefaction: For that I think is the meaning of Solomon, when he prefers a
Good Name before precious Ointment, Eccl. 7.1. A good name is better than
precious Ointment. This they used in Embalming of dead Bodies, Sermon. VII.
to preserve them from noisomness and corruption: but a Good Name preserves a
Man's Memory, and makes it grateful to Posterity; which is a far greater
Benefit, than that of a precious Ointment which serves only to keep a dead Body
from stench and rottenness.

I shall briefly explain the Words, and then consider the matter contained in
them; the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. By the righteous is
probably here meant the good man in general; for though Justice and
Righteousness, are in Scripture frequently used for that particular Virtue,
whereby a Man is disposed to render to every Man his own; which is known by the
name of Justice; yet it is less frequently, and perhaps in this place, used in
a larger Sense, so as to comprehend all Piety and Virtue. For so the righteous
man is described at the beginning of this Psalm, Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments: And he is
opposed to the wicked man, v. 10. the wicked shall see it, and be grieved; that
is, he shall be troubled to see the Prosperity of the righteous; the manifold
Blessings of his life, and the Good Name he shall leave behind him at his
death; which is the meaning of his being in everlasting remembrance; that is,
long after he is dead, perhaps for many Ages, he shall be well spoken of, and
his Name mentioned with honor, and his Good Deeds recorded and remembered to
all Posterity.

So that the sense of the words amounts to this, That eminently good men, do
commonly leave a Good Name behind them, and transmit a grateful Memory of
themselves to after Ages. I say commonly, for so we are to understand these
kind of sayings; not that they are strictly, and universally true, without
exception; but usually, and for the most part. It is possible, that a Good Man
may soon be forgotten, by the Malice of Men; or through the partiality and
iniquity of the Age, may have his Name blemished after death, and be
misrepresented to Posterity: but for the most part it is otherwise; and though
the World be very wicked, yet it seldom deals so hardly and unjustly with Men
of eminent Goodness and Virtue, as to defraud them of their due Praise and
Commendation after death. It very frequently happens otherwise to Good Men,
whilst they are alive; nay they are then very seldom so justly treated, as to
be generally esteemed and well spoken of, and to be allowed their due Praise
and Reputation: But after death, their Good Name is generally secured and
vindicated, and Posterity does them that right, which perhaps the Age wherein
they lived denied to them. Therefore in the Prosecution of this Argument, I
shall enquire into these Two things.

First, Whence it comes to pass, that Good Men are very often defrauded of
their just Praise and Reputation, whilst they are alive? And,

Secondly, What Security they have of a Good Name after death?

First, Whence it comes to pass, that Good Men are so frequently defrauded of
their just Praise and Reputation, while they are alive? And to give our selves
full satisfaction in this matter, Two things are fit to be enquired into.

1. From what Cause this proceeds? 2. For what Reason the Providence of God
does often permit it?
(1.) From what Cause it proceeds, that good Men have so often the hard Fate to
be ill spoken of, and to be severely censured, and to have their worth much
detracted from, while they are alive?

And this proceeds partly from Good Men themselves; and partly from others.

1. Good Men themselves, are many times the cause of it. For the best Men are
imperfect; and present and visible Imperfections do very much lessen, and abate
the Reputation of a Man's Goodness. It cannot be otherwise, but that the luster
of a great Piety and Virtue should be somewhat obscured, by that mixture of
Humane Frailty, which does necessarily attend this state of Imperfection: And
though a Man by great Care and Consideration, by great Vigilance and Pains with
himself, be arrived to that degree and pitch of Goodness, as to have but a very
few visible Failings, and those small, in comparison; yet when these come to be
scanned and commented upon, by Envy or Ill Will, they will be strangely
inflamed and magnified, and made much greater, and more than in truth they are.
But there are few Persons in the World, of that excellent Goodness, but besides
the common and more pardonable Frailties of Humanity, they do now and then
discover something, which might perhaps justly deserve a severe Censure, if
some amends were not made for it, by many and great Virtues.

Very good Men are subject to considerable Imprudences, and sudden Passions;
and especially to an affected Severity and Moroseness of Carriage; which is
very disgustful, and apt to beget dislike. And they are the more incident to
these kind of Imperfections; because out of a just hatred of the vicious
Customs and Practices of the World, and to keep out of the way of Temptation,
they think it safest to retire from the World as much as they can; being loath
to venture themselves, more than needs, in so infectious an Air. By this means,
their Spirits are apt to be a little sower, and they must necessarily be
ignorant of many points of Civility, and good Humor; which are great Ornaments
of Virtue, though not of the Essence of it.

Now two or three Faults in a Good Man, if an Uncharitable Man have but the
handling and managing of them, may easily cast a considerable Blemish upon his
Reputation; because the better the Man is, so much the more conspicuous are his
Faults; as Spots are soonest discovered, and most taken notice of, in a pure
and white Garment. Besides that, in matters of Censure, Mankind do much incline
to the harder side; and but very few Persons are so charitable and equal, as to
construe things to the best sense, and to consider a Man all together; and
fairly to set the Good that is in him, against his Faults and Imperfections.
But,

2. Though Good Men many times contribute too much, to the lessening of their
own Reputation, with those among whom they live; yet the principal Cause of
their Suffering in this kind, is not from themselves, but others; and that upon
these Three Accounts.

1. From the Hatred and Opposition of Bad Men to Holiness and Virtue; and these
are commonly the greatest number, and make the loudest cry. They are declared
Enemies to Goodness; and then how can it be expected, they should have any
great Kindness for Good Men? They want Virtue themselves; and therefore they
think themselves upbraided by the Good Qualities of others.

This Enmity of Wicked Men against the Righteous, and the true Reason of it, is
very well expressed, in the Wisdom of Solomon, chapter 2. v. 12. Let us (say they)
lie in wait for the Righteous; because he is not for our turn, and is clean
contrary to our doings; he upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and he
objecteth to our Infamy, the sins of our youth; he was made to reprove our
Thoughts, therefore he is grievous unto us, even to behold; for his life is not
like other men, he is quite of another fashion; we are esteemed of him as
reprobate Silver, he abstaineth from our ways, as from filthiness. This is that
which fills the Minds of wicked Men with Malice against the Righteous; and
Malice will easily invent ways to blast any Man's Reputation. Good Men do
sometimes, as it is their duty, reprove those that are bad; or if they do it
not in Word, yet they upbraid them in their Actions, and contrary course of
life; and both these are grievous and provoking to them. Not but that Wicked
Men are many times in their Consciences convinced of the real Goodness of those
whom they speak against; but they will not own it, least in so doing they
should condemn themselves.

2. Another Cause of this, is the Envy of those, who perhaps have some degree
of Goodness themselves. For great Virtue is apt to raise Envy in those who fall
short of it; and this makes those who are but imperfectly Good, to detract from
the Eminent Worth of others; because they are sensible, they are out-shined by
them, and that it occasions a disadvantagious Comparison, and makes their
Defects taken notice of.

They can endure a Man that is moderately Good, and keeps pace with his
Neighbors: But if he endeavor to outstrip them, they presently combine
against him, and take all oportunities to undermine his Reputation; and will be
very glad, either to find a blot in his Escutcheon, or to fix one there.

3. There is something in the very Presence and Nearness of Goodness and
Virtue, which is apt to lessen it.

In matters of Sense, the nearer the Object is, the bigger it appears; and the
farther distant it is from us, the less it seems to be: But here it is quite
otherwise; Men are not so apt to value Present Worth, when yet they will
reverence it mightily at a Distance.

I know not whence it comes to pass, but so we certainly find it; that Men are
more sensible of the Goodness and Excellency of any thing, under the want of
it, than while they enjoy it; and do usually value it more when it is gone,
than they did whilst it was present with them. Whilst we live with Good Men,
and converse with them every day, we take but little notice of them; but no
sooner are they departed, but we admire them, and every Man's Mouth is open to
celebrate their Good Qualities. Perhaps Familiarity, and Acquaintance, and
Conversation does insensibly beget something of Contempt; but whatever the
Reason of it be, we find the Thing most certainly true in Experience.

(2.) Let us consider in the next place, for what Reasons the Providence of God
permits it thus to be? I shall mention but these Two.

1. To keep Good Men humble, and, as the expression is in Job, to hide pride
from Men.

God's Providence, in the disposal and ordering of things in this World, seems
rather to consult our Safety, than our Satisfaction; and the Security of our
Virtue, than the full Reward of it. Now if Good Men should always meet with
that clear Esteem and Reputation, which their Goodness deserves, they would be
in great danger of being puffed up with a proud Conceit of themselves; and Pride
is enough to supplant the greatest Virtue in the World; such a dead fly, as
this, were sufficient to spoil a Box of the most precious Ointment. For Man is
an ambitious Creature, and vain above all things; so vain, as not only to be
covetous of Praise, but even patient of Flattery; and the best of Men lie too
open, on this blind side of Humane Nature; and therefore God, who knows our
frame, and how apt Dust and Ashes are to be proud, has in his wise and
merciful Providence so disposed things, that good Men are seldom exposed to the
full force of so strong a Temptation. And for this Reason, he lets loose
envious and malicious Tongues, to detract from Good Men, for a check to the
Vanity of Humane Nature, and to keep their Virtue safe, under the protection of
Humility.

And this is the way likewise to secure the Reputation which they have, and
which otherwise would be in danger of being lost: For he that is once proud of
the Esteem he has got, takes the readiest way to fall into Contempt; and
certainly it is better of the two, that our Reputation should suffer a little,
by the Malice of others; than be ruined by our own Pride and Vanity.

God does not envy Good Men, the Reputation of their Goodness and Virtue; but
he knows the weakness of Humane Nature, and will not suffer it to be tempted,
above what it is able. When Good Men are grown up to Perfection, and able to
bear it, as they will be when they come to Heaven, their Good Name shall be
fully vindicated, and they shall have Praise, not only from Men, but from
Angels, and from God himself.

2. This life is not the proper Season of Reward, but of Work and Service.

In this life, God is pleased to give some present encouragement to Piety and
Virtue, but reserves the main of our Recompense, to be bestowed upon us at the
end of our Work. When our Course is finished, then, and not before, we must
expect our Crown; when our Accounts are cast up, and stated, and it appears
what improvement we have made of our Talents, then will come, the Euge bone
serve, Well done good and faithful Servant. In the mean time, Good Men must be
content with such a portion of Esteem, as an envious and ill-natured World will
afford them.

And thus I have done with the First thing I proposed to enquire into; Whence
it comes to pass, that Good Men are frequently defrauded of their due Praise
and Reputation, while alive? I proceed to the Second Enquiry, namely, What
Security Good Men have of a Good Name after Death?

And the true Account of this is to be given, partly from the Providence of
God, and partly from the Nature of the Thing.

(1.) From the Providence of God; which is concerned herein, upon a twofold
account.

1. In respect of the Equity of it. 2. In regard of the Example of it.
1. In respect of the Equity of it. God, who will not be behind-hand with any
Man, concerns himself, to secure to Good Men the proper Reward of their Piety
and Virtue. Now Praise is one of the most proper Recompenses of good and
virtuous Actions; this Good Men seldom meet with in this life, without a great
deal of allay and abatement; and therefore the Providence of God has so
ordered thing, that it should come in the properest Season, when our Work is
done, and when we are out of the Danger of the Temptation of it.

2. In regard of the Example of it. It is a great Argument to Virtue, and an
encouragement to Men, to act their Part well, to see Good Men applauded, when
they go off the Stage. Every Man that has any spark of Generosity in him, is
desirous of Fame; and though Men care not how soon it comes, yet they will be
glad to have it after Death, rather than not at all. Piety and Virtue would be
but very melancholy and uncomfortable things; if they should always be so
unfortunate, as never to meet with due Esteem and Approbation: but when Men are
assured, that they shall have this Reward, one time or other, and observe it to
be so in experience; this is a great Spur and Encouragement to do virtuously:
And a great Mind, that has a just sense of Reputation and a good Name, will be
content to lay in for it beforehand; and patiently to wait the time, which God
knows fittest for the bestowing of it.

(2.) The other part of the Account of this Truth, is to be given from the
Nature of the Thing: Because Death removes and takes away the chief Obstacle of
a Good Man's Reputation. For then his Defects are out of sight, and Men are
contented that his Imperfections should be buried in his Grave with him. Death
has put him out of the reach of Malice and Envy, his Worth and Excellency does
now no longer stand in other men's light; his great Virtues are at a distance,
and not so apt to be brought into Comparison, to the prejudice and disadvantage
of the living; mortui non mordent; The Example of the dead, is not so cutting a
reproof to the Vice of the living; the Good Man is removed out of the way, and
his Example, how bright soever, is not so scorching and troublesome at a
distance; and therefore Men are generally contented, to give him his due
Character.

Besides, that there is a certain Civility in Humane Nature, which will not
suffer Men to wrong the dead, and to deny them the just commendation of their
worth. Even the Scribes and Pharisees, (as bad a sort of Men as we can well
imagine) though they were just like their Fathers in persecuting and slaying
the Prophets, while they were alive; yet had they a mighty Veneration for their
Piety and Virtue, after they were dead, and thought no Honor too great to be
done to them. They would be at the Charge of raising Monuments to the Memory of
those Good Men, whom their Fathers had slain; and whom they would certainly
have used in the very same manner, had they either lived in the days of those
Prophets, or those Prophets had lived in their days, as our Savior plainly
told them.

All that now remains is, to draw some Inferences from what has been said, by
way of Application; and they shall be these Three.

1. To vindicate the Honor and Respect which the Christian Church, for many
Ages, has paid to the Memory of the first Teachers and Martyrs of our
Religion. 2. To encourage us to Piety and Goodness, from this Consideration;
that the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. 3. That when we pretend
to honor the Memory of Good Men, we would be careful to imitate their Holiness
and Virtue.
1. To vindicate the Honor, which the Christian Church has for many Ages done
to the first Teachers and Martyrs of our Religion; I mean more especially to
the Holy Apostles of our Lord and Savior; to whose Honor, the Christian
Church has thought fit to set apart Solemn Times, for the Commemoration of
their Piety and Suffering, and to stir up others to the imitation of them.

This certainly can with no good color, either from Scripture or Reason, be
pretended to be unlawful; and when David here says, the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance; he cannot certainly be thought to exclude the most
solemn Way of commemorating their Piety and Virtue.

I do not pretend, this Custom can be derived from the very first Ages of
Christianity; but surely it is sufficient, for the lawfulness of it, that it is
no where forbidden; nay it is rather required here in the Text; the best way to
preserve the Memory of Good Men, being thus to commemorate them. And it may be
of great Use to us, if it be not our own fault; the setting before our eyes,
the holy lives of Excellent Men, being in its own nature apt to excite us to
the Imitation of them.

Besides that I could tell you, that though this cannot be proved so ancient,
as some vainly pretend; yet it is of great Antiquity in the Church, and did
begin in some of the best Ages of Christianity. Memoriae Martyrum, the Meetings
of Christians at the Tombs of the Martyrs was practiced long before the
degeneracy of the Western Church; and the Christians were wont at those
Meetings, solemnly to commemorate the Faith and Constancy of those Good Men,
and to encourage themselves from their Examples.

I know very well, that this did in time degenerate into gross Superstition,
which afterward gave color and occasion to that gross and Idolatrous Practice
in the Church of Rome, of Worshipping Saints. But this Abuse is no sufficient
Reason for us, to give over the Celebrating of the Memory of such holy Men, as
the Apostles and Martyrs of Christ were; and propounding them to our selves for
our Patterns. We may still lawfully give them their due Honor; though the Church
of Rome has so over-done it, as to rob God of his.

2. Let this Consideration, that the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance, be an encouragement to us, to Piety and Goodness. This to a
generous Nature, that is sensible of Honor and Reputation, is no small Reward
and Encouragement. Before the Happiness of Heaven was clearly revealed, and
life and immortality brought to light, by the Gospel, one of the greatest
Motives to worthy and virtuous Deeds, was the earnest desire which Men had of
leaving a Good Name behind them, and of Perpetuating the Fame and Glory of
their Actions to after Ages. Upon this ground, chiefly, many of the Bravest
Spirits, among the Heathen, were animated to Virtue, and, with the hazard of
their lives, to do great and glorious Exploits for their Country.

And certainly, it is an Argument of a great Mind, to be moved by this
Consideration; and a sign of a low and base Spirit, to neglect it. He that has
no regard to his Fame, is lost to all purposes of Virtue and Goodness; when a
Man is once come to this, not to care what others say of him, the next step is,
to have no care what himself does. Quod conscientia est apud Deum, id fama est
apud homines, what Conscience is in respect of God, that is Fame in respect of
Men. Next to a good Conscience, a clear Reputation ought to be to every Man the
dearest thing in the World. Men have generally a great value for Riches; and
yet the Scripture pronounces him the happier Man, that leaves a Good Name,
than him that leaves a great Estate behind him, Prove. 22.1. A good name is
rather to be chosen, than great riches.

If then we have any regard to a Good Name; the best way to secure it to our
selves, is by the holy and virtuous Actions of a good Life. Do well, and thou
shall be well spoken of; if not now, yet by those who shall come after; the
surest way to glory, and honor, and immortality, is by a patient continuance
in well-doing. God has engaged his promise to us to this purpose, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. The name of the wicked shall rot, says Solomon, Prove. 10.7. But God
does usually take a particular care, so preserve and vindicate their Memory,
who are careful to keep his Covenant, and remember his Commandments to do them.

3dly, and lastly, When ever we pretend to do honor to the Memory of Good Men,
let us charge our selves with a strict Imitation of their Holiness and Virtue.
The greatest honor we can do to God, or Good Men, is to endeavor to be like
them; to express their Virtues, and represent them to the World in our lives.
Upon these Days, we should propound to our selves, as our Patterns, all those
holy and excellent Persons, who have gone before us; the Apostles of our Lord
and Savior, and all those blessed Saints and Martyrs, who were faithful to the
death, and have received a crown of life and immortality.

We should represent to our selves the Piety of their Actions, and the Patience
and Constancy of their Sufferings, that we may imitate their Virtues, and be
followers of them, who through faith and patience, have inherited the promises;
and seeing we are compast about with such a cloud of witnesses, we should lay
aside every weight, and run with patience the race which is set before us.

Let us imagine all those great Examples of Piety and Virtue, standing about us
in a throng, and fixing their Eyes upon us. How ought we to demean our selves
in such a Presence, and under the eye of such Witnesses! and how should we be
ashamed to do any thing, that is unworthy of such excellent Patterns, and blush
to look upon our own lives, when we remember theirs! Good God! at what a
distance do the greatest part of Christians follow those Examples! and while we
honor them with our lips, how unlike are we to them in our lives!

Why do we thus reproach our selves with these glorious Patterns? Let us either
resolve to imitate their Virtues, or to make no mention of their Names; for
while we celebrate the Examples of Saints and Holy Men, and yet contradict them
in our lives, we either mock them, or upbraid our selves.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc.

SERMON VIII. The Duty of imitating the Primitive Teachers, and Patterns of
Christianity.
Preached on All Saints Day, 1684.
HEB. XIII. 7. The latter Part of the Verse. Whose faith follow, considering
the end of their conversation.

The whole Verse runs thus,

Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word
of God; whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.


THE great Scope and Design of this Epistle, is to persuade the Jews, who were
newly converted to Christianity, VOL. II.
to continue steadfast in the Profession of it, notwithstanding all the
Sufferings and Persecutions it was attended withal; and to encourage them
hereto, among many other Arguments which the Apostle makes use of, he does
several times, in this Epistle, propound to them the Examples and Patterns of
Saints and Holy Men, that were gone before them; especially those of their own
Nation, who in their respective Ages had given remarkable Testimony of their
Faith in God, and constant Adherence to the Truth. Chapter 6.11, 12. And we desire,
that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of
hope, unto the end: that ye be not slothful; but followers of them, who through
faith and patience inherit the promises. And, Chapter 11. he gives a Catalogue of
the Eminent Heroes and Saints of the Old Testament, who by Faith had done such
Wonders, and given such Testimony of their Patience and Constancy, in doing and
suffering the Will of God; from whence he infers, Chapter 12.1. that we ought to
take Pattern and Heart from such Examples, to persevere in our Christian
course; Sermon. VIII.
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of Martyrs,
or Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us;
especially since they had greater Examples than these, nearer to them, and more
fresh in Memory; the great Example of our Lord, the Founder of our Religion;
and of the first Teachers of Christianity, the Disciples and Apostles of our
Lord and Savior. The Example of our Lord himself, the Captain and Rewarder of
our Faith, v. 2. of that 12th Chapter Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame; v. 3. For consider him who endured such contradiction of
sinners aagainst himself, lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds. This
indeed is the great Pattern of Christians, and in regard of the great
Perfection of it, surpasses all other Patterns, and seems to make them
useless; as having in it the Perfection of the Divinity, not in its full
brightness, (which would be apt to dazzle rather than direct us) but allayed and
shadowed with the Infirmities of Humane Nature; and for that Reason, more
accommodate and familiar to us, than the Divine Perfections abstractedly
considered.

But yet because our Blessed Savior was God as well as Man, and clear of all
stain of sin, (for though he was clothed with the Infirmities, yet he was free
from the Corruption of Humane Nature) therefore the Examples of mere Men,
liable to sin as we are, may in many respects be more suitable and accomodate,
to encourage us to the imitation of those Virtues, which are attainable by us,
in this state of Imperfection; for which Reason the Apostle has thought fit
likewise to propose to us, the highest Examples of that kind, the first
Teachers of our Religion; for of these he seems to speak here in the Text,
namely those Apostles, or Apostolical Men, by whom they had been instructed in
the Faith of Christ, but who were now departed this life; it being very
probable, that the Apostle here speaks of such as were dead, when he says,
Remember them, which have the rule over you, (or, those that have been your
Guides) who have spoken to you the word of God, whose Faith follow, considering
the end of their conversation.

I say this is very probable, because he minds them to remember them, which
supposes them to be absent; but especially, because he minds them, to consider
the end of their conversation; by which surely he means the Blessed State of
those Good Men after Death; which is elsewhere called, the end of our faith,
even the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. So likewise, Romans 6.22. this is
said to be the End of a holy Life; ye have your fruit unto holiness and the
End, everlasting life. And it very much favors this Interpretation, that the
Apostle afterward speaks of the living Guides, and Governors of the Church,
v. 17. Obey them which have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls.

So that it is highly probable, that the Apostle here speaks of such Guides,
and Governors of the Church, as had once been over them, but were now departed
this Life; and therefore he might with more freedom and less envy, recommend
their Example to them, and bid them call to mind their Faith, and exemplary
Conversation among them, and propose it for a Pattern to themselves,
considering the happy End of it, viz. The Blessed State they were now in, and
the Glorious Reward they were made Partakers of, in another Life.

In the Words thus explained, you have,

I. A Duty enjoined; which is, to propose to our selves, for our Imitation, the
Examples of Good Men, that have gone before us; especially the primitive
Patterns of Christianity, and the first Teachers of our Religion. Remember them
which have been your Guides, and have spoken to you the Word of God, whose
Faith follow.

II. The Motive or Encouragement to it, from the Consideration of the Reward of
it; Considering the End of their Conversation.

I. The Duty enjoined; which is, to propose to our selves, for our Imitation,
the Example of Good Men, that have gone before us; especially the Primitive
Patterns of Christianity, and first Teachers of our Religion. Remember them
that have had the rule over you, that have been your Guides, and have spoken to
you the word of God, whose Faith follow. In which Words, the Apostle bids them
call to mind their first Guides and Instructors in Christianity, whom they had
known, and heard, and conversed with in this World, but who were now rested
from their labors, and were receiving the Reward of them; to remember the
Doctrines they heard from them, and the Virtues they had seen in them; and to
embrace the one, and imitate the other.

Thus We cannot remember the Primitive Teachers, and Patterns of Christianity,
the Apostles of our Lord and Savior; became we did not personally know them,
and converse with them, living at the distance of many Ages from their time:
But we may do that which is equivalent, and a kind of Remembrance of them; we
may commemorate their Faith, and the Virtue and Holiness of their Lives; and
what we hear and read of them, we may propose for Patterns to our selves, and
copy them out in our Lives and Actions: And this is our Duty, and the same in
substance with theirs, who had the happiness to know, and converse with those
excellent Persons, to hear them Preach, and to see the Rules and Precepts of
that Holy Doctrine, which they Taught, exemplified in their Lives.

In the handling of this Argument, I shall do these Three things.

First, Show why amongst all the Examples of Good Men, we should more
especially propose to our Imitation, the Primitive Teachers, and Patterns of
our Religion.

Secondly, Wherein we should Imitate them. The Apostle expresses it in one
Word, in their Faith; whose Faith follow.

Thirdly, The Encouragement to this, from the Consideration of the happy State
they are in, and the glorious Reward they are made Partakers of; Considering
the End of their Conversation.

First, I shall endeavor to show, why among all the Examples of Good Men, we
should more especially propose to our Imitation, the Primitive Teachers and
Patterns of our Religion, I mean, the holy Apostles of our Lord and Savior,
whose Faith, we should endeavor to follow; and to Imitate the holiness and
virtue of their Conversation. For These certainly come nearest to that most
Perfect, and Excellent Pattern of all Goodness, our Blessed Savior, and are
the fairest Transcripts of that unblemisht Original. Hence it is that St. Paul
so frequently exhorts Christians to Imitate his Example, and the Examples of
the other Apostles; it being reasonable to presume, that They came nearest to
the Pattern of our Lord. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am
of Christ, Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them
which walk so, as ye have us for an Ensample. For our Conversation is in Heaven.

And this is reasonable, that the first in every kind should be the Rule and
Pattern of the rest, and of all that follow after; because it is likely to be
most perfect. In process of Time, the best Institutions are apt to decline, and
by insensible degrees to swerve, and depart from the Perfection of their first
state; and therefore it is a good Rule, to preserve things from corruption and
degeneracy, often to look back to the first Institution, and by that to correct
those Imperfections and Errors, which will almost unavoidably creep in with
Time.

If we would preserve that Purity of Faith and Manners, which our Religion
requires, we should have frequent recourse to the Primitive Teachers and
Patterns of Christianity, and endeavor to bring our Belief and Lives to as
near a Conformity with theirs, as is possible. Who so likely to deliver the
Faith and Doctrine of Christ pure, and uncorrupted, as the Primitive Teachers
of it, who received it from our Lord himself; and were, by an extraordinary
assistance of the Holy Spirit, secured from Error and Mistake in the delivery
of it? And who so likely to bring their Lives and Conversations to an exact
Conformity with this holy Doctrine, as they, who were so thoroughly Instructed
in it by the best Master, and shown the Practice of it in the most perfect
Example of all Holiness and Virtue? Great Reason there is therefore, why all
Christians should follow their Faith, and make their Coversation more
especially the Patterns of their Lives.

The want of a due regard to these Fountains of Christian Doctrine, and the
first and best Patterns of Christian Practice, has been the great Cause of
that foul degeneracy of the Romish Church, both in the Doctrine and Practice of
Christianity. They do not follow the Faith of the Apostles, the first Fathers
and Teachers of Christianity; but of the Fathers of the Council of Lateran, and
Trent. Thus have they forsaken the Fountain of living waters, the Holy
Scriptures, and have hewn to themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold no
water; the Doctrines and Traditions of Men. Nay, they have stopped up this
Fountain of living waters from the People, and forbid them to come to it; and
forced them to drink of those impure and pudled Streams, which they let out to
them; and instead of the Lives of the holy Apostles, and those eminent Graces
and Virtues which shined forth in them, they represent to them the Patterns of
new Saints; some of which neither they nor their Fathers knew, and indeed never
were in being; as St. Almanach, and St. Synoris, and several others; many of
them so far from being Saints, that they may be reckoned among the worst of
Men; (for instance, our Countryman Thomas a Becket, who for Pride and Rebellion
may almost vye with Lucifer himself; and yet this ill Man, and worst of
Subjects, was Canonized to that height, as for Two hundred Years together, to
engross the Worship of these Western Parts of the World, and to impoverish the
Shrines of all other Saints, even of the Blessed Virgin her self;) others, such
Idiots, or hotheaded Fanatics, that he that reads their Lives, would take
them to be Fools and Madmen, rather than Saints, (as Francis, and Dominick, and
Ignatius Loyola, and several others of the same stamp;) and many the very best
of them, so disguised by their Legends, that instead of the substantial Virtues
of a Good Life, their story is made up of false and fantastical Miracles, and
ridiculous Freaks of Superstition.

All which considered, there is great Reason, why we should have recourse to
the Primitive Patterns of Faith and Holiness, and be followers of them, who we
are sure were followers of Christ. I proceed to the

Second Thing I proposed, namely, wherein we should imitate these Patterns. And
the Apostle expresses it in one word, in their Faith, Whose faith follow. And
the word Faith is frequently in the New Testament used so largely, as to
comprehend the whole Condition of the Gospel; a firm Belief of the Doctrine of
it, and the Fruit and Effect of this Belief, in a good Conversation. And that
Faith here in the Text, takes in a holy Life, is evident from what follows,
Whose faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation; from whence it
is evident, that the Apostle speaks of such a Faith, as shows forth it self in
a good Conversation.

So that we may very well suppose the Apostle here to recommend the Primitive
Faith to our imitation, in these Four respects.

1. In regard of the Sincerity and Purity of it. 2. In regard of the Firmness
and Stability of it. 3. Of their Constancy and Perseverance in it. 4. Of the
Efficacy and Fruitfulness of it, in a good Conversation. All these may be
collected from the Expressions and Circumstances of the Text.
1. We are to imitate these Primitive Patterns, in the Sincerity and Purity of
their Faith; I mean, that the Faith which we profess, be the sincere Doctrine
of Christianity, and the pure Word of God, free from all mixture of Humane
Additions and Inventions, and not made up, as the Faith of the Pharisees was
among the Jews, and theirs of the Church of Rome is at this day, of the Word of
God, and the Doctrines and Traditions of Men; not like the Creed of Pope Pius
the IV. (which is now the Standard of the Roman Faith) consisting of the 12 Old
Aricles of the Christian Faith, delivered to us by Christ and his Apostles, and
as many new ones, coined and stamped by their later Councils. This is not to
follow the Faith of the Apostles, and first Patterns of Christianity, the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, as St. Jude calls it. This is to have our Faith
stand upon the Authority of Men, and not on the Word of God; whereas we are to
follow the Faith of the first Guides of the Christian Church, who spoke unto
them the Word of God, as the Apostle expressly charge here in the Text.

2. We are to imitate them, in the Stability and Firmness of our Faith, and not
suffer our selves to be shaken, and removed from it, by every wind of new
Doctrine; the Faith of Christ being unchangeable, as Christ himself. And that
by following the Faith of the Primitive Guides and Teachers of Christianity,
the Apostle here means, that we should be steadfast and unmovable in it, is
plain from what follows immediately after the Text; Whose faith follow,
considering the End of their Conversation. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever. Be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines: for it is a good thing, that the heart be established with grace,
that is, in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is frequently called the grace of
God.

3. We are to imitate them, in the Constancy and Perseverance of their Faith;
and that, notwithstanding all the Discountenance and Opposition, the
Persecution and Suffering, which attend the Profession of this Faith; which the
Apostle sufficiently intimates in this Epistle, to have been the Condition of
those Christians, to whom he wrote; and therefore he proposes so many Examples
to them, of constant and patient Suffering for God and his Truth; and it is
probable enough, that the Apostle here recommends the Example of those, who
were the Primitive Martyrs, as well as Teachers of Christianity. He had before
proposed to them the living Examples of those, who were under actual
Persecution and Sufferings for the Gospel, v. 3. Remember those that are in
bonds, and those that suffer adversity; and here in the 7. v. he seems to
propose the Pattern of those, who had laid down their Lives and dyed for the
Faith; Remember those who have been your Guides, and have spoken to you the
Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the End of their
Conversation,(...), which may be rendr'd, the last act of their Lives, the
manner of their going out of the World, perhaps by Martyrdom; as if had said,
Imitate them in their Constancy and Perseverance in the Faith, even to the
last, in laying down their Lives for it. And thus we should be ready to do, if
God calls us to it. However, it is certain, the Aopstle meant their Constancy
and Perseverance in the Faith, to the last, and their dying in, if not for the
Faith of Christ. And this is necessary, if we expect the Crown of Life, and
hope for the same happy End, which they had; for none but they that continue to
the end, shall be saved.

4. We should imitate them, in the efficacy and fruitfulness of their Faith, in
the Practice and Virtues of a good Life. Whose faith follow, considering the
end of their Conversation, that is, their Perseverance in a holy Course to the
end. And these must never be separated; a sound Faith, and a good Life. Without
this, our Faith is barren and dead, as St. James tells us, chapter 2. v. 17. Our
Knowledge and Belief of the Christian Doctrine, must manifest it self in a good
Conversation. Who is a wise man (says the same St. James, chapter 3. v. 13.) Who is
a wise man; and endowed with knowledge amongst you? Let him shew-out of a good
conversation his works. This is a faithful saying, says St. Paul to Titus, chapter
3. v. 8. and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who
have believed in God, be careful to maintain good works.

And herein the Apostles of our Lord and Savior were eminent Examples. They
lived as they Taught, and Practiced the Doctrine which they Preached. So St.
Paul strictly charge Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an example of the
Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in purity. And our
Savior tells us, that hereby chiefly false Prophets and Teachers might be
known from the true Apostles of Christ, Matthew. 7.20. By their fruits ye shall
know them. And indeed we do not follow the faith of those Excellent Persons, if
we do not abound in all the fruits of righteousness, which, by Jesus Christ,
are to the praise and glory of God. I come now to the

Third and Last Thing I Proposed, viz. the Encouragement to this, from the
Consideration of the happy state of those Persons, who are proposed to us for
Patterns, and the glorious Reward which they are made Partakers of in another
World. Considering the end of their Conversation(...), their egress, or
departure out of this Life, into a Blessed and Glorious State, where they have
received the Crown and Reward of their Faith and Patience, and Pious
Conversation in this World; or else, (which comes much to one,) considering the
conclusion of their Lives, with what Patience and Comfort they left the World,
and with what joyful Assurance of the happy Condition they were going to, and
were to continue in for ever.

And this is a great encouragement to Constancy and Perseverance in Faith and
Holiness, to see with what Cheerfulness and Comfort good Men die, and with what
a firm and steady Persuasion of the Happiness they are entering upon. For who
would not be glad to leave the World, in that Calmness and Serenity of Mind,
and comfortable Assurance of a Blessed Eternity? Bad Men wish this, and are
ready to say with Balaam, Let me die the death of the Righteous, and let my
last end be like his. But if we would have the Comfort of such a Death, we must
live such Lives, and imitate the Faith and good Conversation of those, whom we
desire to resemble in the manner of their Death, and to go into the same Happy
State that they are in after Death. If we do not make their Lives our Pattern;
we must not expect to be conformable to to them, in the happy Manner of their
Death. When we hear of the Death of an eminent good Man, we do not doubt but he
is happy; and are confident, that he will meet with the Reward of his Piety and
Goodness in another World. If we believe this of him; let us endeavor to be
like him; that we may attain the same Happiness, which we believe him to be
possessed of, and, as the Apostle exhorts, chapter 6.12. Let us not be slothful; but
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Let us
show the same Diligence that they did; that we may have the same full Assurance
of Hope unto the End, which they had.

The Inference from this Discourse, which I have made upon this Argument, is,
to show what Use we ought to make of these excellent Examples, which are set
before us, of the first Founders and Teachers of our Religion, and what is the
proper Honor and Respect, which we ought to pay to their Memory: Not
Invocation and Adoration; but a zealous Imitation of their Faith, and good
Conversation. The greatest Honor we can do them, the most acceptable to God,
the most grateful to them, and the most beneficial to our selves, is to
endeavor to be like them: Not to make any Images, and Likeness of them, to
fall down before them, and worship them; but to Form the Image of their Faith
and Virtues upon our Hearts and Lives: Not to Pray to them; but to Praise God
for such bright and glorious Examples, and to endeavor with all our Might to
imitate their Faith, and Patience, and Piety, and Humility, and Meekness, and
Charity, and all those other Virtues which were so resplendent in them. And
this is to remember the Founders of our Religion as we ought, to follow their
Faith, and to consider the end of their Conversation.

Had the Christian Religion required, or intended any such thing, as of latter
Times has been practiced in the World; it had been as easy for the Apostle to
have said, Remember them that have been your Guids, and have spoken to you the
Word of God, to erect Images to them, and to worship them with due Veneration,
and to pray to them and make use of their Intercession. But no such thing is
said, or the least Intimation given of it, either in this Text, or any other in
the whole Bible; but very much to the contrary.

Their Example indeed is frequently recommended to us, for our Imitation and
Encouragement; and for this Reason, the Providence of God has taken particular
Care, that the Memory of the Apostles, and so many primitive Christians and
Martyrs, should be transmitted to Posterity; that Christians in all succeeding
Ages might propound these Patterns to themselves, and have perpetually before
their Eyes the Piety and Virtue of their Lives, and their patient and constant
Sufferings for the Truth; that when God shall please to call us to the like
Trial, we may not be wearied and faint in our Minds; but being compassed about
with such a Cloud of Witnesses, having so many Examples in our Eye of those,
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, and do now as it were look
down from their happy State upon us here below, who are combating with manifold
Temptations, to see how we behave and acquit our selves in our Christian
Course, we may take encouragement to our selves, from such Examples, and such
Spectators, to run with Patience the Race which is set before us.

I know indeed that other Use than this has been, and is at this Day made of
the Memory of the Saints and Martyrs of former Ages, very dishonorable to God,
and very grievous to them, if they be sensible of what is done here below; I
mean to Worship them, and to Pray to them, and (to the great Disparagement of
the powerful Intercession of our great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God) to
make them the Mediators and Intercessors in Heaven with God for us. Of this the
Scripture has no where given us the least intimation; but has expressly
commanded the contrary, to worship the Lord our God, and him only to serve; and
to pray to him alone, in the name of Jesus Christ, who is the only Mediator
betwixt God and Man. Nor are there any Footsteps of any such Practice, in the
primitive Church, for the first Three Hundred Years; as is acknowledged by our
most Learned Adversaries of the Church of Romer

The Scripture no where propounds the Saints to us, for Objects of our Worship;
but for the Patterns of our lives. This is the greatest Respect and Veneration,
that we can, or ought to pay to them; and whatever is beyond this, is a
Voluntary Humility, injurious to God and our Blessed Savior, and most
certainly displeasing to those, whom we pretend to Honor; if they know how Men
play the fool about them here below.

Let us then endeavor to be like them, in the Holy and Virtuous Actions of
their Lives, in their constant Patience and Suffering for the Truth; if God
shall call us thereto. And we may be like them, if we do but sincerely
endeavor it, and pray to God for his Grace and Assistance to that end. For
these Examples were not left for our Admiration only; but for our Imitation. We
frequently read the Lives of the Apostles and first Founders of our Religion:
But I know not how it comes to pass, we choose rather lazily to admire them,
than, vigorously to follow them; as if the Piety of the first Christians were
Miraculous, and not at all intended for the Imitation of succeeding Ages; as if
Heaven and Earth, God and Men, and all things were altered, since that time; as
if Christianity were then in its Youthful Age and Vigor, but is since decayed,
and grown old, and has quite lost its Power and Virtue. And indeed the
generality of Christians live at such a faint and careless rate, as to make the
World believe, that either all the Stories of the Primitive Christians are
Fables; or else, that the Force of Christianity is strangely abated, and that
the Holy Spirit of God has forsaken the Earth, and is retired to the Father.
But Truth never grows old, and those Laws of Goodness and Righteousness, which
are contained in the Gospel, are still as reasonable, and apt to gain upon the
Minds of Men, as ever. God is the same he was, and our Blessed Savior is still
at the Right Hand of God, Interceding powerfully for Sinners, for mercy and
grace to help in time of need. The Promises and Threatenings, of the Gospel, are
still as true and powerful as ever; and the holy Spirit of God is still in the
World, and effectually works in them that believe.

Let us not then deceive our selves in this matter. The Primitive Christians
were Men like our selves, subject to the same Passions that we are, and
compassed about with the same Infirmities; so that although that extraordinary
Spirit and Power of Miracles, which God endowed them withal, for the first
planting and propagating of the Gospel in the World, be now ceased; yet the
sanctifying Power and Virtue of God's Holy Spirit, does still accompany the
Gospel, and is ready to assist us in every good work.

In a word: We have all that is necessary to work the same Graces and Virtues
in us, which were in them; and if we be not slothful, and wanting to our
selves, we may follow their faith, and at last attain the end of it, even the
Salvation of our Souls.

Let us then, from an idle admiring of those excellent Patterns, proceed to a
vigorous imitation of them, and be so far from being discouraged by the
Excellency of them, as to make even that Matter and Ground of encouragement to
our selves; according to that of Tertullian, Admonetur omnis aet as fieri
posse, quod aliquando factum est; all Ages to the end of the World may he
convinced, that what has been done, is possible to be done. There have been
such Holy and Excellent Persons in the World; and therefore it is possible for
Men to be such.

Let us not then be slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises. Since we are compast about with such a Cloud of
Witnesses; let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which so easily besets
us, and let us run with Patience the Race which is set before us, looking unto
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame, and is now set down at the
right hand of God.

SERMON IX. The Encouragement to Suffer for Christ; and the Danger of denying
him.
Preached on All Saints Day.
2 Timothy II. 11, 12. It is a faithful saying; For if we be dead with him, we
shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: If we
deny him, he also will deny us.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, St. Paul encourages Timothy to continue
steadfast in the Profession of the Gospel, notwithstanding the Sufferings which
attended it; VOL. II.
Verse 1. Thou therefore my Son, be strong in the grace which is in Christ
Jesus; and Verse 3. Thou therefore endure hardship, as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ. And to animate him in his Resolution, he quotes a Saying, which it
seems was well known and firmly believed among Christians; a Saying on the one
hand full of Encouragement to those who with Patience and Constancy Suffered
for their Religion; and on the other hand, full of Terror to those who for
fear of Suffering denied it.

It is a faithful saying. This is a Preface used by this Apostle, to introduce
some remarkable Sentence, of more than ordinary weight and concernment; 1 Timothy
1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save Sinners; and chap. 4.8, 9. Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having a promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, Titus 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly, Sermon. IX.
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works.
And here in the Text, the same Preface is used to signify the Importance of the
saying he was about to mention; It is a faithful saying; If we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him:
If we deny him, he will deny us.

The First Two Sentences are Matter of Encouragement to those who Suffer with
Christ, and for him, and are the very same in Sense. If we be dead with him,
that is, if we lay down our lives for the Testimony of the Truth, as he did; we
shall also live with him, that is, we shall in like manner be made Partakers of
Immortality, as he is: If we suffer or endure as he did, we shall also reign
with him in Glory.

The other Sentence is Matter of Terror to those who deny him and his Truth.
If we deny him, he also will deny us; to which is subjoyned another Saying much
to the same Sense; if we believe not,(...), if we be unfaithful; yet he
remains faithful, he cannot deny himself; that is, he will be as good as his
word, and make good that Solemn Threatening which he has denounced against
those, who shall for fear of Suffering deny him, and his Truth.

The Words being thus explained, I shall begin with the First Part of this
remarkable Saying; If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him. This it seems, was a noted Saying among
Christians; and whether they had it by Tradition of our Savior, or whether it
was in familiar use among the Apostles, as a very proper and powerful Argument
to keep Christians steadfast to their Religion, I cannot determine. It is
certain, that Sayings to this Sense are very frequent, especially in the
Epistles of St. Paul. Romans 6.5. For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death; we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection;
and Verse 8. Now if we be dead with Christ; we believe that we shall also live
with him. 2 Cor. 4.10. Always bearing about in the body, the dying of our Lord
Jesus; that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body; and
Verse 18. For we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake;
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh; and
Romans 8.17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. Phil. 3.10, 11. That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made comfortable unto
his death: If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. 1.
Pet. 4.12, 13. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which
is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice, in as
much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be
revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.

You see that the Sense of this Saying was in frequent use among the Apostles,
as a powerful Argument to Encourage Christians to Constancy in their Religion,
notwithstanding the Dangers and Sufferings which attended it. This is a
faithful saying: If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him.

And the Force of this Argument will best appear, by taking into consideration
these Two things;

I. What Virtue there is in a firm Belief and Persuasion of a Blessed
Immortality in another World, to support and bear up Men's Spirits, under the
greatest Sufferings for Righteousness sake; and even to animate them, if God
shall call them to it, to lay down their Lives for their Religion. II. How it
may be made out to be reasonable, for Men to Embrace and Voluntarily to submit
to Present and Grievous Sufferings, in Hopes of a Future Happiness and Reward;
concerning which we have not, nor perhaps are capable of having the same degree
of Certainty and Assurance which we have of the Evils and Sufferings of this
present Life.
I. What Virtue there is in a firm Belief and Persuasion of a blessed
Immortality in another World, to support and bear up Men's Spirits, under the
greatest Sufferings for Righteousness sake; and even to animate them, if God
should call them to it, to lay down their Lives for their Religion.

If Men do firmly believe that they shall change this Temporal and Miserable
Life, for an Endless State of Happiness and Glory, and that they shall meet
with a Reward of their Sufferings infinitely beyond the proportion of them,
both in the Weight and Duration of it; this must needs turn the Scales on that
side, on which there is the greatest Weight: And there is a sufficient ground
for a firm Belief of this. For if any thing can certainly be concluded from the
Providence of God, this may, That Good Men shall be happy one time or other:
And because they are very often great Sufferers in this Life; that there is
another State remains for them after this Life, wherein they shall meet with a
full Reward of all their Sufferings for Righteousness sake.

But besides the Reasonableness of this, from the consideration of God's
Providence; we have now a clear and express Revelation of it; life and
immortality being brought to light by the Gospel. This St. John tells us is the
great Promise of the Gospel, 1 John 2.25. This is the promise which he has
promised us; even eternal life. And this Promise, our Savior most expressly
makes to those who Suffer for him, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which
are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say all manner
of evil against you falslly for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for
great is your reward in heaven. Mark 10.29. Verily I say unto you, there is no
man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospel's; but he shall receive
an hundredfold now in this time, with persecutions, (that is, so far as a
State of Persecution would admit) and in the world to come eternal life.

And if such a Persuasion be firmly fixed in our Minds; the Faith of another
World, and the assured Hope of Eternal Life and Happiness, must needs have a
mighty force and Efficacy upon the Minds of Sober and Considerate Men; because
there is no proportion between Suffering for a little while, and being
Unspeakably and Etternally happy. So St. Paul tells us, he calculated the
matter, Romans 8.18. I reckon (says he) that the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. The
vast disproportion, between the Sufferings of a few Days, and the Joys and
Glory of Eternity, when it is once firmly believed by us, will weigh down all
the Evils and Calamities, of this World, and give us Courage and Constancy
under them. For why should we faint; if we believe, that our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, will work for us a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of Glory? As the same St. Paul assures us, 2 Cor. 4.17. If our Minds be
but thoroughly possessed with the hopes of a Resurrection to a Better and Happier
Life; this will make Death, attended even with Extremity of Terror, to be
tolerable; as we read of some, in that long Catalogue of Saints and Martyrs,
Heb. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might
obtain a better resurrection. It would make a Man to rejoice in the Ruin and
Dissolution of this earthly tabernacle, to be assured, that when it is
dissolved, we shall have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens, as the same Apostle assures us, 2 Cor. 5.1. Thus you
see what Virtue there is in the firm Belief and Persuasion of a better Life, to
bear up Men's Spirits under those Sufferings and Torments which may seem
unsupportable to Humane Nature.

And so indeed they would be, without an extraordinary Grace and Assistance of
God, to enable them to bear those Sufferings, which his Providence permits them
to be exercised withal. But of this extraordinary Grace, we are assured, not
only from the consideration of the Attributes and Providence of God; but
likewise from the express Promises and Declarations of his Word.

The Attributes of God and his Providence, give us good Grounds to believe that
he who loves Goodness and Righteousness, and has a Peculiar Favor and Regard
for good Men, will never suffer his Faithful Friends and Servants, to be
brought into that Distress for Righteousness sake, that they shall not be able
to endure those Evils and Afflictions which befall them upon that Account: And
if in the Course of his Providence, any thing happen to them that is above the
ordinary Constancy and Patience of Humane Nature to bear, that in such a Case,
God will extraordinarily interpose, and give them Strength and Patience,
Support and Comfort, proportionable to the Evils and Sufferings that are upon
them; and that he will either lighten their Burden, or add to their Strength;
he will either mitigate their Pain, or increase their Patience; either he will
check and restrain the Effect of Natural Causes; as in the Case of the Three
Children, that were in the fiery Furnace; and of Daniel, who was cast into the
Den of Lions; or else, (which comes to the same Issue,) if he will suffer
Causes to have their Natural Course, he will afford Supernatural Comforts to
balance the Fury and Extremity of them. This is very credible, from the mere
consideration of God's Goodness, and of the Particular Care and Favor of his
Providence toward Good Men.

But besides this, we have the Express Promise and Declaration of God's Word,
to this Purpose, which puts us out of all doubt concerning that which we had
good Reason to hope and expect before. 1 Cor. 10.13. St. Paul there tells the
Christians at Corinth, that though they had met with some Troubles, yet they had
not been Tried with the Extremity of Suffering: But when that should happen,
they had no cause to doubt, but God would enable them to bear it. There has no
Temptation taken you, but such as is common to man; that is, you have not yet
been exercised with any Trial, but what is Humane; what the ordinary Strength
and Resolution of Humane Nature is able to bear: But in case it should come to
extreme Suffering, and that they must either comply with the Heathen Idolatry,
or endure Extremity of Torments; they had the Promise of God's Help, to support
them in that Case. God is faithful, says he, who will not suffer you to be
tempted, above that you are able to bear; but will with the temptation also
make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it; And then it follows,
wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry; that is, let no Suffering that
you are Tempted withal, make you guilty of this Sin. And 1 Pet. 4.14. The
Presence of God's Spirit, in a very glorious manner, for our Support and
Comfort, is promised to those who Suffer for him. If ye be reproached for the
Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon
you.

And this consideration, of God's Strength to support us under Sufferings,
makes the other, of the Reward of them, a Perfect and Complete Encouragement;
which it could not be without it. For if upon the whole matter, the present
Sufferings of Good Men were intolerable, and Humane Nature were not Divinely
assisted to bear them: How great soever the Future Reward promised to them
should be; they that lay under them would be forced to consult their own
present Ease and Deliverance. I proceed to the

II. Thing I proposed to consider, namely, How it may be made out to be
Reasonable to Embrace and Voluntarily to submit to present and grievous
Sufferings, in Hopes of future Happiness and Reward; concerning which we have
not, nor perhaps are capable of having the same degree of Certainty and
Assurance, which we have of the Evils and Sufferings of this present Life.

Now granting that we have not the same Degree of Certainty concerning our
future Happiness, that we have of our present Sufferings which we feel, or see
just ready to come upon us; yet Prudence making it necessary for Men to run
this hazard, does justify the Reasonableness of it. This I take to be a known
and ruled Case in the common Affairs of Life, and in Matters of Temporal
Concernment; and Men Act upon this Principle every Day. The Husbandman parts
with his Corn, and casts it into the Earth, in confidence that it will spring
up again, and at the time of Harvest bring him in a considerable return and
advantage. He parts with a Certainty, in hope only of a great future Benefit:
And though he have no Demonstration, for the Infallible Success of his Labor and
Hazard; yet he Acts very Reasonably: Because if he does not take this course,
he runs a greater and more certain Hazard, of perishing by Famine at last, when
his present Stock is spent. The Case of the Merchant is the same, who parts
with a Present Estate, in hopes of a Future Improvement; which yet is not so
certain, as what he parts withal.

And if this be Reasonable in these Cases; then the Hazard which Men run, upon
much greater Assurance, than either the Husbandman or the Merchant have, is
much more Reasonable. When we part with this Life in hopes of one infinitely
better; that is, in sure and certain hope of a Resurrection to eternal life;
and when we submit to Present Sufferings to avoid an Eternity of Misery, which
is much more to be dreaded than Temporal Want; this is Reasonable: because here
is a much greater Advantage in view, and a more pressing Necessity in the Case;
nothing being so desirable to one that must live for ever as to be Happy for
ever; and nothing to be avoided by him with so much Care, as everlasting Misery
and Ruin. And for our security of obtaining the one, and escaping the other, we
have the promise of God, who cannot lie; which is all the Certainty and
Security that Things Future and Invisible are capable of.

Nay, I will go lower. If God had made no express Promise and Declaration of a
Future Happiness and Reward, to those that serve him and suffer for him: Yet if
any Man out of a sincere Love to God, and awful Regard to his Laws, endure
Trouble and Affliction, if there be a God and Providence this is Assurance
enough to us, that our Services and Sufferings shall one time or other be
Considered and Rewarded. For as sure as any Man is, that there is a God, and
that his Providence regards the Actions of Men; so sure are we, that no Man
shall finally be a loser, by any thing that he does or suffers for him.

So that the Matter is now brought to this plain Issue; That if it be
Reasonable to Believe there is a God, and that his Providence Regards and
Considers the Actions of Men; it is also Reasonable to endure Present
Sufferings, in Hope of a Future Reward; and there is certainly enough in this
Case, to govern and determine a Prudent Man, that is in any good measure
Persuaded of another Life after this, and has any tolerable Consideration of
and regard to his Eternal Interest.

Indeed, if we were sure, that there were no Life after this; if we had no
expectation of a Happiness or Misery beyond this World; the wisest thing that
any Man could do, would be to enjoy as much of the present Contentments and
Satisfactions of this World, as he could fairly come at. For if there be no
resurrection to another life; the Apostle allows the Reasoning of the Epicure
to be very good, Let us eat and drink, for, to morrow we dye. But on the other
hand, if it be true that we are designed for Immortality, and that another
State remains for us after this Life, wherein we shall be Unspeakably Happy, or
intolerably and Eternally Miserable, according as we have behaved our selves in
this World; it is then evidently Reasonable, that Men should take the greatest
Care of the longest Duration, and be content to bear, and dispense with some
Present Trouble and Inconvenience, for a Felicity that will have no end; and be
willing to Labor and take Pains, and deny our present Ease and Comfort for a
little while, that we may be Happy for ever. This is reckoned Prudence in the
Account of this World, for a Man to part with a Present. Possession and
Enjoyment, for a much greater Advantage in Reversion: But surely the
disproportion between Time and Eternity, is so vast; that did Men but firmly
believe that they shall live for ever, nothing in this World could reasonably
be thought too good to part withal, or too grievous to suffer, for the
obtaining of a Blessed Immortality.

In the Virtue of this Belief and Persuasion, the Primitive Christians were
Fortified, against all that the Malice and Cruelty of the World could do
against them; and they thought they made a very wise Bargain, if thorugh many
tribulations they might at last enter into the Kingdom of God; because they
believed, that the Joys of Heaven would abundantly Recompense all their Sorrows
and Sufferings upon Earth. And so confident were they of this, that they looked
upon it as a special Favor and Regard of God to them, to call them to Suffer
for his Name. So St. Paul speaks of it, Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given, on
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him; but also to suffer for his
sake. Yea, they accounted them happy, who upon this account were miserable in
this World. So St. James expressly pronounces of them, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is
the man that endures temptation; (meaning the Temptation of Persecution and
Suffering) for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. And this consideration was that,
which kept up their Spirits from sinking under the weight of their greatest
Sufferings. So St. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 4.14, 16. Knowing that he which raised
up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus. For which cause we faint
not; but though our outward man perish: yet our inward man is renewed day by day.
The Sufferings of their Bodies, did but help to raise and fortify their
Spirits: Nay, so far were they from fainting under those Afflictions; that they
rejoiced and gloried in them. So the same Apostle tells us, Romans 5.2, 3. that
in the midst of their Sufferings, they rejoiced in hope of the Glory of God;
and that they gloried in tribulations, as being the way to be made Partakers of
that Glory: And Heb. 10.34. That they took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods; knowing in themselves, that they had in heaven a better and an enduring
substance. And for this Reason, St. James, Chap. 1.2. exhorts Christians to
account it all joy, when they fell into diverse temptations; (that is, various
kinds of Sufferings) because of the manifold Advantages which from thence would
redound to them.

Now what was it that Inspired them to all this Courage and Cheerfulness; but
the Belief of a mighty Reward, far beyond the Proportion of all their
Sufferings, and a firm Persuasion that they should be vast Gainers by them at
the last? This Consideration St. Paul urges with great force, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: whilst we look not at the things which
are seen; but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen,
are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal. If we would
compare things, justly, and attentively regard and consider the invisible
Glories of another World, as well as the things which are seen; we should
easily perceive, that he who suffers for God and Religion, does not renounce
Happiness; but puts it out to Interest, upon terms of the greatest advantage.

I shall now speak briefly to the

Second Part of this remarkable Saying in the Text; If we deny him, he also
will deny us, To which is subjoined in the words following, if we believe
not;(...), if we deal unfaithfully with him; yet he abides faithful, he cannot
deny himself; that is, he will be constant to his Word, and make good that
solemn Threatening which he has denounced against those, who for fear of
Suffering shall deny him and his Truth before Men, Matt. 10.33. Whosoever
(faith our Lord there) shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in heaven, Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of
me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also
shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father,
with the Holy Angels. This is a Terrible Threatening, to be disowned by Christ
at the Day of Judgment, in the presence of God and his Holy Angels; And this
Threatening will certainly be made good; and though we may renounce him, and break
our faith with him; yet he remains faithful, who has threatened, and cannot
deny himself.

This is matter of great Terror, and seriously to be thought upon by those who
are tempted to deny Christ and his Truth, either by the hope of worldly
Advantage, or the fear of temporal Sufferings. What worldly Advantage can we
propose to our selves, by quitting our Religion, which can be thought an equal
Price, for the loss of our immortal Souls, and of the Happiness of all
Eternity? Suppose the whole World were offered us in consideration; yet what is
a man profited; if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? or
what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? as our Savior Reasons, Matt.
16.26.

And on the other hand, if the fear of Temporal Suffering be such a Terror to
Men, as to shake their Constancy in Religion, and to tempt them to renounce it;
the fear of Eternal Torments ought to be much more Powerful, to keep them
steadfast to their Religion, and to deter them from the denial of it. If Fear
will move us; then in all Reason, that which is most Terrible, ought to prevail
most with us, and the greatest Danger should be most dreaded by us, according
to our Savior's most Friendly and Reasonable Advice, Luke 12.4, 5. I say unto
you, my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear. Fear
him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
you, fear him. If there can be no doubt, which of them is most to be dreaded;
there can be no doubt, what we are to do, in case of such a Temptation.

I shall now draw some Inferences from this Discourse by way of Application.

First, If this be a faithful saying, that if we be dead with Christ, we shall
also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him; but if we deny
him, he will also deny us. The Belief of it ought to have a mighty influence
upon us, to make us steadfast and unmovable in the Profession and Practice of
our Holy Religion. This Inference the Apostle makes from the Doctrine of a
Blessed Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as
you know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. If any thing will fix
Men in the Profession of their Religion, and make them serious in the Practice
of it; the Belief of a Glorious Resurrection, and of the Reward which God will
then give to his Faithful Servants, must needs have a very powerful Influence
upon them to this purpose. Upon the same ground, the Apostle to the Hebrews
exhorts them to hold fast the Profession of their Faith, without wavering;
because he is faithful that has promised. If we be constant in the Profession
and Practice of our Holy Religion; God will be faithful to the Promise which he
has made of Eternal Life, to those who by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality.

If under the dark and imperfect Dispensation of the Law, Good Men showed so
much Courage and Constancy, for God and Religion, as we read in that long
Catalogue of Heroes, Heb. 11. How much more should Christians, whose Faith is
supported much more strongly than theirs was, by a much clearer Evidence of
another Life, and a Blessed Immortality, than they had; by more express
Promises of Divine Comfort and Assistance under Sufferings, than were made to
them; and by the most Divine and Encouraging Example, of the greatest Patience
under the greatest Sufferings, that the World ever had, in the Death and
Passion of the Son of God, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne
of God! When we consider this Glorious Example of Suffering, and the Glorious
Reward of it; how can we be weary and faint in our minds! If the Saints and
Apostles of the Old Testament did such great things, by Virtue of a Faith,
which relied chiefly upon the Attributes and Providence of God; what should not
we do, who have the Security of God's express Promise, for our Comfort and
Encouragement! We certainly have much greater Reason to take up our Cross more
cheerfully, and to bear it more patiently, than they did.

Secondly, We should always be Prepared in the Resolution of our Minds, to
Suffer for the Testimony of God's Truth and a good Conscience, if it should
please God at any time to call us to it. This our Savior has made a necessary
Condition of his Religion, and a Qualification of a true Disciple. If any man
will be my disciple; let him take up his Cross and follow me. so that we are to
reckon upon it, and to prepare for it; that if it comes, we may not be
surprised, as if some strange thing had happened to us; and may not be
unresolved what to do in such a case. And God knows, when we may be called to
it: However it is wise, to forecast it in our Minds, and to be always in a
Preparation and Readiness to entertain the worst that may happen; that if it
come, we may be able to stand out in an evil day; and if it does not come, God
will accept the Resolution of our Minds, and reward it according to the
Sincerity of it. He that knows what we would have done, will consider it, as if
we had done it.

Thirdly, The less we are called to suffer for God, the more we should think
our selves obliged to do for him; the less God is pleased to exercise our
Patience, we should abound so much the more, in the active Virtues of a good
Life; and our Obedience to God, should be so much the more cheerful, and we
more fruitful in every good work. If there be no need of sealing the Truth with
our Blood; we should be sure to adorn and recommend it by our Lives.

Fourthly and Lastly, If the hopes of Immortality will bear Men up under the
extremity of Suffering and Torments, and give Men Courage and Resolution
against all the Terrors of the World; they ought much more to make us
victorious over the Temptations and Allurements of it. For certainly it is in
Reason much easier to foregoe Pleasure, than to endure Pain; to refuse or lay
down a good Place, for the Testimony of a good Conscience, than to lay down our
lives upon that Account. And in vain does any Man pretend that he will be a
Martyr for his Religion; when he will not rule an Appetite, nor restrain a
Lust, nor subdue a Passion, nor cross his Covetousness and Ambition, for the
sake of it, and in hope of that eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has
promised. He that refuses to do the less, is not like to do the greater. It is
very improbable, that a Man will die for his Religion; when he cannot be
persuaded to live according to it. So that by this we may try the Sincerity of
our Resolution concerning Martyrdom. For what Profession soever Men make, he
that will not deny himself the Pleasures of Sin, and the Advantages of this
World, for Christ; when it comes to the push, will never have the Heart to take
up his Cross and follow him. He that cannot take up a Resolution to live a
Saint, has a Demonstration within himself, that he is never like to dye a
Martyr.

SERMON X. The Blessedness of Good Men, after Death.
Preached on All Saints Day.
REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.


I Will not trouble you with any nice Dispute about the Author of this Book of
the Revelation, or the Authority of it; VOL. II.
though both these were sometimes controverted; because it is now many Ages since
this Book was received into the Canon of the Scriptures, as of Divine
Authority, and as written by St. John. Nor shall I at this time enquire into
the particular meaning of the several Visions and Predictions contained in it.
It is confessedly in several parts of it, a very obscure Book; and there needs
no other Argument to satisfy us that it is so, than that so many Learned and
Inquisitive Persons, have given such different Interpretations of several
remarkable Passages in it; as particularly concerning the slaying of the Two
Witnesses, and the number of the Beast.

The words which I have read to you, though there be some difficulty about the
Interpretation of some particular Expressions in them; yet in the general Sense
and Intendment of them, they are very plain, being a Solemn Declaration of the
Blessed State of Good Men after this Life.

And that we may take the more notice of them, they are brought in with a great
deal of Solemn Preparation and Address, Sermon. X.
as it were on purpose to bespeak our attention to them: I heard a voice from
heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth. And for the greater Confirmation of them, the special Testimony of
the Spirit, is added to the voice from Heaven, declaring the Reason, why they
that die in the Lord, are Pronounced to be in so happy a Condition: Yea, says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow
them.

In the handling of these Words, I shall First inquire into the particular
Sense and Meaning of them.

Secondly, Prosecute the general Intendment of them; which I told you is to
declare to us, the Blessed Estate of those that die in the Lord, (that is) of
Saints and Good Men, after they are departed this Life.

First, I shall enquire into the particular Sense and Meaning of the Words. To
the clearing of which, nothing will conduce more, than to consider the Occasion
of them, which was briefly this. In the Visions of this and the foregoing
Chapter, is represented to St. John, the great Straits that the Christians, the
true Worshipers of the True God, should be reduced to. On the one hand, they
are Threatened with Death; or if they be suffered to live, they are interdicted
all Commerce with Humane Society, Chap. 13.15. And he had power to cause, that
as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed: And
Verse 17. That no man may buy or sell, save he that had the Mark of the Beast.
And on the other hand, they that do Worship the Beast, are Threatened with
Damnation, Chap. 14.9, 10. If any man do worship the Beast, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone. So that whenever this should happen, it would be a time of great
Trial to the sincere Christians, being threatened with Extreme Persecution on
the one hand, and Eternal Damnation on the other; and therefore it is added in
the 12 Verse, Here is the Patience of the Saints: Here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. This is represented in St. John's
Visions, as the last and extremest Persecution of the true Worshipers of God,
and which should preceed the final Downfall of Babylon. And when this should
happen, then he tells us, the Patience of the Saints would be tried to purpose,
and then it would be seen, who are faithful to God, and constant to his Truth;
and upon this immediately follows the Voice from Heaven in the Text; And I
heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors; and their works do follow them.

The main Difficulty of the words depends upon the word (...), from henceforth;
which Interpreters do variously refer to several parts of the Text. Some by
changing the Accent, and reading it (...), would change the signification of
the word into omnino; omnino beati sunt, they are altogether blessed, very
happy, who die in the Lord. But this is altogether destitute of the Countenance
and Warrant of any ancient Copy. We will then suppose that the word is (...),
and to be rendered as we Translate it, from henceforth, from this time. All the
Difficulty, is to what part of the Text we are to refer it. Some refer it to
the word Blessed; Blessed from henceforth are the dead which die in the Lord:
As if from this time, and not before, the Souls of Good Men were, immediately
after Death, admitted into Heaven; which, many of the Ancient Fathers thought,
the Souls of Good Men who died before the coming of Christ, were not. But then
this Blessedness ought to have been dated, not from the time of St. John's
Vision, but of Christ's Ascension; according to that of St. Ambrose, in the
Hymn called Te Deum; When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou
did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

Others refer it to dying in the Lord; Blessed are the dead, that from
henceforth die in the Lord. But this has no peculiar Emphasis in it; because
they were blessed, that died in the Lord, before that time.

Others refer it to the words following, concerning the Testimony of the
Spirit; yea, from henceforth says the Spirit. All these Varieties agree in
this Sense in general; That some special Blessedness is Promised and Declared
to those who should die after that time: But what that is in Particular, is not
easy to make out.

But the most plain and simple Interpretation, and that which seems to be most
suitable to the Occasion of these words, is this; that the word (...), from
henceforth, is to be referred to the whole Sentence, thus; from henceforth
blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; as if St. John had said,
considering the Extremity and cruel Circumstances of this last and severe
Persecution, we may from that time forward reckon those, who are already dead,
(supposing that they died in the Lord) to be very happy; in that they did not
live to see and suffer those things, which will then befall the faithful
Servants of God, when the Devil shall come, having great wrath, because he
knows he has but a short time. Much in the same Sense as Solomon, when he
considered the oppressions that were done under the Sun, says, Eccl. 4.2. That
he praised the dead, which were already dead; more than the living, which were
yet alive; that is, considering the Oppressions, which were so frequent in the
World; he reckoned those happier that were out of it, than those who still
lived in it.

And as this is very agreeable to the Scope of what goes before; so it suits
very well with what follows after, as the Reason, why those Persons are
declared to be so happy; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors; and their works do follow them; that is, that they may be at an end of
their Troubles and Sufferings; and may not be tried beyond their Strength and
Patience, under that Terrible Persecution which will Reign at that time; and
likewise that they may receive the Reward of all the Good they have done, and
the Evils they have suffered in this World; in the very same sense, that the
righteous are said to be taken away from the evil to come, Esai. 57.1, 2. The
righteous is taken away from the evil to come, he shall enter into peace: They
shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness; that is,
enjoying the comfort of his Integrity and Sincerity toward God.

And now the main Difficulty being over, we shall need to trouble our selves
the less about the other Expressions in the Text: Yet there are Two which I
shall a little explain to you.

1. What is here meant by dying in the Lord. And this sort of Phrase, in the
Lord, in Christ, and in the name of Christ, is used in Scripture very
variously. In general it signifies, the doing or suffering any thing, with
relation to Christ, and upon his account; and so to die in the Lord, does most
frequently signify, to die in the Faith of Christ, and the Profession of the
Christian Religion. Sometimes it signifies to die for his Cause, and to bear
Testimony to his Truth, which is therefore called Martyrdom, as St. Paul is
said to be (...), Ephesians. 4.1. A Prisoner in the Lord; that is, for his Cause. So
likewise, St. Peter; If ye be reproached(...), in the name of Christ; happy are
ye: And it is probable, that the expression, 1 Cor. 15.18. Then they also which
are fallen asleep in Christ, is to be stood, of those that died for his Cause;
because it follows immediately, if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable; that is, considering how much Christians
Suffered for him in this Life, they were in a most miserable Condition, if
there were nothing to be expected beyond it; but especially, if we consider the
parallel Phrase, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. So them also that sleep in Jesus,(...), for
Jesus sake; that is, them that have suffered Martyrdom for him, will God bring
with him. And in this sense, many understand the Phrase in the Text, as spoken
of Martyrs; Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord; that is, for his
Cause. And though I think the Phrase may well enough be understood more
generally, yet I shall not reject this Sense: Because it is not unsuitable to
the Scope and Occasion of the words. For considering that last and extreme
Persecution which he had described; it was not altogether improper to pronounce
those happy, that had Suffered Martyrdom already, and were taken away from
those dreadful Calamities, which in these last days of Antichrist were to fall
upon the faithful Servants of Christ.

The other Expression is the last in the Text, And their works do follow them
So we render the word (...), which yet does most properly signify to
accompany, or go along with one; and so indeed the Expression will rather be
more Emphatical, they rest from their labors, and their works accompany them.
But whether the word be rendered, to follow, or to accompany, the difference is
not very material.

Thus you see what the particular sense and meaning of the words probably is,
to declare the happy Estate of those Saints or Martyrs, who were already dead,
in and for the Faith of Christ, and should not live to see those cruel and
fearful Sufferings, which should afterward come upon the Christians. But then
this is grounded upon that general Truth, that they are happy that dye in the
Lord. And this is that which I intend now to prosecute, abstracting from the
Particular occasion, upon which these words were spoken; which brings me to the

Second thing I propounded, and chiefly designed to handle upon the occasion of
this day; namely, the happy Estate of Good Men after they are departed out of
this Life. And in speaking to this, I shall confine my self to Two Particulars,
which the Text mentions, as the Reasons and Grounds, why they that dye in the
Lord, are declared to be in so Blessed a Condition; yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

1. Good Men, when they are departed this Life, are freed from all the Labors
and Pains they were exercised with in this World: That they may rest from their
labors. 2. They reap the Comfort and Reward of all the Good which they have
done in this World: And their works do follow them, or rather, go alo^^ with
them, to receive the Reward which God has promised to them, who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality.
1. Those who die in the Lord, are freed from the Evils and Miseries of this
Life. And this is so great a Felicity that some, (and those who think
themselves no small Philosophers) have placed the chief Happiness of Man in
freedom from Pain and Trouble. But though Happiness do not consist in this alone;
yet it cannot be denied to be a great part of it: For though some have been so
phantastically obstinate, as, against the Reason and Common Sense of Mankind,
to maintain this Paradox, that a wise Man may be as happy upon the Rack, or in
Phalaris his Bull, as in the greatest ease and freedom from Pain that can be
imagined; Yet Nature cries shame of this Hypocrisy; and there are none of
those wise Men they speak of, were ever such Fools as to try the Experiment,
and to show by their Actions, that it was indifferent to them, whether they
laid themselves down upon their Beds every Night, or were stretched upon a
Rack; which yet ought to have been indifferent to them, had they believed
themselves, and really esteemed that, which others account Pain, to be as Happy
a Condition, as that which is commonly called Ease.

But we need not trouble our selves to confute so stupid a Principle, which is
confuted by Nature, and by every Man's Sense and Experience. I think we may
take it for granted, that Freedom from Misery is a very considerable part of
Happiness; otherwise Heaven and Hell, if we consider only the Torment of it,
would be all one. But certainly it is no small endearment of Religion, to the
common Sense of Mankind, that it promises to us in the next Life, a Freedom
from all the Evils and Troubles of this. And by this the Happiness of Heaven is
frequently described to us in Scripture, Esai. 57.2. speaking of the righteous
Man; he shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
where the Apostle speaking of the Reward of those, who should Suffer
Persecution for Religion, It is a righteous thing with God, (says he) to
recompense to you, who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. And the Apostle to the Hebrews,
frequently describes the Happiness of Christians by entering into rest. And Rev.
21.4. the State of the New Jerusalem is set forth to us, by Deliverance from
those Troubles and Sorrows, which Men are subject to in this World; and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the
former things are past away.

Thus it is with us in this World, we are liable to Sorrow and Pain, and Death:
But when we are once got to Heaven, none of these things shall approach us. The
former things are passed away, that is, the Evils we formerly endured, are past
and over, and shall never return to afflict us any more.

And is not this a great Comfort, when we are Laboring under the Evils of this
Life, and Conflicting sorely with the Miseries of it; that we shall one Day be
past all these, and find a safe Refuge and Retreat from all these Storms and
Tempests: When we are Loaded with Afflictions, and even tired with the Burden
of them, and ready to faint and sink under it; to think that there remains a
rest for us, into which we shall shortly enter? How can it choose but be a
mighty Consolation to us, whilst we are in this vale of tears and troubles, to
be assured that the Time is coming, when God shall wipe away all tears from our
eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow nor crying?

There are none of us, but are obnoxious to any of the Evils of this Life; we
feel some of them, and we fear more: Our outward Condition, it may be, is
uncomfortable, we are poor and persecuted; we are destitute of Friends, or have
many Enemies; we are despoiled of many of those Comforts and Enjoyments which
we once had: Our Bodies perhaps are in Pain, or our Spirits troubled; or though
we have no real Cause of outward Trouble, yet our Souls are ill Lodged, in the
dark Dungeon of a Body; overpowered with a Melancholy Humor, which keeps out
all Light and Comfort from our Minds.

And is it no reviving to us, to think of that Happy Hour, when we shall find a
Remedy and Redress of all these Evils at once? Of that blessed Place, where we
shall take Sanctuary, from all those Afflictions and Troubles which pursued us
in this World? Where Sorrow and Misery, and Death are perfect Strangers, and
into which nothing that can render Men in the least unhappy, can ever enter?
Where our Souls shall be in perfect rest and contentment, and our Bodies after
a while shall be restored and reunited to our Souls; not to Cloud and Clog them
as they do here, but so happily changed, and refined to such a Perfection, that
they shall be so far from giving any disturbance to our Minds, that they shall
mightily add to their Pleasure and Happiness?

And when we are once Landed in those Blessed Regions, what a Comfort will it
be to us, to stand on the Shore, and look back upon those rough and dangerous
Seas, which we have escaped? How pleasant to consider the manifold Evils and
Calamities which we are freed from, and for ever secured against? To remember
our past Labors and Sufferings, and to be able to defy all those Temptations,
which were wont to assault us in this World, with so much violence, and with
too much success?

And this is the Condition of the Blessed Spirits above. They find a perfect
cessation of all Afflictions and Troubles, they rest from their labors. But
this is not all: For.

2. They are not only freed from all the Evils and Sufferings they were
exercised withal in this World; but they shall receive a plentiful Reward of
all the Good they have done in it; their works do accompany them. When Pious
Souls go out of this World, they do not only leave all the Evils of the World
behind them; but they carry along with them all the Good they have done, to
reap there the Comfort and Reward of it. Just as on the other hand, Wicked Men,
when they die, leave all the good things of this World, all the Pleasures and
Enjoyments behind them; but the Guilt and Remorse of their wicked Lives
accompany them, and stick close to them, to Torment them there, and that there
they may be Tormented for them.

Thus the Scriptures represent to us the different Condition of Good and Bad
Men, Esai. 3.10, 11. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him:
for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be
ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Which is many
times true in this World; but however that happen, will most certainly and
remarkably be made good in the other. And this is most Emphatically expressed to
us, in the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, Luke 16.25. where the Rich Man
Petitions Abraham for some Ease, and Abraham returns him this Answer; Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. What a
Change was here! How Comfortable to the one, and how Dismal to the other!
Lazarus found rest from all his Labors and Sufferings, and his Piety and
Patience accompanied him into the other World, and conveyed him into Abraham's
Bosom. Whereas the Rich Man was parted from all his good things, and the Guilt
of his Sins went along with him, and lodged him in the place of Torments.

But my Text confines me to the bright side of this Prospect; The consideration
of that Glorious Recompense which Good Men shall receive, for the Good Works
which they have done in this World. Indeed the Text does not expressly say, that
their works shall be rewarded; but that they shall go along with them, and that
they are blessed upon this Account; and this implies that they shall receive a
sure Reward. For as the Apostle Reasons, God is not unrighteous to forget our
Work and Labor of Love. Verily there is a Reward for the righteous, as sure as
there is a God that judges in the Earth.

But how Great and Glorious that shall be, I am not in any measure able to
declare to you. It may suffice, that the Scripture has assured us in general,
that God is the Rewarder of Good Men, and that he will make them Happy, not
according to what can now enter into our narrow Thoughts, but according to the
exceeding greatness of his Power and Goodness. If we are to receive our Reward
from God; we need not doubt, but it will be very large, and such as is every
way worthy of him to bestow. For he is a great King, and of great Goodness; and
we may safely refer our selves to him, in confidence that he will consider us,
not according to the Meanness of our Service, but according to the Vastness of
his Treasures, and the Infinite Bounty of his Mind. If he has promised to make
us Happy, though he have not particularly declared to us, wherein this Happiness
shall consist; yet we may trust him that made us, to find out ways to make us
happy; and may believe, that he who made us without our Knowledge or desire, is
able to make us Happy beyond them both.

Only for the greater Encouragement of our Holiness and Obedience, though he has
promised to Reward every Good Man, far beyond the Proportion of any Good he
has or can do; yet he has declared, that these Rewards shall be
proportionably greater or less, according to the degree of every Man's Piety
and Virtue. So our Savior tell us, that they who are persecuted for
righteousness sake, great shall be their reward in heaven, Matt. 5.12. That
there will be a difference between the Reward of a righteous Man, and a
Prophet; that is, of one who is more publicly and eminently useful for the
Salvation of others. And among those who are Teachers of others, they that are
more industrious, and consequently more likely to be successful in this Work,
shall have a more Glorious Reward; as we are told by the Angel, Dan. 12.3. And
they that be Wise, (or as it is in the Margin rendered, they that be Teachers)
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. So likewise we find in the
Parable of the Talents, that he that improved his Talent to Ten, was made Ruler
over Ten Cities. And St. Paul, 2 Cor. 9.6. speaking of the Degrees of Men's
Charity and Liberality toward the Poor, says expressly, He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; but he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully; which by Proportion of Reason may be extended to the Exercise of
all other Graces and Virtues. 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. The Apostle there represents
the different Degrees of Glory, which Good Men shall be invested with at the
Resurrection, by the different Glory and Splendour of the Heavenly Luminaries.
There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars; for one Star differs from another Star in glory: So also is the
Resurrection of the dead. So that the more any Man suffers for God, and the
more Patiently he Suffers, the more Holily and Virtuously, the more Charitably
and Usefully he lives in this World; the more good Works will accompany him
into the next, and the Greater and more Glorious Reward he may hope to receive
there; which as the Apostle Reasons (in the Conclusion of that Chapter,
concerning the Doctrine of the Resurrection) ought to be a mighty Encouragement
to every one of us, not only to be steadfast and unmovable (that is, fixed and
resolute in the Profession and Practice of our Religion) but abounding likewise
in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as we know, that our labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

Every Degree of Diligence and Industry, in the Work and Service of God, will
most certainly one day turn to a happy Account. Having therefore such Promises,
dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. The more perfectly holy we are
here on Earth; the more perfectly happy we shall be in Heaven, and continue so
to all Eternity.

I have now done with the Two Reasons, which are here given in the Text, of the
Happiness that Good Men, such as die in the Lord, shall be made Partatakers of
in another Life; because they rest from their labors, and their works
accompany them; they are freed from all the Evils which they suffered, and
shall receive the Reward of all the Good they have done in this Life.

I should now have proceeded to make some Inferences from this Discourse; But
those I will reserve for another Discourse on this Subject.

All that I shall add at present, as the Application of what I have already
said, is, That this should stir us up to a careful and zealous Imitation of
those Blessed Persons described in the Text, who are dead in the Lord, and are
at rest from their Labors, and whose works do accompany them. Let us Imitate
them, in their Faith and Patience, in their Piety and Good Works, and in their
Constancy to God, and his Truth, which was dearer to them than their Lives.

Thus their Virtues and Sufferings are described in the Visions of this Book,
Chap. 13.10. Here is the Patience and the Faith of the Saints; and Chap. 14.12.
Here is the Patience of the Saints: Here are they that keep the Commandments of
God, and the Faith of Jesus; and Chap. 12.11. And they overcame by the Blood of
the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony; and they loved not their Lives
unto the Death.

In this Way, and by these Steps, all the Saints and Martyrs of all Ages, have
ascended up to Heaven, and attained to that Blessed State, which they are now
Possessed of, after all the Evils which they Suffered in this World. They are
now at rest from their labors, and all the good Works which they have done,
are gone along with them, and they are now, and shall for ever be, receiving the
Comfort and Reward of them. And if we tread in their Steps, by a zealous
Imitation of the Piety and Holiness of their Lives, and of the Constancy and
Patience of their Sufferings; we shall one Day be Translated into their Blessed
Society, and made Partakers with them of the same Glorious Reward. If we have
our Fruit unto Holiness; our end shall be everlasting life. If we be faithful
unto death; we shall receive a Crown of Life.

Let us then, as the Apostle to the Hebrews exhorts, Chap. 6.11, 12. Every one
of us show the same Diligence, to the full assurance of hope, unto the end: and
let us not be slothful; but followers of them, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make you Perfect in every good word and work, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight.

SERMON XI. The Blessedness of Good Men, after Death.
The Second Sermon on REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying
unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth:
Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works
do follow them.


IN my Explication of these Words I told you, that they are in the general
Sense and Meaning of them, a solemn Declaration of the Blessed Estate of Good
Men after this Life; but delivered upon a Special Occasion, as is signified by
that expression, VOL. II.
from henceforth; that is, from the time of that Vision, in which was
represented to St. John, the last and extremest Persecution of the faithful
Servants of Christ, and which should precede the fatal downfall of Babylon; from
that time, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; that is, considering the
Extremity, and the cruel Circumstances of this last and severest Persecution,
we may, from that time forward, reckon those who are already dead (supposing
that they died in the Lord,) to be very Happy; in that they do not live to see
and suffer those grievous things, which then will befall the Faithful Servants
of God.

In my former Discourse, I considered the Words according to the general
intention of them, abstracting from the particular occasion, upon which they
were spoken, endeavoring to set forth the Happy Estate of Good Men after this
life, from the Two Reasons and Grounds mentioned in the Text, namely, because
they rest from their labors, and because their works do follow, or accompany
and go along with them; which two particulars constitute the Happiness of the
future State. Sermon. XI


That which farther remains, and to which I now proceed, is to make some
Inferences from what I have said upon this Subject. And in doing this, I shall
have an Eye on the special occasion of the Words, as well as on their general
intention. And the Inferences shall be these following:

First, If those that die in the Lord are at rest from their Labors and Pains;
then this Text concludes directly against the feigned Purgatory of the Church
of Rome, which supposes a great number of those that die in the Lord, and have
obtained Eternal Redemption by him from Hell, not to pass immediately into
Happiness; but to be detained in the Suburbs of Hell, in great Pain and
Torment, till their Souls be Purged, and the Debt of Temporary Punishment, to
which they are liable, be some way or other paid off and dischargeed.

Secondly, Here is a mighty encouragement to Piety and Virtue, to consider,
that all the good we do in this World, will accompany us into the other.

Thirdly, It is a great encouragement to Patience under the Sufferings and
Persecutions, which attend Good Men in this World; that how heavy and grievous
soever they are at present, they will end with this Life, and we shall then
rest from all our labors.

Fourthly, The consideration of the extreme Sufferings of Christians in the
last Times, and which perhaps are not far from us, should render us very
indifferent to Life, and all the enjoyments of it, so as even to esteem it a
particular Grace and Favor of God, to be taken away from the Evil to come, and
by Death to prevent (if he sees it good) those extremities of Sufferings, which
seem to be hastening upon the World.

that die in the Lord are at rest from all their labors and pains; then this
Text concludes directly against the feigned Purgatory of the Church of Rome,
which supposes a great number, yea the far greatest part of those that die in
the Lord, and have obtained Eternal Redemption by him from Hell, not to pass
immediately into Happiness, but to be detained somewhere (they are not certain
where, but most probably in the Suburbs of Hell) in great Pain and Torment,
equal in degree to that of Hell, and differing only in Duration; I say, to be
detained there, till their Souls be purged from the Defilements they have
contracted in this World, and the Debt of Temporary Punishments, to which they
are liable, be some way or other paid off and discharged.

They suppose indeed some very few Holy Men to be so Perfect at their departure
out of this Life, that they do immediately, and without any stop, pass into
Heaven, because they need no Purgation; and those likewise who Suffer
Martyrdom, because they Discharge their Debt of Temporary Punishments here: But
the generality of Christians who die in the Lord, they suppose so imperfect, as
to stand in need of being Purged by Fire, and accordingly that they are
detained a longer or shorter time, as their Debt of Temporary Punishments is
greater or less.

And indeed they have a very Considerable and Substantial Reason, to exempt as
few as possibly they can from going to Purgatory; because the more they put in
fear of going thither, the Market of Indulgences rises the higher, and the
Profit thence accruing to the Popes Coffers; and the more and greater Legacies
will be left to the Priests, to hire their saying of Masses, for the delivery
of Souls out of the Place of Torments: For though the Prayers of Friends and
Relations will contribute something to this; yet nothing does the Business so
Effectually, as the Masses and Prayers of Priests to that end.

But how is it then that St. John says, that those that die in the Lord are
happy, because they rest from their labors; If so be, the far greatest part of
those who die in the Lord, are so far from resting from their labors, that
they enter into far greater Pains and Torments, than ever they endured in this
World? And therefore Bellarmine, that their Doctrine of Purgatory may receve no
prejudice from this Text, would have from henceforth, in the Text, to be dated
from the day of Judgment; when he supposes the Pains of Purgatory will be at
an end. But why, from henceforth, should take date from the day of Judgment, he
can give no Reason, but only to save Purgatory from being Condemned by this
Text. For St. John plainly speaks of the Happiness of those that should die
after that time, (whatever it be) which he there describes; but that time
cannot be the day of Judgment, because none shall die after that time. Just
thus Estius (one of their most Learned Commentators) deals with another Text,
which by the generality of their Writers is urged as a plain proof of
Purgatory; he shall be saved, yet so as by fire: Upon which he says, it is
sufficient that there is nothing in this Text against Purgatory. Sufficient,
for what? Not to prove Purgatory, as they generally pretend from this Text; but
to save it harmless from it; as if we had pretended that this Text makes
against it.

But there are others that make against it with a Witness. Not only the
perpetual Silence of Scripture about it, when there are so many far occasions
of speaking of it; as in the Parable of the rich man and Lazarus, where the
future State is so particularly described, and yet no mention made, nor the
least intimation given of this Third State: But besides the Silence of
Scripture about it, there are several Passages utterly inconsistent with it; as
namely, St. Paul's Discourse in the beginning of the Fifth Chapter of the
Second Epistle to the Corinthians, where he plainly declares the Assurance he
had, that all sincere Christians, so soon as they quit the Body, do pass into
Happiness: For we know, (says he) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle
were dissolved; we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens. The plain meaning of which is, that so soon as we quit the One,
we shall pass into the Other. And this Consideration, he tells us, made
Christians weary of this World, and willing to die; Ver. 2. For in this we
groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from
heaven; and Ver. 4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being
burdened. But had Christians believed, that the greatest part of them, when
they left the Body, were to go into Purgatory, to be terribly Tormented there;
they would not have been in such haste to die; but would have protracted the
time as long as they could, and have contentedly born the burden of this
earthly Tabernacle, rather than to quit it, for a Condition a Thousand times
more intolerable. But St. Paul expressly says, that Christians knew the
contrary, and that as soon as ever they went out of the Body, they should be
happy, and with the Lord; and that this gave them courage against the Fears of
Death; Ver. 6. Therefore we are always confident,(...), bono igitur animo
sumus; Therefore we are always of good courage, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; and Ver. 8. we are of good
courage I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with
the Lord. The plain Sense of which is, that Christians were willing rather to
die than to live; because they knew, that so soon as they left the Body and
departed this Life, they should be present with the Lord. But now if the
Doctrine of Purgatory be true, this whole Reasoning of St. Paul, proceeds upon
a gross Mistake; and therefore I am certain it is not true: And so does the
voice from Heaven here in the Text; Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
that they may rest from their labors: For there is no Reason to restrain this
general expression, that die in the Lord, only to the Martyrs; for though they
are certainly included, and prehaps Primarily intended in it; yet this Phrase
comprehends all those who die in the faith of Christ, and is most frequently so
used in the New Testament.

But let this suffice to have been spoken of this matter; especially since
Bishop Fisher, and several of their own Learned Writers, do so frankly
acknowledge, that their Doctrine of Purgatory has no sufficient Ground in
Scripture. Other Reasons I grant they have for it, which make them very loath to
quit it; it is a very Profitable Doctrine, and therefore they have taken care
to have it more abundantly confirmed, by Apparitions of Souls from the dead,
than any other Doctrine whatsoever. In short, how little soever they can say
for it; it is in vain to go about to persuade them to part with it. Demetrius
the Silver Smith argued as well as he could for his Goddess Diana, from the
universal consent of the World in the Worship of her; the great Goddess Diana,
whom all Asia, and the World Worshipeth. But his trusty Argument to his Workmen
was, Sirs ye know that by this Craft we have our Wealth, and this our Craft is
in danger to be set at naught.

II. Here is a mighty encouragement to Piety and Virtue, to consider that all
the good we do in this World will accompany us into the other. Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord; for their works accompany them.

When we come to die, we can call nothing our own but the Good Works which by
the Grace of God we have been enabled to do in this Life. These will stick by
us, and bear us company into the other World, when we shall be stripped of all
other things, and forced to part from them, whether we will or no. Our Riches
and our Honors, our Sensual Pleasures and Delights will, all take their leave
of us, when we leave this World; nay, many times they do not accompany us so
far as the Grave, but leave us very unkindly and unseasonably, when we have the
greatest need and use of them.

There is one way indeed, whereby we may secure our Riches, and make sure
Friends to our selves of them; by laying them out in Charity. By this means we
may send them before us, and consign them over to another World, to make way
for our reception there. So our Lord assures us, Luke 12.33. that by giving
Alms we provide our selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens
which fails not; and Luke 16.9. that by this way we may make to our selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; that when we fail, they may recieve
us into everlasting habitations. The Mammon of unrighteousness, What is that?
It is what the Scripture elsewhere calls deceitful riches; because in other
ways, in which Men commonly lay them out, they turn to no certain account, but
one way or other do deceive and frustrate our Expectation: but by disposing of
them in Charity, to the relief of the Poor and Persecuted, we make sure Friends
of them, and consign the Effects of them to our certain Benefit and Advantage
in another World.

And as Charity, so likewise all other Graces and Virtues are that good part
which cannot be taken away from us. All the good Actions that we do in this
Life, will go with us to the Grave, and bear us company into the other World,
and will stand by us, when we come to appear before our Judge, and through the
Merits of our Blessed Savior will procure for us, at the Hands of a Gracious
and Merciful God, a most Ample and Eternal Reward.

And what an encouragement is this to Holiness and Virtue, to consider that it
will be all our own another day, and turn to our unspeakable advantage at our
great Account! To be assured, that whoever serves God faithfully, lays up so
much Treasure for himself, which he may take along with him into the other
World; and does provide for himself lasting Comforts and faithful Companions,
which will never leave him nor forsake him; a Happiness large as his Desires,
and Durable and Immortal as his Soul!

Let us then do all the good that possibly we can, whilst we have opportunity:
Let us serve God industriously, and with all our Might, knowing that no good
Action that we do shall be lost and fall to the ground, that no Grace and
Virtue that we Practice in this Life, nor any Degree of them, shall lose their
Reward. If we faithfully improve the Talents, which are committed to us, to our
Masters advantage; when he comes to call us to an Account, and finds that we
have done so, we shall not fail to receive both his Approbation and Reward. And
what a Comfort will it be to any one of us, to hear those Blessed words from
the Mouth of our Lord; Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much; enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord! We shall not need to plead our Services to him, and put him in
Mind of them: Our Judge himself will celebrate our good Deeds upon the Theater
of the World, and commemorate them to our advantage; and interpret every good
Office we have done, to any of his Poor and Afflicted Members, as if it had
been a Kindness immediately done to himself. So our Lord represents the
Proceedings of the great Judge and King of the World, in the great day of
Recompense, Mat. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked and
ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee in
any of these circumstances; hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison and ministered unto thee? And the King shall answer and say
unto them, Verily I say unto you. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Who would not be ambitious
and glad to serve such a Prince, who will so benignly Intepret, and so
bountifully Reward the least Service we do to him!

III. The Consideration of this should likewise be a great Argument and Support
to our Patience, under all those Evils and Sufferings and Persecutions, which
many times attend Good Men in this World. They are for the present perhaps very
heavy and grievous: But there is a time shortly coming, when we shall be at
ease, and perfectly freed from them; when we shall find rest from our labors
and sufferings; when we shall enter into peace, and rest in our beds, every one
walking in his uprightness; that is, reaping the Comfort, and enjoying the
Reward of his Sincerity toward God, and constant Suffering for his Cause and
Truth. And therefore it was well said of a Good Man, Blessed be God that we are
to die; because to Good Men, that is a certain Remedy of all the Evils of this
Life, and will unquestionably put an end to them. The Grave is a place of Rest,
and discharge from all Trouble, as Job elegantly describes it, Chap. 3.17, 18,
19. There the Wicked cease from troubling: there the weary be at rest. There
the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor. The
small and the great are there, and the Servant is free from his Master.

So soon as we enter into the other World, we are secure against the Pursuit
and Danger of all those Evils which Afflicted us in this World; and nothing
will remain, but the joyful remembrance of our Sufferings, and the plentiful
Reward of our Constancy and Patience under them. And the more our Tribulations
and Persecutions have abounded, the greater will our Comfort and Happiness then
be, which (says St. Paul) is a manifest token, a clear demonstration, of the
righteous judgment of God, that ye may be accounted worthy of the kingdom of
God, for which ye also suffer; seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to
recompense to you who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7.

IV. The Consideration of the extreme Sufferings, which are to fall upon the
faithful Servants of Christ in the last times, and which seem now to be begun
in the World, should make us very contented to leave this World, and glad of
any fair Opportunity and Excuse, to take our leave of it, and to be out of the
reach and danger of those violent and more than humane Temptations, with which
our Faith and Constancy may be assailed: Nay, to esteem it a particular Grace
and Favor of God to us, to be taken away from the Evil to come, and to prevent
(if God sees it good) those Extremities of Sufferings which are coming upon the
World.

These seem now to be begun in some part of it: They in our Neighbor Nation
have a bitter Cup put into their hands; a Cup of Astonishment to all those that
hear of it. Whether this be that last and extreme Persecution spoken of here by
St. John, I shall not pretend positively to determine. It is plainly
distinguished in the Visions, froth that under the first Beast, described Rev.
13. from Verse the first, to Verse 11. And Chap. 17. there is a description of
the Beast upon which the woman sits, on whose forehead is a name written,
Mystery, Babylon the Great: And this Beast is there said to have seven heads
and ten horns, which are thus explained by St. John, Chap. 17.9, 10. And here
is the Mind which has Wisdom; the seven Heads are seven Mountains upon which
the Woman sits; and there are seven Kings, that is, (as is generally agreed
by Interpreters) a succession of seven Governments: And Verse 12, 13, 14. And
the ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdoms
as yet; but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. These have one
mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast; and shall make
war with the Lamb. And Verse 18. And the woman which thou saw, is that great
City which reigns over the Kings of the earth.

So that this Beast is plainly the Roman Empire; and the Woman that sits
upon her, is the great City standing upon seven mountains, which reigns over
the Kings of the earth; which can be no other than Rome, as is agreed by
Interpreters on all sides. Bellarmine ( l. 2. c. 2. de Romans Pontif.) confesses
that St. John in the Revelations every where calls Rome, Babylon, as
Tertullian (says he) has noted, and as is plain from Chap. 17. where Babylon
is said to be seated on seven mountains, and to have dominion over the Kings of
the earth: There being no other City than Rome, which in the time of St. John
had dominion over the Kings of the earth; and that Rome was built upon seven
hills is famous. Thus much Bellarmine acknowledged, constrained by the Force of
Truth; and for another small Reason; namely, because St. Peter writes his first
Epistle from Babylon, by which if Rome be not meant, they have no Proof from
Scripture, that St. Peter was ever there.

Indeed they of the Church of Rome would have it to be only Rome Pagan. But
that cannot be; because this Beast, after his last head was wounded to death,
and his deadly wound was healed, had power given him to continue two and forty
Months, or (as it is elsewhere expressed,) 1260 days; that is, in the Prophetic
Style, so many Years; and likewise because it was not to begin till the Ten
Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire upon its dissolution was divided, were
set up; which was not till after the Western Empire was Overthrown and
Destroyed by the Goths and Vandals. And Lastly, because this is that Rome or
Babylon, which should finally be destroyed, and cast as a Millstone into the
bottom of the Sea, never to rise again; which is yet to come. And of this Beast
it is said, that he should make War with the Saints, and overcome them, Chap.
13. Ver. 7. that is, that he should raise a long and great Persecution against
them, which should try their Faith and Patience; Ver. 10. Here is the Patience,
and the Faith of the Saints. The Beast then with Ten Horns, must be Rome,
governing the Ten Kingdoms, into which the Romam Empire was broken; and this
can be nothing else, but Rome Papal, to which the Ten Kings are said to give
their Power, and to which they were in a most Servile manner subject for
several Ages, as is plain from History.

And to confirm this, it is very observable, that the Ancient Fathers generally
agree, that that which hindered the revealing of the Wicked One, (spoken of by
St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8.) was the Roman Empire; and that being removed, the
Man of Sin or Antichrist was to succeed in its room. I shall produce a few
Testimonies to this purpose, but very remarkable ones. Tertulllian expounding
what St. Paul means, by him that withholds or leteth, has these words,
Quis, nisi Romanus Status, etc? Who is that, but the Roman State, which being
broken into Ten Kings, shall bring on Antichrist? And then the Wicked one shall
be revealed. And in his Apology he gives this Reason, why the Christians should
pray for the Roman Emperors, and the whole State of the Empire; because the
greatest mischief hanging over the World, is hindered by the continuance of it.
St. Chrysostom speaking of that which hinders the revelation of the Man of Sin;
this (says he) can be no other, than the Roman Empire: for as long as that
stands, he dares not show himself; but upon the vacancy or ceasing of that, he
shall assume to himself both the Power of God and Man. St. Austin, in his Book
de Civit. Dei, no Man (says he) doubts, but that the Successor to the Roman
Emperor in Rome shall be the Man of Sin; and we know who has Succeeded him.

But now after this, another Beast is represented coming out of the Earth; not
succeeding in the place of the first Beast, but appearing during his
continuance, Ver. 12. and he has these remarkable Characters, by which he may
be known.

1. He is said to have but two horns; by which, according to the Interpretation
of the ten horns, signifying the ten Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire
after its dissolution should be divided, we are in all Reason to understand two
of those Kingdoms, of which this Beast, whoever he be, shall be Possessed.

2. He is said to be like a Lamb, but (...) speak like a Dragon; that is, to
pretend and make a show of great Lenity and Mildness, in his Proceedings; but
that really he shall be very cruel. It shall be pretended, that he does all
without Violence, and without Arms; but he shall speak as a Dragon, that is, in
Truth shall exercise great Force and Cruelty; either alluding to the Cruelty of
the Dragon, literally so called; or perhaps prophetically pointing at a
particular sort of Armed Soldiers, called by that name of Dragons, or, as we
according to the French Pronunciation call them, Dragoons.

3. He shall arise during the continuance of the first Beast, and engage in his
Cause; but the first Beast shall only stand by and look on, Ver. 12. and he
exercises all the Power of the first Beast, before him, and causes the earth
and them that dwell therein, to Worship the Beast, whose deadly wound was
healed; plainly declaring, that this Persecution should not immediately arise
from the first Beast, which is said to come out of the Sea, which in this
Prophecy denotes the State Ecclesiastical; but from the second Beast, which
comes out of the Earth, and denotes the Temporal Power. But yet all this ought
to be acted in the sight of the first Beast, and in his behalf, to compel Men
to worship him.

4. That he shall be remarkable for causing Fire to come down from Heaven to
Earth, in a wonderful manner, to the great Terror and Amazement of Men; Ver.
13. And he does great wonders; so that he makes fire to come down from heaven
on the earth, in the sight of men.

5. That he should interdict all those, who would not Worship the Beast, all
Commerce with Humane Society, the Exercise of Civil Trades and Professions;
Ver. 17. And he causes, that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark of the Beast.

6. and Lastly, (which seems to be the most Peculiar and Characteristical Note
of all the rest,) that his Number should be 666, that is, (as most of the
Ancients understand it,) that the Numeral Letters of a certain Word or Name,
should, being computed, amount to that Number. And it is expressly said to be
the Number of a Man. Ver. 18. Let him that has understanding count the Number
of the Beast; for it is the Number of a Man. And in the Verse before, it is
said to be the Number of his Name.

Now to whom all these Characters do agree, and especially the last, concerning
the Number of his Name, I shall not presume to conjecture; much less positively
to determine, whether he be now in being; because it is said to require a
particular Wisdom and Understanding to find it out. Here is Wisdom; let him
that has Understanding count the number of the Beact. However the Event, when
the thing is fully accomplished, will clearly discover it. Thus much is certain,
that this extreme Persecution, whenever it shall be, will forerun the Final
Destruction of Babylon, which will not then be far off. And concerning this it
is that St. John speaks, Chapter 14.12. when he says, Here is the Patience of the
Saints, here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of
Jesus. And then he immediately adds, as it is in the Text, And I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors;
and their works do accompany them. Thus much may suffice to have been spoken on
this Text.

SERMON XII. The Vanity and Wickedness of honoring dead Saints, and
Persecuting the Living. Preached on All Saints Day.
Luke XI. 49, 50, 51. Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them
Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: That the
blood of all the Prophets, which was shed front the foundation of the world,
may be required of this Generation; from the blood of Abel, unto the blood of
Zacharias which perished between the Altar and the Temple: Verily I say unto
you, it shall be required of this Generation.


THE latter part of this Chapter is a very sharp, but just Invective, made by
our Savior against the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, VOL. II.
of which he gives many instances; and this among the rest for one, that they
pretended a great Honor and Respect for the Righteous Men, and Prophets of
former Ages, whom their Fathers had Persecuted and Slain; but yet were of the
very same Spirit and Temper, and as ready to Persecute Good Men, as their
Fathers were. They raised indeed stately Monuments to the Memory of those
Saints and Martyrs, and adorned them with great Art and Cost, and it is likely
made a great Show of Esteem and Veneration for them: But all this while they
were of the same disposition with their Fathers, and bare the same implacable
Hatred and Malice against the Prophets and Righteous Men who then lived among
them, (yea against that great Prophet, whom God had sent into the World, Jesus
the Son of God,) which their Fathers did against the Good Men of their Times.
And though they disclaimed the Wickedness and Cruelty of their Fathers, with
never so much Zeal and Vehemence; yet for all that, they were ready to do the
same things. Now this was so gross and odious a piece of Hypocrisy in them,
Sermon. XII.
that our Savior does with great Reason denounce so severe a Woe against them:
Woe unto you; for ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and your Fathers
killed them: Truly ye bear Witness, that ye allow the deeds of you Fathers;
For they indeed killed them, and ye build their Sepulchers. And then it
follows; Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and
Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: That the blood of all
the Prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required
of this generation; from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zacharias, which
perished between the Altar and the Temple.

There are considerable Difficulties in both these Passages. As to the former,
Woe unto you; for ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and your Fathers
killed them. Truly ye bear Witness, that ye allow the deeds of your Fathers:
For they indeed killed them, and ye build their Sepulchers. The force of this
Reasoning; is at first sight not easy to be discerned; and therefore
Expositors have gone several ways to explain it.

Some comparing this with the parallel Place in St. Matthew's Gospel (Chapter
23.29.) will not have our Savior to mean, that by building the Sepulchers of
the Prophets they expressed their approbation of their Fathers killing them.
They did indeed testify by their usage of the Righteous Men that lived amongst
themselves, that they were of the very same Temper and Spirit, which their
Fathers had been of; and that they would have done just as their Fathers did,
if they had been in the same Circumstances with their Fathers; So that they
were Witnesses to themselves (as it is in St. Matthew) that they were the
Children of them which killed the Prophets;They owned themselves their Children
by Descent, and their Actions Witnessed that they were their Children also in
Resemblance; nay, (as it is there farther intimated) they seemed resolved to
fill up the Measure of their Fathers: though all this while they pretended not to
approve their Fathers Behavior; and therefore whilst they were building the
Tombs of the Prophets, and garnishing the Sepulchers of the Righteous, they
said, if we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. And the Interpreters that go
this way do accordingly render these words of St. Luke; not as they are in our
Translation, ye bear Witness that ye allow the deeds of your Fathers: But, ye
bear Witness, and ye allow (or, are well pleased with) the deeds of your
Fathers; that is, ye own that they were your Fathers, who did these things; and
though ye do not in words allow what they did, yet your inward Tempers and
Dispositions (whether you know it or no) are the very same with theirs, which
you too plainly testify by your Actions; so that when you build the Sepulchers
of the Prophets, you only expose the Deceitfulness and Hypocrsie of your
Hearts, your Pretenses and your Actions directly contradicting each other. Thus
some Expositors give the Sense of this Passage.

But Others think, that our Savior intended somewhat more, in St. Luke,
namely, to retort upon them the Honor which they seemed to do to the Prophets,
in building their Sepulchers, as an Argument that they rejoiced in their Death;
seeing they were so well content to be at the Charge of a Monument for them;
like Herod, who when he had Murdered Aristobulus, made a Magnificent Funeral
for him; or as the Roman Historians say of Caracalla, though he hated all Good
Men, whilst they were alive, yet he would pretend to Honor them, when they
were dead. This Some think our Savior intended in these Words, Truly ye bear
Witness, that ye allow the deeds of your Fathers: For they indeed killed them,
and ye build their Sepulchers; As if he had said, Hereby ye testify, that ye
allow and like very well what your Fathers did to the Prophets. According to
which latter Exposition, there seems to be more Force and greater Sharpness in
our Savior's Reproof; as not only charging them with their ill usage of the
Righteous Men of their own Times; but moreover making them, by their building
the Tombs, and garnishing the Sepulchers of the Ancient Prophets, to become as
it were Accessories to the Murder of them.

But leaving this Digression, I now proceed to that which I primarily intended,
namely, First, to explain the following Words, which I have chosen as my
present Subject, and then to make some Observations upon them,

Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles,
and some of them they shall slay and persecute; that the blood of all the
Prophets which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of
this Generation; from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zacharias, which
perished between the Altar and the Temple: Verily I say unto you, it shall be
required of this Generation.

There are Three considerable Difficulties in the Words, which I shall
endeavor to explain to you.

I. What is here meant by the Wisdom of God. II. Who this Zacharias was, here
mentioned by our Savior; from the blood of Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias,
who perished between the Altar and the Temple. III. In what Sense, and with
what Reason and Justice it is here threatened, that the blood of all the
Prophets and righteous men, shed from the foundation of the world, should be
required of that Generation.
I. What is here meant by the Wisdom of God. Therefore also said the Wisdom of
God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, etc. In St. Matthew our Savior
speaks this in his own Name, wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets: For
which Reason Some think, that by the Wisdom of God, our Savior here designed
himself; as if he had said, therefore I, who am the Wisdom of God, declare unto
you. But this is not very probable, our Savior no where else in the Gospel
speaking of himself in any such Style; though St. Paul calls him the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God. Others think that our Savior here refers to some
Prophecy of the Old Testament, to this purpose; therefore the Wisdom of God
has said, that is, the Holy Spirit of Wisdom, which Inspired the Prophets in
the Old Testament. But this Conceit is utterly without ground; for we find no
such Passage, nor any thing to that Sense, in any of the Prophets of the Old
Testament.

But the most plain and simple Interpretation is this, therefore has the
Wisdom of God said, that is, the most Wise God has determined to send among
you such Messengers and Holy Men, and I foresee that ye will thus abuse them,
and thereby bring Wrath and Destruction upon your selves. And whereas our
Savior says in St. Matthew, behold I send unto you Prophets; it is very
probable, he speaks in God's Name, and that it is to be understood, behold,
says God, I send unto you. And this Phrase of the Wisdom of God, for the most
Wise God, is very agreeable to other Forms of Speech, which we meet with in the
Jewish Writers; as, Dicit norma judicii, the Rule of Judgment says, that is,
the most Just and Righteous God; which serves very well to explain the Phrase
in the Text, Therefore says the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and
Apostles.

By Apostles is here meant, all sorts of Divine Messengers: For so St. Matthew
expresses it, I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes; that is,
several Holy and Excellent Men, endowed with all sorts of Divine Gifts;
Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, which were the most glorious and admired
Titles among the Jews.

And some of them they shall slay and persecute. St. Matthew expresses it more
particularly, some of them ye shall kill and crucify; as it was afterward
fulfilled in the two James's, and Stephen, who were slain by them, and in Simon
the Son of Cleophas, and before him in Jesus the Son of God, who were
Crucified; and some of them ye shall scourge in your Synagogues, as we read
they did to Peter and John; and persecute them from City to City, as they did
Paul and Barnabas. The sending of these Messengers of God among the Jews, and
this ill usage of them, the All-wise and All-knowing God had determined and
foreseen.

II. Who this Zacharias was, here mentioned by our Savior. And there are so
many of them, (no less than Four of this Name) to whom it may with some
probability be applied, but especially to Two of them, that it is very hard to
determine which of them our Savior means. Three Zacharias's are mentioned in
Scripture, and one more in the History of Josephus.

There was Zacharias the Father of John the Baptist; but whose Son he was, we
do not read; and though of his Death the Scripture is silent, yet there are two
Traditions about it; one that he was slain by Herod's Officers, because he
would not tell where his Son, John the Baptist was, when Herod sent for him.
But the Credit of this relies upon very doubtful Authors. The other is
mentioned by several of the Fathers, and the substance of it is briefly this;
that there being a Place in the Temple, where the Virgins by themselves used to
Pray, the Virgin Mary coming to that Place to pray among the Virgins, was
forbidden, because she had had a Child; and that Zacharias for maintaining her
Virginity, was set upon and killed between the Temple and the Altar. But this
Tradition is rejected by St. Jerome; and I doubt there is little ground for it.

Zacharias, one of the lesser Prophets, was the Son of Barachias, which agrees
so far with St. Matthew's description of him: But there is no mention in
Scripture that he was slain; nor could he well be in the Temple, which was but
building in his Time; though the Author of the Targum says, that Zacharias the
Son of Ido, was slain by the Jews in the house of the Lord's Sanctuary, on the
Day of the Propitiation; because he admonisht them not to do Evil before the
Lord. Now Zacharias the Son of Barachias, was the Grandson of Ido; but yet, I
think, this was only lapse of Memory, and that he means Zachary in the
Chronicles, who was slain by Joash.

And He is the Third Zacharias I mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. who as he was
reproving the People for transgressing the Commandment of the Lord, was stoned
with stones at the Comandment of the King, in the court of the house of the
Lord. And this our Savior seems more particularly to reflect upon, immediately
after the Text; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that stonest the Prophets, etc.
Now this one would think was certainly the Person intended by our Savior, and
fit to be mentioned with Abel, whose blood is said to have cried to the Lord.
For of Zacharias it is likewise said, that when he died, he said, the Lord look
upon it, and require it. And Derusius cites a Jewish Writer, speaking thus by
way of complaint against the Jewish Nation; because in the midst of thee fell
the Priests of the Lord, and his Prophets, and because before the Holy Temple
in the midst of thee, was slain the Godly and Righteous Prophet Zacharias, who
lay unburied, nor did the Earth cover his blood, but to this day it goes up and
speaks in the midst of thee. So that none could have been more fit to have been
joined with Abel in this respect.

But as probable as this looks, there are Two very great Objections against it.
One is, that St. Matthew calls the Zacharias spoken of by our Savior, the Son
of Barachias; whereas this Zacharias slain by Joash, was the Son of Jehoiada:
And though it be very considerable, which St. Jerome observes, that in the
Hebrew, or Nazarene Gospel, it is Zacharias the Son of Jehoiada; yet it is hard
to rely upon that, against all the Greek Copies. But a more difficult
Objection, in my opinion, is, that our Savior seems to design to mention the
Two Extremes, the First and Last Righteous Man that was shin, and between them
two comprehended the Good Men of all Ages, that were Persecuted and Slain; and
if so, then that Zacharias in the Chronicles, who was slain so long before, can
by no means be the Person.

There is yet a Fourth Zacharias, mentioned by Josephus, Lib. 4. the Son of
Baruch (which is probably enough the the same Name with Barachias,) who was the
last remarkable Good Man that was slain, immediately before the Siege of
Jerusalem; and that as Josephus tells us, in the midst of the Temple; which
agrees with our Savior's description of it, between the Altar and the Temple;
not the Altar of Incense, but of Burnt Offerings, which was in the outward
Court, before the ascent to the Temple. So that Grotius thinks this was the Man
intended by our Savior, yet so that he does both allude to the History of the
former Zacharias, and foretell the Death of this. And there is but one
Objection against this; that our Savior speaks of this as already past, whom
you have slain; whereas this Zacharias was not slain till after our Savior's
Death. But I think that a satisfactory Answer may be given to this ( viz. that
our Savior foretelling those future Persecutions, which should fill up the
Measure of their Sins, and bring final Destruction upon them, he speaks of this
as already past; because before that Destruction should come upon them, it
would be true, they had slain him: So that speaking of the Vengeance coming
upon them, well might he say, that upon them should come the blood of all the
righteous men, from Abel to Zacharias, whom they had slain, etc.

III. The Third Difficulty remains, III.
and that is, in what Sense, and with what Reason and Justice it is here
threatened, that the blood of all the Prophets and Righteous Men, shed from the
foundation of the World, should be required of that Generation. Some understand
this more strictly; they should be charged with it, and formally punished for
it, because in imitating their cruel Predecessors, they should be guilty of all
their Cruelty. But there is no necessity of this: All that our Savior seems to
intend, is this, that their Punishment in the Destruction of Jerusalem, should
be so horrible, as if God had once for all Arraigned them of all the Righteous
Blood that ever had been shed in the World, and brought the Punishment of it
upon them; though in Truth the Punishment did not exceed the desert of their own
Sins. And if this be the meaning of it, there is nothing Harsh and Unreasonable
in it. And thus I have explained, as well as I can, the several Difficulties in
the Text. I shall make Two or Three Observations from the main Scope and Design
of it, and so conclude.

I. That it has been the Lot of Holy and Righteous Men, in most Ages of the
World, to meet with very bad usage, to be Persecuted and Slain. The Devil began
this Work early. When there were but Three Men in all the World, and Two of
them Brethren; the one slew the other, because he was more righteous, and
served God better than he did. And this trade has continued, and been
practiced more or less, in most Ages and Generations of the World, as might be
deduced through the History of the Old and New Testament, and of most Ages
since: though the rod of the wicked has not always abode upon the back of the
righteous, lest at last Piety should be quite discouraged, and the faithful
fail from among the Children of men. The People and the Church of God have had
many Intervals of Peace and Prosperity; and sometimes for a long continuance,
the favor and countenance of Authority, and the Powers of the World, and the
Laws of Nations on their side.

But yet there is a continual enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the
Serpent, between the Righteous and the Wicked, between those that serve God,
and those that serve him not; because their ways are contrary one to another,
and quite of another fashion, their Principles and Practices do contradict and
clash with one another; the Virtues of good Men are a continual upbraiding of
the bad, a living reproof and reproach to them; so that it is no wonder, that
evil Men do so violently hate and persecute the good, and do by all means
endeavor to remove out of the way those who are so opposite and offensive to
them.

II. We may observe likewise hence, how great a Sin they are guilty of, who
persecute the Righteous, and how terrible a Vengeance from God waits on them.
Particular Examples of this have been in all Ages: But as the guilt of this Sin
never went higher, than at this time foretold by our Savior, when God sent to
the Jews such Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, and such a Number of them,
as never upon any occasion were sent unto the World, and they used them in that
bloody and barbarous manner; no wonder, if the Vengeance that came upon them
was such as never had been before; and if, after they had filled up the measure
of their Sins, by crucifying the Lord Jesus, and persecuting his Apostles, and
stoning and killing all the Prophets that were sent unto them, the wrath of God
came upon them to the utmost, and such a terrible Destruction from the Lord, as
never befell any People; insomuch that our Savior, upon the foresight and
mention of it, Forty Years before it happened, could not but weep over them,
and express himself in those compassionate Words, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Pro: phets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thee, as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings; but ye would not! Behold your house is left unto you desolate.

III. From this whole Passage of our Savior, which I have been explaining to
you, we may learn, how vain it is for Men to pretend to Honor the dead Saints,
when they Persecute the living. This was the great Hypocrisy of the Scribes
and Pharisees among the Jews in our Savior's time; and is at this Day of the
Rulers and Governor's of the Roman Church among us Christians; Nay, they exceed
the Scribes and Pharisees, not only in their Veneration of the ancient Saints
and righteous Men, but also, if it be possible, in their malice and cruelty
toward the living. For they not only build costly Monuments to their Memory,
which was the utmost the Scribes and Pharisees did, but they honor them with
Shrines and rich Offerings, with Prayers and Vows to them, more frequent than
to Almighty God himself, and our Blessed Savior: But then they hate and
persecute the living, with as great violence and cruelty, as ever was used by
any part of Mankind toward one another. It Is true they do it under the Notion
of Heresy; and so did the Scribes and Pharisees too, as St. Paul witnesses,
After the way which ye call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things that are written in the Law and in the Prophets. So they
call us Heretics; though we receive and believe all that is written in the Holy
Scriptures, only rejecting their Additions, whereby they would make the
Commandment of God of none effect. And as Rome is parallel with Jerusalem in
many other respects; so especially in the bloody Persecution of righteous Men:
And as Jerusalem is charged by our Savior with the blood of all the Prophets
and righteous men of all Ages; so St. John in the Revelation says of Rome, that
in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the earth, chapter 18.24. Which is no less true of Rome Christian, than
of Rome Pagan. In all the Churches and Religions in the World, and perhaps in
Rome Pagan her self, has not so much innocent Blood been shed, as in Rome
Christian and Catholic, and that under a pretense of Religion: And no doubt
there is a Day a coming, when she shall be called to a heavy Account for these
things, when the Heavens shall rejoice over her, and the Holy Angels and
Prophets, because God has avenged them on her.

SERMON XIII. The Danger of Zeal, without Knowledge. Preached on November 5.
1682.
ROMANS X. 2. I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God; but not according
to knowledge.


THere is nothing more commonly cried up, than Zeal in Religion; and yet there
is nothing in which Men do more frequently and fatally mistake and miscarry,
and in the Expressions and Effects whereof Men ought to govern themselves with
more Care and Caution. VOL. II.
To speak the truth, Zeal is as all other Passions are, in its own Nature
indifferent, and of it self neither Good nor Bad; but according to the Object
and Degree of it: for Zeal is nothing else, but an earnest Concernment for, or
against something, and a violent Pursuit and Prosecution of it. For if it be
applied to a right Object, so as we be earnestly concerned for things that are
unquestionably Good, and against: things that are unquestionably Evil; and in a
due Degree; that is, if the Expression of it be Proportionable to the less or
greater Good or Evil of things; then it is a commendable Quality or Virtue: But
if it be wrong placed, and we be earnestly concerned for that which is Evil,
and against that which is Good, or about things which are of an indifferent, or
doubtful Nature, as to the Good and Evil of them; or if we notoriously exceed
in the Degree of it, being more zealously concerned about things, than they
deserve, and zealously concerned about lesser things, to the prejudice of
greater; in any of these Cases, it is so for from being a Virtue, that it is a
Vice, Sermon. XIII.
of a most pernicious and mischievous consequence, and many times has as bad
Effects, as can proceed from the worst Principle or Disposition of Mind.

It is sometimes used in a good Sense; but it is, when it is applied to the
best things, in which the Honor of God, and the Salvation of Men is concerned,
to the great and unquestionable Duties of Religion. As Zeal for the Honor of
God, and the Place of his Public Worship, in opposition to Profaneness, John
2.17. The Zeal of thine house has eaten me up. For an earnest desire of those
Gifts, whereby we are to Edify the Church, 1 Cor. 12.31. But covet earnestly
the best gifts, so we render the words; be zealous of the best gifts, so it is
in the Greek. For a Forwardness and Readiness to relieve the Necessities of the
Saints, 2 Cor. 9.2. I know the forwardness of your minds, and your zeal has
provoked very many. And to the same purpose is that Expression, Tit. 2.14.
Zealous of good works. And then for a Zeal for the Salvation of Men's Souls, 2
Cor. 11.2. I am zealous of you with a godly zeal.

But the word is much more frequently in Scripture used in a bad Sense, for a
malicious and furious Rage, against the Professors of Christianity, Acts 5.17,
18. Then the high Priest, and they that were with him, were filled with
indignation, (the word is Zeal) and laid their hands on the Apostles, and put
them in prison. And, Chap. 13.45. it is said, the Jews were filled with Zeal,
and spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming. And, Chap. 17.5. The Jews which believed not, moved with Zeal,
gathered a company, and set all the City in an uproar.

It Is frequently reckoned amongst the works of the flesh, and mentioned in the
company of the greatest Vices and Crimes; Wrath, Contention, Division,
Sedition, Murders, Tumults, Confusions. Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly as in
the day, not in Chambering and wantonness, not in strife and zeal. 1 Cor. 3.3.
Whereas there is among you zeal, and strife, and divisions; are ye not carnal?
2 Cor. 12.20. Lest there be debates, zeal, wrath, strife. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
The works of the flesh are manifest, among which the Apostle reckons hatred,
variance, zeal, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders. St.
James calls it a bitter zeal. Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. But if ye have bitter zeal and
strife in your hearts; glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom
descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where zeal
and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. By which it appears that
zeal most frequently goes under a bad Name and Character in Scripture; zeal, I
mean, in matters of Religion; for of that most of the Texts I have mentioned
speak; and this is that which St. Paul means, here in the Text, by a zeal of
God, that is, a zeal about Religion, and divine things. I bear them record,
that they have a zeal of God; but not according to knowlede.

In which words, the Apostle being desirous to say the best he could of his
Countrymen, the Jews, he commends the good meaning of their zeal, and blames
the ill conduct of it, I bear them record, (...), I give this testimony on
their behalf, that they have a zeal of God, that is, that by all this
fierceness against the Christian Religion, they intend the honor of God, and
think they do him service: but yet this Zeal is greatly to be condemned;
because it is a mistaken and misguided zeal, not at all directed as it should
be; they have a zeal of God; but not according to knowledge.

From which words I shall take into consideration these Three things.

I. What are the Qualifications and Properties of a Zeal according to
knowledge. II. By what Marks and Characters, we may know that zeal, which here,
and elsewhere in Scripture is condemned, as not being according to knowledge.
III. How far the doing of any thing, out of a zeal for God, does mitigate and
extenuate the Evil of it. For when the Apostle here testifies concerning the
Jews, that they had a zeal of God; he speaks this in favor of them, and by way
of mitigation of their Faults. When I have handled these Three Particulars, I
shall apply my Discourse to the present Occasion of this day.
I. What are the Qualifications and Properties of a zeal according to
knowledge. I shall mention these Three.

1. That our Zeal be right, in respect of its Object. 2. That the Measure and
Degree of it be proportioned to the Good or Evil of things, about which it is
conversant. 3. That we pursue it by lawful ways and means.
1. That our Zeal be right, in respect of its Object; I mean, that those things
which we are zealous for, be certainly and considerably Good; and that those
things which we are zealous against, be certainly and considerably Evil. A
mistake in any of these quite marrs our Zeal, and spoils the Virtue of it: And
though it be never so much intended for God, it is not at all pleasing and
acceptable to him; because it is a blind and ignorant and mistaken Zeal: And
the hotter, the worse; it is not an heavenly fire, that comes down from above;
but it is like the fire of Hell, Heat without Light. If we mistake Good and
Evil, and be zealously concerned, against that which is Good, or for that which
is Evil; the greater our Zeal is, the greater is our Fault; and instead of
doing God and Religion Service and Credit, we do the greatest Mischief and
Dishonor we can to them both: Or if the thing about which our Zeal is
conversant, be of a doubtful and uncertain nature; this is not properly an
Object of Zeal. Men should never be earnest for or against any thing, but upon
clear and certain Grounds, that what we contend so earnestly for, is
undoubtedly Good; and that which we are so violent against, is undoubtedly
Evil: If it be not, we are zealous for we know not what, and that I am sure, is
a zeal not according to knowledge.

And if the thing be certainly Good or Evil, which we are so concerned about;
it must also be considerably so: otherwise it will not warrant our being
zealous about it. All Truth is Good, and all Error Bad; but there are many
Truths so inconsiderable, and which have so small an influence upon Practice,
that they do not deserve our Zeal and earnest Contention about them; and so
likewise are there many Errors, and Mistakes, of so slight and inconsiderarable
a Nature, that it were better Men should be let alone in them, than provoked to
Quarrel and Contend about them.

Thus that great Heat that was in the Christian Church, about the Time of
observing Easter, was, in my Opinion, a Zeal not according to knowledge. They
were on both sides agreed in the main, which was to celebrate the Memory of our
Savior's Resurrection: But there were different Customs about the Time, which
was a matter of no such consideration, as to deserve so much Heat and Zeal
about it, especially considering the uncharitable, and mischievous Consequences
of that difference.

2. That our Zeal may be according to knowledge, the Measure and Degree of it
must be proportioned to the Good or Evil of things, about which it is
conversant. That is an ignorant Zeal, which is conversant about lesser things,
and unconcerned for greater. Such was the Zeal of the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were mightily concerned about external and lesser Matters; but took little or
no care of inward Purity, and real and substantial Goodness; they were very
careful, not to eat with unwasht hands, and to make clean the outside of the
cup and platter; but then they were full of extortion, and all unrighteousness:
they paid tithe of mint, and anise, and cumin; but omitted the weightier
things, judgment, mercy, and fidelity; or, as St. Luke expresses it, they past
over Judgment and the love of God.

A zealous strictness about external Rites and Matters of difference, where
there is a visible neglect of the substantial Duties of Religion, and the great
Virtues of a good life, is either a gross Ignorance of the true Nature of
Religion, or a fulsome Hypocrisy. And so likewise is a loud and zealous outcry
against Rites and Ceremonies, and the Imposition of indifferent things in
Religion, when Men can release themselves from the Obligation of Natural and
Moral Duties, and pass over mercy, and justice, and charity.

3. A Zeal that is is according to knowledge, must be pursued and prosecuted by
Lawful and Warantable Means. No Zeal for God and his Glory, for his true Church
and Religion; will justify the doing of that which is morally and in it self
evil. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? We do not
know what belongs to the Honor of God and Religion, if we think to promote his
Glory, by means so dishonorable and offensive to him. The Apostle pronounces
it a Damnable Sin, for any to charge this Doctrine upon Christianity, that evil
may be done for a good end, and to promote the glory of God, Romans 3.8. As we he
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil that good
may come; whose damnation is just.

And yet nothing is more frequent, than for a Man, out of a Zeal for God and
Religion, to overlook the Evil and Unlawfulness of the Means they use, for the
advancing so good an End. This is that which has sanctified those refined Arts
of Lying and Perjury, by Equivocation, and Mental Reservation; those seditious
ways of disturbing the Peace of Kingdoms, by Treason and Rebellion, by the
Excommunicating, and Disposing of Princes, upon pre, tence of Heresy; of
Extirpating those, whom they please to call Heretics, by Inquisitions, and
Croisado's, and Massacres; and this, not only in the opinion of private
Persons, but in the judgment of Popes, and of General Councils. I proceed in the

II. Place to show by what Marks and Characters we may know the contrary Zeal,
that which is not according to knowledge, which is condemned here in the Text,
and very frequently in other Places of Scripture: And though this may be
sufficiently known by the contrary Marks and Properties (which I shall but
briefly mention) yet to discover it more fully, I shall add One or Two more
very gross and sensible signs and instances of it.

1. It is a zeal without knowledge, that is mistaken in the proper Object of
it, that calls good evil, and evil good; a Zeal for gross Errors and
Superstitions, plainly contrary either to the revelation of God's Word, or the
light of Reason, or to common Sense; any or all of these cannot be a zeal
according to knowledge. A Zeal for the Worship of Images, for praying to Saints
and Angels, contrary to the plain Law and Word of God; a Zeal for the
sacrilegious depriving of the People of half the Sacrament, contrary to our
Savior's plain Institution, and the acknowledged Practice of the Catholic
Church, for a thousand years; a Zeal for that most absurd of all Doctrines
that, ever was taught in any Religion, I mean the Dostrine of
Transubstantiation, not only without any sufficient Authority from Scripture
(as is acknowledged by several of the most learned of the Roman Church) but
contrary to Reason, and in defiance of the Sense of all Mankind; a Zeal for
these, and many more like gross Errors and Practices, cannot possibly be a zeal
according to knowledge.

2. That is a zeal without knowledge, the degree whereof is manifestly
disproportioned to the Good or Evil of things about which it is conversant;
when there is in Men a greater and fiercer Zeal for the Externals of Religion;
than for the Vital and Essential Parts of it: for the Traditions of men; than
for the Commandments of God: for Bodily Severities; than for the Mortification
of our Lusts: for the Means of Religion; than for the End of it: a greater zeal
against the Omission and Neglect of some senseless and superstitious Practices;
than against the Practice of the grossest Immoralities: and against the Denyers
of the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, and of the Pope's Infallibility, an
equal, if not a greater zeal (I am sure a more severe Prosecution) than against
those who deny our Savior to be the true Messiah, and the Son of God: This
certainly is not a zeal according te knowledge. Nor,

3. That which is prosecuted by unlawful and unwarrantable Means. That cannot
be a zeal of God according to knowledge, which warrants the doing of Evil, that
Good may come; the violating of Truth and Faith, and of the Peace of Humane
Society, for the Cause of the Catholic Church; and breaking the eternal and
immutable Laws of God, for the advancing of his Glory. Nor,

4. An uncharitable Zeal, which is an Enemy to Peace and Order, and thinks it
self sufficiently warranted to separate from the Communion of Christians, and
to break the Peace of the Church, upon every scruple, and upon every fancy and
conceit of unlawful Impositions, though in the most indifferent things; nay upon
this single Point, because a thing which they acknowledge lawful, and
indifferent in it self, is in the worship of God enjoined by Authority; The
most unreasonable Principle that I think ever was avowed among Christians; not
to do a thing, which otherwise they might do, only because it is enjoined; and
to fancy, that an indifferent thing becomes comes presently unlawful, because
it is commanded by lawful Authority; and that it is a Sin to do any thing, in
the Worship of God, which is not left to their Liberty, whether they will do it
or not. This is not only a Zeal without knowledge; but contrary to common
Sense. Nor,

5. A Furious and Cruel Zeal, which St. James calls a bitter, or a wrathful
Zeal, and which tends to confusion and every evil work, which is blind with its
own rage, and makes Men, as St. Paul says of himself, when he persecuted the
Christians, exceedingly mad against all that differ from them, and stand in the
way of their fierce and outrageous Zeal.

6. And lastly, A Zeal for ignorance, is most certainly not a zeal according to
knowledge; and this is a Zeal peculiar to the Church of Rome, by such strict
Laws to forbid People the use of the Holy Scriptures in a known Tongue; nay not
so much as to allow them to understand what they do in the Service of God; to
require them to be present at their Public Prayers, and to join with them in
them, without letting them know the meaning of them; to pretend to teach them,
by reading Lessons to them in an unknown Tongue; and all this under pretense of
increasing their Devotion; as if the less Men understand of the Service of God,
the more they would be affected with it, and edified by it.

And yet there is nothing in which the Church of Rome has been more zealously
concerned, than to keep the People in ignorance: Nothing they hive opposed with
more obstinacy, against the repeated application of Princes, and People, at the
beginning of the Reformation; than to allow the People the use of the
Scriptures, in their public Prayers, in an unknown Tongue. And their obstinacy
in this Point, was not without Reason; nothing being more certain, than that if
the People were once brought to understand the Scriptures, they would soon quit
their Religion, which in so many things is so directly contrary to the word of
God. The

III. And last thing remains to be spoken to, viz. How far the doing of things,
out of a Zeal for God, does Mitigate and Extenuate the Evil of them. For when
the Apostle here testifies, concerning the Jews, that they had a zeal of God,
he speaks this in favor of them, and by way of mitigation of their fault. I
bear them record; I who was once acted by this ignorant and furious zeal, which
now possesses them, and persecuted the Christians in the same outrageous
manner, as they still continue to do, and all this with a very good Conscience,
as I thought, and out of a zeal for God, and the true Religion. So he tells us,
Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. So that his zeal was sincere, and
with a real intention to do Service to God and Religion; and yet for all that
was very faulty and sinful, and, if he had persisted in it, Damnable; so that
his confidence, that he was in the right, and the Sincerity of his zeal in
acting according to the persuasion of his Conscience, did not alter the Nature
of the actions he did out of this zeal, and make them less wicked in
themselves; though it was some mitigation of the fault of the Person, and
rendered him more capable of the Mercy of God, by Repentance, than if he had
done contrary to his Conscience, and the clear convictions of his own Mind.

And therefore the best way to understand the great Evil and Wickedness of this
furious and blind Zeal, will be, to consider the account which St. Paul, after
his Conversion, gives of his own doings, and what load he lays upon himself,
notwithstanding the Sincerity of his Zeal, and that he acted according to his
Conscience. Acts viii and ix. you have the History at large of his outrageous
doings, how he made havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling
men and women to Prison; how he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord. Acts 22.4. I persecuted, says he, this way unto the
death, binding and delivering into Prisons both men and women. And Chapter 26.10,
11. Many of the Saints did I shut up in Prison, and when they were put to
death, I gave my voice against them; and I punished them often in every
Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against
them, I persecuted them even to strange Cities. Gal. 1.13, 14. Ye have heard,
says he, of my conversation in times past, in the Jews Religion; how that
beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it, being exceedingly
zealous of the traditions of my fathers. 1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious. So that he charge himself with
the guilt of Blasphemy and Murder, and a most furious and outrageous
Persecution of Good Men; for which elsewhere he pronounces himself the chief
of Sinners. From whence it evidently appears, that Men may do the most Wicked
and Damnable Sins, out of a zeal for God.

And this was the case of many of the Jews, as our Savior foretold, that the
time should come, when they should kill men, thinking they did God good
Service. But yet for all this, the Apostles of our Lord make no scruple, to
charge them with downright Murder. Acts 2.23. speaking of their putting our
Savior to death, whom ye by wicked hands have crucified and slain. And Acts
7.52. The just One, of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers.

Yet notwithstanding their Sin was of this high Nature in it self; yet it was
some mitigation of the fault of the Persons, that they did these things out of
an ignorant zeal, and rendered them more capable of the Mercy of God, upon their
repentance. And upon this account our Savior interceded with God for Mercy for
them; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. St. Peter also
pleads the same in mitigation of their fault, Acts 3.17. And now, brethren, I
wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers. And St. Paul
tells us, that he found mercy, upon his repentance, on this account, 1 Timothy
1.13. But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, and in unbelief. But
still, for all this, wicked things done out of Conscience and Zeal for God, are
Damnable, and will prove so, without repentance.

I shall now draw some Inferences from this Discourse, by way of Application.

1. If it be so necessary, that our Zeal be directed by knowledge; this shows
us how dangerous a thing Zeal is in the weak and ignorant sort of People. Zeal
is an Edg-Tool, which Children in understanding should not meddle withal; and
yet it most frequently possesses the weakest Minds; and commonly by how much
the less knowing People are, by so much the more zealous they are: And in the
Church of Rome, where Knowledge is professedly discouraged, and suppressed in the
common People, Zeal is mightily countenanced and cherished. And they make great
use of it; for this blind and furious Zeal, is that which inspires diem to do
such Cruel and Barbarous things, as were hardly ever acted among the Heathen.
Zeal is only fit for wise Men; but it is chiefly in Fashion among Fools,

Nay it is dangerous in the hands of wise Men, and to be governed and kept in
with a strict Rein; otherwise it will transport them to the doing of Undue and
Irregular things. Moses, one of the wisest and best of Men, and most likely to
govern and manage his Zeal as he ought, and to keep aloof from all Excess and
Extravagance, being the meekest Man upon Earth, yet he was so surprised, upon a
sudden occasion, that in a fit of zeal, he let fall the Two Tables of the Law,
which he had but just received from God, and dashed them in pieces. A true
Emblem of an ungoverned zeal, in the transport whereof even Good Men are apt to
forget the Laws of God, and let them fall out of their Hands, and to break all
the Obligations of Natural and Moral Duties.

2. From hence we plainly see, that Men may do the worst and wickedest things,
out of a Zeal for God and Religion. Thus it was among the Jews, who engrost
Salvation to themselves, and denied the possibility of it to all the world
besides; and the Church of Rome have taken Copy by them, as in an arrogant
conceit of themselves, so in the blindness, and fury, and uncharitableness of
their Zeal toward all, who refuse to submit to their Authority and Directions.

And as the Teachers and Rulers of the Jewish Church did of old, so do the
Church of Rome now; They take away the Key of Knowledge from the People, and
will neither enter into the kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer those that
would, to enter in. They Brand for Heretics those who make the Holy Scriptures
the Rule of their Faith, and Worship; as St. Paul tells us the Jews did in his
Time, Acts 24.14. After the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God
of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and the
Prophets. They Establish the Merit of their own Righteousness, not submitting
to the Righteousness of God, by the Faith of Jesus Christ. So St. Paul tells us
the Jews did, in the Verse immediately after the Text; For they being ignorant
of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. And as the Jews
Anathematized and Excommunicated the first Christians, and Persecuted them to
the Death, as our Savior foretold, That the time would come, when they should
put them out of their Synagogues, yea and kill them, thinking they did God good
service; so the Church of Rome has, for many Ages, used the sincere Professors
of the same Religion, Persecuting them, first with Excommunication, and then
with Fire and Faggot; and with all the violence and fury in the world
endeavoring the utter extirpation and ruin of them, by bloody Croisado's and
a barbarous Inquisition, by treacherous Massacres, and all sorts of hellish
Plots and Machinations; witness the monstrous Design of this day, never to be
remembered or mentioned without horror, To have destroyed at one blow, and have
swallowed up in one common ruin, our King, and Prince, and Nobles, and the
Represent ative Body of the whole Nation; witness the bloody Massacre of
Ireland, and all their wicked Designs and Practices, continued to this very day.

3. And lastly, That zeal for God and Religion, does not alter the Nature of
Actions done upon that account. Persecution and Murder of the sincere
Professors of Religion, are Damnable Sins; and no zeal for God and Religion can
excuse them, or take away the guilt of them; zeal for God will justify no
Action that we do, unless there be discretion to justify our zeal.

There is nothing oftener misleads Men, than a misguided Zeal; it is an ignis
fatuus, a false fire, which often leads Men into Boggs and Precipices; it
appears in the Night, in dark and ignorant and weak minds, and offers it self a
guide to those who have lost their way; it is one of the most ungovernable
Passions of Human Nature, and therefore requires great knowledge and judgment
to manage it, and keep it within bounds. It is like fire, a good Servant, but a
bad Master; if it once get head, it consumes and devours all before it, and the
great danger and mischief of it is, that it is most commonly found where it
should not be, and possesses those most, who are least fit to govern it; and
most frequently employed about what it should not be; and ten to one but it is
either mistaken in the Object, or in the Measure and Degree of it; and even
when it is a Virtue, it is a nice and dangerous one; for the wisest Men are apt
to mingle their own Passions and Interests with their Zeal for God and
Religion. So that it is not enough that Men are acted by a zeal for God, and do
sincerely follow the dictates of their Consciences; but they must be careful to
inform their Consciences, and not suffer themselves to be violently transported
and hurried on by their own Passions and Prejudice, and by a blind and furious
zeal without knowledge.

But what then? Would we have Men not follow their own Consciences, or act
contrary to them? No, by no means: For though Conscience be not our Rule; yet it
is our immediate Guide; and he does ill, who does act against his Conscience.
But Men must be careful how they settle their Practical Judgment of things, and
conclude things to be Lawful or Unlawful, Duties or Sins, without Reason and
good Ground.

God has given us Understandings, to try and examine things, and the light of
his Word to direct us in this trial; and if we will judge rashly, and suffer
our selves to be hurried by Prejudice or Passion, the Errors of our Judgment
become Faults of our Lives: For God expects from us that we should weigh and
consider what we do; and when he has afforded us light enough to discern
betwixt Good and Evil, that we should carefully follow the direction of it;
that we should be suspicious of our selves, when our Zeal carries us to do
things that are furious and cruel, false and treacherous, and have a horrid
appearance even to the light of Nature; we should question that zeal which is
so contrary to Christian Goodness and Meekness, to Peace and Charity, and which
tends to Confusion and every Evil Work.

I will conclude all with that excellent Passage of St. James, which will show
us how little regard is to be had to many Men's Pretenses of Zeal for Religion,
Jam. 3.13. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him
show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye
have bitter zeal and strife in your hearts; glory not, and lie not against the
truth. This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where zeal and strife is; there is confusion, and every evil
work. But the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy and good fruits; without
partiality, and without hypocrisy: And the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace of them that make peace.

SERMON XIV. The best Men liable to the worst Treatment, from Mistaken Zealots.
Preached on November 5. 1686.
JOHN XVI. 2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: Yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think, that he does God service.


THESE words were spoken by our Blessed Savior, when he was about to leave the
World; at the thoughts whereof, finding his Disciples to be exceedingly
troubled, VOL. II.
he comforts them by the Consideration of the great Benefit and Advantage which
from thence would accrue to them; he tells them that he was going to Heaven to
interceed for them, and to make way for their admission there; and withal
promises, that his Father would send the Holy Ghost, who should abundantly
supply the want of his Presence with them: but he tells them at the same time,
that they should meet with very ill Entertainment and Usage from the World: but
so had He, Chapter 15.18. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me, before
it hated you; and why should they expect to be better treated than He was? v.
20. Remember the word that I said unto you, the servant is not greater than the
Lord; if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

And at the beginning of this Chapter he tells them, that he did on purpose
forewarn them of these things, to prepare their Minds beforehand, and to arm
them against the worst that might happen; v. 1. These things have I I have
spoken to you, Sermon. XIV.
that ye should not be offended. And then he declares more particularly, how
far the Rage and Malice of Men should proceed against them, and in what kind
they should suffer: They shall put you out of the Synagogues: Yea the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service.

So that our Savior here fortells Two sorts of Persecution, which his
Disciples should be Exercised withal, Excommunication; they shall put you out
of their Synagogues: And Excision; Yea the time comes, that whosoever kills
you will thinks that he does God service. And these perhaps were but several
Kinds and Degrees of Excomunication; for the clearer understanding whereof, it
will be requisite, briefly to explain the Three Degrees of Excommunication
among the Jews.

The First called Niddui, is that which our Savior here means, by putting out
of the Synagogue; and which he elsewhere expresses by (...), or separation.
Luke 6.22. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate
yon from their company. And the Effect of this Excommunication was to exclude
Men from the Communion of the Church and People of God, and from his Service;
which was a great disgrace; because, after this Sentence, none of the Jews were
to converse with them, but to look upon them as Heathens and Publicans.

The Second Degree of this Censure was called Cherem; which included the first,
but extended farther, to the Confiscation of Goods into the Sacred Treasury,
and devoting them to God; after which there was no Redemption of them. And of
this we find express mention, Ezra, 10.7, 8. where it is said, That they made
Proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem, unto all the children of the
captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem; and that
whosoever would not come within three days, according to the Counsel of the
Princes and Elders, all his substance should be devoted, and himself separated
from the congregation of those that had been carriied away.

The Third Degree ws Shammatha, when the Rebellious and Contumacious Person was
Anathematized and Devoted, and, as some conceive, according to the Law ( Levit.
27.29.) was to be put to death; though other very konwing Men in the Jewish
Learning think it amounted, to no more, than a final Sentence, whereby they
were left to the Judgment of God, by some remarkable Judgment of his to be cut
off from the Congregation of Israel.

Of the First and Last of these Degrees of Excomunication, our Savior seems
here to speak; but whether in both Instances in the Text, he alludes in the one
to the lowest, and in the other to the highst Degree of Excommunication among
the Jews, is not so certain. To the First he plainly does, when he says, they
shall put you out of the Synagogues: And then he adds, that they should proceed
much higher against them, even to put them to death; the time comes, that
whosoever kills you will think that he does God service; that is, they should
not only think it Lawful to kill them, but look upon it as a Duty, as a high
Act of Religion, as an acceptable Piece of Worship, and a Sacrifice
well-pleasing to God. For so indeed the word does not only import, but most
properly signify, whosoever kills you shall think, (...), that he offers a
Sacrifice to God; for so the word (...) is sometimes used for a Sacrifice; but
being joined with (...) seems necessarily to be determined to that Sense.

From the words thus explained, I shall make these following Observations, very
proper for our Consideration upon the Occasion of this day.

1. That the best of Men may be separated and excluded from the Communion of
those who may assume to themselves to be the true and the only true Church; yea
and suffer under the Notion of very Bad and Criminal Persons. This our Savior
here foretold of his Apostles, some of the best Men that ever lived: They shall
put you out of their Synagogues. 2. That they who are thus Excommunicated, by
the pretended true Church, may nevertheless be real Members of the true Church
of Christ. Though the Apostles were thus dealt withal by the Jewish Church; they
did not cease for all that to be Members of the true Church of God. 3. That
from uncharitable Censures Men do easily and almost naturally proceed to Cruel
Actions. After they had put the Disciples of our Lord out of their Synagoguse,
and thereby concluded them to be Heretics and Reprobates, they presently
proceed to kill them, as not worthy to live. They shall put you out of their
Synagogues; and when they have done that, they will soon after think it a thing
not only fit, but Pious and Meritorious, to put you to death; the time will
come, that they will think it a good service to God, to kill you. 4. That Men
may do the Vilest things, and the most Wicked, not only under a grave pretense
of Religion, but out of a real opinion and persuasion that they do Religiously.
Murder is certainly one of the greatest and most crying Sins; and yet our
Savior foretells, that the Jews should put his Disciples to death, being
verily persuaded that in so doing they offered a most acceptable Sacrifice to
God: Yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills you shall think that he
offers a Sacrisice to God. 5. That such Actions are never the less horribly
Impious and Wicked, notwithstanding the good Mind with which, and the Good End
for which they are done. The Jews were not excused from the guilt of
Persecution and Murder, for all they thought they did well in killing the
Disciples of our Lord. 6. I observe that the Corruption of the best tilings is
the worst. Religion is the highest Accomplishment and Perfection of Humane
Nature; and Zeal for God and his Truth an excellent Quality, and highly
acceptable to God: And yet nothing is more Barbarous, and spurs Men on to more
horrible Impieties, than a blind Zeal for God, and false and mistaken
Principles in the matter of Religion; as is plain from the Instances here
before us in the Text. I shall speak as briefly as I can to these Observations.
1. That the best of Men may be separated and excluded from the Communion of
those, who may assume to be the true and only true Church, and that, under the
Notion of very Bad and Criminal Persons. This our Savior foretells in the Text
should be the Fate of his Apostles, some of the best and holiest Persons that
ever lived; they shall put you out of the Synagogues.

And what the Jews did in the beginning of Christianity, to the Apostles of our
Lord and Savior, has been too frequently practiced since, by some of the
Professors of Christianity toward one another; and very Good Men have in
several Ages fallen under the Censure of Excommunication, and been separated
from the External Communion of the Church, and branded with the odious Names of
Heretics and Apostates, by those who have arrogated to themselves to be the
only Orthodox and true Church, and have gotten the external Power and
Management of Religion into their hands; witness the Case of Athanasius and
others, in the Reign and Prevalency of Arianism; and the ill Treatment, that
not only particular Persons, Eminent for their Learning and Piety, but whole
Churches have met with in this kind, from that haughty and uncharitable Church,
which makes nothing of thundering out this most fearful Sentence of
Excommunication, against Persons, and Churches much better and more Christian
than her self, and against all that will not submit to her pretended
Infallibility, and usurped Authority over the Souls and Consciences of Men.

But it is our great Comfort, that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord and
Master were thus used, by a Church that made the same Pretenses that they do,
and upon Grounds every whit as plausible, as I could clearly show, if I were
minded to pursue and make out this Comparison.

2. They who are thus Excommunicated, by the pretended only true Church, may
nevertheless be true Members of the Church of Christ. Though the Apostles were
thus dealt withal by the Jewish Church; they did not cease for all this to be
real Members of the true Church of God. For it is not calling Heretics first,
that proves them that do so to be no Heretics, or acquits them from the same
or greater Crimes, than those which they are so forward to charge upon other
Men; nor will God condemn all those who are Excommunicated by Men, and deny
Salvation to every one, whom they shall please to separate from their Society,
and to call by some odious name. Men may be put out of the Synagogue, and yet
received into Heaven; for the Judgment of God is not according to the
uncharitable Censures of Men; but according to Truth and Right.

The Sentence of Excommunication is certainly very dreadful, where it is duly
inflicted; and next to the Judgment of God, Men ought to be afraid of justly
incurring the danger of this Censure; and it ought to be upon very plain and
evident grounds, that Men either separate themselves, or endanger their being
cut off from the Communion of the Church they live in: But when it once comes
to this, that a Church is infected with gross Errors and Corruptions, plainly
contrary to the Word of God, especially if that Church will impose her Errors
upon all that are of her Communion; then those who refuse to comply, do not
sepavate themselves, but are cut off; do not depart, but are driven out of the
Communion of that Church; and Separation in that case is as innocent and free
from the guilt of Schism, as the Cause of it is; for the terms of Communion are
become such, that those who are convinced of those Errors and Corruptions can
have no Salvation, if they continue in that Communion, and then I am sure their
Salvation will not be endangered by leaving it, or being Excommunicated out of
it; for that would be the hardest case in the World, that Men should be Damned
for continuing in the Communion of such a Church, and damned likewise for being
cast out of it.

Therefore no Man ought to be terrified, because of the boldness and
presumption of those, who with so much Confidence, and so little Charity, damn
all that are not of their Communion; for we see plainly from the Text, that Men
may be in the right and surest way to Salvation, and yet be Excommunicated by
those who call themselves the true Church, and will not allow Salvation to any,
but those of their own Communion. The Disciples of our Lord and Savior were
certainly very good Men, and in a safe way of Salvation, though they were
Excommunicated, and put out of the Synagogue, by the chief Priests and the
Rulers of the Jewish Church. I proceed to the

3. Observation, which was this, that from uncharitable Censures, Men do by an
easy step, and almost naturally proceed to Cruel Actions. After the Jews had
put the Disciples of our Lord out of their Synagogues, and thereby concluded
them to be Heretics and Reprobates; no wonder they should proceed to kill
those, whom they thought not worthy to live; they shall put you out of their
Synagogues, (says our Savior) and when they have done that, they will soon
think it a thing not only fit and reasonable, but Pious and Meritorious, and a
good Piece of Service done to God, to put you to death. Uncharitableness
naturally draws on Cruelty, and hardens Humane Nature toward those, of whom we
have once conceived so hard an opinion, that they are Enemies to God and his
Truth.

And this has been the source of the most barbarous Cruelties that have been
in the world; witness the severity of the Heathen Perfection of the Christians,
which justified it self by the Uncharitable Opinion which they had conceived of
them, that they were despisers of Religion and the Gods, and consequently
Atheists; that they were pertinacious and obstinate in their Opinions, that is,
in the Modern Style, they were Heretics. And the like uncharitable conceit
among Christians has been thought a sufficient ground (even in the judgment of
the Infallible Chair) for the justification of several bloody Massacres, and
the cruel Proceedings of the Inquisition against Persons suspected of Heresy;
for after Men are once Sentenced to Eternal Damnation, it seems a small thing,
to torment and destroy their Bodies.

4. Men may do the vilest and most wicked things, not only under a grave
Pretense of Religion, but out of a real Opinion and Persuasion of Mind, that
they do Religiously. Murder is certainly one of the greatest and most crying
Sins; and yet our Savior foretells, that the Jews should put his Disciples to
Death, being verily persuaded that in so doing they should offer a most
acceptable Sacrifice to God; yea the time comes, that whosoever kills you
shall think that he offers a Sacrifice to God.

Not but that the great Duties and Virtues of Religion are very plain and easy
to be understood; and so are the contrray Sins and Vices: But then they are
only plain to a teachable, and honest, and well-disposed mind; to those who
receive the word with meekness, and are not blinded with wrath and furious
Zeal; to those that receive the truth into an honest heart, and entertain it in
the love of it; they are plain to the humble and meek; for the humble God will
guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his ways; such as these God
seldom suffers to fall into fatal mistakes about their Sin, or Duty, so as to
call good evil, and evil good; to call light darkness, and darkness light; to
think Uncharitableness a Virtue, and downright Murder a great Duty.

But if Men will give up themselves to be swayed by self-Love and self-Conceit,
to be governed by any base or corrupt Interest, to be blinded by Prejudice, and
intoxicated by Pride, to be transported and hurried away by violent and furious
Passions; no wonder if they mistake, the Nature; and confound the Differences
of things, in the plainest and most palpable cases; no wonder if God give up
Persons of such corrupt minds to strong delusions, to believe lies. It ought
not to be strange to us, if such Men bring their Understandings to their Wills
and Interests, and bend their Judgments to their Prejudices, make them to stoop
to their Pride, and blindly to follow their Passions, which way soever they
lead them; for God usually leaves such persons to themselves, as run away from
him, and is not concerned to secure those from splitting upon the most
dangerous Rocks, who will stear their Course by no Compass, but commit
themselves to the wind and tide of their own Lusts and Passions.

In these Cases Men may take the wrong Way; and yet believe themselves to be in
the right: they may oppose the Truth, and persecute the Professors of it, and
be guilty of the blackest Crimes, and the most horrid Impieties, Malice and
Hatred, Blasphemy and Murder; and yet all the while be verily persuaded, that
they are serving God, and Sacrificing to him.

Of this we have a plain, and full instance, in the Scribes and Pharisees, the
chief Priests and Rulers among the Jews, who because they sought the Honor of
Men, and not that which was from God, and loved the Praise of Men, more than
the Praise of God; because they were prejudiced against the Meanness of our
Savior's Birth and Condition, and had upon false Grounds (though as they thought
upon the Infallibility of Tradition, and of Scripture interpreted by Tradition)
entertained quite other Notion of the Messiah, from what he really was to be;
because they were proud, and thought them selves too wise to learn of him; and
because his Doctrine of Humility, and Self-denial, did thwart their Interest,
and bring down their Authority and Credit among the People; therefore they set
themselves against him with all their Might, opposing his Doctrine, and
blasting his Reputation, and persecuting him to the Death; and all this while
did bear up themselves with a conceit of the Antiquity and Privileges of their
Church, and their profound Knowledge in the Law of God, and a great External
show of Piety and Devotion, and an arrogant Pretense and Usurpation of being
the only Church and People of God in the World: And by virtue of these
Advantages, they thought they might do any thing; and that whosoever opposed
the Authority of so ancient and good a Church, must needs be very bad Men, and
deserve to be proceeded against in the severest manner. As if any pretense of
Piety could give a Privilege to do wickedly, and by how much the Wiser and
Holier any Man took himself to be, he might do so much the worse things.

There is another remarkable Instance of this in St. Paul, who out of a blind
and furious Zeal, for the Traditions of his Fathers, Persecuted the true Church
of God, by Imprisonment and Death, and all manner of Cruelties; and all this
while he verily thought that he was in the right, and that he ought to do all
these things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. And if God had not in a
miraculous manner checked him in his course, and changed his Mind, he would have
spent his whole life in that course of Persecution and Cruelty, and would (with
Pope Paul the IV. upon his Deathbed) have recommended the Inquisition (or if
he could have thought of any thing more severe) to the chief Priests and Rulers
of the Jewish Church.

I will not trouble you with nearer Instances; though the Jewish Church is not
the only Church in the World, that has countenanced the Destruction and
Extirpation of those who differed from them, as a piece of very acceptable
Service to God, and meritorious of the Pardon of their Sins.

5. I observe that such Actions as these are never the less horribly Wicked and
Impious, notwithstanding the good Mind with which, and the good End for which
they are done. The Jews were not excused from the guilt of Persecution and
Murder, for all they thought they did well, in killing the Disciples of our
Lord.

For to make an Action good and acceptable to God, the goodness of all Causes,
and of all Circumstances, must concur; and any one defect in any of these, does
vitiate the whole Action, and spoil the goodness of it. We must do it with a
good Mind, being verily persuaded that what we do is good and acceptable to
God; in which sense St. Paul says, that whatever is not of Faith is Sin; and
we must do it for a good End, for the Honor of God, and the Service of
Religion, and the Benefit and Edification of Men. But there is one thing
wanting yet, which is often forgotten, but is mainly considerable, viz. what we
do with a Good Mind, and to a Good End, must be Good and Lawful in it self,
commanded or allowed, or at least not forbidden by God: If it be; what good
Circumstances soever may belong to the Action, the whole Action is stark
naught; because the very Matter and Substance of it is Evil, and Unlawful, and
Damnable, though done for never so good an End. So St. Paul tells us, that they
who said they might do evil, that good might come, their damnation was just. He
tells us indeed, that some would have charged this Doctrine upon the
Christians, and particularly upon himself; but he rejects it, with the greatest
detestation; and (which is not unworthy of our observation) in his Epistle to
the Roman Church; as if the Spirit of God, to whom all Times are present, had
particularly directed him to give this Caution to that Church, that in future
Ages they might be warned against so Pernicious a Principle, and all wicked
Practices that are consequent upon it.

And we find that St. Paul, after his Conversion, did think it no sufficient
Plea and Excuse for himself, and his Persecution of the Christian Profession,
that what he did was out of Zeal for God and his true Religion, as he was
verily persuaded; but, notwithstanding that, acknowledged himself a Murderer,
and one of the greatest Sinners; for which, without the great Mercy of God, he
had perished everlastingly.

6. And lastly, I observe that the Corruption of the best things is the worst.
Religion is certainly the highest Accomplishment and Perfection of Humane
Nature; and Zeal for God and his Truth an excellent Quality, and highly
acceptable to God: and yet nothing is more barbarous, and spurs Men on to more
horrid Impieties, than a blind zeal for God, and false and mistaken Principles
in the matter of Religion.

Our Savior compares the Christian Religion, and the Ministers and Professors
of it, to Salt and Light, The most useful and delightful things in the World.
Religion enlightens the minds of Men, and directs them in the way, wherein we
should go; it seasons the Spirits and Manners of Men, and preserves them from
being Putrified and Corrupted: but if the Salt lose its savor, if that which
should season other things, be tainted it self; it is thenceforth the most
insipid and offensive thing in the World, good for nothing, but to be cast upon
the Dunghill: if the light that is in us be darkness; how great is that darkness?

Mistakes and false Principles are no where so pernicious, and of such
mischievous Consequence, as in Religion. A blind and misguided Zeal in Religion
is enough to spoil the best Nature and Disposition in the World. St. Paul (for
ought appears) was of himself of a very kind and compassionate Nature; and yet
what a Fury did his mistaken Zeal make him! It is hardly credible how madly he
laid about him, but that he himself gives us the account of it, Acts 26.9, 10,
11. I verily thought with my self (says he) that I ought to do many things,
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth; which thing I also did in Jerusalem,
and many of the Saints I shut up in Prison, having received authority from the
Chief Priests. And when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them;
and I punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and
being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them, even to strange Cities.

I might descend lower, and give Instances both of former and later times, of
Emperors and Princes, both Heathen and Christian, that of themselves were mild
and gentle; and yet through a mistaken Zeal, and the instigation of their Chief
Priests, have been carried to Cruel and Bloody things. And indeed nothing gives
so keen an edg, even to the mildest Tempers, as an erroneous and wild zeal for
God and Religion; it is like Quicksilver in the back of a Sword, that is not
very sharp of it self, which gives a mighty force and weight to its blow, and
makes it to cut terribly.

And it is very sad to consider, that the zealous Prosecution of Mistakes in
Religion, has produced sadder and more barbarous Effects in the World, and
more frequently, than the ordinary Corruptions and Degeneracy of Natural light
is apt to do; as the decay of the richest and most generous Wines makes the
sowerest Vinegar; so that the Pasquil or Libel against Pope Urban the VIII.
upon occasion of his taking off the Brazen Roof of the Old Capitol (which had
held out so many Ages, and that notwithstanding Rome had been so often sacked by
Barbarous Nations) and his selling it to enrich his Family [ quod non fecerant
Barbari, fecerunt Barberini] may, with changing the Name and Occasion, be
applied to a great many others; that they have been guilty of those Cruelties
against Christians, upon account of difference in Religion, which the most
Barbarous Nations never exorcised upon one another.

I have done with the Observations and the Text; and shall I now need to make
any Application of what has been said, to the Occasion of this day? The thing
applys it self; since the horrid Design of this Day was undertaken and carried
on upon the same Pretenses and Principles, upon which the Jews persecuted the
Disciples of our Lord, and much in the same Method; for they first thundered
out an Excommunication against them, and then took it for granted, that it
would be an acceptable Sacrifice to God, to destroy them.

I will not go about to aggravate the Comspiracy of this Day, it is past my
skill; nor will I extend the blame and guilt of it any farther than the plain
Evidence and Reason of the thing does enforce. It is a thing so scandalous to
Humane Nature, and so great a Reflection upon any Church and Religion, to be
accessory to the contriving or countenancing of any such Design, that I am very
well contented, that it should be confined to as narrow a compass as may be,
and none esteemed guilty of it, but those that were openly in it, or have since
endeavored to excuse it. All that we desire of others, is, that they would
declare their hearty detestation of such abominable Practices, and be as good
as their word; and that they would not account it a service and sacrifice to
God, to destroy all that cannot be of their Mind.

So that the Inference from all this Discourse, in short, shall be this, that
Men should take great care to inform their Consciences aright, and to govern
them by the plain Rules of Good and Evil, the Law of God written upon our
hearts, and revealed in his Word, which forbids such Practices as I have been
speaking of, as clearly as the Sun shines at Noonday; and that we would always
be afraid to do a bad thing, though gilded over with never so glorious Colors,
and specious Pretenses of zeal for God and his Truth. For a Man may do a thing
with an honest Mind, and for a religious End, and be Commissioned and
Countenanced (as St. Paul was) by them who take themselves to be the only true
Church in the World; and yet at last prove to have been all the while a
Blasphemer, and a Murderer, and the greatest of Sinners; for none of these
Pretenses are sufficient to warrant and sanctify a wicked action: Before this
can be done, the immutable nature of Good and Evil must be changed.

I will conclude all with that gentle Reproof of our Blessed Savior to his
Disciples, when their Zeal for him had transported them to make that cruel
Request to him, that he would (as Elias had done upon a like occasion) call for
fire from heaven to destroy the Samaritans: Ye know not what manner of Spirit
ye are of; for the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them;
hereby declaring to us the true Spirit and ^^^per of Christianity, and that
they (...) contrary to it, are ignorant (...) nature of the Christian Religion:
Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of man came not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

SERMON XV. The Duty and Reason of Praying for Governors.
Preached on the 29 of May. 1693.
1 TIMOTHY II. 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings,
and for all that are in authority; that we way lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty.


I Need not tell any here, that this Day is appointed by Authority for an
Anniversary Solemnity, in a grateful Commemoration of the great Mercy of God to
these Nations, VOL. II.
in putting an end to the intestine Wars and Confusions of many Years, in
restoring to us our own ancient Government and Laws, and in bringing home, as
upon this Day, the rightful Heir of these Kingdoms, to the Crown and Throne of
his Fathers: And though the Glory of this Day has been not a little sullied and
obscured by many things which have happened since that Time, fitter now to be
buried in Silence and Oblivion, than to be mentioned and raked up; yet it has
pleased God, in scattering those black Clouds, which not long since hung over
us, to restore this Day to its first Luster and brightness; so that we may now
with great joy look back upon it, as designed by the wise Providence of God, to
make way for the Happiness which we now enjoy under their present Majesty's, by
whom, under God, we have been delivered from that terrible and imminent Danger
which threatened our Religion and Laws, and the very Constitution it self of our
ancient Government. And to this Occasion, no kind of Argument can be more
proper and suitable, Sermon. XV.
than that which the Text affords to our Consideration, in this Injunction of
St. Paul to Timothy, to take care that in the Public Worship of God,
Supplications and Thanksgivings be put up to God, for Kings, and all that are
in authority. I exhort therefore, etc.

In which Words there are Four things considerable.

First, The Duty here enjoined, which is Prayer; expressed to us in several
Words, which seem to denote the several kinds or parts of Prayer; I exhort
therefore, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in authority, etc. Some of
these words are of a very near signification; and yet there seems some
difference betwixt them, most probably this:

1. By (...), which we render Supplications, is probably meant that part or
kind of Prayer, wherein we supplicate God for the Pardon of our Sins, and for
the averting and removing of Evils, whether Temporal or Spiritual, from our
selves or others.

2. By (...), which we render Prayers, seems to be meant Petitions for
Blessings and good things from God; and these are most properly called Prayers.

3. By (...), seems to be particularly meant Pleadings and Intercessions on the
behalf of others.

4. By (...), is certainly intended Praises and Thanksgivings to God, for his
Blessings and Goodness to our selves and others. This seems to be the
difference between them, which whether it be exactly so or not, is not very
material, since these are unquestionably the several kinds or parts of Prayer.
And these several sorts of Prayer, St. Chrysostom, in his Comment upon this
Text, tells us were Publicly used in his Time, in the daily Service of the
Church; this (says he) all Communicants do know is done every day, Morning and
Evening; how that we pray for all the World, for Kings, and for all that are in
authority.

Secondly, For whom we are to pray: In general, for all men. Our Prayers are
one of the greatest and best Expressions of our Charity, and therefore ought to
be as large and extensive as our Charity is. We are bound in common Charity to
love all Men, and to wish well to them; but our bare Wishes signify nothing,
unless we direct them to God, who is able to confer upon them the Blessings and
Good Things which we wish to them.

And this is a Charity which God has put into every Man's Power, and which the
poorest Man in the World, as well as the richest, is capable of exercising at
all times, and upon all occasions: For the Ear of God if open to the Prayers of
the poor, as well as of the rich, and they are every whit as prevalent with
him; nay, the Scripture seems to say, that God has a more particular regard to
the Prayers of the poor. So that we may be liberal and bountiful in our Prayers
to those, to whom we are able to give nothing else; and when our Hands cannot
reach to relieve them, we may pour out our Hearts to God for them; we may pray
for their Spiritual and Temporal good, and we may praise God for the good which
befalls them, though it was out of our power to be any ways instrumental to
procure it for them.

Thirdly, For whom we are more especially, and in the first place, to pray;
viz. for those who have the greatest and most public influence of all others,
upon the peace and happiness of Mankind, for Kings, and for all that are in
authority; that is, for the Supreme Magistrate, and for all inferior
Magistrates, who derive their Power and Authority from the Supreme.

Government is necessary to the welfare of Mankind; because it is the great
Band of Humane Society, the Guard of its Peace, and the Security of every Man's
Person and Property; and therefore we are concerned as much as is possible,
both to pray for our Governors, and to bless God for them; because without
them we should be in a most wretched Condition. Mankind would be unavoidably
miserable without Government; Humane Society would presently disband, and all
things would run into confusion. It is a remarkable Saying of one of the Jewish
Masters, Pray for the happiness of the Kingdom or Government; for if it were
not for the fear of that, Men would devour one another alive. And Josephus
tells us, that when the Jews were made subject to the Romans (though it was by
Conquest) twice a day they offered up Sacrifices for the life and safety of the
Emperor. And this was very agreeable to what God had commanded that People by
his Prophet, in a much like case, when the Jews were Conquered by the King of
Babylon, and carried away Captives, Jer. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City
whither I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it; for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace. And surely the Reason is
much stronger, why we should pray for our natural Princes and Governors. I
come now to the

Fourth and Last Thing Considered in the Text, and which I principally design
to speak to, namely, the Reason or Argument which the Apostle uses, to engage
us to pray for our Princes, and for all that are in Authority, that we may live
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. The manifold Benefits
and Advantages which redound to us from our Governors, is a sufficient Argument
why we should pray to God for them, and Praise him likewise for so great a
Blessing, and that in the first place; I exhort therefore, first of all (says
the Apostle,) etc. Now the Apostle here in the Text expresses Two great
Advantages of Government, which upon the Matter do comprehend all the rest.

1. That by Government we are Secured in our Civil Rights and Interests, in the
quiet and peaceable Possession of what is our own. 2. That we may thereby be
protected in the free Practice and Exercise of Religion and Virtue.
These are the Two greatest and most desirable Things to Man; and neither of
these can be had without Government. I shall briefly consider these Two
particulars, and then endeavor to show, what Obligation the Consideration of
them lays upon us, both to Pray to God in the behalf of our Princes and
Governors, and likewise to Praise God for them: And then I shall conclude all
with a brief Application of this whole Discourse to the Solemn Occasion of this
Day.

First, I shall begin with the Benefits and Advantages of Government mentioned
in the Text, namely, these Two.

1. That by it we are secured in our Civil Rights and Interests, in the quiet
and peaceable Possession of what is our own.

Without Government there could be no such thing as Property in any thing
beyond our own Persons; for nothing but Law can make Property, and Laws are the
Effect of Government and Authority: Nay, without Government, we have no
security of our Persons and Lives, much less of any thing that belongs to us,
and is at present in our Possession. Were we not protected by Laws (which are
the Effect of Government) we could have no safety, no quiet enjoyment of any
thing; but every Man must be perpetually upon his guard against all the World,
and exposed to continual Violence and Injuries from those, who are too many,
and too strong for him; so that all our quiet and security from Fear and
Danger, from the Fraud and Oppression of those who are more Crafty and Powerful
than our selves, from endless Confusions and Distractions, and from a State of
perpetual Feud and War with all Mankind, is entirely due and owing to Civil
Government.

And this alone is so unspeakable a Benefit, that without it, Men, of all
Creatures, would be the most Miserable; because all that Wit and Sagacity, all
that Cunning and Contrivance, which Mankind has above the Bruit Creatures,
would but enable them to do so much the more Mischief to one another, and to
devise and find out more Powerful and Effectual Means and Instruments to harm
and destroy one another.

In short, that we live, and that we live well, in any tolerable Condition
either of Safety or Plenty, and that we are able to call any thing our own for
one Day, or for one Hour; that we are not in perpetual Terror and Apprehension
of mortal Dangers, and that we are at any time free from the Invasion of what
we at present possess, by the fraud and force of others, is solely the Effect
of this great Blessing, and Divine Appointment of Government, to preserve the
peace of Humane Society, and by wise and wholesome Laws, to tie up Men's Hands
from mutual Injuries and Violence. Upon this all the Comfort and all the
Security of Humane Laws does depend. From hence it comes to pass, that (as the
Scripture expresses it) We may sit down every man under his own Vine, and
under his own Fig Tree, and that there shall be none to make us afraid. So that
if Security is necessary to the Comfort and Happiness of Mankind; then
Government is so too: For without this, the Societies of Men would presently
dissolve and fall in pieces, and all things would run into Confusion and
Disorder.

2. Another great Benefit which may reasonably be expected from Government
(though it does always so happen) is, that Men are protected by it, in the free
Exercise and Practice of Religion and Virtue. Therefore we should pray for
Kings, and for all that are in authority, (says the Apostle) that we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; that is, in the
Practice of Piety and Devotion toward God; of Sobriety and Temperance in
regard to our selves; and of Justice and Charity toward all Men.

It Is true indeed, (and so the Apostles and first Christians found it by
experience) that the Edg and Authority of Laws may be, and sometimes is turned
upon the true Religion, and the sincere Professors of it: But even then, though
Good Men may receive great harms and injuries from Persecuting Princes and
Governors; (as the Primitive Christians did from several of the Roman Emperors)
yet then it so happens, that Good Men have some considerable Benefit and
Protection from the Civil Government and Laws, being for the most part
preserved from the fury and rage of the Multitude; so that though particular
Persons undergo the Trial of Cruel Sufferings, yet much greater Numbers do
escape and are preserved.

And which is very considerable in this Matter, against several of the main and
essential Parts of Religion, there never was any Humane Laws made; as against
the inward Love, Honor, and Reverence of Almighty God, and the Worshipping him
in our Hearts, and in Secret; of this Part of Religion, Humane Laws can take no
cognizance: Nay, farther yet, against Humility and Meekness, against Modesty
and Patience, against Temperance and Chastity, against Peaceableness and
obedience to Government, against Justice and Gratitude, against Charity and
Forgiveness of Injuries, against these and such like Virtues, the Apostle has
told us, there is no Law. Against the Practice of these (without some of which
Government could not possibly subsist) no Perfection was ever raised, no not by
the worst of Governors: On the contrary, in the Practice of these Virtues, Good
Men have been in all Ages and Times protected by Law.

It Is true indeed, that Good Men have many times been grievously Perfected by
the Civil Government and Authority, for the external Profession of revealed
Religion; which was the case of the Christians at that Time, when the Apostle
commanded them to pray for Kings, and for all that were in Authority; that
under their protection, they might lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty. St. Paul knew very well, when he gave this injunction to
them, that Supplications and prayers be made for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that the Powers of the World did not at that Time favor
Christianity: But he knew likewise, that Government was necessary to the
Happiness of Mankind, and that Christians, even in that State of Perfection,
did enjoy many considerable Benefits and Advantages by it, so that they were
not perpetually exposed to popular Rage and Cruelty, and the Violence of Wicked
and Unreasonable Men; Which would not only have hindered the progress of
Christianity, but would in a short time have endangered the extinguishing of
it: Besides that by the favor and protection of Government, the Christians had
many considerable Intervals of Peace and Ease, which gave Christianity a
breathing time, and opportunity to recover it self; and though the Secular
Authority did for a long time discountenance Christianity, and keep it under
Hatches; that was but an accidental effect and abuse of Government, and
Obedience was still due, and Prayers for it so much the more necessary, yea and
Thanksgivings to God for it very reasonable, upon account of the common
Benefits and Advantages of it to Humane Society.

Besides that Christians did hope and believe, that the Civil Government might
in time be gained, to give its countenance and assistance to Christianity, and
that Kings and Princes might become nursing Fathers to the Church, as was
expressly foretold by the Prophets, and afterward in God's due time was
remarkably accomplished. In the mean time, Christians were patiently to Obey and
Suffer in expectation of those Glorious Rewards in another World, which were
promised to their Faith and Patience; and to pray for the Powers that
Persecuted them, that they also might be brought to the acknowledgment of the
Truth, and might use that Power which God had committed to them, for the
protection of Truth and Innocence, and for the Continuance and Support of the
true Religion; which, blessed be God, was afterward the Case of Christianity,
for several Ages. I proceed in the

Second Place, to show what Obligation the Consideration of the mighty Benefits
and Advantages of Government lays upon us, both to pray to God on the behalf of
Princes and Governors, and likewise to praise God for them.

Because in their Welfare and Prosperity the Public Peace and Happiness does
chiefly consist, and in the Public Good consists the Good of particular
Persons; and above all, the Piety and Goodness of Princes and Magistrates
(especially those who are in highest Place of Authority) have a general good
influence upon the Manners of Men, both for the discountenancing of Wickedness
and Vice, and for the encouragement of Religion and Virtue, which are the main
Pillars and Foundation of public Peace and Prosperity. A King sitting in the
Throne of Judgment, (says Solomon, Prove. 20.8.) scatters away all evil with
his eyes. The Pattern of a Religious and good Prince is a living Law to his
Subjects, and more than the Example of Ten thousand others, to Mould and
Fashion the Manners of the People to a Conformity to it.

Besides that there is (as one expresses) a kind of Moral Connection and
Communication of Evil and of Guilt betwixt Princes and People, so that they are
many times mutually Rewarded for the Virtues and good Actions, and Punished for
the Sins and Faults of one another. Of which proceedings of the Divine Justice
toward the People of Israel, there are many remarkable instances in Scripture,
where God Rewarded the Piety of Good Princes, with great Blessings upon their
People, and Punished the Personal Faults of their Kings with public Judgments
upon the whole Nation. So that in Truth, it is the greatest Kindness and
Charity to our selves, to pray for our Princes and Governors; because our
welfare is involved in theirs, and we suffer not only in all the Misfortunes
and Calamities which befall them, but many times upon account of their Personal
Faults and Miscarriages. Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi, the
Extravagances of Princes are punished in the Misfortunes of their Subjects. Thus
David, (otherwise a very good King,) sinned in Numbering the People, and the
Plague fell upon them; he was Punished in the Calamity of his People. And this
was in no wise unjust, because there are always Sins enough in any Nation to
deserve Punishment, and God may take what occasion he pleases, to send his
Judgments upon them that deserve them; for Princes and People make but one
Civil and Political Body, and what part of it soever is punished, the other
suffers. And this is the true Ground and Reason of the Communication of
Punishments betwixt Princes and People.

Another Consideration which should engage us to pray for those that are in
authority, is, that we reap the great Benefit of their Care, and Pains, and
Vigilance for us, under their shadow we are safe. Our Innocence and our Rights
are protected by their Power and Laws, and by the just Punishments which they
inflict upon evildoers, and upon those who go about to violate our Rights in
any kind; so that we ought to pray and to praise God for them, as our great
Benefactors, and the chief Instruments of our Security and Welfare; and
therefore not only in Duty, but in Justice and Gratitude, we are bound to wish
all good to them, and to intercede with God for them, for the Peace and
Prosperity of their Government, and to bless God on their behalf: Yea, we ought
to do this out of love to our selves; because their good and prosperity is
ours, their Goodness and Righteousness, their Personal Piety and Virtues extend
to us, and have a Mighty Influence upon us, to excite and encourage us to
follow their good Example, and to go and do likewise.

And we ought likewise to do this out of Charity and Compassion to our Princes
and Governors, whose Condition is in truth rather to be pityed than envied,
and whose high Place and Dignity is much more to be dreaded than desired by a
wise Man, considering how heavy a Burden they sustain, what Dangers they are
continually exposed to, what Cares and Troubles and Censures they daily
undergo, for our Safety and Ease. So that whatever Ambitious and Inconsiderate
Men may think, wise Men do certainly know and find by experience, that to
discharge with care and faithfulness all the Parts of a good Governor, is a
very difficult and troublesome Province. Inferior Magistrates find care and
trouble enough, in that small share and part of it which they sustain; and if
so, then certainly the Care and Concernment of the whole, must needs be a heavy
Burden indeed; and what Abilities are sufficient for it, what Shoulders are
strong enough to stand under it?

And as upon this account they have the greatest need of our Prayers, for God's
Direction and Assistance in the discharge of their high Office, so likewise for
his powerful Grace to preserve them from Sin and Evil, in the midst of those
manifold Temptations to which they are continually exposed, in appearance much
beyond other Men, from the height of their Condition, and the extent of their
Power, which are strong Temptations to weak Minds, to Pride and Insolency, to
Injustice and Oppression; from the abundance of all things, which Minister to
Luxury and Excess; and from the officious fertility of Parasites and
Flatterers, who sooth them in their Faults, and humor them in their Passions,
and comply with their Corrupt and Vicious Inclinations, and are always ready at
hand, and forward Instruments to execute their Commands, and to serve their
Lusts and Vices.

And as Princes greatly need our Prayers upon these Accounts; so it is just
Matter of Praise and Thankfulness to God, when a Nation has wise, just, and
good Princes, who lay to heart the Interests of their People, and endeavor by
all the wise Methods and honest Arts of Government, effectually to procure it;
who by their Authority and due Execution of the Law, do discountenance, and, as
much as in them lies, restrain Wickedness and Vice; and by their own Example
encourage Virtue and Piety in their Subjects; and thereby invite, and even
provoke them to the like Practices: The life of a good Prince is a kind of
Public Censure of ill Manners, and reproof of vicious Practices. And I do not
know whether there be a more delightful Sight on this side Heaven, than to see
those who are in Eminent Place and Power, even if they might do whatever they
would, yet continually chufing to do what they ought; as if their Power were so
far from being a Temptation to them to do Evil, that on the contrary, the
Consideration of it is one of the best and strongest Arguments to restrain them
from it.

Weak Minds are apt to measure their Liberty by their Power, and to think that
the higher and greater they are, so much the greater Privilege they have to be
more extravagantly bad than others: but if the Matter be really considered, the
Argument runs the other way; and he that Reasons wisely, will certainly
conclude with Tully, in maxima quaque fortuna minimum licere, that they who are
in the highest Station, and greatest Power, have of all others the least
liberty to do what they list. Their Power, supposing it never so uncontrollable
and unaccountable, would be so far from being in Reason a Temptation to them to
do what they ought not, that in truth it would set them above the Temptation of
doing an ill thing; because they would stand in awe of no body, and there would
be nothing that could hinder them from doing what is best, if they had a mind
to it; and every one ought to have such a mind: And nothing can be more
mis-becoming, and more directly contrary to the Nature of their Office, and the
Power wherewith they are entrusted, than to give an Example of breaking those
Laws, which they are to see put in Execution.

God himself, because he has all Power, is therefore all Goodness, and is
therefore holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works; according to
the reasoning of the Author of the Book of Wisdom, who Argues thus with God, It
is not (says he) agreeable with thy Power to condemn him that has not deserved
to be punished; that is, it is not agreeable with infinite Power, to do any
thing that is unjust; For thy Power (says he to God,) is the beginning of
righteousness, and because thou art the Lord of all, it makes thee to be
gracious unto all. Infinite Power is the Foundation and Principle of Goodness
and Righteousness, and an All-powerful Being is good and Righteous, not only
from Choice, but from a Necessity of Nature.

And this is the true Ground and Reason of that Saying of St. James, that God
cannot be tempted with Evil, because his infinite Power sets him above all
Temptation to it: For what Reason can be imagined, why he that has all Power
should have any inclination to be otherwise than good? What can tempt him
thereto? Since he that has all Power can neither have any hopes of being
greater than he is, nor any fear of becoming less: And all Temptation is
founded either in hope or fear, and where neither of these can have any place,
there can be no occasion, no possible Motive or Temptation to Evil; for to be
Evil, and to do Evil, is always an Effect of weakness and want of Power.

The sum of what I have said upon this Argument, and the design indeed of it,
is to show, that the greater Power and Authority any one has, the less Liberty
he has to do any thing that is bad. And I have been the larger upon this,
because I would fain imprint upon the Minds of Persons, whom the Providence of
God has invested with great Power and Authority, that as they have great
opportunities of doing more good than others, so they have greater Reason, and
more Advantages of doing it, and are more inexcusable if they do any thing that
is bad; not only because their Actions are of a more public influence and
observation; but because their Temptations to Evil, how great soever they may
seem to be, are in truth and reality much less than other Men's. Happy are those
Princes, that wisely consider this, and make their Power and Authority over
others, an Argument to be so much better themselves, and to do so much more
good to others; and because they are less subject to the coercive Power of Law,
do for that Reason think themselves so much the more obliged to be a Law to
themselves. Blessed be God for the Happiness which we enjoy in this respect;
and let us earnestly beseech him, that he would be pleased to bestow such a
plentiful measure of his Grace and Holy Spirit, on our most Gracious King and
Queen, as may Effectually both engage and enable them to use their Power to the
best purposes for the Public good.

And thus I have briefly gone over, and explained to you, the several
Particulars in the Text; the duty of Prayer here enjoined; for whom we are to
pray, in general for all Men; and for whom more especially, and in the first
place; for Kings, and all that are in authority; and upon what Considerations
we are to pray for them, and to Praise God in their behalf; because of the
great Benefits we receive by them; and because both in respect of the Dangers
and Difficulties of their Condition, they stand in need of our Prayers above
other Men; besides that in praying for their Welfare and Prosperity, we pray
for our own Peace and Happiness.

And now to apply this to our selves, and to the Occasion of this Day. By all
that has been said, we cannot but be convinced, what Cause we have to bless
God for that happy Government which we live under, that excellent Constitution,
under the gentle Influences whereof we enjoy more Liberty, more Plenty, and
more Security from all manner of Injury and Oppression, than any Nation this
Day on the Face of the Earth. Therefore with what Thankfulness should we this
Day commemorate the happy Restoration of this Government to us, after the
miserable Distractions and Confusions of twenty Years, by the Restoration and
Return of our banished Sovereign, in so peaceable, and yet so wonderful a
Manner, that a Remembrance of it, even at this Distance, is almost still Matter
of Amazement to us!

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who alone does wondrous Things.

And with our joyful Praises, let us join our most devout and fervent Prayers
to Almighty God, for the King's and Queen's Majesty's, and for all that are in
Authority. And I may truly say, that there was hardly ever greater Reason and
Occasion for it, both from our Distractions at Home, and our Dangers from
abroad; never was there greater Need of our earnest Supplications and Prayers,
than at this Time, when our Armies and Fleets are in Motion, and when God seems
already to have given us some Earnest of good Success; blessed be his great and
glorious Name.

We have indeed a great Army, and a more powerful Fleet, than ever this Nation
sent forth; but unless God be on our Side, and favor our Cause, in vain are
all our Preparations; for whenever his Providence is pleased to interpose, by
strength shall no Man prevail. Have we not Reason then to cry mightily unto
God, when the only Strength of the Nation is at Stake, when our Sins and
Provocations are so many and great, and there lies so heavy a poal of Guilt
upon us? When the person of his Sacred Majesty is exposed to so much Hazard,
not only in the high Places of the Field, but from the restless Attempts of the
malicious and implacable Enemies of our Peace and Religion, that he would be
graciously pleased to go forth with our Armies and Fleets, and not remember our
Iniquities against us, but save us for his Mercies sake?

We are too apt to murmur and complain of Miscariages, and the ill management
of Affairs; but surely the best thing we can do, and that which best becomes
us, is to look forward, and to turn our Censures of our Governors and their
Actions, into humble Supplications to God in their behalf, and in behalf of the
whole Nation; that he would be pleased to turn us every one from the Evil of
our Ways, that he may return to us, and have mercy on us, that so Iniquity may
not be our Ruin; that he may rejoice over us to do us good, and may at last
think Thoughts of Peace toward us, Thoughts of Good and not of Evil, to give
us an expected End of our Troubles.

Let us then betake our selves to the proper Work of this Day, hearty Prayers
and Thanksgivings to Almighty God, for the King and Queen, and for all that are
in Authority; that as he has been pleased, by a wonderful Providence, to
rescue us from the imminent danger we were in, and from all our fears, by the
happy Advancement of their Majesty's to the Throne of these Kingdoms; so he
would of his infinite goodness still preserve and continue to us this Light of
our Eyes, and Breath of our Nostrils, Princes of that great Clemency and
Goodness, which render them the true Representatives of God upon Earth, and the
most Gracious Governors of Men.

And let us earnestly beseech him, that he would confirm and strengthen them in
all goodness, and make them wise as Angels of God, to discern betwixt Good and
Evil, that they may know how to go in and out before this great People; that be
would give them the united affections of their People, and a heart to study and
seek their good all the days of their lives.

And Finally, That he would be pleased to continue so great a Blessing to us,
and to grant them a long and Prosperous Reign over us; and that their Posterity
in this Royal Family may endure for ever, and their Throne as the Days of
Heaven; that under them the People of these Nations, we and the Generations to
come, may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty; for his
Mercies sake in Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power,
now and for ever. Amen.

SERMON XVI. The Love of God to Men, in the Incarnation of Christ.
Preached in the Chapel of Lambeth-House, ON Christmas Day, 1691.
1 JOHN IV. 9. In this was manifested the love of Go toward us, because that
God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.


THESE Words contain a clear and evident Demonstration of the Love of God to
us; In this was manifested the Love of God toward us; VOL. II.
that is, by this it plainly appears, that God had a mighty Love for us, That
he sent his only-begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him.
In which we may consider this Threefold Evidence of God's Love to Mankind.

I. That he should be pleased to take our Case into Consideration, and to
concern himself for our Happiness. II. That he should design so great a Benefit
to us, which is here expressed by Life; that we might live through him. III. That
he was pleased to use such a Means for the obtaining and procuring of this
Benefit for us; he sent his only-begotten Son into the World, that we might
live through him. Each of these singly is a great Evidence of God's Love to us;
much more all of them together.
I. It is a great Evidence of the Love of God to Mankind, that he was pleased
to take our Case into Consideration, Sermon. XVI.
and to concern himself for our Happiness. Nothing does more commend an Act of
Kindness, than if there be great Condescension in it. We use to value a small
Favor, if it be done to us by one that is far above us, more than a far
greater, done to us by a mean and inconsiderable Person. This made David to
break out into such Admiration, when he considered the ordinary Providence of
God toward Mankind, Lord, what is Man, that thou art mindful of him! or the
Son of Man, that thou should consider him! This is a wonderful Condescension
indeed, for God to be mindful of Man.

At the best we are but his Creatures, and upon that very Account at an
infinite Distance from him; so that were not he infinitely Good, he would not
be concerned for us, who are so infinitely beneath the Consideration of his
Love and Pity. Neither are we of the highest Rank of Creatures; we are much
below the Angels, as to the Excellency and Perfection of our Beings; so that if
God had not had a peculiar Pity and Regard to the Sons of Men, he might have
placed his Affection and Care, upon a much nobler Order of Creatures than we
are, and so much the more miserable, because they fell from a higher Step of
Happiness, I mean the lost Angels; but yet for Reasons best known to his
Infinite Wisdom, God past by them, and was pleased to consider us. This the
Apostle to the Hebrews takes notice of, as an Argument of God's peculiar and
extraordinary Love to Mankind, that he sent his Son, not to take upon him the
Nature of Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham.

Now that he, who is so far above us, and, after that we by wilful
Transgression had lost our selves, had no Obligation to take Care of us, but
what his own Godness laid upon him, that he should concern himself so much for
us, and be so solicitous for our Recovery, this is a great Evidence of his
Kindness and Good Will to us, and cannot be imagined to proceed from any other
Cause.

II. Another Evidence of God's great Love to us, is, that he was pleased to
design so great a Benefit for us. This the Scripture expresses to us by Life;
and it is usual in Scripture to express the best and most desirable things by
Life; because as it is one of the greatest Blessings, so it is the Foundation
of all other Enjoyments: And therefore the Apostle, uses but this one word to
express to us all the Blessings and Benefits of Christ's coming into the World;
God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

And this Expression is very proper to our Case because Life signifies the
reparation of all that which was lost by the Fall of Man. For Man by his
willful Degeneracy and Apostasy from God, is sunk into a State of Sin and
Misery, both which the Scripture is wont to express by Death. In respect of our
Sinful State we are Spiritually Dead; and in respect of the Punishment and
Misery due to us for our Sins, we are Judicially Dead, Dead in Law; for the
wages of Sin is Death. Now God has sent his Son into the World, that in both
these respects we might live through him.

1. We were Spiritually Dead, Dead in Trespasses and Sins, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein in times past ye walked, according to the course of this world.
Every Wicked Man, though in a Natural Sense he be Alive, yet in a Moral Sense he
is Dead. So the Apostle speaking of those who live in sinful Lusts and
Pleasures, says of them, that they are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. What
Corrupt Humors are to the Body, that Sin is to the Soul, their Disease and
their Death. Now God sent his Son to deliver us from this Death, by renewing
our Nature, and mortifying our Lusts; by restoring us to the Life of Grace and
Holiness, and destroying the Body of Sin in us, that henceforth we should not
serve Sin. And that this is a great Argument of the mighty Love of God to us,
the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ. It is an Argument of the Riches of God's Mercy, and of
his great Love to us, to recover us out of this sad and deplorable Case. It is
a kindness infinitely greater, than to redeem us from the most wretched
Slavery, or to rescue us from the most dreadful and cruel Temporal Death; and
yet we should value this as a Favor and Benefit, that could never be
sufficiently acknowledged: But God has sent his Son to deliver us from a worse
Bondage, and a more dreadful kind of Death; so that well might the Apostle
ascribe this great Deliverance of Mankind from the slavery of our Lusts, and
the Death of Sin, to the boundless Mercy and Love of God to us. God who is rich
in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved us, has quickened us together
with Christ, even when we were dead in Sins; when our Case was as desperate as
could well be imagined; then was God pleased to undertake this great Cure, and
to provide such a Remedy, as cannot fail to be effectual for our Recovery, if
we will but make use of it.

2. We were likewise judicially Dead, Dead in Law, being Condemned by the just
Sentence of it. So soon as ever we sinned, Eternal Death was by the Sentence of
God's Law become our due Portion and Reward; and this being our Case, God in
tender Commiseration and Pity to Mankind, was pleased to send his Son into the
World, to inter pose between the Justice of God and the Demerits of Men; and by
reversing the Sentence that was gone out against us, and procuring a Pardon for
us, to rescue us from the Misery of Eternal Death; and not only so, but upon
the condition of Faith and Repentance, of Obedience and a Holy Life, to bestow
Eternal Life upon us; and by this means to restore us to a better Condition
than that from which we were fallen, and to advance us to a Happiness greater
than that of Innocence.

And was not this great Love, to design and provide so great a Benefit and
Blessing for us, to send his Son Jesus to bless us, in turning away every one
of us from our Iniquities? Our Blessed Savior, who came from the bosom of his
Father, and knew his tender Affection and Compassion to Mankind, speaks of this
as a most wonderful and unparalleled expression of his Love to us, John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son. God so loved the
world, so greatly, so strangely, so beyond our biggest hopes, nay, so contrary
to all reasonable expectation, as to send his only-begotten Son, to seek and to
save the sinful Sons of Men.

If it had only in general been declared to us, that God was about to send his
Son into the World upon some great design, and been left to us to conjecture,
what his Errand and Business should be; how would this have alarmed the guilty
Consciences of sinful Men, and filled them with infinite Jealousies and
Suspicion, with fearful expectations of Wrath and fiery Indignation to consume
them! For considering the great Wickedness and Degeneracy of Mankind, what
could we have thought, but that surely God was sending his Son upon a design of
vengeance to Chastise a Sinful World, to Vindicate the Honor of his despised
Laws, and to revenge the multiplied Affronts which had been offered to the
highest Majesty of Heaven, by his Pitiful and Ungrateful Creatures? Our own
Guilt would have been very apt to have filled us with such Imaginations as
these, that in all likelihood the Son of God was coming to Judgment, to call
the Wicked World to an Account, to proceed against his Father's Rebels, to pass
Sentence upon them, and to Execute the Vengeance which they had deserved. This
we might justly have dreaded; and indeed considering our Case, how ill we have
deserved at God's Hands, and how highly we have provoked him; what other
weighty Matter could we hope for?

But the Goodness of God has strangely outdone our Hopes, and deceived our
Expectation; so it follows in the next Words, God sent not his Son into the
world, to condemn the world, (intimating that this we might justly have
imagined and feared) but upon a quite contrary Design, that through him the
world might be saved. What a surprise of Kindness is here! that instead of
sending his Son to condemn us, he should send him into the world to save us; to
rescue us from the Jaws of Death and of Hell, from that Eternal and Intolerable
Misery which we had incurred and deserved!

And if he had proceeded no farther, this had been wonderful Mercy and
Kindness: But his Love stopped not here, it was not contented to spare us, and
free us from Misery; but was restless till it had found out a way to bring us
to Happiness; for God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son,
not only that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but might have
everlasting life. This is the Second Evidence of God's great Love to us, the
greatness of the Blessing and Benefit which he had designed and provided for
us, that we might live through him; not only be delivered from Spiritual and
Eternal Death; but be made partakers of Eternal Life.

III. The last Evidence of God's great Love to us, which I mentioned, was this,
that God was pleased to use such a Means, for the obtaining and procuring of
this great Blessing and Benefit; he sent his only-begotten Son into the World,
that we might live through him. And this will appear to be great Love indeed,
if we consider these Four things.

1. The Person whom he was pleased to employ upon this Design; he sent his
only-begotten Son. 2. How much he abased him, in Order to the effecting and
accomplishing of this Design, employed in these words, he sent him into the
World. 3. If we consider to whom he was sent, to the World. And, 4. That he did
all this voluntarily and freely, out of his mere Pity and Goodness; not
constrained hereto by any Necessity, not prevailed upon by any Application or
Importunity of ours, nor obliged by any Benefit or Kindness from us.
1. Let us consider the Person whom God was pleased to employ in this Design,
he sent his only-begotten Son; no less Person than his own Son, and no less
dear to him, than his onlybegotten Son.

(1.) No less Person than his own Son; and the Dignity of the Person that was
employed in our behalf, does strangely heighten and set off the Kindness. What
an Endearment is it of the Mercy of our Redemption, that God was pleased to
employ upon this Design no meaner Person than his own Son, his begotten Son; so
he is called in the Text, his Son, in so peculiar a Manner as no Creature is,
or can be; the Creatures below Man are called the Works of God, but never his
Children; the Angels are in Scripture called the Sons of God; and Adam likewise
is called the Son of God, because God made him after his own Image and
Likeness, in Holiness and Righteousness, and in his Dominion and Sovereignty
over the Creatures below him: But this Title of begotten Son of God was never
given to any of the Creatures, Man or Angel; for unto which of the Angels said
he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, as the Apostle
Reasons, Heb. 1.5. He must be a great Person indeed to whom this Title belongs,
of the begotten Son of God; and it must be a mighty Love indeed, which moved
God to employ so great a Person, on the behalf of so pitiful and wretched
Creatures as we are. It had been a mighty Condescension for God to treat with
us at all; but that no less Person than his own Son should be the Ambassador,
is an astonishing Regard of Heaven to poor sinful Dust and Ashes

(2) This Person was as dear to God, as he was great; he was his only-begotten
Son. It had been a great Instance of Abraham's Love and Obedience to God, to
have sacrificed a Son at his Command; but this Circumstance makes it much
greater, that it was his only Son; hereby I know that thou fear God (says
the Angel) since thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. This
is a demonstration that God loved us at a stupendous rate, when he would send
his only-begotten Son into the World for us.

Before this, God had tried several Ways with Mankind, and employed several
Messengers to us; sometimes he sent his Angels, and many times his Servants the
Prophets: But in these last Days he has sent his Son. He had many more
Servants to have employed upon this Message, but he had but one Son; and rather
than Mankind should be ruined and lost, he would send him. Such was the Love of
God toward us, that rather than our Recovery should not be effected, he would
employ in this Work the greatest and dearest Person to him both in Heaven and
Earth, his only begotten Son; in this was the Love of God manifested, that he
sent his only-begotten Son, that we might live through him.

2. Let us consider how much this Clorious and Excellent Person was abased, in
order to the effecting and accomplishing of this Design, which is here expressed
by sending him into the World; and this comprehends his Incarnation, with all
the mean and abasing Circumstances of it. This the Apostle declares fully to
us, Phil. 2.6, 7. though he was in the Form of God, (that is, truly and really
God) yet he made himself of no Reputation, (...), he emptied himself, was
contented to be strangely lessened and diminished, and took upon him the Form
of a Servant, or Slave, and was made in the likeness of Men; that is, did
really assume Humane Nature. Here was an Abasement indeed, for God to become
Man, for the only-begotten Son of God to take upon him the Form of a Servant,
and to become obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross, which was the
Death of Slaves, and famous Malefactors. Here was Love indeed, that God was
willing that his own dear Son should be thus obscured and diminished, and
become so mean and so miserable for our sakes; that he should not only stoop to
be made Man, and to dwell among us, but that he should likewise submit to the
Infirmities of our Nature, and to be made in all things like unto us, Sin only
excepted; that he should be contented to bear so many Affronts and Indignities
from perverse and unthankful Men, and to endure such Contradiction of Sinners
against himself; that he who was the Brightness of his Father's Glory, should
be despised and rejected of Men, a Man of sorrows, und acquainted with griefs,
and rather than we should perish, should put himself into our Place, and be
contented to suffer and die for us; and that God should be willing that all
this should be done to his only Son, to save Sinners. What greater Testimony
could he give of his Love to us!

3. Let us consider farther to whom he was sent, which is also employed in these
Words, he sent his Son into the World; into a wicked World, that was altogether
unworthy of him; and to an Ungrateful World, that did most unworthily use him.

First, Into a Wicked World, that was altogether unworthy of him, that had
deserved no such Kindness at his Hands. For what were we, that God should send
such a Person amongst us, that he should make his Son stoop so low, as to dwell
in our Nature, and to become one of us? We were Rebels and Enemies, Enemies to
God by evil Works, up in Arms against Heaven, and at open Defiance with God our
Maker. When the World was in this Posture of Enmity and Hostility against God;
then he sent his Son to Treat with us, and to offer us Peace. What can more
commend the Love of God, than this, that he should show such Kindness to us,
when we were Sinners and Enemies! Herein God has commended his Love toward
us, (says the Apostle, Romans 5.8.) in that whilst we were yet Sinners, Christ
died for us.

Secondly, Into an Ungrateful World, that did most unworthily use him, that
gave no becoming Entertainment to him (the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of
the Air had Nests; but the Son of Man had not where to lay his Head) that
heaped all manner of Contumelies and Indignities upon him, that Persecuted him
all his Life, and at last put him to a most painful and shameful Death; in a
word, that was so far from receiving him as the Son of God, that they did not
treat him with common Humanity, and like one of the Sons of men.

4. He did all this voluntarily and freely; God sent his Son into the World,
mero motu, of his own mere Grace and Goodness, moved by nothing but his own
Bowels, and the Consideration of our Misery; not overpowered by any Force; (for
what could offer Violence to him to whom all Power belongs?) not constrained by
any Necessity, for he had been Happy, though we had remained for ever Miserable;
he might have chosen other Objects of his Love and Pity, and have left us
involved in that Misery, which we had wilfully brought upon our selves.

Nor was he prevailed upon by any Application from us, or importunity of ours
to do this for us. Had we been left to have contrived the way of our Recovery;
this, which God has done for us, could never have entered into the Heart of Man
to have imagined, much less to have defir'd it at his Hands. If the way of our
Salvation had been put into the Hands of our own Counsel and Choice, how could
we have been so impudent as to have begged of God, that his only Son might
descend from Heaven and become Man, be poor, despised, and miserable for our
sakes? God may stoop as low as he pleases, being secure of his own Majesty and
Greatness; but it had been a Boldness in us, not far from Blasphemy, to have
desired of him to condescend to such a a submission.

Nor, Lastly, was he pre-oblig'd by any Kindness or Benefit from us; so far
from that, that we had given him all possible Provocation to the contrary, and
had Reason to expect the Effect of his heaviest Displeasure: And yet though he
was the pars laesa, the party that had been disobliged and injured; though we
were first in the Offense and Provocation; he was pleased to make the first
Overtures of Peace and Reconciliation; and though it was wholly our Concernment,
and not his; yet he was pleased to condescend so far to our Perverseness and
Obstinacy, as to send his Son to us, and to beseech us to be reconciled.

Now herein, (says the Apostle, immediately after the Text) herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our Sins: Herein is the Love of God manifested, that the
kindness began on his part, and not on ours; that being neither obliged nor
desired by us, he did freely and of his own accord, send his only-begotten Son
into the world, that we might live through him.

What now remains but to apply this to our selves?

1. Let us propound to our selves the Love of God for our Pattern and Example.
This is the Inference which the Apostle makes in the next Verse but one after
the Text, Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. One
would have thought the Inference should have been, if God so loved us, then we
ought also to love him. But the Apostle does not speak so much of the
Affection, as the Effect of Love; and his meaning is, if God has bestowed such
Benefits upon us, we ought, in imitation of him, to be kind and beneficial one
to another. Not but that we ought to love God with all our hearts, and souls,
and strength; but in this Sense we are not capable of it. We cannot be
beneficial to him; because he is self-sufficient, and stands in need of
nothing; and therefore the Apostle adds this as a Reason, why he does not
Exhort Men to love God, but one another; no man has seen God at any time; he
is not sensible to us, and therefore none of these sensible things can signify
any thing to him. But he has Friends and Relations here in the World, who are
capable of the sensible Effects of our Love, and to whom we may show kindness
for his sake; we cannot be beneficial to God, but we may testify our Love to
him, by our Kindness and Charity to Men, who are made after the Image of God;
and if we see any one Miserable, that is Consideration enough to move our
Charity. There was nothing but this in us to move him to Pity us, when we were
in our blood, and no eye pitied us.

God is a Pattern of the most generous Kindness and Charity. Though he be
infinitely above us, yet he thought it not below him to confider our Case, and
to employ his only Son to Save us; he had no Obligation to us, no Expectation
of Advantage from us, and can never be in a possibility to stand in need of us;
and yet he loved us, and has conferred the greatest Benefits upon us. So that
no Man can have deserved so ill at our hands, but that if he be in want, and we
in a Condition to help him, he ought to come within the Compass and
Consideration of our Charity.

And this is the proper Season for it, when we Commemorate the greatest
Blessing and Benefit that was ever conferred on Mankind, The Son of God sent
into the world, on purpose to redeem and save us. And therefore I cannot but
very much commend the Custom of Feeding and Relieving the Poor, more especially
at this time, when the Poor do usually stand most in need of it, and when we
Commemorate the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who being rich became poor for
our sakes, that we through his poverty might be made rich.

2. Let us readily comply with the great Design of this great Love of God to
Mankind. He has sent his Son, that we might live through him. But though he had
done all this for us, though he has purchased so great Blessings for us, as the
Pardon of our Sins, and Power against them, and Eternal Life and Happiness; yet
there is something to be done on our parts, to make us Partakers of these
Benefits. God has not so loved us, as to send his Son into the World, to carry
Men to Heaven whether they will or no; and to rescue those from the slavery of
the Devil, and the Damnation of Hell, who are fond of their Fetters, and
wilfully run themselves upon Ruin and Destruction. But the Son of God came to
offer Happiness to us, upon certain Terms and Conditions, such as are fit for
God to propound, and necessary for us to perform, to make us capable of the
blessedness which he offers; as namely, repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ; a sincere and constant Endeavor of Obedience to the
Laws and Precepts of our Holy Religion.

These are the Terms of the Gospel; and the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, offers it only upon these Terms, that we deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world:
then we may expect the blessed hope. But if we will not submit to these
Conditions, the Son of God will be no Savior to us; for he is the Author of
Eternal Salvation only to them that obey him. If Men will continue in their
Sins, the Redemption wrought by Christ will be of no Advantage to them; such as
obstinately persist in an impenitent Course, Ipsa si velit salus servare non
potest, Salvation it self cannot save them.

These are the Conditions of our Happiness, and if we submit to them we are
Heirs of Eternal Life; if we refuse, we are Sons of Perdition, eternally lost
and undone; for we may assure our selves, that these are the best and easiest
Terms that can ever be offered to us, because God sent them by his Son. This is
the last Effort of the Divine Love and Goodness, toward the Recovery and
Salvation of Men; so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 1.1, 2. that God, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke to the fathers, by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken to us by his Son; and if we refuse to hear him, he will
speak no more. After this it is not to be expected, that God should make any
farther Attempts for our Recovery; for he can send no greater nor dearer Person
to us, than his, own Son; and if we refuse him, whom will we reverence? If
after this we still wilfully go on in our Sins; there remains no more sacrifice
for Sin; but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation to
consume us.

3. With what Joy and Thankfulness should we Commemorate this great Love of God
to Mankind, in sending his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live
through him!

This is the proper End of the Blessed Sacrament, which we are now going to
receive, to represent to our Minds the Incarnation and Passion of our dear
Lord, by the Symbols of his Body broken, and his blood shed for us. With what
acknowledgments should we Celebrate the Memory of this wonderful Love, which
the Son of God has shown to the Sons of Men; endeavoring to make all the
World in love with him, who has so loved all Mankind!

When ever we see his Blood poured forth, and his Body broken for us, so moving
a Sight should raise strange Passions in us, of love to our Savior, and hatred
to our Sins; and should inspire us with mighty Resolutions of Service and
Obedience to him; and when ever the Pledges and Seals of these Benefits are
delivered into our Hands, the sight of them should at once wound and revive our
Hearts, and make us to cry out, Lord, how unworthy am I, for whom thou
should do and suffer all this! I am overcome by thy love, and can no longer
hold out, against the mighty force of such kindness! I render my self to thee,
and will serve thee for ever, who have redeemed me at so dear a rate!

Now to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb that was slain, to
God even our Father, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, the first begotten from the
Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; unto him that has loved us,
and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests to God and his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

