His Grace John Ld. Arch-Bpp. of Canterbury AEtat: 64 An^o: 1694


SIX SERMONS, I. Of Stedfastness in Religion. II. Of Family-Religion. III. IV.
V. Of Education of Children. VI. Of The Advantages of an early Piety.
Preached in the Church of St. Lawrence Jury in London.

By His Grace JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill; and W. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. M DC XC IV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
BEING, I hope, for the remainder of my Life, released from that irksome and
unpleasant work of Controversy and Wrangling about Religion, I shall now turn
my thoughts to something more agreeable to my temper, and of a more direct and
immediate tendency to the promoting of true Religion, to the happiness of Human
Society, and the Reformation of the World.

I have no intention to reflect upon any that stand up in defense of the Truth
and contend earnestly for it, endeavoring in the spirit of meekness to reclaim
those that are in Error. For I doubt not but a very good man may upon several
occasions be almost unavoidably engaged in Controversies of Religion; and if he
have a head clear and cool enough, so as to be master of his own Notions and
temper in that hot kind of Service, he may therein do considerable advantage to
the Truth: Though a man that has once drawn blood in Controver^y, as Mr. Mede
expresses it, is seldom known ever perfectly to recover his own good temper
afterward.

For this reason a good Man should not be very willing, when his Lord comes, to
be found so doing, and as it were beating his fellow servants: And all
Controver^y, as it is usually managed, is little better. A good man would be
loath to be taken out of the World reeking hot from a sharp contention with a
perverse Adversary; and not a little out of countenance, to find himself in
this temper translated into the calm and peaceable Regions of the Blessed,
where nothing but perfect charity and good will reign for ever.

I know not whether St. Paul, who had been taken up into the third Heavens, did
by that Question of his, Where is the Disputer of THIS WORLD? intend to
insinuate that this wrangling work has place only in this World, and upon this
Earth where only there is a Dust to be raised; but will have no place in the
Other. But whether St. Paul intended this or not, the thing it self I think is
true, that in the other World all things will be clear and past dispute. To be
sure, among the Blessed; and probably also among the Miserable, unless fierce
and furious Contentions, with great Heat without Light, about things of no
moment and concernment to them, should be designed for a part of their Torment.

As to the following Sermons, I am sensible that the Style of them is more
loose and full of words, than is agreeable to just and exact Discourses: But so
I think the Style of Popular Sermons ought to be. And therefore I have not been
very careful to mend this matter; choosing rather that they should appear in
that native simplicity in which, so many years ago, they were first framed,
than dressed up with too much care and Art. As they are, I hope the candid and
ingenuous Readers will take them in good part.

And I do heartily wish that all that are concerned in the respective Duties,
treated on in the following Sermons, would be persuaded so to lay them to heart
as to put them effectually in practice: That how much soever the Reformation of
this corrupt and degenerate Age in which we live is almost utterly to be
despaired of, we may yet have a more comfortable prospect of future Times, by
seeing the foundation of a better World begun to be laid in the careful and
conscientious discharge of the Duties here mentioned: That by this means the
Generations to come may know God, and the Children yet unborn may fear the Lord.

I have great reason to be sensible how fast the infirmities of Age are coming
upon me, and therefore must work the Works of Him, whose Providence has placed
me in the Station wherein I am, whilst it is Day, because the Night comes when
no man can work.

I knew very well, before I entered upon this great and weighty Charge, my own
manifold defects, and how unequal my best abilities were for the due discharge
of it; but I did not feel this so sensibly as I now do every day more and more.
And therefore that I might make some small amends for greater failings, I knew
not how better to place the broken hours I had to spare from almost perpetual
business of one kind or other, than in preparing something for the Public that
might be of use to recover the decayed Piety and Virtue of the present Age; in
which iniquity does so much abound, and the Love of God and Religion is grown
so cold.

To this end I have chosen to publish these plain Sermons, and to recommend
them to the serious perusal and faithful practice both of the Pastors and
People committed to my Charge; earnestly beseeching Almighty God, that by his
Blessing they may prove effectual to that good end for which they are sincerely
designed.

Concerning Resolution and Stedfastness in Religion. A SERMON Preached at St.
LAWRENCE JURY, JUNE the 3 d. 1684.
JOSH. XXIV. 15. -- But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
AFTER Joshua had brought the People of Israel into the promised Land and
settled them in the quiet possession of it, his great desire was to establish
them in the true Religion, namely, in the Worship of the One true God, who had
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and given them the possession of that
good Land, the Land of Canaan.

And now finding himself weak and declining, being an hundred and ten years
old, and fearing le^t after his death the People should fall off from the true
Religion to the worship of Idols, he like a wise and good Governor considers
with himself what course he had best to take to keep them firm and steadfast in
their Religion, and to prevent their defection to the Idolatry of the Nations
round about them.

And to this end he calls a general Assembly of all Israel, Chap. 23. V. 1.
that is, of the Elders, and Heads, and Judges, and Officers of the several
Tribes; and in a very wise and eloquent Speech represents to them in what a
miraculous manner God had driven out the Na^ions before them, much greater and
strong^r Nations than they, and had given them their Land to possess it. And,
in a word, had performed punctually all that he had promised to them.

And therefore they ought to take great heed to themselves, to love God, and to
serve Him; and if they did not, he tells them that it should come to pass, that
as all good things are come upon you which the Lord your God promised you, so
shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from
off this good Land which the Lord your God has given you, Chap. 23. 15.

After this, he calls them together a second time, and gives them a brief
historical account and deduction of the great Mercies of God to them and their
Fathers, from the days of Abraham, whom he had called out from among his
Idolatrous Kindred and Countrymen, unto that Day.

From the consideration of all which, he earnestly exhorts them to renew their
Covenant with God; and for his particular satisfaction, before he left the
World, solemnly to promise that they would for ever serve God and forsake the
service of Idols: Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve Him in sincerity and
in truth: And put away the Gods which your Fathers served on the other side of
the Flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.

And then in the Text, by a very elegant Scheme of Speech he does, as it were,
once more set them at liberty; and, as if they had never engaged themselves to
God by Covenant before, he leaves them to their free choice: And if it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether
the Gods whom your Fathers served on the other side of the Flood, or the Gods
of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwell.

Not that they were at liberty whether they would serve the true God, or not;
but to insinuate to them that Religion ought to be their free choice: And
likewise, that the true Religion has those real advantages on its Side, that
it may safely be referred to any considerate Man's choice: If it seem evil unto
you; as if he had said, If after all the demonstrations which God has given of
his Miraculous Presence among you, and the mighty obligations which he has
laid upon you by bringing you out of the Land of Egypt, and the House of
Bondage by so out^tretched an Arm; and by driving out the Nations before you,
and giving you their Land to possess: If after all this, you can think it ^it
to quit the service of this God, and to worship the Idols of the Nations whom
you have subdued, those vanquished and baffled Deities: If you can think it
reasonable so to do, but surely you cannot; then take your choice: If it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve.

And to direct and encourage them to make a right choice, he declares to them
his own Resolution, which he hopes will also be theirs; and as he had
heretofore been their Captain, so now he offers himself to be their Example:
But whether they will follow him or not, he for his part is fixed and immovable
in this Resolution; But as for ME and my house, we will serve the Lord.

In effect he tells them; I have proposed the best Religion to your choice, and
I cannot but think, nay I cannot but hope, that you will all steadfastly adhere
to it. It is so reasonable and wise, so much your Interest and your Happiness
to do it. But if you should do otherwise, if you should be so weak as not to
discern the Truth, so wilful and so wicked as not to embrace it: Though you
should all make another choice, and run away from the true God to the worship
of Idols; I for my part am steadfastly resolved what to do: In a case so
manifest, in a matter so reasonable, no Number, no Example shall prevail with
me to the contrary; I will, if need be, stand alone in that which is so
evidently and unquestionably Right: And though this whole Nation should revolt
all at once from the Worship of the true God, and join with the rest of the
World in a false Religion and in the Worship of Idols; and mine were the only
Family left in all Israel, nay in the whole World, that continued to worship
the God of Israel, I would still be of the same mind; I would still persist in
this Resolution, and act according to it; As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord.

A Resolution truly worthy of so great a Prince and so good a Man: In which he
is a double Pattern to us.

First, Of the brave Resolution of a good Man, namely, That if there were
occasion, and things were brought to that extremity, he would stand alone in
the Profession and Practice of the true Religion: As for ME, I will serve the
Lord.

Secondly, Of the pious Care of a good Father and Master of a Family, to train
up those under his Charge in the true Religion and Worship of God; As for me
and MY HOUSE, we will serve the Lord.

I shall at this time, by God's assistance, treat of the First of these, namely,

I. Of the brave Resolution of a good Man, that if there were occasion, and
things were brought to that extremity, he would stand alone in the Profession
and Practice of God's true Religion: Choose you this day, says Joshua, whom ye
will serve; but as for ME, I will serve the Lord. Joshua here puts the Case at
the utmost extremity, That not only the great Nations of the World, the
Egyptians and Chaldeans, and all the lesser Nations round about them, and in
whose Land they dwelt, were all long since revolted to Idolatry, and pretended
great Antiquity and long Prescription for the Worship of their false Gods: But
he supposes yet further, That the only true and visible Church of God then
known in the World, the People of Israel, should likewise generally revolt and
forsake the Worship of the true God, and cleave to the Service of Idols: Yet in
this Case, if we could suppose it to happen, he declares his firm and steadfast
Resolution to adhere to the Worship of the true God: And though all others
should fall off from it, that he would stand alone in the Profession and
Practice of the true Religion: But as for ME, I will serve the Lord.

In the handling of this Argument I shall do these two things.

First, I shall consider the matter of this Resolution, and the due bounds and
limits of it.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to vindicate the reasonableness of this Resolution
from the Objections to which this singular and peremptory kind of Resolution
may seem liable.

First, I shall consider the matter of this Resolution, and the due bounds and
limits of it.

1st. The matter of this Resolution. Joshua here resolves that if need were,
and things were brought to that pass, he would stand alone, or with very few
adhering to him, in the Profession and Practice of the true Religion. And this
is not a mere Supposition of an impossible Case, which can never happen: For it
may, and has really and in fact happened in several Ages and Places of the
World.

There has been a general Apostasy of some great part of God's Church from the
Belief and Profession of the true Religion to Idolatry, and to damnable Errors
and Heresies: And some good Men have, upon the matter, stood alone in the open
Profession of the true Religion, in the midst of this general Defection from it.

Elijah in that general Revolt of the People of Israel, when they had forsaken
the Covenant of the Lord, and broken down his Altars, and slain his Prophets,
and he only, as he thought, was left to stand alone: I say, in this Case when,
as he verily believed, he had no body to stand by him, he was very zealous for
the Lord God of Hosts, 1 Kings 18. 18. and with an undaunted courage stood up
for the Worship of the true God, and reproved Ahab to his face for his
defection to the Worship of Idols.

And those three brave Youths, in the Prophecy of Daniel, chap. 3. did in the
like resolute and undaunted manner refuse to obey the Command of the great King
Nebuchadnezzar, to worship the Image which he had set up; when all others
Submitted, and paid Honor to it: Telling him plainly, If it be so, our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnance, and He
will deliver us out of thy hand: If not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up.
v. 17, 18.

In like manner, and with the same Spirit and courage, Daniel withstood the
Decree of Darius, which forbad men to ask a Petition of any God or man for
thirty days, save of the King only; Dan. 6. 7. and this under the pain of being
cast into the Den of Lions: and when all others gave obedience to it, he set
open the windows of his chamber toward Jerusalem, and kneeled down upon his
knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks, as he did before time. v.
10.

In the prevalency of the Arian Heresy Athanasius almost stood alone in the
profession and maintenance of the Truth. And in the Reign of Antichrist the
true Church of God is represented by a Woman flying into the Wilderness, and
living there in obscurity for a long time; insomuch that the Professors of the
Truth should hardly be found. And yet during that Degeneracy of so great a Part
of the Christian Church, and the prevalency of Antichrist for so many Ages,
some few in every Age did appear who did resolutely own the Truth and bear
Witness to it with their Blood: But these did almost stand alone and by
themselves, like a few scattered Sheep wandering up and down in a wide
Wilderness.

Thus, in the height of Popery, Wickliffe appeared here in England; and
Hierome of Prague and John Huss in Germany and Bohemia. And in the beginning of
the Reformation, when Popery had quite overrun these Western Parts of the
World and subdued her Enemies on every side, and Antichrist sat securely in
the quiet possession of his Kingdom; Luther arose, a bold and rough Man, but a
fit Wedge to cleave in sunder so hard and knotty a Block; and appeared stoutly
against the gross Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome; and for a long
time stood alone, and with a most invincible spirit and courage maintained his
ground and resisted the united malice and force of Antichrist and his
Adherents; and gave him so terrible a Wound, that he is not yet perfectly
healed and recovered of it.

So that for a Man to stand alone, or with a very few adhering to him and
standing by him, is not a mere imaginary Supposition, but a Case that has
really and in fact happened in several Ages and Places of the World. Let us
then proceed to consider in the

2d. place, The due limits and bounds of this peremptory Resolution. In all
matters of Faith and Practice which are plain and evident either from Natural
Reason, or from Divine Revelation, this Resolution seems to be very reasonable:
But in things doubtful a modest man, and every man has reason to be so, would
be very apt to be staggered by the judgment of a very Wise man; and much more
of many such, and especially by the unanimous Judgment of the generality of
Men; the general Voice and Opinion of Mankind being next to the Voice of God
himself.

For in matters of an indifferent nature, which God has neither commanded nor
forbidden, such as are many of the Circumstances and Ceremonies of God's
Worship, a man would not be singular, much less stiff and immovable in his
singularity; but would be apt to yield and surrender himself to the general
Vote and Opinion, and to comply with the common Custom and Practice; and much
more with the Rules and Constitutions of Authority, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. Because in things lawful and indifferent, we are bound by the
Rules of Decency and Civility not to thwart the general Practice; and by the
Commands of God, we are certainly obliged to obey the lawful Commands of lawful
Authority.

But in things plainly contrary to the evidence of Sense or Reason, or to the
Word of God, a man would complement no Man, or Number of Men; nor would he pin
his Faith upon any Church in the World; much less upon any single Man, no not
the Pope; no, though there were never so many probable Arguments brought for
the proof of his Infallibility.

In this Case, a Man would be singular, and stand alone against the whole
World; against the wrath and rage of a King and all the terrors of his fiery
Furnace; as in other matters, a Man would not believe all the Learned Men in
the World against the clear evidence of Sense and Reason. If all the great
Mathematicians of all Ages, Archimedes, and Euclide, and Apollonius, and
Diophantus, etc. could be supposed to meet together in a General Council, and
should there declare in the most solemn manner, and give it under their Hands
and Seals, that twice two did not make four, but five; this would not move me
in the least to be of their mind; nay, I who am no Mathematician would maintain
the contrary, and would persist in it without being in the least startled by
the positive Opinion of these great and learned men; and should most certainly
conclude, that they were either all of them out of their Wits, or that they
were biased by some Interest or other, and swayed against the clear evidence
of Truth and the full conviction of their own Reason to make such a
determination as this. They might indeed overruled the Point by their
Authority, but in my inward judgment I should still be where I was before.

Just so in matters of Religion, if any Church, though with never so glorious
and confident a pretense to Infallibility, should declare for
Transubstantiation, that is, that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, by
virtue of the Consecration of the Priest, are substantially changed into the
natural Body and Blood of Christ; this is so notoriously contrary both to the
Sense and Reason of Mankind, that a Man should choose to stand single in the
opposition of it, and laugh at or rather pity the rest of the World that could
be so servilely blind as seemingly to conspire in the belief of so monstrous an
Absurdity.

And in like manner, if any Church should declare, that Images are to be
worshipped, or that the Worship of God is to be performed in an unknown Tongue;
and that the H. Scriptures, which contain the Word and Will of God, and teach
men what they are to believe and do in order to their eternal Salvation, are to
be locked up and kept concealed from the People in a Language which they do not
understand, lest if they were permitted the free use of them in their Mother
Tongue they should know more of the Mind and Will of God than is convenient for
the common People to know, whose Devotion and Obedience to the Church does
mainly depend upon their Ignorance: Or should declare, that the Sacrifice of
Christ was not offered once for all, but is and ought to be repeated ten
Millions of times every Day: And that the People ought to receive the Communion
in one kind only, and the Cup by no means to be trusted with them for fear the
Profane Beards of the Laity should drink of it: And that the saving efficacy of
the Sacraments does depend upon the intention of the Priest, without which the
Receiver can have no benefit by them: These are all of them so plainly contrary
to Scripture, and most of them in Reason so absurd, that the Authority of no
Church whatsoever can oblige a man to the belief of them.

Nay, I go yet further, that being evidently contrary to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, though an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven should declare them, we
ought to reject them. And for this I have St. Paul's authority and warrant, who
speaking of some that perverted the Gospel of Christ by teaching things
contrary to it, Though we, says he, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed:
As we said before, so say I now again, though an Apostle, though an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which ye have received, let
him be accursed, Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9. You see he repeats it over again, to express
not only his own confident assurance, but the certainty of the thing. And here
is an Anathema with a witness, which we may confidently oppose to all the
Anathema's which the Council of Trent has so liberally denounced against all
those who shall presume to gainsay these New Doctrines of their Church; which
are in truth another Gospel, than that which our B. Savior and his Apostles
taught: And yet on their Side there is neither an Apostle, nor an Angel from
Heaven in the Case.

To give but one Instance more: If Bellarmin shall tell me, as he expressly
does, That if the Pope should declare Virtue to be Vice, and Vice to be Virtue,
I were bound to believe him unless I would sin against Conscience: And if all
the World should say the same that Bellarmin does, namely, that this Infallible
Declarer of Virtue and Vice were to be believed and followed; yet I could not
possibly be of their mind, for this plain and undeniable Reason; because if
Virtue and Vice be all one, then Religion is nothing; since the main Design of
Religion is to teach men the difference between Virtue and Vice, and to oblige
them to practice the one and to refrain from the other: And if Religion be
nothing, then Heaven and Hell are nothing: And if Heaven be nothing, then an
infallible Guide thither is of no use and to no manner of purpose; because he
is a Guide no whither, and so his great Office ceases and falls of it self.

And now lest any should think me singular in this Assertion, and that thereby
I give a great deal too much to the single Judgment of private Persons, and too
little to the Authority of a Church, I will produce the deliberate Judgment of
a very Learned Man and a great Assertor of the Church's Authority, concerning
the matter I am now speaking of: I mean Mr. Hooker, in his deservedly admired
Book of Ecclesiastical Policy. His words are these, I grant, says he, that
Proof derived from the Authority of Man's Judgment is not able to work that
Assurance which does grow by a stronger proof: and therefore although ten
thousand General Councils should set down one and the same Definitive Sentence
concerning any Point of Religion whatsoever, yet one Demonstrative Reason
alleged, or one Testimony cited from the Word of God himself to the contrary,
could not choose but oversway them all: In as much as for them to be deceived it
is not so impossible, as it is that Demonstrative Reason or Divine Testimony
should deceive.

And again, For men, says he, to be tied and led by Authority, as it were with
a kind of Captivity of Judgment, and though there be Reason to the contrary not
to listen to it, but follow like Beasts the first in the Herd, this were
Brutish.

Again, That the Authority of Men should prevail with Men, either against or
above Reason is no part of OUR Belief. Companies of Learned Men, though they be
never so great and Reverend, are to yield unto Reason, the weight whereof is no
whit prejudiced by the simplicity of the Person which does allege it; but
being found to be sound and good, the bare Opinion of men to the contrary must
of necessity stoop and give place. And this he delivers not only as his own
particular Judgment, but that which he apprehended to be the Judgment of the
Church of England.

I have produced these clear and positive Testimonies of so learned and
judicious a Person, and of so great esteem in our Church, on purpose to prevent
any misapprehension, as if by this Discourse I intended to derogate from the
Authority of the Church and her just and reasonable Determinations, in things
no wise contrary to plain Reason or the Word of God. And beyond this pitch no
judicious Protestant, that I know of, ever strained the Authority of the
Church. I proceed now in the

Second place, to vindicate the Reasonableness of this Resolution from the
Objections to which this singular and peremptory kind of Resolution may seem
liable; as

Obj. 1. First, it may very speciously be said, that this does not seem modest
for a man to set up his own private Judgment against the general Suffrage and
Vote. And it is very true, as I said before, that about things indifferent a
man should not be stiff and singular; and in things doubtful and obscure a man
should not be over-confident of his own Judgment, and insist peremptorily upon
it against the general Opinion: But in things that are plain and evident,
either from Scripture or Reason, it is neither immodesty, nor a culpable
singularity, for a man to stand alone in the defense of the Truth. Because in
such a Case a man does not oppose his own single and private Judgment to the
Judgment of Many, but the common Reason of Mankind and the Judgment of God
plainly declared in his Word.

If the generality of men should turn Atheists and Infidels, and should deny
the Being of God, or his Providence; the Immortality of men's Souls, and the
Rewards and Punishments of another World: Or should deny the Truth of the
Gospel and of the Christian Religion, it would not certainly be any breach of
modesty for a man to appear single, if no body else would stand by him, in the
resolute defense of these great Truths.

In like manner, when a whole Church, though never so large and numerous, shall
conspire together to corrupt the Christian Religion so far as to impose upon
Mankind, under the name of Christian Doctrines and Articles of Faith, things
plainly contrary to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, and to the clear and
express Word of God, why must a Man needs be thought immodest, if he oppose
such gross Errors and Corruptions of the Christian Doctrine? And what reason
have the Church of Rome to talk of modesty in this Case, when they themselves
have the face to impose upon Mankind the belief of things contrary to what they
and every man else sees? As they do in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation:
And to require of them to do what God has expressly forbidden, as in the
Worship of Images; besides a great many other Idolatrous Practices of that
Church: To deny the People the free use of the H. Scriptures, and the public
Service of God in a known Tongue^ contrary to the very end and design of all
Religion, and in affront to the common Reason and Liberty of Mankind.

Obj. 2. Secondly, It is pretended that it is more prudent for private Persons
to err with the Church, than to be so pertinacious in their own Opinions. To
which I answer, that it may indeed be pardonable in some Cases to be led into
mistake by the Authority of those to whose Judgment and Instruction we ought to
pay a great deference and submission: Provided always it be in things which are
not plain and necessary; but surely it can never be prudent to err with any
number, how great soever, in matters of Religion which are of moment, merely
for Numbers sake: But to comply with the known Errors and Corruptions of any
Church whatsoever is certainly damnable.

Obj. 3. Thirdly, It is pretended yet further, that men shall sooner be excused
in following the Church, than any particular Man or Sect. To this I answer,
that it is very true if the matter be doubtful, and especially if the
Probabilities be equal, or near equal on both Sides: But if the Error be gross
and palpable, it will be no excuse to have followed any number of Men, or any
Church whatsoever. For here the competition is not between Men and Men, but
between God and Men: And in this Case we must forsake all Men to follow God and
his Truth. Thou shall in no wise follow a Multitude in a known Error, is a Rule
which in Reason is of equal obligation with that Divine Law, Thou shall in no
wise follow a Multitude to do evil; or rather is comprehended in it, because to
comply with a known Error is certainly to do Evil.

And this very Objection the Jews made against our B. Savior and the Doctrine
which He taught, that the Guides and Governors of the Jewish Church did
utterly differ from Him, and were of a contrary mind, Have any of the Rulers,
say they, believed on him? What? will you be wiser than your Rulers and
Governors? What? follow the Doctrine of one single Man against the unanimous
Judgment and Sentence of the Great Sanhedrim, to whom the Trial of Doctrines
and pretended Prophets does of right belong?

But, as plausible as this Objection may seem to be, it is to be considered
that in a corrupt and degenerate Church the Guides and Rulers of it are
commonly the worst, and the most deeply engaged in the Errors and Corruptions
of it. They brought them in at first, and their Successors, who have been bred
up in the belief and practice of them, are concerned to uphold and maintain
them: And so long a Prescription gives a kind of Sacred Stamp even to Error,
and an Authority not to be opposed and resisted.

And thus it was in the corrupt State of the Jewish Church, in our Savior's
Time: And so likewise in that great Degeneracy of the Christian Church, in the
Times of Popery, their Rulers made them to err: Insomuch that when Martin
Luther appeared in opposition to the Errors and Superstitions of that Church,
and was hard pressed with this very Objection which the Pharisees urged against
our Savior, he was forced to bolt out a kind of unmannerly Truth, Religio
nunquam magis periclitatur quam inter Reverendissimos, Religion, says he, is
never in greater hazard and worse treated, than amongst the most Reverend;
meaning the Pope and his Cardinals, and all the Romish Hierarchy who had their
dependence upon them.

Obj. 4. Fourthly, it is Objected, That as on the one hand there may be danger
of Error in following blindly the Belief of the Church, so on the other hand
there is as great a danger of Schism in forsaking the communion of the Church
upon pretense of Errors and Corruptions. Very true; but where great Errors and
Corruptions are not only pretended, but are real and evident: and where our
Compliance with those Errors and Corruptions is made a necessary Condition of
our Communion with that Church: In that Case, the guilt of Schism, how great a
Crime soever it be, does not^ fall upon those who forsake the Communion of that
Church, but upon those who drive them out of it by the sinful Conditions which
they impose upon them.

And this is truly the Case between Us and the Church of Rome, as we are ready
to make good, and have fully done it upon all Occasions; and they have never
yet been able to vindicate and clear themselves of those gross Errors and
Corruptions which have been charged upon them, and which they require of all
their Members as necessary Conditions of Communion with them here, and of
eternal Salvation hereafter.

For we do not object to them doubtful matters, but things as plain as any are
contained in the Bible, as every body would see if they durst but let every
body read it. The Worship of Images is there as plainly forbidden in the
Decalogue, as Murder and Adultery are. The Communion in both Kinds is as
express an Institution of our Savior, as any in all the New Testament; and
even as the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper it self; only that Church pretends
to a Dispensing Power, as a Privilege inherent in the^^ Church and inseparable
from it.

And, to add but one Instance more; Public Prayers, and the Service of God in
an unknown Tongue, are as plainly and fully declared against by St. Paul, in a
long Chapter upon this single Argument, as any one thing in all his Epistles.

These things are plain and undeniable, and being so, are a full justification
not only of the Church of England, in the Reformation which She thought fit to
make within her self from the gross Errors and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome; but likewise of particular Persons who have at any time for the same
Reasons withdrawn themselves from Her Communion, in any of the Popish
Countries: Yea though that single Person should happen to be in those
Circumstances that he could not have the Opportunity of holding Communion with
any other Church, that was free from those Errors and Corruptions, and which
did not impose them as necessary Conditions of Communion.

For if any Church fall off to Idolatry, every good Christian not only may, but
ought to forsake Her Communion; and ought rather to stand single and alone in
the Profess^on of the pure and true Religion, than to continue in the Communion
of a corrupt and Idolatrous Church.

I know that some Men are so fond of the Name of a Church that they can very
hardly believe that any thing which ^ears that glorious Title can miscarry or
do any thing so much amiss as to give just occasion to any of her Members to
break off from Her Communion: What? the Church err? That is such an Absurdity,
as is by many thought sufficient to put any Objection out of countenance. That
the whole Church, that is, that all the Christians in the World should at any
time fall off to Idolatry and into Errors and Practices directly contrary to
the Christian Doctrine revealed in the H. Scriptures, is on all hands, I think,
denied: But that any Particular Church may fall into such Errors and Practices
is, I think, as universally granted: Only in this Case they demand to have the
Roman Catholic Church excepted: And why I pray? Because though the Roman
Church is a Particular Church, it is also the Universal Church: If this can be,
and good sense can be made of a Particular-Universal Church, then the Roman
Church may demand this high Privilege of being exempted from the Fate of all
other Churches; but if the Roman Catholic, that is a Particular-Universal
Church be a gross and palpable Contradiction, then it is plain that the Church
of Rome has no more pretense to this Privilege, than any other Particular
Church whatsoever.

And which is yet more, some men talk of these matters at that rate, as if a
man who thought himself obliged to quit the Communion of the Church of Rome,
should happen to be in those Circumstances that he had no Opportunity of
joining himself to any other Communion, he ought in that Case to give over all
thoughts of Religion, and not be so conceited and presumptuous as to think of
going to Heaven alone by himself.

It is without doubt a very great Sin to despise the Communion of the Church,
or to break off from it so long as we can continue in it without Sin: But if
things should once come to that Pass that we must either disobey God for
company, or stand alone in our obedience to Him, we ought most certainly to
obey God whatever comes of it; and to profess his Truth, whether any body else
will join with us in that Profession or not.

And they who speak otherwise condemn the whole Reformation, and do in effect
say that Martin Luther had done a very ill thing in breaking off from the
Church of Rome, if no body else would have joined with him in that honest
Design. And yet if it had been so, I hope God would have given him the Grace
and Courage to have stood alone in so good and glorious a Cause, and to have
laid down his Life for it.

And for any man to be of another Opinion, is just as if a man upon great
deliberation should choose rather to be drowned, than to be saved either by a
Plank or a small Boat; or to be carried into the Harbor any other way, than in
a Great Ship of so many hundred Tuns.

In short, a good man must resolve to obey God and to profess his Truth, though
all the World should happen to do otherwise. Christ has promised to preserve
his Church to the end of the World, that is, he has engaged his Word that he
will take care that there shall always be, in some part of the World or other,
some persons that shall make a sincere Profession of his true Religion.

But He has no where promised to preserve any one Part of his Church from such
Errors and Corruptions, as may oblige all good men to quit the Communion of
that Part; yea though when they have done so, they may not know whither to
resort for actual Communion with any other sound Part of the Christian Church.
As it happened to some particular Persons, during the Reign and Rage of Popery
in these Western Parts of the Christian Church.

The Result from all this Discourse is, to confirm and establish us all, in
this Hour of Temptation and of the Powers of Darkness, in the well-grounded
Belief of the necessity and justice of our Reformation from the Errors and
Corruptions of the Roman Church. And to engage us to hold fast the Profession
of our Faith without wavering: And not only to profess and promise as Peter did
to our Lord, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I: But if there should
be Occasion, to perform and make good this Promise with the hazard of all that
is dear to us, and even of Life it self. And whatever Trials God may permit any
of us to fall into, to take up the pious Resolution of Joshua here in the Text,
that whatever others do, WE will serve the Lord.

I will conclude my Discourse, upon this First Particular in the Text, with the
Exhortation of St. Paul to the Philippians, chap. 1. v. 27. Only let your
conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. Stand fast in one Spirit,
be of one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel: In nothing
terrified by your Adversaries, which to them is an evident token of Perdition,
but to you of Salvation, and that of God.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken to the First thing in the Text,
namely, the pious Resolution of Joshua, that if there were Occasion and things
were brought to that extremity, he would stand alone in the Profession and
Practice of God's true Religion: Choose you this Day whom ye will serve, but as
for ME, I will serve the Lord.

I should now have proceeded to the Second thing, and which indeed I chiefly
intended to speak to from this Text, namely, the pious C^re of a good Father
and M^ster of a F^mily, to train up those under his Charge in the Religion and
Worship of the true God: As for Me and MY HOUSE, we will serve the Lord. But
this I shall not now enter upon, but defer it to some other Opportunity.
Consider what ye have heard, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Concerning FAMILY-RELIGION. A SERMON Preached at St. LAWRENCE JURY, JULY the
13 th. 1684.
JOSH. XXIV. 15. -- But as for me and MY HOUSE, we will serve the Lord.
I Shall now proceed to the Second Point contained in the Text, namely,

II. The pious Care of a good Master and Father of a Family, to train up those
under his Charge in the Worship and Service of the true God: As for me and MY
HOUSE, we will serve the Lord.

And this is the more necessary to be spoken to, because it is a great and very
essential part of Religion, but strangely overlooked and neglected in this
loose and degenerate Age in which we live. It is a great part of Religion; for
next to our personal Homage and Service to Almighty God, and the Care of our
own Souls, it is incumbent upon us to make those, who are under our Charge and
subject to our Authority, God's subjects, and his Children and Servants; which
is a much more honorable and happy Relation, than that which they bear to us.

Our Children are a natural part of our selves, and the rest of our Family are
a Civil and Political part: And not only we our selves, but all that we have
and that belongs to us is God's, and ought to be devoted to his service. And
they that have the true Fear of God themselves, will be careful to teach it to
others; to those especially who are under their more immediate Care and
Instruction. And therefore God had so great a confidence conc^rning ^braham as
to this particular, as to undertake for him, that being so very good a man
himself he would not fail in so great and necessary a part of his Duty, For I
know him, says God of him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment.
God passes his Word for him, that he would not only take care to instruct his
Children and the rest of his numerous Family in the true Religion, but that he
would likewise lay a strict Charge upon them to propagate and transmit it to
their Posterity.

And this certainly is the Duty of all Fathers and Masters of Families; and an
essential part of Religion, next to serving God in our own Persons, to be very
careful that all that belong to us do the same. For every man must not only
give an account of himself to God, but of those likewise that are committed to
his Charge that they do do not miscarry through his neglect.

In speaking of this great and necessary Duty I shall do these four things.

First, I shall show wherein it does consist.

Secondly, I shall consider our Obligation to it, both in point of Duty and of
Interest.

Thirdly, I shall enquire into the Causes of the so common and shameful neglect
of this Duty, to the exceeding great Decay of Piety amongst us.

Fourthly, As a Motive and Argument to us to endeavor to ^etrieve the practice
of this Duty, I shall represent to you the pe^nicious Cons^quences of the
neglect of it, both with regard to our Selves, and to the Public. In all which
I shall be very brief, because things that are plain need not to be long.

I. I shall show wherein the Practice of this Duty does consist. And in this I
am sure there is no need to be long, because this Duty is much better known
than practiced. The principal Parts of it are these following.

First, By setting up the constant Worship of God in our Families. By daily
Pray^rs to God, every Morning and Evening; and by reading some Portion of the
H. Scriptures at those Times, especially out of the Psalms of David, and the
New Testament. And this is so necessary to keep alive and to maintain a sense
of God and Religion in the minds of men, that where it is neglected I do not
see how any Family can in reason be esteemed a Family of Christians, or indeed
to have any Religion at all.

And there are not wanting excellent Helps to this purpose for those that stand
in need of them, as I think most Families do for the due and decent discharge
of this solemn Duty of Prayer: I say, there are excellent Helps to this
purpose, in the several Books of Dev^tion calculated for the private use of
Families, as well as for Secret Prayer in our Closets.

So that besides the reading of the H. Scriptures, which are the great
Fountains of Divine Truth; we may do well likewise to add to these other pious
and profitable Books, which by their plainness are fitted for the instruction
of all Capacities in the most necessary Points of Belief and Practice: Of which
sort, God be thanked, there is an abundant store; but none that I think is more
fitted for general and constant use than that excellent Book so well known by
the Title of The whole Duty of Man: Because it is conveniently divided into
Parts or Sections; one of which may be read in the Family, at any time when
there is leisure for it; but more especially on the Lord's Day, when the whole
Family may the more easily be brought and kept together, and have the
Opportunity to attend upon these things without distraction.

And, which I must by no means omit, because it is in many Families already
gone, and in others going out of Fashion: I mean a solemn acknowledgment of the
Providence of God, by begging his Blessing, at our Meals, upon his good
Creatures provided for our use; and by returning Thanks to him for the benefit
and refreshment of them: This being a piece of Natural Religion owned and
practiced in all Ages, and in most Places of the World; but never so shamefully
and scandalously neglected, and I fear by many slighted and despised, as it is
amongst us at this Day: And most neglected where there is greatest Reason for
the doing of it, I mean at the most plentiful Tables, and among those of
highest Quality: As if Great Persons were ashamed, or thought scorn to own from
whence these Blessings come; like the Nation of the Jews, of whom God complains
in the Prophet, Hos. 2. 8. She knew not that I gave Her Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold: She knew not, that is, She would not
acknowledge from whose Bounty all these Blessings came: Or, as if the poor were
obliged to thank God for a little, but those who are fed to the full, and whose
Cups overflow, so that they are almost every day surfeited of plenty, were not
at least equally bound to make returns of thankful acknowledgment to the Great
Giver of all good things; and to implore His Bounty and Blessing, upon whom the
eyes of all do wait, that He may give them their meat in due season.

O crooked and perverse Generation! Do you thus reason? Do ye thus requite the
Lord, foolish and unwise? This is a very sad and broad Sign of the prevalency
of Atheism and Infidelity among us, when so Natural and so Reasonable a piece
of Religion, so meet and equal an acknomledgment of the constant and daily Care
and Providence of Almighty God toward us begins to grow out of Date and use;
in a Nation professing Religion, and the Belief of the Being and Providence of
God. Is it not a righteous thing with God to take away his Blessings from us,
when we deny Him this just and easy Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving? Shall
not God visit for this horrible Ingratitude? And shall not his Soul be avenged
on such a Nation a^ this? Hear, O Heavens, and be ye horribly astonished at
this! I hope it cannot be thought misbecoming the meanest of God's Ministers,
in a matter wherein the Honor of God is so nearly concerned, to reprove, even
in the Highest and Greatest of the Sons of Men, so shameful and heinous a
Fault, with a proportionable Vehemence and Severity.

Secondly, Another, and that also a very considerable Part of this Duty,
consists in instructing those committed to our Charge in the Fundamental
Principles, and in the careful Practice of the necessary Duties of Religion;
instilling these into Children in their tender years, as they are capable of
them, line upon line, and precept upon precept, here a little and there a
little; and into those that are more grown up, by proper and suitable means of
instruction, and by furnishing them with such Books as are most proper to teach
them those things in Religion which are most necessary by all to be believed
and practiced.

And in order hereunto we should take care that those under our Charge, our
Children and Servants, should be taught to read, because this will make the
business of Instruction much easier; so that if they are diligent and
welldispos'd they may, after having been taught the first Principles of
Religion, by reading the H. Scriptures and other good Books, greatly improve
themselves, so as to be prepared to receive much greater benefit and advantage
by the public teaching of their Ministers.

And in this work of Instruction our great care should be to plant those
Principles of Religion in our Children and Servants which are most fundamental
and necessary, and are like to have the greatest and most lasting influence
upon their whole Lives: As right and worthy Apprehensions of God, especially of
his infinite Goodness, and that He is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity:
And a lively sense also of the great evil and danger of Sin: A firm belief of
the Immortality of our Souls, and of the unspeakable and endless Rewards and
Punishments of another World. If these Principles once take root, they will
spread strangely, and probably stick by them and continue with them all their
Days.

Whereas if we plant in them doubtful Doctrines and Opinions, and inculcate
upon them the Notions of a Sect, and the Jargon of a Party, this will turn to a
very pitiful account, and we must expect that our Harvest will be answerable to
our Husbandry: We have sown the Wind, and shall reap the Whirlwind. But of this
I shall have occasion to speak more particularly and fully in the ensuing
Sermons concerning the good Education of Children.

And this work of Instruction of those that are under our Charge, as it ought
not to be neglected at other Times, so is it more peculiarly seasonable on the
Lord's Day, which ought to be employed by us to Religious purposes, and in the
Exercises of Piety and Devotion: Chiefly in the Public Worship and Service of
God, upon which we should take care that our Children and Servants should
diligently and devoutly attend. Because there God affords the Means which he
has appointed for the begetting and increasing of Piety and Goodness and to
which he has promised a more especial Blessing: There they will have the
opportunity of joining in the public Prayers of God's Church, and of sharing
in the unspeakable bene^^t and advantage of them: And there they will also have
the advantage of being instructed by the Ministers of God in the Doctrine of
Salvation, and the way to Eternal Life; and of being powerfully incited to the
practice of Piety and Virtue.

There likewise they will be invited to the Lord's Table, to participate of the
H. Sacrament of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood; which being the most
Solemn Institution of the Christian Religion, the frequent participation
whereof is by our B. Lord, in remembrance of his Dying Love, enjoined upon all
Christians, we ought to take a very particular care that those who are under
our Charge, so soon as they are capable of it, be duly instructed and prepared
for it; that so as often as Opportunity is offered for it, they may be present
at this Holy Action, and partak^ of the inestimable Benefits and Comforts of it.

And when the Public Worship of that Day is over, our Families should be
instructed at Home, by having the Scriptures and other good Books read to them;
and care likewise should be taken that they do this themselves; this being the
chief Opportunity that most of them, especially those that are Servants, have
of minding the business of Religion, and thinking seriously of another World.

And therefore I cannot but think it of very great consequence to the
maintaining and keeping alive of Religion in the World, that this Day be
Religiously observed, and spent as much as may be in the exercises of Piety,
and in the care of our Souls. For surely every one that has a true sense of
Religion will grant that it is necessary that some Time should be solemnly set
apart for this purpose, which is of all other our greatest Concernment: And
they who neglect this so proper Season and Opportunity, will hardly find any
other Time for it: Especially those who are under the Government and Command of
others, as Children and Servants, who are seldom upon any other Day allowed to
be so much Masters of their Time, as upon this Day.

Thirdly, I add further, as a considerable Part of the Duty of Parents and
Masters of Families, if they be desirous to have their Children and Servants
Religious in good earnest and would set them forward in the way to Heaven, that
they do not only allow them Time and Opportunity, but that they do also
strictly and earnestly charge them to retire themselves every Day, but more
especially on the Lord's Day, Morning and Evening, to pray to God for the
Forgiveness of their Sins, and for his mercy and Blessing upon them; and
likewise to Praise Him for all his Favors and Benefits conferred upon them
from Day to Day.

And in order to this, they ought to take care that their Children and Servants
be furnished with such short Forms of Prayer and Praise, as are proper and
suitable to their capacities and conditions respectively; because there are but
very few that know how to set about and perform these Duties, especially at
first, without some Helps of this kind.

Fourthly and lastly, another principal Part of this Duty consists in giving
good Ex^mple to our Families. This was David's Resolution, Psalm. 101. 2. I will
behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will walk within my House with a
perfect heart. Take great care to be exemplary to thy Family in the best
things; in a constant and devout serving of God, and in a sober and prudent and
unblameable Conversation.

One of the best and most effectual ways to make those who are under our Care
and Authority good, is to be good our Selves, and by our good Example to show
them the way to be so. Without this our best Instructions will signify but very
little, and the main force and efficacy of them will be lost. We undermine the
best Instructions we can give, when they are not seconded and confirmed by our
own Example, and Practice. The want of this will weaken the Authority of all
our good Counsel, and very little Reverence and Obedience will be paid to it.
The Precepts and Admonitions of a very good Man have in them a great power of
Persuasion, and are apt strongly to move and to inflame others to go and do
likewise: But the good Instructions of a bad Man are languid and faint, and of
very little force; because they give no heart and encouragement to follow that
Counsel which they see he that gives it does not think fit to take himself. But
of this likewise I shall have Occasion to speak more fully in the following
Discourses concerning the good Education of Children. And thus much may suffice
to have spoken of the First thing which I proposed, namely, wherein the
Practice of this Duty does consist. I proceed to the Second, namely,

II. To consider our Obligation to it, both in point of Duty and of Interest.

First, In Point of Duty. All Authority over others is a Talent entrusted with
us by God for the benefit and good of others; and for which we are accountable,
if we do not improve it and make use of it to that end. We are obliged by all
lawful means to provide for the temporal welfare of our Family, to feed and
cloth their Bodies and to give them a comfortable Subsistence here in the
World: And surely much more are we obliged to take care of their Souls, and to
consult their eternal Happiness in another Life; in comparison of which all
temporal Concernments and Considerations are as nothing.

It would be accounted a very barbarous thing in a Father or Master to suffer a
Child to starve for want of the necessaries of Life, food and raiment, and all
the World would cry shame upon them for it: But how much greater Cruelty must
it in reason be thought to let an immortal Soul, and one for whom Christ died,
perish for want of knowledge and necessary Instruction for the attaining of
eternal Salvation?

The Apostle St. Paul thinks no words bad enough for those who neglect the
temporal welfare of their Families, He that provideth not, says he, for his
own, especially for those of his own House, has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, that is, he does not deserve the Name of a Christian, who
neglects a Duty to which from the plain Dictates of Nature a Heathen thinks
himself obliged. What then shall be said for them who take no care to provide
for the everlasting Happiness, and to prevent the eternal Misery and Ruin of
those who are so immediately under their Charge, and so very nearly related to
them?

We are obliged to procure the Happiness of our Children not only by the Laws
of Christianity, but likewise by all the Natural bonds of Duty and Affection.
For our Children are a part of our Selves, and if they perish by our fault and
neglect, it will be a perpetual Wound and Sting to us; their Blood will be upon
our heads, and the guilt of it will for ever lie at our doors.

Nay, we are obliged likewise in Justice, and by way of Reparation, to take all
possible care of their Happiness; for we have conveyed a sad Inheritance to
them, in those corrupt and evil inclinations which they have derived from us:
And therefore we should with the greatest care and diligence endeavor to
rectify their perverse Natures, and to cure those cursed dispositions to evil
which we have transmitted to them: And since God has been pleased in so much
mercy to provide, by the abundant Grace of the Gospel, so powerful a Remedy for
this hereditary Disease of our corrupt and degenerate Nature, we should do what
in us lies, that they may partake of the Blessing and Benefit of it.

And as to other Members of our Family, whether they be Servants, or other
Relations of whom we have taken the Charge; common Humanity will oblige us to
be concerned for their Happiness as they are Men and of the same Nature with
our Selves; and Charity likewise, as they are Christians and Baptized into the
same Faith and capable of the same common Salvation, does yet more strictly
oblige us by all means to endeavor that they may be made partakers of it;
especially since they are committed to our Care, and for that reason we must
expect to be accountable to God for them.

So that our Obligation in point of Duty is very clear and strong, and if we be
remiss and negligent in the discharge of it we can never answer it either to
God, or to our own Consciences: Which I hope will awaken us all who are
concerned in it to the serious consideration of it, and effectually engage us
for the future to the faithful and conscientious performance of it.

Secondly, We are hereto likewise obliged in point of Interest; because it is
really for our service and advantage that those that belong to us should serve
and fear God: Religion being the best and surest Foundation of the Duties of
all Relations, and the best Caution and Security for the true discharge and
performance of them.

Would we have dutiful and obedient Children, diligent and faithful Servants?
Nothing will so effectually oblige them to be so, as the Fear of God and the
Principles of Religion firmly settled and rooted in them. Abraham who by the
Testimony of God himself was so eminent an Example in this kind, both of a good
Father and a good Master of his Family, found the good success of his Religious
care in the happy effects of it, both upon his Son Isaac, and his chief Servant
and Steward of his House, Eliezer of Damascus.

What an unexampled Instance of the most profound respect and obedience to the
Commands of his Father did Isaac give, when without the least murmuring or
reluctance he submitted to be bound and laid upon the Altar, and to have been
slain for a Sacrifice; if God had not by an Angel, sent on purpose, interposed
to prevent it?

What an admirable Servant to Abraham was the Steward of his House, Eliezer of
Damascus? How diligent and faithful was he in his Master's service? So that he
trusted him in his greatest Concernments and with all that he had. And when he
employed him in that great Affair of the Marriage of his Son Isaac, what pains
did he take, what prudence did he use, what fidelity did he show in the
discharge of that great Trust, giving himself no rest till he had accomplished
the Business he was sent about? God seems purposely to have left these two
Instances upon Record in Scripture, to encourage Fathers and Masters of
Families to a Religious care of their Children and Servants.

And to show the power of Religion to oblige men to their Duty, I will add but
one Instance more. How did the Fear of God secure Joseph's fidelity to his
Master, in the Case of a very great and violent Temptation? When there was
nothing else to restrain him from so lewd and wicked an act and to which he was
so powerfully tempted, the consideration of the great trust his Master reposed
in him and the sense of his Duty to him, but above all the Fear of God
preserved him from consenting to so vile and wicked an action, How can I, says
he, do this great wickedness and sin against God?

So that in prudence, and from a wise consideration of the great benefit and
advantage which will thereby redound to us, we ought with the greatest care to
instill the Principles of Religion into those that belong to us. For if the
Seeds of true Piety be sown in them, we shall reap the fruits of it: And if
this be neglected, we shall certainly find the mischief and inconvenience of
it. If out Children and Servants be not taught to fear and reverence God, how
can we expect that they should reverence and regard us? at least we can have no
sure hold of them. For nothing but Religion lays an obligation upon Conscience,
nor is there any other certain bond of Duty and Obedience and Fidelity: Men
will break loose from all other Ties when a fit Occasion and a fair Opportunity
does strongly tempt them. And as Religion is necessary to procure the favor of
God and all the comfort and happiness which that brings along with it, so it is
necessary likewise to secure the mutual Duties and Offices of men to one
another. I proceed to the Third thing which I proposed, namely,

III. To enquire into the Causes of the so common and shameful Neglect of this
Duty, to the exceeding great decay of Piety among us. And this may in part be
ascribed to our Civil Confusions and Distractions, but chiefly to our
Dissentions and Differences in Religion, which have not only divided and
scattered our Parochial Churches and Congregations, but have entered likewise
into our Families, and made great disturbances and disorders there.

First, This may in good part be ascribed to our Civil Confusions and
Distractions, which for the time do lay all Laws asleep, and do not only
occasion a general Licentiousness and dissoluteness of Manners, but have
usually a proportionable bad in^luence upon the order and Government of
Families; by weakening the Authority of those that Govern, and by giving the
opportunity of greater License to those that should be governed: For when
public Laws lose their Authority, it is hard to maintain and keep up the
strict Rules and Order of Families, which after great and long Disorder are
very hard to be retrieved and recovered.

Secondly, This great Neglect and Decay of Religious Order in Families is
chiefly owing to our Dissentions and Differences in Religion, upon occasion
whereof many under the pretense of Conscience have broke loose into a boundless
Liberty. So that among the manifold ill Consequences of our Divisions in
Religion this is none of the least, that the Religious Order of Families has
been in a great measure broken and dissolved. Some will not meet at the same
Prayers in the Family, nor go to the same Church and Place of public Worship;
and upon that pretense take the liberty to do what they please, and under
color of serving God in a different way according to their Consciences, do
either wholly or in great measure neglect the Worship of God; nay, it is well
if they do not at that Time haunt and frequent Places of Debauchery and
Lewdness; which they may safely do, being from under the eye of their Parents
and Masters: However by this means it becomes impossible for the most careful
Masters of Families, to take an account of those under their Charge how they
^pend their time on the Lord's Day, and to train them up in any certain and
orderly way of Religion.

And this methinks is so great and sensible an inconvenience, and has had such
dismal effects in many Families, as ought effectually to convince us of the
necessity of endeavoring a greater Union in matters of Religion; and to put us
in mind of those happy Days when God was served in one way, and whole Families
went to the House of God in Companies; and Fathers and Masters had their
Children and Servants continually under their eye, and they were all united in
their Worship and Devotion, both in their own Houses and in the House of God;
and by this means the Work of Religious Education and Instruction was
effectually carried on, and a steady Authority and decent Order was maintained
in Families; men were edified and built up in Religion, and God in all things
was glorified.

And we may assure our selves, that till we are better agreed in matters of
Religion, and our unhappy and childish Differences are laid aside; and till the
Public and unanimous Worship of God do in some measure recover its reputation,
the good Order and Government of Families as to the great ends of Religion is
never likely to obtain and to have any considerable effect. Which I hope will
make all men who heartily love God and Religion, to consider seriously how
necessary it is to put an end to these Differences; that in our private
Families, as well as in the public Assemblies of the Church, we may with one
mind and with one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I beseech you therefore Brethren, as St. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
1. 10. by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing,
and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, that is, so far as is
necessary to the keeping of the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and
to prevent Divisions and Separations among Christians. I proceed to the Fourth
and last thing I proposed, and which remains to be very briefly spoken to,
namely,

IV. The very mischievous and fatal Consequences of the neglect of this Duty,
both to the Public, and to our Selves.

First, To the Public. Families are the first Seminaries of Religion, and if
care be not there taken to prepare persons, especially in their tender years,
for public teaching and instruction, it is like to have but very little
effect. The neglect of a due preparation of our Children and Servants at home,
to make them capable of profiting by what they hear and may learn at Church, is
like an error in the first Concoction which can hardly ever be corrected
afterward. So that in this first neglect the foundation of an infinite
Mischief is laid; because if no care be taken of persons in their younger
years, when they are most capable of the impressions of Religion, how can it
reasonably be expected that they should come to good afterward? And if they
continue void of the Fear of God, which there has been no care taken to plant
in them, they will almost necessarily be bad in all Relations; undutiful
Children, slothful and unfaithful Servants, scandalous Members of the Church,
unprofitable to the Commonwealth, disobedient to Governors both Ecclesiastical
and Civil; and in a word, Burdens of the Earth, and so many Plagues of Human
Society: And this Evil, if no Remedy be applied to it, will continually grow
worse, and diffuse and spread it self farther in every Age, till Impiety and
Wickedness, Infidelity and Profaneness have overrun all, and the World be ripe
for its final Ruin: Just as it was before the Destruction of the Old World,
when the wickedness of Man was great upon the Earth, and all Flesh had
corrupted their way, then the Flood came and swept them all away.

Secondly, The Consequences of this Neglect will likewise be very dismal to our
Selves. We shall first of all others feel the Inconvenience, as we had the
greatest share in the Guilt of it. We can have no manner of security of the
Duty and Fidelity of those of our Family to us, if they have no sense of
Religion, no fear of God before their eyes. If we have taken no care to
instruct them in their Duty to God, it is no-wise probable that they will make
Conscience of their Duty to us.

So that we shall have the first ill Consequences of their Miscarriage; besides
the Shame and Sorrow of it: And not only so, but all the evil they commit ever
after, will be in a great measure chargeable upon us, and will be put upon our
score in the Judgment of the Great Day. It ought to make us tremble to think
with what bitterness and Rage our Children and Servants will then fly in our
faces, for having been the Cause of their eternal Ruin, for want of due care on
our part to prevent it. In that Day, next to God and our own Consciences, our
most terrible Accusers will be those of our own House, nay those that came out
of our own Bowels, and were not only Part of our Family, but even of our
Selves. But this also I shall have a proper Occasion to prosecute more fully in
the following Discourses concerning the Education of Children, to which I refer
it.

Upon all these Considerations and many more that might be urged upon us, we
should take up the pious Resolution of Joshua here in the Text, that We and OUR
HOUSES will serve the Lord: And that, through God's Grace, we will do all that
in us lies by our future Care and Diligence to repair our former neglects in
this kind.

I shall only add this one Consideration more to all that I have already
mentioned: If Children were carefully educated, and Families regularly and
Religiously ordered, what a happy and delightful Place, what a Paradise would
this World be, in comparison of what now it is?

I beseech you therefore Brethren, that these things which I have with so much
plainness and faithfulness laid before you, may sink into your hearts, before
it be too late, and whilst the thing may be remedied; that you may not for ever
lament this neglect and repent of it, when the thing will be past Remedy and
there will be no place for Repentance. But I hope better things of you,
Brethren, and things that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak.

SERMON I. OF THE Education of Children.
PROVE. XXII. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he
will not depart from it.
I Have on purpose chosen this Text for the subject of a Preparatory Discourse
in order to the reviving of that so shamefully neglected and yet most useful
and necessary Duty of Catechizing children and young persons: But I shall
extend it to the consideration of the Education of Children in general, as a
matter of the greatest consequence both to Religion and the Public welfare.

For we who are the Ministers of God ought not only to instruct those who are
committed to our charge in the common Duties of Christianity, such as belong to
all Christians, but likewise in all the particular Duties which the several
Relations in which they stand to one another do respectively require and call
for from them.

And amongst all these I know none that is of greater concernment to Religion
and to the good Order of the World than the careful Education of Children. And
there is hardly any thing that is more difficult, and which requires a more
prudent and diligent and constant application of our best care and endeavor.

It is a known Saying of Melancthon that there are three things which are
extremely difficult, parturire, docere, regere; to bear and bring forth
Children, to instruct and bring them up to be Men, and to govern them when they
arrive at Man's estate. The instruction and good Education of Children is none
of the least difficult of these. For to do it to the best advantage does not
only require great sagacity to discern their particular disposition and temper,
but great discretion to deal with them and manage them, and likewise continual
care and diligent attendance to form them by degrees to Religion and Virtue.

It requires great wisdom and industry to advance a considerable Estate, much
art and contrivance and pains to raise a great and regular Building: But the
greatest and noblest Work in the World, and an effect of the greatest prudence
and care is to rear and build up a Man, and to form and fashion him to Piety,
and Justice, and Temperance, and all kind of honest and worthy actions. Now the
Foundations of this great Work are to be carefully laid in the tender years of
Children, that it may rise and grow up with them; according to the advice of
the Wiseman here in the Text, Train up a Child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from it.

In which words are contained these two things.

First, The Duty of Parents and Instructers of Children, Train up a Child, etc.
By Childhood here I understand the Age of Persons from their Birth, but more
especially from their first capacity of Instruction till they arrive at the
State and Age which next succeeds Childhood, and which we call Youth; and which
is the proper Season for Confirmation. For when Children have been well
Catechized and instructed in Religion, then is the fittest Time for them to
take upon themselves and in their own Persons to confirm that solemn Vow which
by their Sureties they made at their Baptism.

Train up a Child in the way he should go, that is, in the course of Life that
he ought to lead; instruct him carefully in the knowledge and practice of his
whole duty to God and Men, which he ought to observe and perform all the days
of his Life.

Secondly, Here is the consequent fruit and benefit of good Education: And when
he is old he will not depart from it. This we are to understand according to
the moral probability of things: Not as if this happy effect did always and
infallibly follow upon the good Education of a Child, but that this very
frequently is, and may probably be presumed and hoped to be the fruit and
effect of a pious and prudent Education. Solomon means that from the very
nature of the thing this is the most hopeful and likely way to train up a Child
to be a good Man. For as Aristotle truly observes, Moral Sayings and Proverbial
Speeches are to be understood only (...), that is, to be usually and for the
most part true. And though there may be several exceptions made, and instances
given to the contrary, yet this does not infringe the general truth of them:
But if in frequent and common experience they be found true, this is all the
truth that is expected in them, because it is all that was intended by them.

And of this nature is this Aphorism or Proverb of Solomon in the Text; and so
likewise are most of the wise Sayings of this Book of the Proverbs, as also of
Eccleasistes: And we do greatly mistake the design and meaning of them when
ever we go about to exact them to a more strict and rigorous truth, and shall
upon due consideration find it impossible to bring them to it.

So that the true meaning of the Text may be fully comprised in the following
Proposition.

That the careful, and prudent, and religious Education of Children has for
the most part a very good influence upon the whole course of their lives.

In the handling of this Argument I design, by God's assistance, to reduce my
Discourse to these Five Heads.

I. I shall show more generally wherein the good Education of Children does
consist, and severally consider the principal parts of it.

II. I shall give some more particular Directions for the management of this
work in such a way as may be most effectual for its end.

III. I shall take notice of some of the common and more remarkable
miscarriages in the performance of this Duty.

IV. I shall endeavor to make out the truth of this Proposition, by showing
how the good Education of Children comes to be of so great advantage and to
have so powerful and lasting an influence upon their whole Lives.

V. and Lastly; I shall by the most powerful Arguments I can offer, endeavor
to stir up and persuade those whose Duty this is, to discharge it with great
care and conscience.

I. I shall show more generally wherein the good Education of Children does
consist, and severally consider the principal Parts of it. And under this Head
I shall comprehend promiscuously the Duty of Parents, and, in case of their
death, of Guardians; and of Godfathers and Godmothers; though this for the
most part signifies very little more than a pious and charitable care and
concernment for them, because the Children for whom they are Sureties are
seldom under their power: And the Duty likewise of those who are the Teachers
and Instructers of them: And the Duty also of Masters of Families toward
Servants in their childhood and younger years: And lastly the Duty of
Ministers, under whose Parochial care and inspection Children are as members of
the Families committed to their charge: I say, under this Head I shall
comprehend the Duties of all these respectively, according to the several
obligations which lie upon each of them in their several relations to them. And
I shall reduce them to these eight particulars, as the principal parts wherein
the Education of Children does consist.

First, In the tender and careful nursing of them.

Secondly, In bringing them to be baptized and admitted Members of Christ's
Church, at the times appointed or accustomed in the National Church of which
the Parents are Members.

Thirdly, In a due care to inform and instruct them in the whole compass of
their Duty to God and to their Neighbor.

Fourthly, And more especially in a prudent and diligent care to form their
Lives and Manners to Religion and Virtue.

Fifthly, In giving them good Example.

Sixthly, In wise restraints from that which is Evil, by seasonable Reproof and
Correction.

Seventhly, In bringing them to be publicly Catechized by the Minister in
order to Confirmation.

Eighthly, In bringing them to the Bishop to be solemnly Confirmed, by their
taking upon themselves the Vow which by their Sureties they entered into at
their Baptism.

I. In the tender and careful nursing of Children. I mention this first,
because it is the first and most natural Duty incumbent upon Parents toward
their Children: And this is particularly the Duty of Mothers. This affection
and tenderness, Nature which is our surest guide and director, has implanted
in all living Creatures toward their young ones: And there cannot be a greater
reproach to Creatures that are endued with Reason, than to neglect a Duty to
which Nature directs even the Brute Creatures by a blind and unthinking
Instinct. So that it is such a Duty as cannot be neglected without a downright
affront to Nature, and from which nothing can excuse but disability, or
sickness, or the evident danger of the Mother, or the interposition of the
Father's Authority, or some very extraordinary and public necessity.

This I foresee will seem a very hard Saying to nice and delicate Mothers, who
prefer their own ease and pleasure to the fruit of their own Bodies: But
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, I think my selfobliged to
deal plainly in this matter, and to be so faithful as to tell them that this is
a natural Duty; and because it is so, of a more necessary and indispensable
obligation than any positive Precept of revealed Religion; and that the general
neglect of it is one of the great and crying Sins of this Age and Nation; and
which as much as any Sin whatsoever is evidently a punishment to it self in the
palpable ill effects and consequences of it: Which I shall, as briefly as I
can, endeavor to represent; that if it be possible, we may in this first Point
of Education, so fundamental and necessary to the happiness both of Parents and
Children, and consequently to the Public Good of Human Society, be brought to
comply with the uner^ing Instinct of Nature, and with the plain Dictate of the
common Reason of Mankind, and the general practice of all Ages and Nations.

First, The neglect of this Duty is a ^ort of exposing of Children; especially
when it is not done, as very often it is not, with more than ordinary care and
choice. It always exposes them to manifest inconvenience, and sometimes to
great danger; even to that degree as in the consequence of it is but little
better than the laying a Child in the Streets, and leaving it to the care and
compassion of a Parish. There are two very visible inconveniences which ^o
commonly attend it.

1 st, Strange Milk, which is often very disagreeable to the Child, and with
which ^he Child to be sure sucks in the natural in^irmities of the Nurse,
together with a great deal of her natural inclinations and irregular passions,
which many times stick by the Child for a long time after: And which is worse
than all this, it sometimes happens that some secret Disease of the Nurse is
conveyed to the Child.

2 dly, A shameful and dangerous neglect of the Child, especially by such
Nurses as make a Trade of it; of whom there are great numbers in and about this
great City: Who after they have made their first and main advantage of the
Child, by the excessive, not to say extravagant vailes, which usually here in
England, above all places in the Wo^ld, are given at Christenings^ And then by
the strait allowances which are commonly made afterward for the nursing and
keeping of the Child, are often tempted, not to say worse, to a great neglect
of the Child; which, if it happen to dye for want of due care, ^ets the Nurse
at liberty to make a new advantage by taking another Child.

Nor can it well be otherwise expected than that a Nurse, who by this course is
first made to be unnatural to her own Child, should have no great care and
tenderness for a Child which is not her own.

I have heard a very sad Observation made by those who have had the opportunity
to know it, that in several of the Towns and Villages about London, where this
Trade of nursing Children is chiefly driven, hardly one in five of these
Children lives out the year: And this surely is a danger which natural
affection as well as duty does oblige Parents to take all possible care to
prevent.

Secondly, This course does most certainly tend very much to the estranging and
weakening of natural affection on both sides; I mean both on the part of the
Mother and of the Child. The pains of nursing as well as of bearing Children
does insensibly create a strange tenderness of affection and care in the
Mother. Can a woman, says God, forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Isa. 49. 15. Can a Woman? that is, a
Mother, not a Nurse; for the sucking child is said to be the son of her womb.
God speaks of this as a thing next to impossible.

And this likewise is a great endearment of the Mother to the Child: Which
endearment, when the Child is put out, is transferred from the Mother to the
Nurse, and many times continues to be so for a great many years after; yea, and
often to that degree as if the Nurse were the true Mother, and the true Mother
a mere stranger. So that by this means natural affection must be extremely
weakened; which is great pity, because when it is kept up in its full strength
it often proves one of the best securities of the Duty of a Child.

But because this severe Doctrine will go down but very hardly with a great
many, I must take the more care to guard it against the Objections which will
be made to it. Those from natural disability, or sickness; from evident and
apparent danger of the Mother, or from the interposition of the Father's
Authority, or from plain necessity; or if there be any other that have an equal
Reason with these, I have prevented already by allowing them to be just and
reasonable exceptions from the general Rule, when they are real, and not made
Pretenses to shake off our Duty.

But there are besides these, two Objections which indeed are real, but yet
seem to have too great a weight with those who would fain decline this Duty,
and are by no means sufficient to excuse Mothers, no not those of the highest
Rank and Quality, from the natural obligation of it. And they are these. The
manifest trouble, and the manifold restraint which the careful discharge of
this Duty does unavoidably bring upon those who submit themselves to it.

1 st. For the trouble of it, I have only this to say, and I think that no more
need to be said about it; that no body is discharged from any Duty by reason of
the trouble which necessarily attends it, and is inseparable from it; since God
who made it a Duty foresaw the trouble of it when he made it so.

2 dly. As to the manifold restraint which it lays upon Mothers; this will best
be answered by considering of what nature these restraints are. And they are
chiefly in these and the like instances. This Duty restrains Mothers from
spending their Morning and their Money in curious and costly Dressing; from
misspending the rest of the Day in formal and for the most part impertinent
Visits, and in seeing and hearing Plays, many of which are neither fit to be
seen or heard by modest Persons and those who pretend to Religion and Virtue;
as I hope all Christians do, especially Persons of higher Rank and Quality: And
it restrains them likewise from trifling away a great part of the Night in
Gaming, and in Revelling till past Midnight, I am loath to say how much.

These are those terrible restraints which this natural Duty, of Mothers
nursing their Children, lays upon them. Now I cannot but think all these to be
very happy restraints: Happy surely for the Child; and in many respects happy
for the Father, and for the whole Family, which by this means will be kept in
much better order: But happiest of all for the Mother, who does herein not only
discharge a great and necessary Duty, but is hereby also hindered from running
into many great Faults, which before they will be forgiven must cost her a deep
Contrition, and a very bitter Repentance.

Perhaps I may have gone further in this unusual Argument, than will please the
present Age: But I hope Posterity will be so wise as to consider it and lay it
to heart. For I am greatly afraid that the World will never be much better till
this great Fault be mended. I proceed to the next Particular wherein the good
Education of Children does consist, namely

II. In bringing them to be Baptized and admitted Members of Christ's Church,
at the times appointed or accustomed in the National Church of which the
Parents are Members. I mean, to bring them to the Church to be there publicly
initiated, and solemnly admitted by Baptism. And this the Rules of the Church
of England do strictly enjoin, unless the Child be in danger of death; and in
that case only it is allowed to administer Baptism privately, and in a summary
way without performing the whole Office: But then if the Child live, it is
ordered that it shall be brought to the Church, where the remainder of the
Office is to be solemnly performed.

I know that of late years, since our unhappy Confusions, this Sacrament has
very frequently been administered in private: And Ministers have been in a
manner, and to avoid the greater mischief of Separation, necessitated to comply
with the obstinacy of the greater and more powerful of their Parishioners; who
for their ease, or humor, or for the convenience of a pompous Christening,
will either have their Children baptized at home by their Minister; or if he
refuse, will get some other Minister to do it; which is very irregular.

Now I would entreat such persons calmly to consider how contrary to Reason,
and to the plain design of the institution of this Sacrament, this perverse
custom, and their obstinate resolution in it, is. For is there any Civil
Society or Corporation into which persons are admitted without some kind of
Solemnity? And is the Privilege of being admitted Members of the Christian
Church, and Heirs of the great and glorious Promises and Blessings of the New
Covenant of the Gospel less considerable and fit to be conferred with less
Solemnity? I speak to Christians, and they who are so in good earnest, will
without my using more words about it, consider what I ^^y in this Particular.

III. Another and very necessary Part of the good Education of Children is, by
degrees to inform and carefully to instruct them in the whole compass of their
Duty to God, their Neighbor, and Themselves: That so they may be taught how to
behave themselves in all the steps of their Life, from their first capacity of
Reason till they arrive at the more perfect use and exercise of that Faculty;
when, if at first they be well instructed, they will be better able to direct
and govern themselves afterward.

This Duty God does expressly and very particularly charge upon his own peculiar
People, the People of Israel, speaking of the Laws which he had given them:
Duet. 6. 7, Thou shall, says He, teach them diligently unto thy Children, and
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way; when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And this God long
before promised that Abraham the Father of the faithful, would do. Genesis 18. 19.
I know Abraham, says He, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him to keep the way of the Lord.

This Work ought to be begun very early, upon the first budding and appearance
of Reason and Understanding in Children. So the Prophet directs; Isa. 28. 9,
10. Whom shall he teach knowledge? Whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts: For precept
must be upon precept, etc.

To this end we must, by such degrees as they are capable, bring them
acquainted with God and themselves. And in the first place we must inform them,
that there is such a Being as God, whom we ought to honor and reverence above
all things? And then, that we are all his Creatures and the work of his hands,
that it is He that has made us, and not we our selves: That He continually
preserves us, and gives us all the good things that we enjoy; and therefore we
ought to ask every thing of Him by Prayer, because this is an acknowledgment of
our dependence upon Him; and to return thanks to Him for all that we have and
hope for, because this is a just and easy Tribute, and all that we can render
to Him for his numberless favors and benefits.

And after this, they are to be instructed more particularly in their Duty to
God and Men, as I shall show more fully afterward. And because Fear and Hope
are the two Passions which do chiefly sway and govern Human Nature, and the
main springs and Principles of action; therefore Children are to be carefully
informed that there is a Life after Death, wherein men shall receive from God a
mighty and eternal Reward, or a terrible and endless Punishment, according as
they have done or neglected their Duty in this Life: That God will love and
reward those who do his will and keep his commandments, but will execute a
dreadful punishment upon the workers of iniquity and the wilful transgressors
of his Laws.

And, according as they are capable, they are to be made sensible of the great
degeneracy and corruption of Human Nature, derived to us by the Fall and wilful
transgression of our first Parents; and of the way of our Recovery out of this
miserable state by Jesus Christ; whom God has sent in our Nature to purchase
and accomplish the Redemption and Salvation of Mankind, from the Captivity of
Sin and Satan, and from the Damnation of Hell.

IV. The good Education of Children consists not only in informing their Minds
in the knowledge of God and their Duty, but more especially in endeavoring
with the greatest care and prudence to form their Lives and Manners to Religion
and Virtue. And this must be done by training them up to the exercise of the
following Graces and Virtues.

First, To Obedience and Modesty; to Diligence and Sincerity; and to Tenderness
and Pity, as the general dispositions to Religion and Virtue.

Secondly, To the good government of their Passions, and of their Tongue; and
particularly to speak truth, and to hate Lying as a base and vile quality;
these being as it were the foundations of Religion and Virtue.

Thirdly, To Piety and Devotion toward God; to Sobriety and Chastity with
regard to themselves; and to Justice and Charity toward all men; as the
principal and essential Parts of Religion and Virtue.

First, As the general dispositions to Religion and Virtue, we must train them
up,

1 st. To Obedience. Parents must take great care to maintain their Authority
over their Children; otherwise they will neither regard their Commands, nor
hearken to and follow their Instructions. If they once get head and grow
stubborn and disobedient, there is very little hope left of doing any great
good upon them.

2 dly. To Modesty, which is a fear of Shame and Disgrace. This disposition,
which is proper to Children, is a mavelous advantage to all good purposes.
They are modest, says Aristotle, who are afraid to offend, and they are afraid
to offend who are most apt to do it; as Children are, because they are much
under the power of their Passions, without a proportionable strength of Reason
to govern them and keep them under.

Now Modesty is not properly a Virtue, but it is a very good Sign of a
tractable and towardly Disposition, and a great preservative and security
against Sin and Vice: And those Children, who are much under the restraint of
Modesty, we look upon as most hopeful and likely to prove good: Whereas
Immodesty is a vicious temper broke loose and got free from all restraint: So
that there is nothing left to keep an impudent person from Sin, when fear of
Shame is gone: For Sin will soon take possession of that person whom Shame has
left. He that is once become shameless has prostituted himself. Therefore
preserve this Disposition in Children as much as is possible, as one of the
best means to preserve their innocence, and to bring them to goodness.

3 dly. To diligence, sine qua vir magnus nunquam extitit^ without which, says
one, there never was any great and excellent person. When the Roman Historians
describe an extraordinary man, this always enters into his Character as an
essential part of it, that he was incredibili industria, diligentia singulari,
of incredible industry, of singular diligence; or something to that purpose.
And indeed a Person can neither be excellently good, nor extremely bad without
this quality. The Devil himself could not be so bad and mischievous as he is,
if he were not so stirring and restless a Spirit, and did not compass the Earth
and go to and fro seeking whom he might devour.

This is part of the Character of Sylla, and Marius, and Cataline, those great
Disturbers of the Roman State; as well as of Caesar and Pompey, who were much
greater and better men, but yet gave trouble enough to their Country, and at
last dissolved the Roman Commonwealth, by their Ambition and Contention for
Superiority: This, I say, enters into all their Characters, that they were of a
vigorous and indefatigable spirit. So that Diligence in it self is neither a
Virtue nor a Vice, but may be applied either way, to good or bad purposes; and
yet where all other requisites do concur it is a very proper Instrument and
Disposition for Virtue.

Therefore train up Children to diligence, if ever you desire they should excel
in any kind. The diligent hand, says Solomon, makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. Rich
in estate, Rich in knowledge. See thou a man diligent in his business, as the
same Wiseman observes, Prove. 22. 29. he shall stand before Princes, he shall
not stand before mean, or obscure men. And again, Prove. 12. 24. The hand of the
diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be under Tribute. Diligence
puts almost every thing into our power, and will in time make Children capable
of the best and greatest things.

Whereas Idleness is the bane and ruin of Children; it is the unbending of
their Spirits, the Rust of their Faculties, and as it were the laying of their
Minds fallow; not as Husbandmen do their Lands that they may get new heart and
strength, but to impair and lose that which they have. Children that are bred
up in laziness are almost necessarily bad, because they cannot take the pains
to be good; and they cannot take pains, because they have never been inured and
accustomed to it; which makes their Spirits restive, and when you have occasion
to quicken them and spur them up to business they will stand stock still.

Therefore never let your Children be without a Calling, or without some
useful, or at least innocent employment that will take them up; that they may
not be put upon a kind of necessity of being vicious for want of something
better to do. The Devil tempts the active and vigorous into his service,
knowing what ^it and proper instruments they are to do his drudgery: But the
slothful and idle, no body having hired them and set them on work, lie in his
way, and he stumbles upon them as he goes about; and they do as it were offer
themselves to his service, and having nothing to do they even tempt the Devil
himself to tempt them, and to take them in his way.

4 thly. To sincerity; which is not so properly a single Virtue, as the life
and soul of all other Graces and Virtues; and without which, what show of
goodness soever a man may make, he is un^ound and rotten at the heart. Cherish
therefore this disposition in Children, as that which when they come to be men
will be the great security and ornament of their lives, and will render them
acceptable both to God and Men.

5 thly. To tenderness and pity: Which, when they come to engage in business
and to have dealings in the World, will be a good bar against Injustice and
Oppression; and will be continually prompting us to Charity, and will fetch
powerful Arguments for it from our own bowels.

To preserve this goodness and tenderness of nature, this so very human and
useful affection, keep Children, as much as is possible, out of the way of
bloody Sights and Spectacles of cruelty; and discountenance in them all cruel
and barbarous usage of Creatures under their power: do not allow them to
torture and kill them for their sport and pleasure; because this will
insensibly and by degrees hard^n their hearts, and make them less apt to
compassionate the wants of the poor and the sufferings and afflictions of the
miserable.

Secondly, As the main Foundations of Religion and Virtue, Children must be
carefully trained up to the Government of their Passions, and of their Tongues;
and particularly to speak truth, and to hate lying as a base and vile quality.

1 st. To the good Government of their Passions. It is the disorder of these,
more especially of Desire, and Fear, and Anger, which betrays us to many evils^
Anger prompts men to contention and murder: Inordinate Desire, to covetousness
and fraud and oppression: And Fear many times awes men into Sin, and deters
them from their Duty.

Now if these Passions be cherished, or even but let alone in Children, they
will in a short time grow headstrong and unruly, and when they come to be men
will corrupt the judgment, and turn good nature into humor, and the
understanding into prejudice and wilfulness: But if they be carefully observed
and prudently restrained, they may by degrees be managed and brought under
government; and the inordinacy of them being pruned away, they may prove
excellent Instruments^ of Virtue.

Therefore be careful to discountenance in Children any thing that looks like
Rage and furious Anger, and to show them the unreasonableness and deformity of
it. Check their longing Desires after things pleasant, and use them to frequent
disappointments in that kind; that when you think fit to gratify them they may
take it for a favor, and not challenge every thing they have a mind to as
their due; and by degrees may learn to submit to the more prudent choice of
their Parents, as being much better able to judge what is good and fit for them.

And when you see them at any time apt out of Fear to neglect their Duty, or to
fall into any Sin, or to be tempted by telling a Lie to commit one fault to
hide and excuse another, which Children are very apt to do: The best Remedy of
this Evil will be to plant a greater Fear against a less, and to tell them what
and whom they should chiefly fear; not him who can hurt and kill the Body, but
Him who after He has killed can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.

The neglect of Children in this matter, I mean in not teaching them to govern
their Passions, is the true cause why many that have proved sincere Christians
when they came to be Men, have yet been very imperfect in their conversation,
and their Lives have been full of inequalities and breaches, which have not
only been matter of great trouble and disquiet to themselves, but of great
scandal to Religion; when their light which should shine before men is so often
darkened and obscured by these frequent and visible infirmities.

2 dly, To the government of their Tongues. To this end teach Children Silence,
especially in the presence of their Betters:: And as soon as they are capable of
such a Lesson, let them be taught not to speak but upon cons^deration, both of
what they say, and before whom. And above all, inculcate upon them that most
necessary Duty and Virtue of speaking truth, as one of the best and strongest
bands of Human Society and Commerce: And possess them with the baseness and
vileness of telling a Lie; for if it be so great a provocation to give a man
the Lie, then surely to be guilty of that Fault must be a mighty Reproach.

They who write of Japan tell us that those People, though mere Heathens, take
such an effectual course in the Education of their Children as to render a Lie
and breach of Faith above all things odious to them: Insomuch that it is a very
rare thing for any Person among them to be taken in a Lie, or found guilty of
breach of Faith. And cannot the Rules of Christianity be rendered as effectual
to restrain men from these Faults which are scandalous even to Nature, and much
more so to the Christian Religion?

To the Government of the Tongue does likewise belong the restraining of
Children from lewd and obscene words, from vain and profane talk; and
especially from horrid Oaths and Imprecations: From all which they are easily
kept at first, but if they are once accustomed to them it will be found no such
easy matter for them to get quit of these evil Habits. It will require great
attention and watchfulness over themselves, to keep Oaths out of their common
discourse; but if they be heated and in passion, they throw out Oaths and
Curses as naturally as men that are highly provoked fling stones, or any thing
that comes next to hand at one another: So dangerous a thing is it to let any
thing that is bad in Children to grow up into a Habit.

Thirdly, As the principal and essential Parts of Religion and Virtue, let
Children be carefully bred up,

1 st, To Sobriety and Temperance in regard to themselves; under which I
comprehend likewise Purity and Chastity. The government of the sensual Appetite
as to all kind of Bodily pleasures is not only a great part of Religion, but an
excellent instrument of it, and a necessary foundation of Piety and Justice.
For he that cannot govern himself is not like to discharge his Duty either to
God or Men. And therefore St. Paul puts Sobriety first, as a primary and
principal Virtue in which men are instructed by the Christian Religion, and
which must be laid as the foundation both of Piety toward God, and of
Righteousness to Men. The Grace of God, for so he calls the Gospel, that brings
Salvation unto all men, has appeared; teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world. It first teaches us to live soberly; and unless we train up
Children to this Virtue we must never expect that they will either live
righteously or godly in this present World.

Especially, Children must be bred up to great Sobriety and Temperance in their
Diet, which will retrench the fuel of other inordinate Appetites. It is a good
Saying I have met with somewhere, Magna pars virtutis est been moratus venture,
a well manner'd and well governed Appetite, in matter of meats and drinks, is a
great part of Virtue. I do not mean, that Children should be brought up
according to the Rules of a Lessian Diet, which sets an equal stint to all
Stomachs, and is as senseless a thing as a Law would be which should enjoin
that Shoes for all Mankind should be made upon one and the same Last.

2 dly, To a serious and unaffected Piety and Devotion toward God, still and
quiet, real and substantial, without much show and noise; and as free, as may
be, from all tricks of Superstition, or freaks of Enthusiasm; which, if Parents
and Teachers be not very prudent, will almost unavoidably insinuate themselves
into the Religion of Children; and when they are grown up will make them
appear, to wise and sober Persons, fantastical and conceited; and render them
very apt to impose their own foolish Superstitions and wild Conceits upon
others, who understand Religion much better than themselves.

Let them be taught to honor and love God above all things, to serve him in
private, and to attend constantly upon his public Worship, and to keep their
minds intent upon the several parts of it, without wandering and distraction: To
Pray to God as the Fountain of all Grace and the giver of every good and
perfect^ gift: And to acknowledge Him and to ^render Thanks to Him, as our most
gracious and constant Benefactor, and the great Patron and Preserver of our
Lives: To be careful to do what He commands, and to avoid what He has
forbidden: To be always under a lively sense and appreh^nsion of his pure and
all-seeing Eye, which beholds us in secret: And to do every thing in obedience
to the Authority of that Great Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy;
and with an awful regard to the strict and impartial Judgment of the Great Day.

3 dly, To Justice and honesty: To defraud and oppress no man; to be as good as
their word, and to perform all their Promises and Contracts: and endeavor to
imprint upon their minds the Equity of that Great Rule, which is so natural,
and so easy, that even Children are capable of it; I mean that Rule which our
B. Savior tells us is the Law and the Prophets, namely, that we should do to
others as we would have others do to us if we were in their Case and
Circumstances, and they in ours.

You that are Parents and have to do in the World, ought to be just and equal
in all your dealings: In the first place for the sake of your own Souls, and
next for the sake of your Children: Not only that you may entail no Curse upon
the Estate you leave them, but likewise that you may teach them no Injustice by
the Example you set before them; which in this particular they will be as apt
to imitate as in any one thing; because of the present worldly advantage which
it seems to bring, and because Justice is in truth a manly Virtue, and least
understood by Children; and therefore Injustice is a Vice which they will
soonest practice and with the least reluctance, because they have the least
knowledge of it in many particular Cases: And because they have so little sense
of this great Virtue, they should not be allowed to cheat, no not in play and
sport, even when they play for little or nothing: For if they practice it in
that Case, and be unjust in a little, they will be much more tempted to be so
when they can gain a great deal by it.

I remember that Xenophon in his Institution of Cyrus, which he designed for
the Idea of a well educated Prince, tells us this little but very instructive
Story concerning young Cyrus: That his Governor, the better to make him to
understand the nature of Justice, puts this Case to him: You see there, says he
to Cyrus, two Boys playing, of different stature; the lesser of them has a
very long Coat, and the bigger a very short one: Now, says he, if you were a
Judge how would you dispose of these two Garments? Cyrus immediately, and with
very good reason as he thought, passes this sudden Sentence, That the taller
Boy should have the longer Garment, and he that was of lower stature the
shorter, because this certainly was fittest for them both: Upon which his
Governor sharply rebukes him to this purpose; telling him, that if he were to
make two Coats for them he said well; but he did not put this Case to him as a
Tailor but as a Judge, and as such he had given a very wrong Sentence: For a
Judge, says he, ought not to consider what is most fit, but what is just; not
who could make the best use of a thing, but who has the most right to it.

This I bring, partly to show in what familiar ways the Principles of Virtue
may be instilled into Children; but chiefly to prove that Justice is a manly
Virtue, and that there is nothing wherein Children may be more easily misled,
than in matter of Right and Wrong: Therefore Children should be taught the
general Principles and Rules of Justice and Righteousness, because if we would
teach them to do Justice we must teach them to know what Justice is. For many
are unjust merely out of Ignorance and for want of knowing better, and cannot
help it.

4 thly, To Charity; I mean chiefly to the poor and destitute; because this, as
it is an essential so is it a most substantial Part of Religion. Now to
encourage this Disposition in Children we must not only give them the Example
of it, but must frequently inculcate upon them such Passages of Scripture as
these, That pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction: That as we sow in this
kind, so we shall reap: That he shall have judgment without mercy who has
showed no mercy: That at the Judgment of the Great Day we shall in a very
particular manner be called to an account for the practice or omission of this
Duty, and shall then be absolved or condemned according as we have exercised or
neglected this great Virtue of the Christian Religion.

SERMON II. OF THE Education of Children.
PROVE. XXII. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he
will not depart from it.
V. THE good Education of Children consists in giving them good Example. This
course David took in his Family, as appears by that solemn Resolution of his,
Psalm. 101. 2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way^ I will walk within
my house with a perfect heart. Let Parents and Masters of Fa^ilies give good
Example to their Children and Servants, in a constant serving of God in their
Families, which will nourish Religion in those that are under their care: And
let them also be Exemplary in a sober and holy Convers^t^on before those that
belong to them.

And let not your Children, as far as is possible, have any bad Examples to
converse with, either among your Servants, or their own Companions; lest by
walking with them they learn their way and get a blot to their Souls. There is
a contagion in Example, and nothing does more slily insinuate it self and gain
upon us than a living and familiar Pattern; therefore, as much as in you lies,
let Children always have good Examples before them.

Especially, let Parents themselves be exemplary to them in the best things,
because their Example is of all other the most powerful and carries greatest
Authority with it. And without this, Instruction will signify very little, and
the great force and effica^y of it will be lost. We shall find it very hard to
persuade our Children to do that which they see we do not practice our selves.
For even Children have so much sense and sagacity as to understand that actions
are more real ^han words, and a more certain indication of what a man does
truly and inwardly believe. Example is the most lively way of teaching, and
because Children are much given to imitation, it is likewise a very delightful
way of instruction, and that of which Children are most capable; both because
it is best understood, and is apt to make the deepest impression upon them.

So that Parents, above all others, have one Argument to be Religious and good
themselves, for the sake of their Children. If you desire to have them good,
the best way to make them so is to give them the Example of it in being good
your selves. For this reason Parents should take great care to do nothing but
what is worthy of imitation. Your Children will follow you in what you do,
therefore do not go before them in any thing that is evil. The evil Example of
Parents is both a temptation and encouragement to Children to Sin, because it
is a kind of Authority for what they do, and looks like a justification of
their wickedness.

With what reason can thou expect that thy Children should follow thy good
Instructions, when thou thy self give them an ill Example? Thou do but as
it were be^kon to them with thy head and show them the way to Heaven by thy
good Counsel, but thou take them by the ^and and leadest them in the way to
Hell by thy contrary Ex^mple. When ever you swear, or tell a lie, or are
passionate and furious, or come dr^nk into your Family, you weaken the
Authority of your Commands, and lose all reverence and obedience to them by
contradicting your own Precepts.

The Precepts of a good man are apt to raise and inflame others to the
imitation of them, but when they come from one who is faulty and vicious in
that kind himself they are languid and faint, and give us no heart and
encouragement to the exercise of those Virtues which we plainly see they do not
practice themselves. It is the Apostle's Argument, Thou therefore that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that teach thy Children to speak
truth, do thou tell a lie? Thou that say they must not swear, do thou
profane the Name of God by customary Oaths and Curses? Thou art unfit to be a
guide of the blind, a light to them that are in darkness, an instructor of the
foolish, and a teacher of Ba^es; because thou thy self ^ast only a form of
Knowledge and of truth in the Law, but art destitute of the life and practice
of it. In a word, if you be not careful to give good Example to your Children
you defeat your own counsels and undermine the best instructions you can give
them; and they will all be spilt like water upon the barren Sands, they will
have no effect, they will bring forth no fruit.

VI. Good Education consists in wise and early Restraints from that which is
evil, by ^easonable Reproof and Correction. And this also is one way of
Instruction: So Solomon t^ll^ us, Prove. 29. 15. The Rod and Re^roof gives
wisdom: And though both these do suppose a Fault that is past, yet the great
end of them is to prevent the like for the fu^ure, and to ^e an admonition to
them for the time to come. And therefore whatever will probably be effectual
for future Caution and Ame^dment ought to be sufficient in this kind, because
the End is always to give measure to the Means: And where a mild and gentle
Rebuke will do the business, Reproof may stop there without proceeding further:
Or when that will not do, if a sharp word and a severe admonition will be
effectual, the Rod may be spared.

Provided always, that our Lenity give no encouragement to Sin, and be so
managed that Children may perceive that you are in good earnest, and resolved
that if they will not reform they shall certainly be punished. And provided
likewise, that your Lenity bear a due proportion to the nature and quality of
the Fault. We must not use mildness in the case of a wilful and heinous Sin,
especially if it be exemplary and of public influence. To rebuke gently upon
such on Occasion is rather to countenance the Fault, and seems to argue that we
are not sensible enough of the Enormity of it, and that we have not a due
dislike and detestation for it: Such cold Reproofs as those which old Eli gave
his Sons, 1 Sam^ 2. 23, 24. Why do you such things? For I hear of your evil
dealing by all this People, that is, their carriage was such as gave public
Scandal: Nay, my Sons; for it is not a good Report that I hear, you make the
Lord's People to transgress.

Such a cold Reproof as this, where the Crime was so great and notorious, was a
kind of allowance of it, and a partaking with them in their Sin; and so God
interprets it, and therefore calls it a kicking at his Sacrifice, and a
despising of his Offering, Chap. 2. 19. And he threatens Eli with most terrible
Judgments upon this very account, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not.

So that our Severity must be proportioned to the Crime. Where the Fault is
great, there greater Severity must be used; so much at least as may be an
effectual Restraint for the future. Here was Eli's miscarriage, that in the
case of so great a Fault as his Sons were guilty of, his proceeding was neither
proportioned to the Crime, nor to the End of Reproof and Correction, which is
Amendment for the future: But he used such a mildness in his Reproof of them,
as was more apt to encourage than restrain them in their vile courses: For so
the Text says, that his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.

There are indeed some Dispositions so very tender and tractable, that a gentle
Reproof will suffice. But most Children are of that temper that Correction must
be sometimes used, and a fond Indulgence in this Case is many times their utter
ruin and undoing; and in truth not Love but hatred. So the Wiseman tells us,
Prove. 13. 24. He that spares the Rod hates his Son, but he that loves him
chasteneth him betimes. Chap. 19. 18. Chasten thy Son while there is hope, and
let not thy Soul spare for his Crying. And again, Chap. 22. 15. Foolishness is
bound up in the heart of a Child, and the Rod of correction shall drive it far
from him. Chap. 23. 13, 14. Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou
beatest him with the rod he shall not dye: Thou shall beat him with the Rod,
and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. Again, Chap. 29. 15. The Rod and Reproof
gives wisdom, but a Child left to himself brings his Mother to shame: He
mentions the Mother emphatically, because She many times is most faulty in this
fond indulgence; and therefore the shame and grief of it does justly fall upon
Her.

So that Correction is of great use, and often necessary; and Parents that
forbear it are not only cruel to their Children, but to Themselves: For God
many times punishes those Parents very severely who have neglected this
necessary piece of Di^cipline^ There is hardly to be found in the whole Bible a
more terrible temporal Threatening than that concerning Eli and his House, for
his sond indulgence to his Sons, who when they came to be Men proved such
horrible Scandals not only to their Father, but to the Priest's Office; and to
that degree as to make the Sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred by all the
People. I will recite the Threatening at large, for an Admonition to Parents
that they be not guilty in this kind, 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. The Lord said
to Samuel, Behold I will do a thing in Israel at which both the ears of every
one that bears it shall tingle: In that day I will perform against Eli all
things which I have spoken concerning his House; when I begin I will also make
an end. For I have told him that I will judge his House for ever for the
Iniquity which he knows, because his Sons made themselves vile and he
restrained them not: And therefore I have sworn unto the House of Eli, that the
Iniquity of Eli's House shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for
ever. I know very well that this enormous wickedness of Eli's Sons was
committed by them after they were grown to be Men, but this Instance is
nevertheless to my present purpose, there being hardly any doubt to be made but
that it was the natural effect of a remiss and too indulgent an Education.

Yea very often God does correct and remarkably punish fond Parents by those
very Children who have wanted due Reproof and Correction: Of which the
Scripture gives us a remarkable Instance in Adonijah, upon the mention of whose
Rebellion against David his Father the Text takes particular notice of his
Father's extreme fondness of him, as both the procuring and meritorious cause
of it, For his Father had not displeased him at any time in saying why have
thou done so? And on the contrary, the wise Son of Sirach tells us, that he
that chastises his Son shall have joy of him.

VII. The next thing I shall mention as a part of good Education is, the
bringing of Children to be publicly Catechized by the Minister, to prepare
them for solemn Confirmation.

It was with a particular respect to this work of public Catechizing, and by
way of introduction to it, that I at first proposed to treat thus largely of
the good Education of Children, hoping it might be of good use to handle this
Subject more fully than it has usually been done, at least to my knowledge,
from the Pulpit.

And therefore I shall say something, and that very briefly concerning the
nature, and concerning the necessity and great usefulness of Catechizing
Children.

First, For the nature of it, it is a particular way of teaching by Question
and Answer, accommodated and fitted for the instruction of Children in the
Principles of Religion. I do not indeed find, that this particular method is
any where enjoined in Scripture; but Instruction in general is: And I doubt not
but that upon this general warrant Parents and Ministers may use that way of
Instruction of Children which is most fit and proper to instill into them the
Principles of Religion. It is true, that the word (...), from whence our word
Catechism does come, is used in Scripture to signify teaching in general: But
it has since by Ecclesiastical Writers been appropriated to that particular
way of Instruction which has been long in use in the Christian Church, and is
commonly called Catechizing.

Secondly, As to the necessity and great usefulness of it; Catechizing has a
particular advantage as to Children: Because they are subject to forgetfulness,
and want of attention. Now Catechizing is a good Remedy against both these;
because by Questions put to them Children are forced to take notice of what is
taught, and must give some Answer to the Question that is asked: And a
Catechism being short, and containing in a little compass the most necessary
Principles of Religion, it is the more easily remembered.

The great usefulness and indeed the necessity of it plainly appears by
experience. For it very seldom happens, that Children which have not been
catechized have any clear and competent knowledge of the Principles of
Religion; and for want of this are incapable of receiving any great benefit by
Sermons, which suppose persons to be in some measure instructed beforehand in
the main Principles of Religion.

Besides, that if they have no Principles of Religion fixed in them, they
become an easy Prey to Seducers. And we have had sad experience of this in our
Age; and among many other dismal effects of our late Civil Confusions this is
none of the least, that public Catechizing was almost wholly disused, and
private too in most Families: For had Catechizing of Children been continued,
it is very probable that this Age would have been infested with fewer Errors
and with fewer Schisms; and that there would not have been so much Apostasy
from the Fundamentals of Religion. For it is, I think, a true Observation, that
Catechizing, and the History of the Martyrs have been the two great Pillars of
the Protestant Religion.

There being then so great a necessity and usefulness of this Way of
Instruction, I would earnestly recommend the practice of it to Parents and
Masters of Families with respect to their Children and Servants. For I do not
think that this Work should lie wholly upon Ministers. You must do your part at
home, who by your constant residence in your Families have better and more easy
opportunities of inculcating the Principles of Religion upon your Children and
Servants. There you must prepare them for public Catechizing, that the Work of
the Minister may not be too heavy upon him.

As to the part which concerns Ministers, I intend by God's assistance, so soon
as the business can be put into a good method, to begin this Exercise. And I do
earnestly entreat all that have young Children and Servants, to bring such of
them as are fit to be publicly Catechized and instructed in the Principles of
Religion: And I shall as often as shall be thought expedient spend some time in
this Work, between afternoon Prayers and Sermon.

The Catechism to be used shall be that appointed in our Liturgy, which is
short, and contains in it the chief Principles of the Christian Religion. And I
shall make a short and plain explication of the Heads of it, suitable to the
capacity of Children. And because this may not probably be of so great
advantage to those who are of riper Years and Understandings, yet because
Children are to be instructed as well as men, I must entreat those who are like
to carry away the least profit to bring with them the more patience: Especially
since I shall for their sakes, in the constant course of my Afternoon S^rmons,
more largely and fully explain the chief Principles of the Christian Belief: A
Work which you know I have some time ago entered upon.

VIII. The last thing I shall mention, and with which the State of Childhood
ends, is the bringing of Children to the Bishop, to be solemnly Confirmed, by
their taking upon themselves the Vow which by their Sureties they entered into
at their Baptism.

This is acknowledged by almost all Sects and Parties of Christians to be of
Primitive Antiquity, and of very great use when it is performed with that due
preparation of persons for it, by the Ministers to whose charge they belong,
and with that seriousness and Solemnity which the nature of the thing does
require.

And to that end it were very desirable that Confirmations should be more
frequent, and in smaller Numbers at a time; that so the Bishop may apply
himself more particularly to every Person that is to be Confirmed, that by this
means the thing may make the deeper impression and lay the stronger obligation
upon them.

One thing more I could wish, both to prevent confusion, and for the ease also
of the Bishop that his work may not be endless, that Ministers would take care
that none may present themselves to the Bishop or be presented by the
Ministers, to be Confirmed a second time: Because a great many are wont to
offer themselves every time there is a Confirmation; which is both very
disorderly and unreasonable, there being every whit as little reason for a
second Confirmation, as there is for a second Baptism: And if any persons need
so often to be Confirmed, it is a sign that Confirmation has very little
effect upon them.

II. I proceed to the Second general Head, which was to give some more
particular Directions for the management of this Work of the good Education of
Children in such a way as may be most effectual to its End.

First, Endeavor, as well as you can, to discover the particular temper and
disposition of Children, that you may suit and apply your selves to it, and by
striking in with Nature may steer and govern them in the sweetest and easiest
way. This is like knowledge of the nature of the ground to be planted, which
Husbandmen are wont very carefully to enquire into, that they may apply the
Seed to the Soil, and plant in it that which is most proper for it: Quid
quaeque ferat regio, quid quaeque recuset.
Hic segetes, illic veniunt fo^licius uvae.
Every Soil is not proper for all sorts of Grain or Fruit; one ground is fit
for Corn, another for Vin^s: And so is it in the tempers and dispositions of
Children: Some are more capable of one Excellency and Virtue than another, and
some more strongly inclined to one Vice than another: Which is a great Se^ret
of Nature and Providence, and it is very hard to give a just and satisfactory
account of it.

It is good therefore to know the particular Tempers of Children, that we may
accordingly apply our care to them and manage them to the best advantage: That
where we discern in them any forward inclinations to good, we may cast in such
Seeds and Principles, as, by their suitableness to their particular Tempers, we
judge most likely to take soonest and deepest root: And when these are grown
up, and have taken possession of the Soil, they will prepare it for the Seeds
of other Virtues.

And so likewise when we discover in their Nature a more particular disposition
and leaning toward any thing which is bad, we must with great diligence and
care apply such Instructions and plant such Principles in them, as may be most
effectual, to alter this evil disposition of their Minds; that whilst Nature is
tender and flexible we may gently bend it the other way: And it is almost
incredible what strange things by Prudence and Patience may be done toward the
rectifying of a very perverse and crooked Disposition.

So that it is of very great use to observe and discover the particular Tempers
of Children, that in all our instruction and management of them, we may apply
our selves to their Nature and hit their peculiar Disposition: By this means we
may lead and draw them to their Duty in human ways, and such as are much more
agreeable to their Temper than constraint and necessity, which are harsh and
churlish, and against the grain. Whatever is done with delight goes on
cheerfully, but when Nature is compelled and forced, things proceed heavily:
Therefore, when we are forming and fashioning Children to Religion and Virtue,
we should make all the advantage we can of their particular Tempers. This will
be a good direction and help to us to conduct Nature in the way it will most
easily go. Every Temper gives some particular advantage and handle whereby we
may take hold of them and steer them more easily: But if we take a contrary
course we must expect to meet with great difficulty and reluctance.

Such ways of Education as are prudently fitted to the particular dispositions
of Children are like Wind and Tide together, which will make the Work go on
amain: But those ways and methods which are applied cross to Nature are like
Wind against Tide, which make a great stir and conflict, but a very slow
progress. Not that I do, or can expect that all Parents should be Philosophers,
but that they should use the best wisdom they have in a matter of so great
concernment.

Secondly, In your instruction of Children endeavor to plant in them those
Principles of Religion and Virtue which are most substantial, and are like to
have the best influence upon the future government of their Lives, and to be of
continual and lasting use to them. Look to the Seed you sow, that it be sound
and good, and for the benefit and use of mankind: This is to be regarded, as
well as the G^ound into which the Seed is cast.

Labor to beget in Children a right apprehension of those things which are
most fundamental and necessary to the knowledge of God and our Duty; and to
make them sensible of the great evil and danger of Sin; and to work in them a
firm belief of the next Life and of the eternal Rewards and Recompenses of it.
And if these Principles once take root they will spread far and wide, and have
a vast influence upon all their actions; and unless some ^owerful Lust, or
temptation to Vice ^urry them away, they will probably accompany them, and
stick by them as ^ong as they live.

Many Parents, according to their ^est knowledge and apprehensions of Religion
in which they themselves ^ave been educated, and too often according to their
Zeal without knowledge, do take great care to plant little and ill-grounded
Opinions in the minds of their Children, and to fashion them to a Party, by
infusing into them the particular Notions and Phrases of a Sect, which when
they come to be examined have no substance, nor perhaps sense in them: And by
this means, instead of bringing them up in the true and solid Principles of
Christianity, they take a great deal of pains to instruct them in some doubtful
Doctrines of no great moment in Religion, and perhaps false at the bottom;
whereby instead of teaching them to hate Sin they fix them in Schism, and teach
them to hate and damn all those who differ from them and are opposite to them;
who yet are perhaps much more in the right, and far better Christians than
themselves.

And indeed nothing is more common and more to be pitied, than to see with what
a confident contempt and scornful pity some ill-instructed and ignorant people
will lament the blindness and ignorance of those who have a thousand times more
true knowledge and skill than themselves, not only in all other things, but
even in the practice as well as knowledge of the Christian Religion; believing
those who do not relish their affected Phrases and uncouth Forms of speech to
be ignorant of the Mystery of the Gospel, and utter strangers to the Life and
Power of Godliness.

But now what is the effect of this mistaken way of Education? The Harvest is
just answerable to the Husbandry, Infoelix lolium and steriles dominantur
avenae;
As they have sown, so they must expect to reap; and instead of good Grain to
have Cockle and Tares: They have sown the Wind, and they shall reap the
Whirlwind; as the expression is in the Prophet; instead of true Religion, and
of a sober and peaceable Conversation, there will come up new and wild
Opinions, a factious and uncharitable spirit, a furious and boisterous zeal,
which will neither suffer themselves to be quiet, nor any body that is about
them.

But if you desire to reap the effects of true Piety and Religion, you must
take care to plant in Children the main and substantial Principles of
Christianity, which may give them a general bias to holiness and goodness, and
not to little particular Opinions, which being once fixed in them by the strong
prejudice of Education will hardly ever be rooted out.

Thirdly, Do all that in you lies to check and discourage in them the first
beginnings of Sin and Vice: So soon as ever they appear pluck them up by the
Roots. This is like the weeding of Corn, which is a necessary piece of good
Husbandry. Vices like ill weeds grow apace, and if they once take to the Soil
it will be hard to extirpate and kill them: But if we watch them and cut them
up as soon as they appear, this will discourage the Root and make it dye.

Therefore take great heed that your Children be not habituated and accustomed
to any evil course. A Vice that is of any considerable growth and continuance
will soon grow obstinate, and having once spread its roots it will be a very
difficult matter to clear the ground of it. A Child may be so long neglected
till he be overgrown with Vice to that degree, that it may be out of the power
of Parents ever to bring him to good fruit. If it once gain upon the depraved
disposition of Children it will be one of the hardest things in the World to
give a stop to it. It is the Apostle's caution to take heed of being hardened
by the deceitfulness of Sin, which they who go on in an evil course will most
certainly be. We should observe the first appearances of evil in Children, and
kill those young Serpents as soon as they stir lest they bite them to death.

Fourthly. Bring them, as soon as they are capable of it, to the public Worship
of God, where He has promised his more especial presence and blessing. It is
in Zion, the place of God's public Worship, where the Lord has commanded the
blessing even Life for evermore: There are the means which God has appointed
for the begetting and increasing of Grace in us: This is the Pool where the
Angel uses to come and to move the Waters: Bring your Children hither, where
if they diligently attend they may meet with an Opportunity of being healed.

And when they come from the Church, call them frequently to an account of what
they have heard and learned there: This will make them both to attend more
diligently to what they hear, and to lay it up in their Memories with greater
care, and will fix it there so as to make a deeper and more lasting impression
upon their Minds.

Fifthly, Be careful more especially to put them upon the exercise and practice
of Religion and Virtue, in such Instances as their understanding and age are
capable of. Teach them some short and proper Forms of Prayer to God, to be said
by them devoutly upon their knees in private, at least every Morning and
Even^ng. A great many Children neglect this, not from any ill disposition of
mind, but because no body takes care to teach them how to do it. And if they
were taught and put upon doing it, the habit and custom of any thing will after
a little while make that easy and delightful enough, which they cannot
afterward be brought to without great difficulty and reluctance.

Knowledge and Practice do mutually^ promote and help forward one another^
Knowledge prepares and disposes for Practice, and Practice is the best way to
perfect Knowledge in any kind. Mere Speculation is a very raw and rude thing in
comparison of that true and distinct knowledge which is gotten by Practice and
Experience. The most exact skill in Geography is nothing compared with the
knowledge of that Man who besides the Speculative part has traveled over and
carefully viewed the Countries he has read of. The most knowing man in the Art
and Rules of Navigation is no body in comparison of an experienced Pilot and
Seaman. Because knowledge perfected by practice is as much dif^erent from mere
Speculation as the skill of doing a thing is from being told how a thing is to
be done. For men may easily mistake Rules, but frequent Practice and Experience
are seldom deceived. Give me a man that constantly does a thing well, and that
shall satisfy me that he knows how to do it. That Saying of our B. Savior, If
any man will do my will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self, is a clear determination of this matter, namely,
That they understand the Will of God best who are most careful to do it. And so
likewise the best way to know what God is, is to transcribe his Perfections in
our Lives and Actions; to be holy, and just, and good, and merciful as He is.

Therefore when the minds of Children are once thoroughly possessed with the true
Principles of Religion, we should bend all our endeavors to put them upon the
practice of what they know: Let them rather be taught to do well than to talk
well; rather to avoid what is evil, in all its shapes and appearances, and to
practice their Duty in the several Instances of it, than to speak with the
Tongues of Men and Angels: Unto Man He said, Behold! the fear of the Lord, that
is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Job 28. 28. Hereby, ^aith
St. John, we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: He that says
I know him and keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in
him, 1 John 2. 3, 4.

Xenophon tells us, that the Persians instead of making their Children learned,
taught them to be virtuous; and instead of filling their heads with fine
Speculations, taught them honesty, and sincerity, and resolution; and
endeavored to make them wise and valiant, just and temperate. Lycurgus also in
the institution of the Lacedemonian Commonwealth took no care about Learning,
but only about the Lives and Manners of their Children: Though I should think
that the care of both is best, and that Learning would very much help to form
the Manners of Children, and to make them both wiser and better Men: And
therefore, with the leave of so great and wise a Lawgiver, I cannot but think
that this was a defect in his Institution^ Because Learning, if it be under the
conduct of true wisdom and goodness is not only an ornament but a great
advantage to the better Government of any Kingdom or Commonwealth.

Sixthly, There must be great care and diligence used in this whole business of
Education, and more particularly in the Instruction of Children. There must be
line upon line, and precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, as
the Prophet expresses it, Isa. 28. 10. The Principles of Religion and Virtue
must be instilled and dropped into them by such degrees and in such a measure as
they are capable of receiving them: For Children are narrow-mouthed Vessels,
and a great deal cannot be poured into them at once.

And they must also be accustomed to the practice and exercise of Religion and
goodness by degrees, till Holiness and Virtue have taken root, and they be well
settled and confirmed in a good course. Now this requires constant attendance
and even the patience of the Husbandman to wait for the fruit of our labors.

In some Children the Seeds that are sown fall into a greater depth of earth
and therefore are of a ^low disclosure, and it may be a considerable time
before they appear above ground; it is long before they shoot and grow up to
any height, and yet they may afterward be very considerable: Which, as an
ingenious Author observes, Sir H. W.
should excite the care and prevent the despair of Parents: For if their
Children be not such speedy Spreaders and Branchers as the vine, they may
perhaps prove -- proles tarde crescentis Olivae.


It is a work of great pains and difficulty to rectify a perverse Disposition.
It is more easy to palliate the corruption of Nature, but the cure of it
requires time and careful looking to. An evil temper and inclination may be
covered and concealed, but it is a great work to conquer and subdue it. It must
first be checked and stopped in its course, and then weakened and the force of
it be broken by degrees, and at last, if it be possible, de^troyed and rooted
out.

Seventhly and Lastly, To all these means we must add our constant and earnest
Prayers to God for our Children, that his Grace may take an early possession of
them; that he would give them virtuous inclinations and towardly dispositions
for goodness: And that he would be pleased to accompany all our endeavors to
that end with his powerful Assistance and Blessing; without which all that we
can do will prove ineffectual. Parents may plant, and Ministers may water, but
it is God that must give the increase.

Be often then upon your knees for your Children. Do not only teach them to
pray for themselves, but do you likewise with great fervor and earnestness
commend them to God and to the power of his Grace which alone is able to
sanctify them. Apply your selves to the Father of lights; from whom comes every
good and perfect gift: Beg his H. Spirit, and ask Divine knowledge and wisdom
for them of Him, who gives to all liberally and upbraideth no man: Beseech Him
to season their tender years with his Fear, which is the beginning of Wisdom:
Pray for them as Abraham did for Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael may live in thy sight.

Many Parents, having ^ound all their endeavors for a long time together
ineffectual, have at length betook themselves to Prayer, earnest and
importunate Prayer to God, as their last Refuge. Monica, the Mother of St.
Austin, by the constancy and importunity of her Prayers, obtained of God the
conversion of her Son, who proved afterward so great and glorious an
Instrument of good to the Church of God: According to what St. Ambrose Bishop
of Milain, to encourage her to persevere in her fervent Prayers for her Son,
had said to her, Fieri non potest ut filius tot lachrymarum pereat, It cannot
be, says he, that a Son of so many Prayers and Tears should miscarry. God's
Grace is free, but it is not likely but that God will at last give in this
Blessing to our earnest Prayers and faithful Endeavors.

Therefore pray for them without ceasing, pray and faint not. Great importunity
in Prayer seldom fails of a gracious answer: Our B. Savior spoke two Parables
on purpose to encourage us herein: Not because God is moved, much less because
he is tired out with our Importunity; but because it is an Argument of our firm
belief and confidence in his great Goodness: And to them that believe all
things are possible, says our B. Lord, To whom etc.

SERMON III. OF THE Education of Children.
PROVE. XXII. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he
will not depart from it.
I Proceed to the next general Head which I proposed, namely,

III. To discover some of the more remarkable and common Miscar^i^ges in the
management of this W^^k. I do not hereby mean gross neglects for want of care,
but mistakes and miscarriages for want of prudence and skill, even when there
is no want of care and diligence in Parents and Instructers. And I shall for
Method's sake reduce the more considerable and common Miscarriages to these
three Heads.

First, In matter of Instruction.

Secondly, In matter of Example.

Thirdly, In matter of Reproof and Correction.

I. In matter of Instruction. Parents do very often mainly miscarry in not
teaching their Children the true difference between Good and Evil, and the
degrees of them: As when we teach them any thing is a Sin that really is not,
or that any thing is not a Sin which in truth is so: Or when we teach them to
lay more stress and weight upon things than they will bear; making that which
perhaps is only covenient to be in the highest degree necessary, or that which
it may be is only inconvenient, or may be an occasion of Scandal to some weak
Christians, to be a Sin in its own nature damnable.

Parents do likewise lay too great a weight upon things, when they are as
diligent to instruct them in lesser things, and as strict in enjoining them,
and as severe in punishing the commission or neglect of them, according as they
esteem them good or evil, as if they were the weightier things of the Law and
matters of the greatest moment in Religion.

Thus I have known very careful and well-meaning Parents that have with great
severity restrained their Children in the wearing of their hair: Nay I can
remember since the wearing of it below their Ears was looked upon as a Sin of
the first magnitude; and when Ministers generally, whatever their Text was, did
in every Sermon either find or make an occasion with great severity to reprove
the great Sin of long hair; and if they saw any one in the Congregation guilty
in that kind, they would point him out particularly, and let fly at him with
great zeal.

I have likewise known some Parents that have strictly forbidden their Children
the use of some sorts of Recreations and Games under the notion of heinous
Sins, upon a mistake that because there was in them a mixture of Fortune and
Skill they were therefore unlawful; a Reason which I think has no weight and
force in it, tho I do not deny but human Laws may for very prudent reasons
either restrain or forbid the use of these Games, because of the boundless
expense both of Money and Time which is many times occasioned by them.

I have known others, nay perhaps the same Persons, that would not only allow
but even encourage their Children to despise the very Service of God under some
Forms, which according to their several apprehensions they esteemed to be
Superstitious or Factious. But this I have ever thought to be a thing of most
dangerous consequence, and have often observed it to end either in the neglect
or contempt of all Religion.

And how many Parents teach their Children dou^tful Opinions, and lay great
stress upon them as if they were saving or damning Points; and hereby set such
an edge and keenness upon them for or against some indifferent modes and
circumstances of God's Worship as if the very Being of a Church and the Essence
of Religion were concerned in them?

These certainly are great Mistakes, and many times have very pernicious
effects, thus to confound things which are of so wide and vast a difference as
good and evil, lawful and unlawful, indifferent and necessary. For when
Children come to be Men, and to have a freer and larger view of the World, and
shall find by the contrary practice of very wise and serious Persons that they
have quite different apprehensions of these matters, and do not think that to
be a Sin which their Parents have so strictly forbidden them under that notion,
and many times punished them more severely for the doing of it than if they had
told a Lie, this may make them apt to question whether any thing be a Sin: And
the violence which they offer to their Consciences, and the strein that they
give them upon such an occasion, by complying wi^h the general practice of
others contrary to the Principles of their Education, does many times open a
gap for great and real Sins.

Besides, that Children which are bred up in high Prejudices for or against
indifferent Opinions or Practices in Religion, do usually when they are grown
up prove to be Men of narrow and contracted Spirits, peevish and froward and
uncharitable, and many times great Bigots and Zealots either in the way of
Superstition or Faction, according to the Principles which have been instilled
into them to bias them either way: And very hardly do they ever quit
themselves so clearly of their Prejudices, as to become wise and peaceable and
substantial Christians.

In short, if we carefully observe it, we shall find that when Children have
been thus indiscreetly educated, their Religion differs as much from that of
sober and judicious Christians, as the Civil behavior and conversation of
those who have been unskilfully and conceitedly taught how to carry themselves,
does from the behavior of those who have had a more free and generous
Education.

II. In matter of Example. There are many Parents whose Lives are Exemplary in
the main, who yet seem to use too great a freedom before their Children. It is
an old Rule, and I think ^ very good one, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia,
There is a very great reverence due to Children. There are many things which
are not Sins, and therefore may lawfully be ^one, which yet it may not be
prudent and expedient to do before all persons. There are some words and
actions so trivial and light, that they are not fit to be said or done before
those for whom we have a reverence. There is a certain freedom of Conversation
which is only proper among Equals in Age and Quality, which if we use before
our Superiors and Betters, we seem to contemn them; if before our Inferiors,
they will go nigh to contemn us.

It ought to be considered, that Children do not understand the exact limits of
good and evil, so that if in our words or actions we go to the utmost bounds of
that which is lawful, we shall be in danger of showing them the way to that
which is unlawful. Children are not wont to be careful of their steps, and
therefore we will not venture them to play about a Precipice, or near a
dangerous Place, where yet Men that will take care may go safely enough. And
therefore Parents should be very careful to keep their Children from the
Confines of Evil, and at as great a distance from it as they can. And to this
end their words and actions should ever be tempered with gravity and
circumspection, that Children may not see or hear any thing which may acquaint
them with the approaches to Sin, or carry them to the Borders of Vice; lest
they should not stop just there, but take a step further than you intended they
should go.

III. In matter of Reproof and C^rrection; many Religious and careful Parents
are guilty of two great Miscarriages in this Part of Education.

First, Of too much rigor and severity; which, especially with some sort of
Tem^ers, has very ill success. The first experiment that should be made upon
Children should be to allure them to their Duty, and by reasonable inducements
to gain them to the love of Goodness; by Praise and Rew^rd, and sometimes by
Shame and Disgnace: And if this will do, there will be no occasion to proceed
to Severity; especially not to great Severities, which are very unsuitable to
Human Nature. A mix^ure of prudent and seasonable Reproof o^ Correction when
there is occasion for it, may do very well; but Whips are not h^ Cords of a
Man: Human Nature may be driven by them, but it must be led by sweeter and
gentler ways.

Speusippus caused the Pictures of Joy and Gladness to be set round about his
School, to signify that the business of Education ought to be rendered as
pleasant as may be: And indeed Children stand in need of all the enticements
and encouragements to Learning and Goodness. Metus haud diuturni Magister
officij, says Tully; Fear alone will not teach a man his Duty and hold him to
it for any long time: For when that is removed, Nature will break loose and do
like it self: Besides, that frequent Corrections make Punishments to lose their
Awe and force, and are apt to spoil the Disposition of Children and to harden
them against Shame; and after a while they will despise Correction, when they
find they can endure it.

Great Severities do often work an effect quite contrary to that which was
intended: And many times those who were bred up in a very severe School, hate
Learning ever after for the sake of the cruelty that was used to force it upon
them: And so likewise an endeavor to bring Children to Piety and Goodness by
unreasonable strictness and rigor does often beget in them a lasting disgust
and Prejudice against Religion, and teaches them, as Erasmus says, virtutem
simul odisse and nosse, to bate Virtue at the same time that they teach them to
know it: For by this means Virtue is represented to the minds of Children under
a great disadvantage, and good and ^vil are brought too near together: So that
whenever they think of Religion and Virtue, they remember the Severity which
was wont to accompany the Instructions about it; and the natural hatred which
men have for Punishment is by this means derived upon Religion it self. And
indeed how can it be expected that Children should love their Duty, when they
never hear of it but with a handful of Rods shak'd over them?

I insist upon this the more, because I do not remember to have observed more
notorious Instances of great miscarriage, than in the Children of very strict
and severe Parents. Of which I can give no other account but this, that Nature
when it is thus overcharged recoils the more terribly: It has something in it
like the Spring of an Engine, which being forcibly pressed does upon the first
liberty return back with so much the greater violence: In like manner the
vicious dispositions of Children, when restrained merely by the severity of
Parents, do break forth strangely as soon as ever they get loose and from under
their Discipline.

Secondly, Another Miscarriage in this matter is, when Reproof and Correction
are accompanied and managed with Passion. This is to betray one Fault, and
perhaps a greater, in the punishment of another. Besides, that this makes
Reproof and Correction to look like Revenge and Hatred, which usually does not
persuade and reform but provoke and exasperate. And this probably may be one
reason of the Apostle's admonition, Parents provoke not your Children unto
wrath, because that is never likely to have any good effect. Correction is a
kind of Physic, which ought never to be administered in Passion, but upon
counsel and good advice.

And that Passion is incident to Parents upon this occasion, the Apostle tells
us when he says, that the Parents of our flesh chasten us for their pleasure,
Heb. 10. 12. that is, they do it many times to gratify their Passion; but God
chastens us for our profit, not in Anger but with a design to do us good: And
can we have a better Pattern than our heavenly Father to imitate?

A Father is as it were a Prince and a Judge in his Family: There he gives
Laws, and inflicts Censures and Punishments upon Offenders. But how misbecoming
a thing would it be to see a Judge pass Sentence upon a man in Choler? It is
the same thing to see a Father in the heat and fury of his Passion correct his
Child. If a Father could but see himself in this Mood, and how ill his Passion
becomes him, instead of being Angry with his Child he would be out of Patience
with himself. I proceed to the next thing I proposed, namely,

IV. To make out the truth of the Proposition contained in the Text, by showing
how the good Education of Children comes to be of so great advantage and to
have so good and lasting an influence upon their whole Lives.

I confess there are some wild and savage Natures, monstrous and prodigious
Tempers, hard as the Rocks, and barren as the Sand upon the Seashore; which
discover strong and early propensions to vice, and a violent antipathy to
Goodness. Such Tempers are next to desperate, but yet they are not utterly
intractable to the Grace of God and the Religious Care of Parents.

I hope such Tempers as these are very rare, though God is pleased they should
sometimes appear in the World, as instances of the great corruption and
degeneracy of Human Nature, and of the great need of Divine Grace. But surely
there is no Temper that is absolutely and irrecoverably prejudiced against that
which is good. This would be so terrible an Objection against the Providence of
God as would be very hard to be answered. God be thanked, most Tempers are
tractable to good Education, and there is very great p^obability of the good
succe^s of it, if it be carefully and wisely managed.

And for the Confirmation of this Truth I shall instance in two very great
Advantages of a Religious and vir^uous Education of Children.

1 st. It gives Religion and Virtue the advantage of the first Possession.

2 dly. The Advantage of Habit and Custom.

First, Good Education gives Religion and Virtue the Advantage of the first
Possession. The Mind of Man is an active Principle, and will be employed about
something or other. It cannot stand idle, and will therefore take up with that
which first offers it self. So soon as Reason puts forth it self, and the
Understanding begins to be exercised, the Mind of man discovers a natural
thirst after knowledge, and greedily drinks in that which comes first. If it
have not the Waters of Life and the pure streams of Goodness to allay that
thirst, it will seek to quench it in the filthy Puddles and impure Pleasures of
this World.

Now since Children will be busying their Minds about something, it is good
that they should be entertained with the best things, and with the best Notions
and Principles of which their Understanding and Age are capable. It is a happy
thing to be Principled, and, as I may say, Prejudiced the better way, and that
Religion should get the first possession of their Hearts. For it is certainly a
great Advantage to Religion to be planted in a tender and fresh Soil. And if
Parents be careless and neglect this advantage, the Enemy will be sure to sow
his Tares whilst the Husbandman is asleep.

Therefore we should prevent the Devil by giving God and Goodness an early
possession of our Children, and by letting Him into their Hearts betimes.
Possession is a great Point, and it is of mighty consequence to have Nature
planted with good Seeds before vicious inclinations spring up and grow into
strength and Habit.

I know that there is a spiteful Proverb current in the World, and the Devil
has taken care to spread it to the discouragement of an early Piety, A young
Saint and an old Devil; but notwithstanding this, a young Saint is most likely
to prove an old one. Sol^mon to be sure was of this mind, and I make no doubt
but he made as wise and true Proverbs as any body has done since: Him only
excepted who was a much greater and wiser Man than Solomon.

Secondly, Good Education gives likewise the Advantage of Habit and Custom; and
Custom is of mighty force. It is, as Pliny in one of his Epistles says of it,
efficacissimus omnium rerum Magister, the most powerful and effectual Master in
every kind. It is an acquired and a sort of Second Nature, and next to Nature
it self a principle of greatest power. Custom bears a huge sway in all Human
actions. Men love those things and do them with ease to which they have been
long inured and accustomed. And on the contrary men go against Custom with
great regret and uneasiness.

And among all others, that Custom is most strong which is begun in Childhood:
And we see in Experience the strange power of Education in forming persons to
Religion and Virtue. Now Education is nothing but certain Customs planted in
Childhood, and which have taken deep Root whilst Nature was tender.

We see likewise in common experience how dangerous an evil Habit and Custom
is, and how hard to be altered. Therefore the Cretians, when they would curse a
man to purpose, wish^d that the Gods would engage him in some bad Custom,
looking upon a man after that to be irrecoverably lost. So on the other Side,
to be engaged in a good Custom is an unspeakable advantage; especially for
Children to be habituated to a holy and virtuous course, before the Habits of
Sin and Vice have taken root and are confirmed in them.

We are too natu^ally inclined to that which is evil: But yet this ought not to
discourage us, because it is certain in Experience that a contrary Cu^^om has
done much in many Cases, even where Nature has been strongly inclined the
other way. Demosthenes did by great Resolution and almost infinite Pains, and
after a long Habit, alter the natural imperfection of his Speech, and even in
despite of Nature became the most eloquent Man perhaps that ever lived. And
this amounts even to a Demonstration, for what has been done may be done.

So that it is not universally true which Aristotle says, That Nature cannot be
altered. It is true indeed in the Instance in which he gives of throwing a
Stone upward; you cannot, says he, by any Custom, nay though you fling it up
never so often, teach a Stone to ascend of it self: And so it is in many other
Instances in which Nature is peremptory: But Nature is not always so; but
sometimes has a great latitude: As we see in young Trees, which though they
naturally grow straight up, yet being gently bent may be made to grow any way.
But above all, Moral inclinations and habits do admit of great alteration, and
are subject to the power of a contrary Custom.

Indeed Children when they come to be Men should take great care, that they do
not owe their Religion only to Custom; but they should upon consideration and
due examination of the grounds of it, so far as they are capable of doing it,
make it their Choice. And yet for all that we must not deny the best Religion
in the World this greatest advantage of all other. It is certainly a great
happiness for Children to be inclined to that which when they come to
understand themselves they would make their Choice, if they were indif^erent:
But an indifferency cannot be preserved in Children: And therefore, since they
will certainly be biassed one way or other, there is all the reason in the
World why we should endeavor to bias them the better way. Parents may often
mistake about what is best, but if they love their Children they cannot but
wish and endeavor that they may be good and do what is best.

I come now to the last Head. I proposed which was.

V. To endeavor by the most powerful Arguments I can offer, to stir up and
persuade those whose Duty this is, to discharge it with great Care and
Conscience.

If the foregoing Discourse be true, what can be said to those who are guilty
in the highest degree of the gross neglect of this great Duty? Who, neither by
Instruction, nor Example, nor Restraint from evil, do endeavor to make their
Children good. Some Parents are such Monsters, I had almost said Devils, as not
to know how to give good things to their Children; but instead of bread give
them a stone, instead of fish give them a serpent, instead of an egg give them
a scorpion, as our Savior expresses it.

These are evil indeed, who train up their Children for ruin and destruction;
in the service of the Devil, and in the Trade and Mystery of iniquity: Who,
instead of teaching them the Fear of the Lord, infuse into them the Principles
of Atheism, and Irreligion, and Profaneness: Instead of teaching them to love
and reverence Religion, they teach them to hate and despise it, and to make a
mock both of Sin and Holiness: Instead of training them up in the knowledge of
the H. Scriptures which are able to make men wise unto Salvation, they do
aedificare ad Gehennam, they edify them for Hell, by teaching them to profane
that Holy Book, and to abuse the Wor^ of God which they ought to tremble at, by
turning it into Jest and Raillery: Instead of teaching them to Pray and to
bless the Name of God, they teach them to Blaspheme that Great and terrible
Name, and to profane it by their continual Oaths and Imprecations: And instead
of bringing them to God's Church, they carry them to the Devil's Chapels, to
Playhouses and Places of debauchery, those Schools and Nurseries of Lewdness
and Vice.

Thus they, who ought to be the great Teachers and Examples of Holiness and
Virtue, are the chief encouragers and Patterns of Vice and wickedness in their
Children; and instead of restraining them from evil, they countenance them in
it, and check all forward inclinations to Goodness; till at last they make them
ten times more the Children of Wrath, than they were by that corrupt Nature
which they derived from them; and hereby treasure up, both for their Children
and themselves, wrath against the Day of wrath and the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God.

But I hope there are few or none such here. They do not use to frequent God's
House and Worship. And therefore I shall apply my self to those who are not so
notoriously guilty in this kind, though they are greatly faulty in neglecting
the good Education of their Children. And for the greater conviction of such
Parents, I shall offer to them the following Considerations.

First, Consider what a sad Inheritance you have conveyed to your Children. You
have transmitted to them corrupt and depraved Natures, evil and vicious
Inclinations^ You have begotten them in your own Image and likeness, so that by
Nature they are Children of wrath. Now methinks Parents that have a due sense
of this should be very solicitous, by the best means they can use, to free them
from that Curse; by endeavoring to correct those perverse dispositions and
cursed inclinations which they have transmitted to them. Surely you ought to do
all you can to repair that broken Estate which from you is descended upon them.

When a Man has by Treason tainted his Blood and forfeited his Estate, with
what grief and regret does he look upon his Children, and think of the Injury
which has been done to them by his Fault? And how solicitous is he, before he
dye, to petition the King for favor to his Children? How earnestly does he
charge his Friends to be careful of them and kind to them? That by these means
he may make the best reparation he can of their Fortune which has been ruined
by his Fault.

And have Parents such a tenderness for their Children, in reference to their
Estate and condition in this World; and have they none for the good estate of
their Souls and their eternal condition in another World? If you are sensible
that their Blood is tainted, and that their best Fortunes are ruined by your
sad Misfortune; Why do you not bestir your selves for the repairing of God's
Image in them? Why do you not travel in birth till Christ be formed in them?
Why do you not pray earnestly to God and give Him no rest, who has reprieved
and it may be pardoned you, that He would extend his Grace to them also, and
grant them the Blessings of his New Covenant?

All your Children are begotten of the Bondwoman; therefore we should pray as
Abraham did, O that Ishmael may live in thy sight: O that these Sons of Hagar
may be Heirs of a Blessing.

Secondly, Consider in the next place, that good Education is the very best
Inheritance that you can leave to your Children. It is a wise Saying of
Solom^n, Eccl. 7. 11. that Wisdom is good with an Inh^ritance; but surely an
Inheritance, without Wisdom and Virtue to manage it, is a very pernicious
thing. And yet how many Parents are there who omit no Care and Industry to get
an Estate that they may leave it to their Children, but use no means to form
their Minds and Manners for the right use and enjoyment of it; without which it
had been much happier for them to have been left in great Poverty and straits?

Do thou love thy Child? This is true love to any one, to do the best for him
we can. Of all your toil and labor for your Children, this may be all the
fruit they may reap, and all that they may live to enjoy, the advantage of a
good Education. All other things are uncertain. You may raise your Children to
Honor, and settle a Noble Estate upon them to support it: You may leave them,
as you think, to faithful Guardians, and by kindness and obligation procure
them many Friends: And when you have done all this, their Guardians may prove
unfaithful and treacherous, and in the Changes and Revolutions of the World
their Honors may slip from under them, and their Riches may take to themselves
wings and fly away: And when these are gone, and they come to be nipp'd with
the Frosts of Adversity, their Friends will fall off like leaves in Autumn.
This is a sore evil, which yet I have seen under the Sun.

But if the good Education of your Children has made them wise and virtuous,
you have provided an Inheritance for them which is out of the reach of Fortune,
and cannot be taken from them. Crates the Philosopher used to stand in the
highest Places of the City, and to cry out to the Inhabitants, O ye People! why
do you toil to get Estates for your Children, when you take no care of their
Education? This is, as Diogenes said, to take care of the Shoe, but none of
the foot that is to wear it; to ^ake great pains for an Estate for your
Children, but none at all to teach them how to use it; that is, to take great
care to undo them, but none to make them happy.

Thirdly, Consider that by a careful and Religious Education of your Children
you provide for your own Comfort and Happiness. However they happen to prove,
you will have the comfort of a good Conscience and of having done your Duty. If
they be good, they are matter of great Comfort and Joy to their Parents. A wise
Son, says Solomon, makes a glad Father. It is a great satisfaction to see
that which we have planted to thrive and grow up; to find the good effect of
our care and industry, and that the work of our hands does prosper. The Son of
Sirach, among several things for which he reckons a Man happy, mentions this in
the first place, He that has joy of his Children, Ecclus. 25. 7.

On the contrary, in wicked Children the honor of a Family fails, our Name
withers, and in the next Generation will quite be blotted out: Whereas a
hopeful Posterity is a prospect of a kind of Eternity. We cannot leave a better
and more lasting Monument of our selves, than in wise and vir^uous Children.
Buildings and Books are but dead things in comparison of these living Memorials
of our Selves.

By the good Education of your Children you provide for your Selves some of the
best Comforts both for this World and the other. For this World; and that at
such a Time when you most stand in need of Comfort, I mean the Time of Sickn^ss
and old Age. Wise men have been wont to lay up some praesidia S^n^ctutis,
something to support them in that gloomy and melancholy Time, as Books, and
Friends, or the like. But there is no such external Comfort at such a Time as
good and dutiful Children. They will then be the light of our Eyes, and the
Cordial of our fainting Spirits; and will recompense all our former care of
them by their present care of us: And when we are decaying and withering away,
we shall have the pleasure to see our Youth as it were renewed, and our selves
flourishing again in our Children. The Son of Sirach speaking of the comfort
which a good Father has in a well educated Son, Though he dye, says he, yet he
^s as if he were not dead, for he has left one behind him that is like
himself. While he lived he saw and rejoiced in him, and when he died he was not
sorrowful, Ecclus. 30. 4, 5.

Whereas on the contrary, a foolish Son is, as Solomon tells us, a heaviness to
his Mother, the miscarriage of a Child being apt most tenderly to affect the
Mother. Such Parents as neglect their Children, do as it were provide so many
pains and Aches for themselves against they come to be Old. And rebellious
Children are to their infirm and aged Parents so many aggravations of an evil
Day, so many burdens of their Age: They help to bow them down and to bring
their gray hairs so much the sooner with sorrow to the grave. They do usually
repay their Parents all the neglects of their Education by their undutiful
carriage toward them.

And good Children will likewise be an unspeakable Comfort to us in the Other
World. When we come to appear before God at the Day of Judgment, to be able to
say to Him, (...) here am I and the Children which thou have given me: How will
this comfort our Hearts, and make us lift up our Heads with joy in that Day?

Fourthly, Consider that the surest Foundation of the public welfare and
happiness is laid in the good Education of Children. Families are increased by
Children, and Cities and Nations are made up of Families. And this is a matter
of so great concernment both to Religion and the Civil happiness of a Nation,
that anciently the best constituted Commonwealths did commit this care to the
Magistrate more than to Parents.

When Antipater demanded of the Spartans fifty of their Children for Hostages,
they offered rather to deliver to Him twice as many Men; so much did they value
the loss of their Country's Education. But now amongst us this Work lies
chiefly upon Parents. There are several ways of reforming Men; by the Laws of
the Civil Magistrate, and by the public Preaching of Ministers. But the most
likely and hopeful Reformation of the World must begin with Children. Wholesome
Laws and good Sermons are but slow and late ways: The timely and the most
compendious way is good Education. This may be an effectual Prevention of evil,
whereas all after-ways are but Remedies, which do always suppose some neglect
and omission of timely care.

And because our Laws leave so much to Parents, our Care should be so much the
greater; and we should remember that we bring up our Children for the Public,
and that if they live to be M^n, as they come out of our hands they will prove
a public Happiness or Mischief to the Age. So that we can no way better
deserve of Mankind and be greater Benefactors to the World, than by Peopling it
with a Righteous Offspring. Good Children are the hopes of Posterity, and we
cannot leave the World a better Legacy than well-disciplin'd Children. This
gives the World the best Security that Religion will be propagated to
Posterity, and that the Generations to come shall know God, and the Children
that are to be born shall fear the Lord.

This was the great Glory of Abraham, next to his being the Friend of God, that
he was the Father of the Faithful. And the careful Education of Children, in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is so honorable to Parents, that God
himself would not pass it by in Abraham without special mention of it to his
^verlasting commendation: I know Abraham, says God, that he will command his
children and his Household after him to keep the way of the Lord, and to do
Justice and Judgment, Gen 18. 19.

Fifthly, Consider yet further, the great Evils consequent upon this neglect.
And they are manifold. But not to enlarge particularly upon them, they all end
in this, the final miscarriage and ruin of Children. Do but leave depraved
corrupt Nature to its self, and it will take its own course, and the end of it
in all probability will be miserable.

If the generous Seeds of Religion and Virtue be not carefully sown in the
tender Minds of Children, and those Seeds be not cultivated by good Education,
there will certainly spring up Briars and Thorns, of which Parents will not
only feel the inconvenience, but every body else that comes near them.
Neglectis urenda filix innascitur Agris.
If the Ground be not planted with something that is good, it will bring forth
that which is either useless or hurtful, or both: For Nature is seldom barren,
it will either bring forth useful ^lants, or Weeds.

We are naturally inclined to Evil, and the neglect of Education puts Children
upon a kind of necessity of becoming what they are naturally inclined to be. Do
but let them alone, and they will soon be habituated to Sin and Vice. And when
they are once accustomed to do evil, they have lost their Liberty and Choice:
They are then hardly capable of good counsel and instruction: Or if they be
patient to hear it, they have no power to follow it, being bound in the chains
of their Sins, and led captive by Satan at his pleasure. And when they have
brought themselves into this condition, their Ruin seems to be sealed, and
without a Miracle of God's Grace they are never to be reclaimed.

Nor does the mischief of this neglect end here, but it extends it self to the
Public, and to Posterity. If we neglect the good Education of our Children,
they will in all probability prove bad Men; and these will neglect their
Children; and so the Foundation of an endless Mischief is laid; and our
Posterity will be bad Members both of Church and Commonwealth.

If they be neglected in matter of In^^^ction, they will either be ignorant or
^rroneous: Either they will not mind Religion, or they will disturb the Church
with new and wild Opinions: And I fear that the neglect of instructing and
Catechizing Youth, of which this Age has been so grossly guilty, has made it
so fruitful of Errors and strange Opinions.

But if besides this, no care be taken of their Lives and Manners, they will
become burdens of the Earth, and Pests of Human Society, and so much Poison
and infection let abroad into the World.

Sixthly and Lastly, Parents should often consider that the neglect of this
Duty will not only involve them in the inconvenience, and shame, and sorrow, of
their Childrens miscarriage, but in a great measure in the guilt of it: They
will have a great share in all the Evil they do, and be in some sort chargeable
with all the Sins they commit. If the Children bring forth wild and sour
Grapes, the Parents teeth will be set on edge.

The temporal Mischiefs and inconveniences which come from the careless
Education of Children as to Credit, Health and Estate, all which do usually
suffer by the vicious and lewd courses of your Children; these methinks should
awaken your care and diligence: But what is this to the guilt which will
redound to you upon their account? Part of all their wickedness will be put
upon your score; and possibly the Sins, which they commit many years afte^ you
are dead and gone, will follow you into the other World, and bring new fuel to
Hell, to heat that (...) hotter upon you.

However, this is certain, that (...) must one Day be accountable for all their
neglects of their Children: And so likewise shall Ministers and Masters of
Families for their People and Servants, so far as they had the Charge of them.

And what will Parents be able to say to God at the Day of Judgment for all
their neglects of their Children, in matter of Instruction, and Example, and
Restraint from evil? How will it make your ears to tingle, when God shall arise
terribly to Judgment, and say to you, Behold! the Children which I have given
you; They were ignorant, and you instructed them not; They made themselves
vile, and you restrained them not: Why did not you teach them at Home, and
bring them to Church to the public Ordinances and Worship of God, and train
them up to the exercise of Piety and Devotion? But you did not only neglect to
give them good Instruction, but you gave them bad Example: And lo! they have
followed you to Hell, to be an addition to your Torment there.

Unnatural Wretches! that have thus neglected, and by your neglect destroyed
those, whose Happiness by so many bonds of Duty and Affection you were obliged
to procure: Behold! the Books are now open, and there is not one Prayer upon
Record that ever you put up for your Children: There is no Memorial, no not so
much as of one Hour that ever was seriously spent to train them up to a sense
of God, and to the knowledge of their Duty: But on the contrary it appears,
that you have many ways contrived their Misery, and contributed to their Ruin,
and helped forward their Damnation. How could you ^e thus unnatural? How could
you thus hate your own Flesh, and hate your own Souls? How much better had it
been for them, and how much better for you, that they had never been born?

Would not such a heavy Charge as this make every joint of you to tremble? Will
it not cut you to the heart, and pierce your very Souls, to have your Children
challenge you in that Day, and say to you one by one, Had you been as careful
to teach me the good knowledge of the Lord, as I was capable of learning it:
Had you been but as forward to instruct me in my Duty, as I was ready to have
hearkened to it, it had not been with me as it is at this Day: I had not now
stood trembling here in a fearful expectation of the eternal Doom which is just
ready to be passed upon me. Cursed be the Man that begat me, and the Paps that
gave me suck. It Is to You that I must in a great measure owe my everlasting
undoing. Would it not strike any of us with horror to be thus challenged and
reproached by our Children in that great and terrible Day of the Lord?

I am not able to make so dreadful a representation of this matter as it
deserves. But I would by all this, if it be possible, awaken Parents to a sense
of their Duty, and terrify them out of this gross and shameful neglect which so
many are guilty of. For when I seriously consider how supinely remiss and
unconcerned many Parents are as to the Religious Education of their Children, I
cannot but think of that Saying of Augustus concerning Herod, Better be his Dog
than his Child: I think it was spoken to another purpose, but is true likewise
to the purpose I am speaking of: Better to be some Men's Dogs, or Hawks, or
Horses, than their Children: For they take a greater care to breed and train up
these to their several ends and uses, than to breed up their Children for
eternal Happiness.

Upon all these accounts, Train up a Child in the way he should go, that when
^e is old he may not depart from it: That neither your Children may be
miserable by your Fault, nor you by the neglect of so natural and necessary a
Du^y toward them. God grant that all that are concerned may lay these things
seriously to heart: For his mercies sake in Jesus Christ; To Whom, with Th^e O
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory both now and ever. Amen.

OF THE Advantages of an early Piety. A SERMON Preached in the Church of St.
Lawrence J^ry, In the Year 1662.
ECCLES. XII. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the d^ys of thy Youth; while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw ^igh when thou shall say I have no
pleasure in them.
IN the former Discourses, concerning the Education of Children, I have carried
the Argument through the state of Childhood to the beginning of the next step
of their Age which we call Youth; when they come to exercise their Reason, and
to be ^it to take upon themselves the performance of that Solemn Vow which was
made for them by their Sureties in Baptism.

To encourage them to set seriously and in good earnest about this Work, I
shall now add another Discourse concerning the Advantages of an Early Pi^ty.
And to this purpose I have chosen for the foundation of it these Words of
S^lomon, in his Book called Ecclesiastes or the Preacher: Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, while the ^vil days come not, nor the years
draw nigh when thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

It will not be necessary to give an account of the Context any further than to
tell you, that this Book of the Roy^l Preacher is a lively description of the
Vanity of the World in general, and particularly of the Life of Man. This is
the main Body of his Sermon, in which there are here and there scattered many
serious Reflections upon our selves, and very weighty Considerations to quicken
our preparations for our latter End, and to put us in mind of the days of
darkness which will be many, as the Preacher tells us in the Chapter before the
Text.

Among these is the Admonition and advice in the words of the Text: Which do
indeed concern those that are young, but yet will afford useful matter of
Meditation to persons of all Ages and Conditions whatsoever: Of great
thankfulness to Almighty God from those who by the Grace of God, and his
Blessing upon a pious Education, have entered upon a Religious course betimes:
And of a deep sorrow and Repentance to those who have neglected and let slip
this best Opportunity of their Lives; and of taking up a firm Resolution of
redeeming that loss, as much as is possible, by their future care and
diligence: And to them more especially, who are grown old and have not yet
begun this great and necessary Work, it will minister occasion to resolve upon
a speedy retreat, and without any further delay to return to God and their
Duty; le^t the Opportunity of doing it, which is now almost quite spent, be
lost for ever.

The Text contains a Duty, which is to remember our Creator; and a Limit^tion
of it, more especially to one particular Age and Time of our Life; in the days
of our Youth: Not to exclude any other Age, but to lay a particular Emphasis
and weight upon this: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, that is,
more especially in this Age of thy Life: To intimate to us, both that this is
the fittest Season, and that we cannot begin this Work too soon.

And this is further illustrated by the opposition of it to Old Age: When the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh of which thou shall say I have no
pleasure in them: This is a Description of Old Age, the evils whereof are
continually growing; and which in respect of the cares and griefs, the
distempers and infirmities which usually attend it, is rather a burden than a
pleasure.

In the handling of these Words, I shall do these three things,

First, I shall consider the nature of the Act or Duty here enjoined, and that
is to remember God.

Secondly, I shall consider what there is in the Notion of God as Creator which
is more particularly apt to awaken and oblige us to the remembrance of Him.

Thirdly, I shall consider the Limitation of this Duty more especially to this
particular Age of our Lives, the days of our youth: Why we should begin this
Work then, and not put it off to the Time of Old Age.

I. I shall consider the nature of the Act or Duty here enjoined, which is to
remember our Creator. For the understanding of which Expression and others of
the like nature in Scripture, it is to be considered that it is very usual in
Scripture to express Religion and the whole Duty of Man by some eminent Act, or
Principle, or Part of Religion: Sometimes by the Knowledge of God, and by Faith
in Him; and very frequently by the Fear and by the Love of God; because these
are the great Principles and Parts of Religion: And so likewise, though not so
frequently, Religion is expressed by the Remembrance of God: Now Remembrance is
the actual thought of what we do habitually know. To remember God is to have
him actually in our minds, and upon all proper occasions to revive the thoughts
of Him, and as David expresses it, to set him always before us: I set the
Lord, says he, always before me, that is, God was continually present to his
mind and thoughts.

And in opposition to this we find wicked men in Scripture described by the
contrary quality, forgetfulness of God^ So they are described in Job; Job 8.
13. Such are the paths of them that forget God, that is, of the wicked: And the
same description David gives of them, Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked, says he, shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God: And elsewhere he
gives the same character of a wicked man, Psalm. 10. 4. that God is not in all
his thoughts.

And the course of a Religious Life is not unfitly expressed by our Remembrance
of God. For to remember a Person or Thing is to call them to mind upon all
proper and ^itting Occasions; to think actually of them, so as to do that which
the remembrance of them does require, or prompt us to. To remember a Friend, is
to be ready upon occasion to do him all good offices: To remember a kindness
and benefit, is to be ready to acknowledge and r^quite it when there is an
opportunity: To remember an injury, is to be ready to revenge it: And in a word
to remember any thing is to be mindful to do that which the memory of such a
thing does naturally suggest to us.

So that to remember God, is frequently and in our most serious and retired
thoughts to consider that there is such a Being as God is; of all Power and
Perfection, who made us and all other things, and has given us Laws to liv^
by, suitable to our Natures; and will call us to a strict account for our
observance or violation of them, and accordingly reward and punish us; very
often in this World, and to be sure in the other.

It is to revive often in our minds the thoughts of God and of his infinite
Perfections, and to live continually under the power and awe of these
apprehensions, that He is infinitely wise and good, holy and just; that He is
always present with us, and observes what we do, and is intimate to our most
secret thoughts, and will bring every work into Judgment, and every secret
thing whether it be good, or whether it be evil; as the Preacher tells us in
the conclusion of this Sermon.

The Duty then here required of us, is so soon as we arrive at the use of
Reason and the exercise of our Understandings, to take God into consideration,
and to begin a Religious Course of Life betimes; to consecrate the beginning of
our Days and the flower and strength of them to his Service: Whilst our Mind is
yet soft and ^ender, and in a great measure free from all other impressions, to
be mindful of the Being that is above us; and in all our designs and actions to
take God into consideration, and to do every thing in his Fear, and with an eye
to his Glory. Remember thy Creator, that is, honor fear, love, obey and serve
Him; and in a word, do every thing as becomes one that is mindful of God, and
has Him continually in his thoughts.

II. I shall in the next place consider, what there is in the Notion of God as
our Creat^r that is more particularly apt to awaken and oblige men to the
remembrance of God. The Text does not barely require us to remember God, but to
remember Him as the Author and Founder of our Beings: Remember thy Creator. And
there is certainly some particular Emphasis in it, so that God considered under
the Notion of our Creator is apt to strike us with a particular regard and awe
of Him. And that upon a threefold account; as Creation is a sensible
demonstration to us 1 st. Of the Being. 2 dly. Of the Power, and 3 dly. Of the
Goodness of God.

First, Of His Being. The Creation is of all other the most sensible and
obvious Argument of a Deity. Other Considerations may work upon our Reason and
Understanding, but this does as it were bring God down to our senses. So often
as we look up to Heaven, or down upon the Earth; upon our Selves, or into our
selves; upon the things without us, and round about us: Which way soever we
turn our eyes, we are encountered with plain evidences of a Superior Being,
which made us and all other things: Every thing which we behold with our eyes
does in some way or other represent God to us and bring him to our minds, so as
we cannot avoid the sight of Him if we would. So the Psalmist tells us, Psalm.
19. 1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows the work
of his hands. And so likewise St. Paul, Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of
Him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen being understood by the
things which are made; even his ete^^al Power and Godhead.

Secondly, As the Creation is a demonstration of God's infinite Power. And this
Consideration is apt to work upon our F^ar, the most wakeful Passion of all
other in the Soul of Man: Insomuch that the Atheist would fain ascribe the
Original apprehension and belief of a Deity to the natural Fears of Men; Primus
in orb Deos f^^it timor, Fear first made Gods; and by this means would fain
persuade us that it is so far from being true that God is our Creator, that He
is merely the Creature of our own vain Fear and Imagination.

But surely this is very unreasonable. For if there be a God that made us,
there is infinite reason why we should stand in awe of Him, and have him always
in our mind and thoughts; because He who made us and all other things, if we
neglect Him and forget so great a Benefactor, can as easily make us miserable,
or turn us out of Being. Therefore Remember thy Creator, and despise or forget
Him at thy utmost peril.

Thirdly, As the Creation is a demonstration of the Goodness of God to his
Creatures. This Consideration of God as our Creator does naturally suggest to
our minds, that his Goodness brought us into ^eing; and that if Being be a
Benefit, God is the Fountain and Author of it, that his Goodness called us out
of nothing, and made us to be what we are; for of his good pleasure we are and
were created. He was under no necessity of doing it; for He was from eternal
Ages happy in himself before we were, and would have been so to all eternity
though we had never been; nor was it possible He could be under any obligation
to us before we were.

And He is not only our Creator as He gave us our Beings at first, but likewise
as we are preserved and continued in Life by the same Goodness which first gave
us Life and Breath; for of his Goodness we ARE as well as were created.

And can we forget so great a Benefactor, and be unmindful of the God that
formed us? Can we choose but remember the Founder of our Beings, the great
Patron and Preserver of our Lives? And so soon as we arrive at the use of
Reason, and discover this great Benefactor to whom we owe our Lives and all the
Blessings of them, can we forbear to do homage to him, and to say with David, O
come, let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker: For He
is the Lord our God, it is He that has made us and not we our selves; we are
his People, and the Sheep of his pasture. I proceed to consider in the

III. and Last place, The Reason of the Limitation of this Duty more especially
to this particular Age of our Lives, Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy Youth, when the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall
say I have no pleasure in them: NOW; in the days of thy Youth; by which Solomon
plainly designs two things,

First, To engage young persons to begin this great and necessary Work of
Religion betimes, and as soon as ever they are capable of taking it into
consideration, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. And the Son of
Sirach much to the same purpose, speaking of one that in good earnest applies
his heart to Wisdom, describes him in this manner, Ecclus. He will give his
heart to resort early to the Lord that made him; which is the same with the
expression in the Text, of remembering our Creator in the days of our Youth.

Secondly, To engage young persons to set about this Work presently, and not to
defer it and put it off to the future, as most are apt to do; Remember NOW thy
Creator, in the days of thy youth: Especially, not to adjourn it to the most
unfit and improper time of all other, to the time of infirmity and old Age,
NOW, in the days of thy Youth; when the ^vil days come not, n^r the years draw
nigh when thou shall say I h^ve no pleasure in them: While the Sun, or the
Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened, etc.

And how much reason there is to press both these Considerations upon young
persons I shall endeavor to show in the following Particulars.

First, Because in this Age of our Lives we have the greatest and most sensible
obligation to remember God our Creat^r: In the days of our youth, when the
Blessing and benefit of Life is new, and the memory of it fresh upon our minds.
It ought not indeed to be so, but we find it true which Seneca says, Nihil
citius senescit quam gratia, Nothing sooner grows old and out of date than
obligation; and we are but too apt to forget what we have the greatest reason
to remember.

In this Age of our Life, when we begin to come to the free use and exercise of
our Reason, the first thing we are instructed in, and if we were not taught it
we should, though perhaps more slowly, discover and find it out of our selves:
I say, the first thing we are instructed in and inquisitive about is the Author
of our Beings, and how we came into the World: And when God first appears to
our Minds, and we come by degrees clearly to understand by whose ^ounty and
Blessing it is that we are and have been preserved thus long, without our own
care; principally by the Providence of God, and under Him by those instruments
which He has raised and p^eserved for that purpose: When we consider this, we
cannot but be strangely surprised both with the Novelty of the ^enefit and the
Greatness of it.

And when we have well viewed our Selves, and looked about us, upon the
Creatures below us, all of them subject to our Dominion and use: And when we
consider seriously in what a noble Rank and order of Creatures we are placed;
and how fearfully and wonderfully we are made, not grovelling upon the earth or
bowed down to it, but of a beautiful and upright shape of Body, and such a
Majesty of Countenance as if we were all Kings of the Creation: And which is
much more excellent than this, that we are endued with Minds and
Understandings, with Reason and Speech, whereby we are capable not only of
conversing with and benefiting one another, but also of the knowledge and
friendship and enjoyment of the Best and most Perfect of Beings, God himself: I
say when we first consider this and meditate seriously upon it, can we possibly
ever after forget God? Shall we not naturally break out into that enquiry which
Elihu thinks so proper for Man that he wonders it is not in every Man's mouth,
Where is God my Maker, who teaches me more than the Beasts of the Earth, and
makes me wiser than the Fowls of Heaven? Job 35. 10, 11.

So that there is a very special obligation upon us to be mindful of God in
this Age of our Lives, when we first come to the knowledge of Him, and when the
sense of his Favors is fresh and new to us; and not only so, but when the
Blessing of Life is at the very best and in its verdure and flower; when our
Health is in its strength and vigor, and the pleasures and enjoyments of Life
have their full taste and perfect relish. So Job describes the days of his
youth, Job 29. 2, 3, 4. O that I were as in months past, as in the days when
God preserved me; when his Candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness, as I was in the days of my youth, etc.

Indeed when the evil days are once come, and thou art entered upon the years
in which thou thy self have no pleasure, there might be some sort of pretense
then to forget God; because then Life begins to wither and decay, and not only
the gloss and beauty but even the comfort and sweetness of it is gone, and it
becomes an insipid and tastless thing: But thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever
thou art, if thou art unmindful of God in the best Age of thy Life, and when
the sense of his Benefits ought upon all accounts to make the strongest and
deepest impressions upon thy Mind.

Secondly, The Reason will be yet stronger to put us upon this, if we consider
that notwithstanding the great obligation which lies upon us to remember our
Creator in the days of our youth, we are most apt at that time of all other to
forget Him. For that which is the great Blessing of Youth is also the great
Danger of it, I mean the Health and Prosperity of it; and though men have then
least reason, yet are they most apt to forget God in the height of pleasure and
in the abundance of all things.

Youth is extremely addicted to pleasure, because it is most capable and most
sensible of it; and where we are most apt to be transported, there we are most
apt to transgress. Nothing does so besot the Mind and extinguish in it all
sense of Divine things as sensual Pleasures. If we fall in love with them, they
will take off our thoughts from Religion and steal away our hearts from God.
For no man can serve two Masters^ and the carnal mind is enmity against God.

Besides that Youth is rash and inconsiderate, because unexperienced; and
consequently not apt to be cautious and prudent, no not as to the future
concernments of this temporal Life; much less of that which seems to be at so
much a greater distance, and for that reason is so very seldom in our thoughts.

Thirdly, Because this Age is of all other the fittest and best to begin a
Religious course of Life. And this does not contradict the former Argument, tho
it seems to do so. For as it is true of Children, that they are most prone to
be idle and yet fittest to learn; so in the case we are speaking of both are
true, that youth is an Age wherein we are too apt, if left to our selves, to
forget God and Religion, and yet at the same time fittest to receive the
impressions of it.

Youth is aetas Disciplinae, the proper Age of Discipline; very obsequious and
tractable, fit to receive any kind of impression and to imbibe any tincture:
Now we should lay hold of this golden Opportunity. This Age of suppleness, and
obedience, and patience for labor, should be plied by Parents, before that
rigor and stiffness which grows with years come on too fast. Childhood and
Youth are choice Seasons for the planting of Religion and Virtue, and if
Parents and Teachers sleep in this Seed time they are ill Husbandmen; for this
is the time of plowing and sowing.

This Age is certainly the most proper for Instruction, according to that of
the Prophet, Isa. 28. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge? Whom shall he make to
understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned from the milk and drawn from the
breast. For precept must be upon precept and lin^ upon line, here a little and
there a little. And the sooner this is done, the better; only things must be
instilled into them gently and by degrees.

It is a noted Saying of Aristotle, That young Persons are not fit to hear
Lectures of Moral Philosophy; because at that Age Passion is so predominant and
unruly: By which, I think, he only means that the Minds of young Persons are
least prepared to receive the Precepts of Morality and to submit to them; but
that he does not hereby intend, that therefore no care ought to be used to form
the Minds and Manners of Youth to Virtue and Goodness. He certainly understood
the nature and power of evil Habits too well to be of that mind; and
consequently must think that the Principles of Morality ought with great care
and diligence to be instilled into young persons betimes: Because they of all
other have the most need of this kind of Instruction, and this Age is the most
proper Season for it: And the less their Minds are prepared for it, so much the
more pains ought to be taken with them, that they may be taught to govern and
subdue their Passions before ^hey grow too s^iff and headstrong. So that if the
Seeds of Religion and Virtue be not planted in our younger years, what is to be
expected in old Age? according to that of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 25. 13. If
thou have g^thered nothing in thy Youth, how can thou expect to find any
thing in thine Age?

Young years are tender and easily wrought upon, apt to be molded into any
fashion, they are udum and molle lutum, like moist and soft clay which is
pliable to any form; but soon grows hard, and then nothing is to be made of it.
It is a very difficult thing to make impressions upon Age, and to deface the
Evil which has been deeply imprinted upon young and tender minds. When good
instruction has been neglected at first, a conceited Ignorance does commonly
take posses^^on, and obstruct all the passages through which Knowledge and
Wisdom should enter into us.

Upon this Consideration the Work of Religion should be begun betimes, because
it is a mighty advantage to any thing to be planted in a ground that is newly
broken up. It is just the same thing for young persons to be entered into a
Religious course and to have their Minds habituated to Virtue before vicious
Customs have got place and strength in us: For whoever shall attempt this
afterward will meet with infinite difficulty and opposition, and must dispute
his ground by inches.

It is good therefore to do that which must be done one time or other, when it
is easiest to be done; when we may do it with the greatest advantage, and are
likely to meet with the least and weakest opposition. We should anticipate
Vice, and prevent the Devil and the World by letting God into our hearts
betimes and giving Religion the first seisine and possession of our Souls^ This
is the time of sowing our Seed, which must by no means be neglected. For the
Soul will not lie fallow; good or evil will come up. If our minds be not
cultivated by Religion, Sin and Vice will get the possession of them: But if
our tender years be seasoned with the knowledge and fear of God, this in all
probability will have a good influence upon the following course of our Lives.

In a word, this Age of our Lives is proper for Labor and Conflict; because
Youth is full of heat and vigor, of courage and resolution to enterprise and
effect difficult things. This heat indeed renders young persons very unfit to
advise and direct themselves, and therefore they have need to be advised and
directed by those who are wiser and more experienced: But yet this heat makes
them very fit for practice and action; for though they are bad at counsel, they
are admirable at execution, when their heat is well directed; they have a great
deal of vivacity and quickness, of courage and constancy in the way wherein
they are set.

Besides, that Youth has a great sense of Honor and Virtue, of Praise and
Commendation, which are of great force to engage young persons to attempt
worthy and excellent things: For hope and confidence, strength and courage,
with which sense of Honor and desire of Praise are apt to inspire them, are
admirable instruments of Victory and Mastery in any kind; and these are proper
and most peculiar to Youth, I write unto you young men, ^aith St. John, because
ye are strong, and have overcome the evil One.

And, besides the spirit and vigor of Youth, young persons have several other
qualities which make them very capable of learning any thing that is good. They
are apt to believe, because they have not been often deceived; and this is a
very good quality in a Learner. And they are full of hopes, which will
encourage them to attempt things even beyond their strength; because Hope is
always of the future, and the Life of young persons is in a great measure
before them and yet to come. And, which is a good Bridle to restrain them from
that which is evil, they are commonly very modest and bashful: And, which is
also a singular advantage, they are more apt to do that which is honest and
commendable than that which is gainful and profitable, being in a great measure
free from the love of Money, which Experience, as well as the Apostle, tells us
is the root of all Evil. Children are very seldom covetous, because they have
seldom been bitten by want.

Fourthly, This is the most acceptable Time of all other, because it is the
first of our Age. Under the Law the first fruits and the firstborn were God's.
In like manner we should devote the first of our Age and Time to Him. God is
the first and most excellent of Beings, and therefore it is fit that the prime
of our Age and the excellency of our strength should be dedicated to Him and
his Service.

An early Piety must needs be very acceptable and pleasing to God. Our Blessed
Lord took great pleasure to see little Children come unto Him; an Emblem of the
pleasure he takes that men should list themselves betimes in his service. St.
John was the youngest of all the Disciples, and our Savior had a very
particular kindness and affection for him; for he is said to be the Disciple
whom Jesus loved.

It is a good sign that we value God as we ought, and have a true esteem for
his service, when we can find in our hearts to give him our good Days, and the
years which we our selves have pleasure in: And that we have a grateful sense
of his benefits and of our mighty obligation to him, when we make the quickest
and best returns we can, and think nothing too good to render to Him from whom
we have received all.

It is likewise an argument of great Sincerity, which is the Soul of all
Religion and Virtue, when a man devotes himself to God betimes: because it is a
good evidence that he is not drawn by those forcible constraints, nor driven to
God by that pressing necessity which lies upon men in time of Sickness and old
Age. And on the contrary, it cannot but be very displeasing to God to be
neglected by us when we are in the flower and vigor of our Age: When our Blood
is warm, and our Spirits quick, and our Parts are at the best, then to think
our selves too good to serve God; what an affront is this to Him who has
deserved so infinitely well of us, and beyond the best and u^most that we can
possibly do?

Besides, that there is a peculiar kind of grace and loveliness in the worthy
and excellent actions of Young Persons, great things being hardly expected from
them at that Age. Early Habits of Virtue, like new Clothes upon a young and
comely Body, sit very gracefully upon a straight and wellshap'd Mind, and do
might^ly become it.

As there is Joy in Heaven at the conversion of a great and old Sinner, so it
cannot but be a very delightful Spectacle to God and Angels, and to the Spirits
of just Men made perfect, to see a Young Person besieged by powerful
Temptations on every side, to acquit himself gloriously, and resolutely to hold
out against the most violent Assaults: To behold one, in the pride and flower
of his Age, that is courted by Pleasures and Honors, by the Devil and all the
bewitching Vanities of this World, to reject all these and to cleave steadfastly
to God: Nay, to frown upon all these Temptations and to look down upon them
with indignation and ^corn, and to say, Let those dote upon ^hese things, who
know no better: Let them adore sensual Pleasures and lying Vanities, who are
ignorant of the sincere and solid Pleasures of Religion and Virtue: Let them
run into the arms of Temptation who can forget God their Creator, their
Preserver, and the Guide of their Youth: As for me, I will serve the Lord, and
will employ my whole time either innocently or usefully, in serving God, and in
doing good to Men who are made after the Image of God. This work shall take up
my whole Life, there shall be no void or empty Space in it; I will endeavor,
as much as possibly I can, that there may be no gap or breach in it for the
Devil and his Temptations to enter in: Lord, I will be thine, I have chosen
thee for my happiness and my portion for ever: Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. Lo! they that are far
from thee shall perish: But it is good for me to draw near to God, to begin and
end my Days in his fear and to his glory.

Fifthly and Lastly, This Age of our Life may, for any thing we know, be the
only Time we may have for this purpose; and if we cast off the thoughts of God
and defer the business of Religion to old Age, intending, as we pretend, to set
about it at that Time, we may be cut off before that Time comes, and turned
into Hell with the People that forget God.

The Work of Religion is the most necessary of all other, and must be done one
time or other, or we are certainly undone for ever. We cannot begin it too
soon, but we easily delay it too long; and then we are miserable past all
recovery. He that would not venture his immortal Soul, and put his everlasting
Happiness upon the greatest hazard and uncertainty, must make Religion his
first business and care, must think of God betimes and remember his Creator in
the days of his Youth.

I have now done with the three things which I proposed to consider from these
Words. The Inferences from this whole Discourse shall be these two,

First, To persuade those that are young to remember God their Creator, and to
engage in the ways of Religion and Virtue betimes.

Secondly, To urge those who have neglected this first and best Opportunity of
their Lives, to repent quickly and return to a b^tter mind; lest the
Opportunity be lost for ever, and their case become desperate and past remedy.

First, To persuade those that are young to remember God their Creator
be^times, and to engage early in the ways of Religion and Virtue. Do not suffer
your selves to be cheated and bewitched by sensual satisfactions, and to be
destroyed by ease and prosperity. Let not a perpetual tenor of Health and
Pleasure soften and dissolve your Spirits, and banish all wise and serious
thoughts out of your Minds. Be not so foolish and unworthy, as to think that
you have a privilege to forget God when he is most mindful of you; when the
Candle of the Lord shines about your Tabernacle, and you are enjoying the
health, and strength, and sweetness of Life.

No man knows what he does, and what an invaluable Treasure he prodigally
wastes, when he lets slip this golden Season and Opportunity of his Life;
whilst he is yet innocent and untainted with Sin and Vice, and his Mi^d is
clear of all bad impressions, and capable of the best; not enslaved to evil,
and at liberty to do well.

Consider, that the ways of Religion and Virtue are nothing so difficult and
unpleasant now, as they will be hereafter: And that the longer you forget God,
and the more you are estranged from Him, the more unwilling you will be to
think of him and to return to him: That your Lusts will every day gain more
strength, and your hearts by degrees will contract such a stiffness and
hardness that it will be no easy matter to work upon them.

Therefore remember your Creator in the days of your youth: To day, whilst it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.
When will you think of beginning a good course, if not now? You have a great
Work before you which cannot be done in a little time, which cannot be begun
and finished at once. Your whole Life is no more than sufficient for it; to do
it to the best advantage, and as it ought to be done. Do not then think of
crowding it into a corner of your Life, much less of putting it off to the very
end of it: When that night comes, no man can work.

Consider further; If we will deny God the hearty and vigorous service of our
best days, how can we expect that he will accept the faint and flattering
Devotions of old Age? Wise men are wont to forecast and provide some stay and
comfort for themselves against the evils and infirmities of that Time; that
they may have something to lean upon in their weakness, something to mitigate
and allay the troubles and afflictions of that dark and gloomy Evening: That
what they cannot enjoy of present pleasure and satisfaction may in some measure
be made up to them in comfortable reflections upon the past actions of a holy
and innocent, an useful and well spent Life.

But on the other hand, if we have neglected Religion, and forgotten God days
without number; if we have lived an ungodly and vicious Life, we have treasured
up so much guilt and remorse, so many aggravations of our sorrow and anguish
against an evil Day; and have foolishly contrived to make our burden then
heaviest, when we are least able to stand under it; and have provided and laid
in infinite matter for Repentance, when there is hardly any space and
opportunity left for the exercise of it; and when we shall be utterly
disheartened from setting about so vast a Work, of which we can see no end; and
yet have so very little time for it, that if we do any thing at all in it we
shall be forced to huddle it up in so much haste and confusion, as will, I
doubt, signify but very little either to our present comfort, or our future
happiness.

Consider this in time, all ye that forget God in the Day of your prosperity
and in the best Age of your Life, and yet when the Day of affliction and the
infirmities of Age come upon you would be glad then to have God mindful of you,
and merci^ul to you. But if thou would not have Him cast thee off in thine
old Age and forsake thee when thy strength fails, do thou remember Him in the
days of thy youth, in the prime and vigor of thine Age: For this is the
acceptable Time, this is the Day of Salvation.

Therefore acquaint thy self with Him, and remember him NOW; in the days of thy
Youth; defer not so necessary a work, no not for one moment: Begin it just now,
that so thou may have made some good progress in it before the evil days
come; before the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars be darkened, and all the
comforts and joys of Life be fled and gone.

Be not deceived, O man, whosoever thou art; for God is not mocked. He will not
be put off by us with the Days in which we our selves have no pleasure. Offer
up thy self a living Sacrifice and not a Carcass, if thou would be accepted.
Do not provoke and affront the Living God by offering up to him faint spirits,
and feeble hands, and dim eyes, and a dead heart. He has been bountiful to us
in giving us the best Blessings of Life, and all things richly to enjoy; and do
we grudge Him the most valuable part of our Lives, and the years which we our
selves have pleasure in? Do we thus requite the Lord? foolish people and
unwise! Is the Giver of all good things unworthy to receive from us any thing
that is good? If we offer up the lame in Sacrifice, is it not evil? and if we
offer up the blind, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy Governor, and try if he
will be pleased with thee and accept thy person. Has God deserved so ill at
our hands, that we should forget and neglect Him? And has the Devil deserved
so well of us, that we should be contented to spend the best part of our Lives
in his Service, which is perfect Slavery? Was he our Creator, or can he make us
happy? Nay, does he not carry on a most malicious design to make us for ever
miserable?

Secondly, Let me urge those who have neglected this first and best Opportunity
of their Lives to repent quickly and return to a better mind, lest all
Opportunity of doing it be lost for ever, and their case become desperate and
past remedy. Resolve to redeem, if it be possible, the Time which you should
have improved: you have squandered away too much already, waste no more of this
precious Opportunity of Life: you have deferred a necessary Work too long,
delay it no longer. Do not delude your selves with vain hopes that this Work
may be done at any time, and in an instant; and that if you can but fashion
your last breath into Lord have mercy upon me, this will prevail with God and
make atonement for the long course of a wicked and sinful Life. What strange
thoughts have men of God and Heaven, what extravagant conceits of the little
evil of Sin and the great easiness of Repentance, that can impose upon
themselves at this rate?

Bethink your selves better in time, consider and show your selves men. What
will you do in the day of your distress, who have neglected God in your most
flourishing and prosperous condition? What will you say to Him in a dying hour,
who scarce ever had one serious thought of him all your Life? Can you have the
face at that time to bespeak him in this manner? Lord, now the World and my
Lusts have left me, and I feel my self ready to sink into eternal perdition, I
lay hold upon thy Mercy to deliver my Soul from going down into the Pit. I have
heard strange things of thy Goodness and that thou art merciful even to a
miracle. This is that which I always trusted to, that after a long Life of Sin
and Vanity thou would at last be pacified with a few penitent words and sighs
at the hour of Death. Let me not, I pray thee, be disappointed of this hope and
put to confusion.

Is this an address ^it to be made to a wise man, much less to the all-wise and
just Judge of the World? and yet this seems to be the plain interpretation of
the late and forced application of a great and habitual Sinner to Almighty God
in his last extremity, and when he is just giving up the ghost and going to
appear before his dreadful Tribunal.

I say again, let no man deceive you with vain words, or with vain hopes, or
with false notions of a slight and sudden repentance: As if Heaven were an
Hospital founded on purpose to receive all sick and maimed persons, that when
they can live no longer to the Lusts of the sinfulPleasures of this World can
but put up a cold and formal Petition to be admitted there.

No, No, as sure as God is true, they shall never see the Kingdom of God, who
instead of seeking it in the first place make it their last Refuge and Retreat:
And when they find themselves under the Sentence of Death and Damnation, only
to avoid present Execution, and since there is no other remedy, do at last
bethink themselves of getting to Heaven, and fall upon their knees to petition
the Great Judge of the World that they may be transported thither.

Can any man in reason expect that such a Petition will be granted? I tell you
Nay; but except you repent sooner, and at a fitter time, and after a better
fashion, you shall certainly perish. As much as God desires the Salvation of
Men, he will not prostitute Heaven, and set the Gates of it wide open to those
who only fly to it in extremity, but never sought it in good earnest, nor
indeed do now care for it or desire it for any other reason, but to excuse them
from going to Hell. They have no value for Heaven, because they are in no wise
fit for it, but yet they think Hell to be the worse Place of the two.

The ever Blessed God is Himself abundantly sufficient for his own Happiness,
and does not need our company to make any addition to it: Nor yet is Heaven so
desolate a Place, or so utterly void of Inhabitants, that like some newly
discovered Plantation it should be glad to receive the most vile and profligate
persons, the Scum and refuse of Mankind. There are an innumerable Company of
glorious Angels, much nobler Creatures than the best of Men, to people those
blessed Regions. Thousands of thousands continually stand before God, and ten
thousand times ten thousands minister unto Him.

We do absolutely stand in need of God to make us happy, but He has no need of
us to help Him to be so. God indeed is so good, as to desire our Happiness as
earnestly as if it were necessary to his own: But he is happy in and from
Himself, and without Him it is impossible we should be happy, nay we must of
necessity be for ever miserable.

To conclude; if we would have God to accept us in a dying hour, and our B.
Savior to rem^mber us now he is in his Kingdom, let us think of him betime^,
and acquaint our selves with him that we may be at peace: NOW; before the evil
days come, and the years draw nigh when we shall say we have no pleasure in
them.

O that men were wise, that they understood this, and that they would consider
their latter end. Which God of his in^inite Goodness grant that we may all
seriously lay to heart, in this our Day; and may learn betimes so to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom: For his mercies sake in Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the H. Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books writ by his Grace JOHN, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
FOrty Two Sermons and Discourses upon Several Occasions, most at Court; in
Four Volumes, in Octavo.

Six Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior,
etc. against the Socinians. In Octavo.

These Six Practical Sermons. In Twelves.

The Rule of Faith^ In Octavo.

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion^ Sticht. Price Three pence.

Printed for B. Aylmer and W. Rogers^

A Family Guide to the Holy Sacrament. By T^^oph. Dorrington.


