AN ESSAY Concerning the POWER of the MAGISTRATE, and the Rights of Mankind, in
Matters of Religion. With some Reasons in particular for the Dissenters not
being obliged to take the Sacramental Test but in their own Churches; and for a
General Naturalization. Together with a Postscript in Answer to the Letter to a
Convocation-Man.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Andrew Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible in
Cornhil. 1697.

THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
PART I.
Chap. 1. THAT Government is from the People, who had a Right to invest the
Magistrate with a Power in those Matters of Religion which have an Influence on
Humane Societies, but not in others that are merely Religious, or have no such
Influence Page 1 Chap. 2. That God has not, either by the Law of Nature, or his
positive Law, given the Magistrate a Power in Matters merely Religious Page 17
Chap. 3. That a Power in the Magistrate to use Force in Matters of mere
Religion, tends to Men's Eternal Ruin Page 27 Chap. 4. That Compulsion is
inconsistent with all those Duties that God, for the sake of Men's Temporal
Happiness, requires of one toward another P. 30 Chap. 5. That the Doctrine of
Compulsion is directly contrary to the Honor of God Page 47
PART II.
Chap. 1. AN Answer to Arguments from Scripture on behalf of Persecution Page
68 Chap. 2. Arguments from Humane Authority answered Page 78 Chap. 3. Object.
That Compulsion tends to make People impartially consider, examined Page 87
Chap. 4. Object. That the Magistrate has a Right to use Force, to prevent the
Increase to those Erroneous Opinions that a Toleration would produce, examined
Page 103 Chap. 5. That all Force upon the Account of mere Religion, is
inconsistent with the Principles of the Protestant Religion Page 117 Chap. 6.
Of the Method to destroy not only Schisms and Heresies, but Hatred and
Incharitableness amongst Christians, notwithstanding their different Opinions
Page 124 Chap. 7. That the Good of the Society obliges the Magistrate to
hinder different Professions of Religion, examined Page 144 Chap. 8. Some few
Reasons for the Dissenters not taking the Sacramental Test but in their own
Churches, and for a General Naturalization, Page 168 Postscript, Page 176
Errata.] Page 28. line 5. for Truth, read Lawfulness. P. 42. l. 12. r. seventy
times. P. 48. l. ult. r. Notion. P. 73. l. 21. r. one. P. 99. l. 19. r.
betrayed him. P. 103. l. 22. r. if Force should. P. 144. l. 1. r. Chap. VII. P.
190. l. 10. r. creating.

An ESSAY Concerning the Power of the MAGISTRATE, etc.
CHAP. I.
That Government is from the People, who had a right to invest the Magistrate
with a Power in those Matters of Religion which have an Influence on Humane
Societies, but not in others that are merely Religious, or have no such
Influence.

1. A Discourse on this Subject cannot be unseasonable, whilst so many, instead
of showing their Gratitude to the Government for rescuing them from the
apparent Danger of Popish Persecution, are so disaffected for being deprived of
the Power of persecuting their Brethren, that they had rather run the risque of
the Nation's being ruined by the French, and themselves under Popish
Persecution, than to be without that Power; and for want of it, do in their
daily invective Discourses and Sermons (besides a great many other malicious
Insinuations) pretend the Church now to be nearer its Ruin than it was in the
late Reign.

I cannot but be sensible I incur a great hazard of exposing my self, by
writing on a Subject in a manner wholly exhausted by the three incomparable
Letters concerning Toleration; which yet I had rather do, than be wanting in my
Endeavors to encourage impartial Liberty and mutual Toleration; which instead
of ruining, is the only way to preserve both Church and State. Yet this was not
the only Motive that engaged me in this Design; for intending to write
concerning what is commonly called Church or Ecclesiastical Power, I thought it
necessary, for the better handling that Subject, first to examine the Extent of
the Magistrate's Power in Matters of Religion, lest the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Power should in my Discourse (what in the World they frequently
do) clash one with the other. I shall therefore, without further prefacing,
attempt to show what Power the Magistrate has in Matters of Religion. Tho to
prevent all occasion of Mistake or Cavil, I shall first explain those Terms.

2. By the Magistrate, I mean the Person or Persons who in every Society have
the Supreme Power, which consists in a Right to make Laws, and by Force
(without which all Laws would be to no purpose) to oblige the Unwilling and
Disobedient to govern their Actions according to them.

3. By Religion, I understand the Belief of a God, and the Sense and Practice
of those Duties which result from the Knowledge we have of him and our selves,
and the Relation we stand in to him and our fellow Creatures; or in short,
whatever appears to us from any convincing Evidence to be our Duty to believe
or practice.

4. In things relating to our selves, or what is in our disposal, any Action is
lawful where there is no Law to forbid it: But there is more than this required
to invest a Man with a Right to deprive others of their natural Freedom, and
make Laws that in Conscience oblige them. Whoever pretends to this, must have a
Commission either from God or Men: but there is no Person that can pretend to
have an immediate Commission from God; therefore they that lay the Foundation
of any Magistrate's Power, not on a Humane, but a Divine Right, destroy all
Obligation of Obedience to him: for why should I be obliged to obey him on the
account of a Divine Commission, when he can neither show, nor ever had any such
Commission? And there are none of his Subjects but what have as good a Pretense
(that is, just none at all) to a Divine Right. Therefore since no Man can
pretend an immediate Right from Heaven, all the Right that one more than
another has to command, must be the Consent of the Governed, either explicitly
or implicitly given. But it is said, the Powers that be are ordained of God;
which may very fitly and justly be said, since they are chosen and appointed by
those, who had not only a Power from God to choose them, but were absolutely
required by the Law of Self-preservation (imprinted by God on their Natures) to
avoid the Inconveniences and Dangers of an unsafe State of Nature, by placing
the Power of governing them in one or more Hands, in such Forms, and under such
Agreements as they should think fit. To suppose the Powers that be, to be
otherwise from God than as they are the Creatures of the People, made by them,
and for them, is not only to contradict St. Peter, who calls Government (...),
the Creature or Contrivance of Man, but the Experience of all Ages, wherein Men
have contrived and framed various sorts of Governments, as they thought most
convenient for themselves: which makes it sufficiently evident that all the
Powers the Magistrates have, are the Gift of their fellow Men. And,

5. It Is as evident that Men could not give the Magistrate a Power they
themselves had not. Now by the Law of Nature no Man had a Right to deprive
another of his Life, Liberty, or Property, but in defense and for the
preservation of his Own, which by that Law he is obliged to preserve, and
consequently had a Right to whatever is necessary to that End. But the
Difficulty of exercising this Right, (every one having the same) obliged Men to
enter into Societies, and to commit to some particular Persons the Inspections
of those things that relate to their common Good: So that Matters of Right and
Wrong, and generally all that part of Morality relating to the reciprocal
Duties of Man to Man, are under the Cognizance of the Magistrate; and any Man
(tho he never so much pretends Conscience) may be punished for acting against
the Welfare of the Society; because no Man's Conscience ought to hinder the
Magistrate from discharging his Trust.

6. But his Power does not extend to those Duties only that one Man owes
another, but even to those that Man owes to God; I mean those that have an
influence on Humane Life, and conduce to the Welfare and Support of Societies,
viz. the acknowledging a Supreme Being, who can discern Men's Actions, and is
both willing and able to punish them for neglecting those Duties that are
necessary for the well-being of Mankind. It being impossible (as is owned by
Pagans as well as Christians) that any Society can subsist without some Notions
of Religion, or the acknowledging of Invisible Powers. Therefore the Magistrate
is obliged to punish those who deny the Existence of a God, or that he concerns
himself with Humane Affairs; it being the belief of these things that
preserves them in Peace and Quiet, and more effectually obliges them to be
true to their Promises and Oaths, and to perform all their Covenants and
Contracts, and all those other Duties in which their mutual Happiness consists,
than all the Rods and Axes of the Magistrate. Nor can the Maintainers of
Atheistical Principles, seeing they destroy Conscience by subverting all
Religion, have any Pretense from it to challenge to themselves a Toleration.
And this is no greater Power than one Man had over another in the State of
Nature; for an Atheist may justly be reckoned an Enemy to Mankind whatsoever
State they are in, and therefore is to be disarmed, and bound to his good
behavior. So far then it is evident that the Magistrate's Power extends in
Matters of Religion. But,

7. As to those Opinions and Actions which relate to God alone, in which no
third Person has an Interest, wherein conscientious People may and do differ,
(which I call merely Religious, to distinguish them from those wherein others
have an Interest) there is no Law of Nature that gives one Man a Right to use
Force on another; and consequently they could not invest any of their Brethren
with this Power. All the Right that Equals (as all by Nature are) have over one
another, is a Right to prevent or repel Force by Force, and to punish the
Aggressor, thereby to discourage him or any other from attempting the like, and
to seek Reparation for the Loss sustained.

They that have no such Power over themselves, as to do themselves any Hurt,
much less to take away their own Lives, have as little Right to deprive others
(whom they are obliged to love as themselves) of their Lives or Properties, or
commit any Violence on them otherways than may be necessary to defend
themselves, and their own Rights. But what Right of his Neighbor's does any
Man invade? or what Injury or Injustice does he do him, in worshipping God
according to that Method he judges best for the saving his own Soul? If Men
think one another in the Wrong, common Charity will oblige them to show each
other their Errors; but this gives neither a Right to punish, because neither
of them are any-wise injured: And it is against the immutable and eternal Law of
Justice, to punish a Person that neither does, nor designs to do another an
Injury. Yea, Christianity, that requires Men to abstain from Revenge, even
after repeated Provocations, and multiplied Injuries, can much less be supposed
to oblige them, who suffer nothing, nor have any Harm done them, to molest and
ill use their Brethren.

8. If the Magistrate was entrusted by the Society to use Force on those that
hold wrong Tenets in things merely religious, this Power upon his Neglect, or
Incapacity to use it, would devolve on them that gave it him; and then every
one would have the same Right to use Force on them that are in the Wrong, as to
use it in defense of their own Lives and Properties, when the Magistrate either
upon the suddenness of the Danger, or otherwise, does not protect them.

It Is an undeniable Argument, that Government, or (in other words) the Right to
use the Force of the Society, in defense of the Peoples Lives or Properties, is
their own Gift; because when the Magistrate does not this, the Right of
defending themselves returns to every one of them, (who may in defense of
themselves, or what belongs to them, take away the Life of an Invader) and so
must the Right of using Force in Matters of mere Religion, upon the
Magistrate's either not using or misusing it, had they at first entrusted him
with it. But they were so far from having such a Right one upon the other in
the State of Nature, that Force to bring a Man to a Religion which he thinks
not true, was an Injury, which in that State every one would avoid; and
consequently Protection from that as well as any other Injury, was one of the
Ends of constituting Civil Society.

9. Could Men have lived in Peace, without any fear of Fraud or Violence one
from the other, there would have been no need of Government: Nor can it be
supposed that Men who are by Nature equal, would have submitted their Lives and
Properties to the Discretion of a single, or a few Persons, but to prevent
those greater Inconveniences. And that which was the End of erecting
Government, ought certainly to be the Measure of its Proceeding. Now it is
evident Men might have lived peaceably and quietly together, and yet have
differed in those things that give no biass to their Conversation, or Actions,
with respect to one another as Members of the Society; and therefore the using
Force in these Matters was not one of the Ends of uniting under Laws, and
submitting to Government, but the direct contrary to prevent it; and
consequently every one by being a Member of a Civil Society, has as much Right
to be protected in his Religious Worship, as in any other Matter whatever. And
if in Civil Matters the Magistrate never does, and it would be looked on as an
Injustice if he should any farther than relates to the good of the Public,
enjoin Men the Care of their Private Concerns, or force them to a prosecution
of their Private Interest, but only protect them from being invaded, (which is
much the same as Toleration) there is the same reason he should no farther use
Force in Matters of Religion, than the Public Good is concerned, and only
protect Men from being injured by others in their Private Concerns between God
and themselves.

10. To suppose that one Man in the State of Nature had a Right to use Force on
another on the account of mere Religion, is to suppose that State a State of
Anarchy, War, and Confusion; because every one supposing himself in the right,
and not being willing to submit to another, there must necessarily happen
perpetual Quarrels, Confusions and Destruction, which is contrary to the Law of
right Reason, whereby in that State Men were wholly to be governed. The only
Difference between being in a State of Nature, and under Government, consists
in this, that under Government Men have debarred themselves from exercising
their natural Rights, and entrusted the Magistrate to do those things that in
the State of Nature every one of them had a Right to do; so that the
Magistrate's Power is not larger, but theirs more contracted than it was in
that State.

11. If in the State of Nature Men had a Right to use Force one upon the other
for Differences of Opinion; different Nations, who with respect to one another
are still in that State, may upon that account justly use it, which would
involve almost all Nations (since there are scarce any but differ, and in their
own Opinions, very materially) in endless Wars. But they are so far from
thinking they ought to make War for this Reason, that by the Sacred Laws of
Nations, Ambassadors, and all vested with a Public Character, have a Right to
exercise their own Religion in the Country they are sent to, tho never so
contrary to that there established. But,

12. If the Magistrate of one Society has no Right to use Force on the Members
of another, he can have as little to use it on those of his own, because in
becoming their Governor, he has obliged himself to promote their Happiness and
Welfare: And he that is entrusted with a Power for the Good of the Society, can
never have a Right to use it to the Prejudice of it, as he manifestly does who
deprives his Subjects either of their Lives or Properties for things that do
not relate to the Safety or Good of the Civil Society.

Which either against Foreign or Domestic Enemies, is best provided for by the
Peoples Union, which arises from the mutual Enjoyments of their Liberty,
whereby the Source and Foundation of Domestic Enmities is taken away, and
their Strength against Foreign Enemies increased; which Union, and with it the
general Welfare of the People, can only be secured by such a Conduct in the
Governors, as gives impartial Encouragement to all that are Virtuous and
Industrious, and perfect Security to every one in the Fruits of their Labors:
Which is altogether inconsistent with the Magistrate's depriving them of those
Fruits, or any part of them, for Matters merely Religious, which can only tend
to divide a People into Parties and Factions, and to weaken the State by their
Disunion, and endanger it by their Discontents.

But this is not the worst; it necessarily tends to the ruining and beggaring
of a Nation, not only by destroying all Encouragement to Industry, Frugality,
and Labor, but by depriving People of the Means to carry on those Trades, upon
which the Safety and Riches of a Nation depend; which must in time depopulate a
Country, as we find evident in all those where Men are not secure in the
enjoyments of the Fruits of their own and their Ancestors Labors. But such
Tyranny is much more destructive, when it happens upon the Account of Religion;
then it wholly falls on the truly Religious, and Conscientious, who are the
most Just, most Frugal, most Industrious, and in a word most serviceable to
their Country both in Peace and War: For that Conscience that makes them suffer
rather than act against it, causes them to abound with all those moral Virtues
(about which there are no Contentions) that are necessary and useful to the
Public.

But because I shall have further occasion to mention the fatal Consequences of
Persecution, I shall only add here, that there never was a Nation (especially a
trading One, where Men could with ease remove themselves and their Effects)
long either Rich, Populous or Happy, where Persecution prevailed: And on the
contrary, no Nation but what has thriven proportionably as they have allowed a
Toleration.

13. In a word, since it is the Magistrate's Duty to preserve as much as
possible, when it is not contrary to the greater Good of the Society, the
Property, Quiet and Life of every individual Person; neither Man nor God can
oblige him to inconsistent or contradictory things, viz. to do this, and
deprive the Members of the Society of these, when the Good of it is not
concerned: But the more the Good of the Society forbids him, the more he is
obliged to use Force, because as the Number of those he judges to be erroneous
increases; so not only the Number of the Sufferers, but even their Sufferings
ought to increase, to put a stop to those spreading Errors. But the more the
Sufferers are, and the more they suffer, the more the Public is damnified; so
that it is evident the Magistrate cannot be obliged both to promote the Public
Good, and to use this Power. Nay, the very exercising such a Power is
inconsistent with Government, and as far as it extends destroys it: because a
Design to deprive People, not only of their Lives, but Properties, (for
conservation of which Government was instituted, and therefore more sacred than
Government it self) and a Design to govern them are inconsistent. And has not
the Magistrate such a Design, when he invades the Peoples Rights for things not
tending to the Good of the Society, nor as much as in their Power, but morally
impossible, such as acting contrary to their Conscience is? And it is a greater
piece of Tyranny to punish Men for what is morally, than what is naturally
impossible.

14. If the Magistrate on pretense of the Honor of God, or the Good of Souls,
can use Force to make Men of that Religion he judges to be true, there can be
no reason why the same religious Causes should not oblige the dissenting
Subjects to use Force on the Magistrate and his Sect, in order to cause them to
be of that Religion they judge to be true. The same reason that will justify
one, will equally justify the other: For Property is no more founded in
speculative Opinions or ceremonial Practices, than Dominion is; and the
Magistrate is as much bound to protect his Subjects, and not to destroy their
Privileges, as they are to obey him, and not to invade his Prerogatives. The
Duties are reciprocal, and consequently one Party cannot be bound, but the
other must be so too, so that both or neither are free to use Force in such
Cases.

It Is said, the Good of the Society hinders the Subjects from using Force: The
same Reason then must hinder the Magistrate too, because Men will not endeavor
to use Force against him, but when they judge themselves strong enough, and then
they will (whatever Passive Principles they may pretend) as little fail to do
it, if he persecutes them; and in the mean time they must suffer all he will
inflict: which makes the Argument to conclude much stronger against the
Magistrate; the Abuse of whose Power produces greater and more unavoidable
Mischiefs to Mankind than any thing else can.

15. By what has been said, I think it is evident that Men, tho they are
answerable to God for every Breach of his Laws, yet are accountable to one
another, for those things only that relate to their mutual Security and
Welfare; because every Man has so much Interest (and no more) in another's
Conduct; and therefore Government is no further concerned in Matters of
Religion, than as the Principles or Practices of the different Professors tend
to make them more or less fit for the Duties of the Society. For which Reason
those Opinions that are merely Speculative, or Practices that are purely
Ceremonial, as having no relation at all to the true Foundation of Government,
ought to be tolerated; for nothing can be evidently more unjust, than for the
Representative of the Civil Society (as the Magistrate is) to deprive any of
the Rights of the Society, who has done nothing against its Interest: nor can
any thing be more ridiculous, than to suppose a Man's Rights to the enjoyment
of this Life, ought to depend upon his thinking just as the Magistrate does
about Things relating to the next; or that a Man's Property in this World is
founded upon his having right Notions of Things no ways relating to it; which
is as absurd as that Property is founded in Grace: and there is as much dispute
who is in the right Opinion, as who has Grace, every one alike pretending to
it, and none being obliged to submit to the Determination of another.

CHAP. II.
That God has not, either by the Law of Nature, or his positive Law, given the
Magistrate a Power in Matters merely Religious.

SINCE it appears that the Magistrate has not his Power immediately from God,
but from the People; and that God has not authorized or capacitated them to
bestow a Right on him to use Force in Cases of mere Religion, it necessary
follows that he has no such Right. But however, to avoid all pretense of
Cavilling, let us suppose, that Government, both as to the Form and to the
Persons that administer it, is immediately from God; yet still it is most
evident that the Magistrate has no such Power.

1. Which thus I prove: A Right in the Magistrate to punish for not doing as he
commands, necessarily supposes it a Duty in the Subject to obey, otherwise he
would punish a Man for not doing what he is not obliged to do: and where there
is no Power to make Laws, or to command, there can be no Disobedience; and
where there is no Disobedience, there punishing on pretense of Disobeying is
manifestly unjust. But that God has the sole Legislative Power in Matters
merely Religious, or what only concerns himself, and can alone prescribe what
Honor, Worship, etc. shall be paid him, none (I suppose) will deny; therefore
the Magistrate has no Legislative nor Coercive Power, which cannot subsist
without Legislation, to which it necessarily adheres. And,

2. As God has reserved to himself the sole Legislature, so he has not given
the Magistrate a Right to interpret for others his Law, or to impose on them in
what sense they must understand it. But he has endowed Men in general with
Reason, which is the only Guide he has obliged them to follow in judging of the
Sense and Meaning of his Laws; and he that does not follow it, degrades himself
from the Rank of rational Creatures, and highly offends God. And this is not
only evident by the Light of Nature, but confirmed by God's Positive Law, which
frequently commands us to make use thereof in Matters of Religion: We are bid
to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good; to try the Spirits; to
let no Man deceive us; to beware of false Prophets, Seducers, Deceivers; to
judge of our selves what is right. But how shall we judge and try? Not as the
Horse and Mule which have no Understanding, but as Circumspect and Wise; that
is, by making use of those Faculties God has given us to discern between Truth
and Falsehood, Good and Evil. And he not only forbids us to act contrary to our
Judgment, but requires we should be fully satisfied before we act: For he that
acts when he doubts, is damned; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. The
Reason is most evident, why a Man ought not to do an Action when he judges it
to be ill, because to judge an Action to be ill, or displeasing to God, is the
same; and he that forms such a Judgment of an Action, and yet does it, does
knowingly and willingly displease God, which is eternally and essentially ill,
because no Circumstances whatever can make it lawful for a Creature to do that
which he judges will offend his Creator, or even to act when he doubts whether
it will or no. If then God rewards and punishes Men according as they have
followed the Dictates of their Reason, that must needs be the Rule of their
Actions, and not the Commands of the Magistrate; and consequently the
Magistrate can have no more Right to use Force on a Subject, than a Subject has
on him: for tho he is his Subject in other Matters, yet in those merely
Religious, he is equally a Sovereign, equally Independent as the Magistrate
himself; because where there is no other Judge on Earth but every one's own
Reason, every Man (one as well as another) is a Supreme Judge: Nay, this
Sovereign Right of judging every one for himself is so inherent, that none can
make this Power over to another. So that it is impossible that the Magistrate
upon any Pretense whatever, can claim a Magisterial Power in these Matters, but
only a Right to advise, which belongs to every one as well as to him. And,

3. The Difference between Advice and Command consists in this, that Advice one
is obliged to follow, not for the sake of the Person that gives it, but for the
good that is contained in it, which he, to whom and for whose sake it is given,
is to judge of; and consequently if he does not think it good, is not obliged to
follow it. It Is ridiculous as well as unjust to use Force in Matters of Advice,
and by Civil Sanctions oblige People to follow it. Whoever does this, does in
effect (however he may deny it in Words) claim a Legislative Power. But where
there is such a Power, one is obliged to obey upon the account, and for the
sake of the Authority that commands it: And if the Magistrate had such a Power,
Men would be obliged to profess whatever Religion he commands them.

4. The Reason why a Judge is necessary in Civil and not in Religious
Controversies, is, because in Civil Matters it is impossible that Titius should
enjoy the things in Controversy, and Sempronius too; therefore the Plaintiff
must injure the Defendant by disquieting his Possession, or the Defendant wrong
the Plaintiff by keeping his Right from him, so that there is a necessity of a
common Judge between them, who would be to no purpose if both Parties were not
obliged to acquiesce in his Sentence, I mean, with an external Obedience, so as
to suffer it to be put in execution; but not with an Internal, so as to believe
it always just.

But in Religious Controversies the Case is otherwise, for there each may hold
his Opinion, and do the other no wrong nor himself neither, if he did his best
in judging concerning his Opinion, so that there can be no occasion of a Judge:
And it is further considerable that here can be none but what is a Party, as
being before engaged either for or against the Opinion that is to be decided:
But for a Party to judge it against all natural Equity, tho it is the constant
practice of the Clergy to make professed and highly interessed Parties, whose
Preferments are held by declaring for such Opinions, to be both Accusers and
Judges; that is, to declare themselves Orthodox, and therefore to engross all
Preferments, and their Opponents Heterodox, and consequently not to share with
them. But if there is a Judge to whose Determination one is obliged to submit,
he that is so obliged must give an Internal Consent, because here all External
Compliance contrary to one's Judgment is a Sin; but all the Power in the World
is not able to make a Man give an Internal Consent, because it is not in his
own, much less in another's Power to make him believe or think as he pleases:
Yet were that possible, no Man is qualified to be a Judge but he that is
infallible; besides, were there any such Judge, yet a Man was not to be ruled by
him, except he was convinced he was so. But,

5. There being no such Judge on Earth, there is an absolute necessity of
leaving those Controversies to be decided by God himself, as being Matters
wholly relating to him, and consequently wholly to be left to him. Therefore
for the Magistrate to punish any for acting according to their Judgments, is
not only invading the Rights of his Fellow-men, but the Prerogative of God
himself, in taking upon him to judge those Matters God has reserved for his own
Tribunal. Nay, he goes further than this, and punishes Men for obeying God
rather than himself. God requires Man to worship him as he in his Conscience
thinks most agreeable to his Will; and the Magistrate threatens him if he does
so, to Fine, Imprison, and Ruin him, which is setting himself above God; a
Crime greater than that of Lucifer, who only attempted an Equality with his
Maker, not a Superiority above him.

6. It Is said, the Magistrate has a Right to hinder his Subjects from following
their Consciences when erroneous. Which is very absurd; for if a Man was not
obliged to act according to his Conscience for fear of its being erroneous, no
Man would be obliged to act according to his Conscience at all, since the
mistaken Person thinks himself as much in the right, nay is generally more
confident than he that is really so: So that if one must follow his Conscience,
there is the same necessity for all, because all equally judge themselves in the
Right. But if the Magistrate is to judge whose Conscience is erroneous, then Men
must desert their Consciences, and all the World over profess the same
Principles with the Magistrates they live under. For Civil Government is every
where the same, and one Magistrate as well as another has an equal right to
judge who of his Subjects have erroneous Consciences.

7. If it be Men's indispensible Duty to worship God according to Conscience,
and that publicly too, (for the more public the Worship is, the more it tends
to the Glory of God) it must be their Duty to use the Means that are necessary
to that End; and consequently, if it be necessary, oppose Force to Force: for
the Magistrate in things beyond his Commission, is but a private Person; and
People do no Injustice in defending that Right none can have a right to deprive
them of, and which themselves cannot part with; it being the Essential Right of
Human Nature, to worship God according to Conviction, which is antecedent to
all Government, and can never be subject to it. But,

8. If the Magistrate has a Right to use Force in Matters of mere Religion, he
must have this Right by God's positive Law, or by the Law of Nature.

But that he has no such Power by God's positive Law, is evident from this one
Consideration, that all Mankind (except the Jews whose Laws were not obligatory
to other Nations) were under no Law but that of Nature, until the coming of
Christ: But Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and who disclaimed all
Civil Power, made no Change or Alteration in the Civil Rights and Conditions of
Mankind, which he must have done had he made Men's Properties depend upon their
thinking or acting in Matters purely Religious according to the Magistrate's
Judgment.

As Christ and the Magistrate have each their distinct Kingdoms, so they must
have each their Limits and Bounds; the Magistrate's Kingdom (it is true) must be
subservient to Christ's in punishing Vice and Immorality, and in preserving
People from being molested in their Civil Rights for worshipping God according
to Conscience; and here he still keeps within the Confines of his own Kingdom:
but if he exercises a Legislature in Christ's, and makes use of Violence to
put his Laws in execution, he assumes a greater Power than Christ himself
claims. But,

9. If the Magistrate claims such a Right by the Law of Nature, that Right
ought fully to be made appear, because there is no part of that Law but what is
most clear and evident.

To prove he has such a Power, it is usually urged, that if Parents by the Law
of Nature have a right to use Force on their Children in Matters of mere
Religion; the Magistrate, whose Power over his Subjects is much greater than
that of Parents over their Children, has at least as great a Right.

I answer; It Is a Duty in Parents, for the Good of their Children, (for which
they are fitted by their natural Love and Tenderness) to supply the Defects of
their Understanding, until they are capable of understanding for themselves.
Before which time Parents no doubt will instruct them in their own Religion,
whether Paganism, Judaism, or Mahometism; yet no Man will suppose that they can
justly use Force on them when they come to Years of Discretion, to make them
embrace those Religions or any other. And yet the Case between the Magistrate
and his Subjects, is very different from that of Parents and Children in their
Nonage; because the Magistrate is not in those Matters to supply the Defects of
his Subjects Understanding for a time, but his Power reaches to Men of all Ages
and Capacities: so that it is evident that the Reason that subjects Children in
their Nonage to the use of Force, does not all concern Men at Years of
Discretion.

10. It Is granted by all, that a Heathen Magistrate has no right to judge in
Matters simply Religious; how then comes a Christian by the Law of Nature to
obtain this Charter, since that Law allows one Magistrate no more Power than
another? and what is done by a competent Authority, tho not right, yet is
valid, ratum si non rectum. And as Civil Power is every where the same, so let
me add Church Power is so too; so that the Church cannot give any new Power to
the Magistrate by his becoming a Member of it, nor the Magistrate any new Power
to the Church by his coming into it.

11. It Is said, the Law of Nature obliges every one in his Station to promote
the true Religion; and for that reason the Magistrate is obliged to exercise a
Coercive Power in Matters merely Religious.

The Magistrate no doubt is to make use of his Power in things that belong to
his Station, but merely religious Ones, as it has been already proved, do not;
as to those he is no more than a private Person, nay, the Clergy cannot own him
for more, without destroying their own Supremacy in Matters Spiritual, which
includes merely religious Ones, except there can be more than one Supreme in
the same thing.

CHAP. III.
That a Power in the Magistrate to use Force in Matters of mere Religion, tends
to Men's Eternal Ruin.

1. BUT if the Magistrate has any such Power from the Law of Nature, it must be
because it tends to promote, either the Eternal or Temporal Good of Mankind, or
the Honor of God: But to take away the least Color of any Right upon these
Pretenses, I shall show, first, the Exercise of such a Power is destructive of
Man's Eternal Happiness. 2dly. Of his Temporal, and contrary to all those Laws
that for our mutual good God requires of us. 3dly. That it is directly opposite
to, and inconsistent with the Honor of God.

2. As to the first; It is of fatal Consequence to the Eternal Happiness of
Mankind, in having a direct tendency to make them act contrary to their
Consciences. For since Force can no more work a Change or Alteration on the
Mind, than Arguments can on Matter, all that it can do, is to make Men
unwilling to lie under the weight of it; which they have no way of avoiding,
but by acting as the Magistrate will have them; the Truth of which Force is
wholly unapt to convince them of, and can only produce an outward compliance,
the Conscience still remaining averse: For nothing is more evident, than that
where a thing is wholly impertinent to convince the Conscience, (as Violence
is) and yet it obliges a Man to act, it obliges him to act contrary to his
Conscience; which is directly contrary to his Eternal Happiness: For if he that
acts when he doubts is damned, he cannot certainly be in a better Condition,
who wholly revolts from his Conscience, and basely lies both to God and Man.

3. The true Religion it self can neither judge nor punish; but the Magistrate
by the True Religion means his own; and since all Magistrates think themselves
in the right, they (if Force is to be used) must think themselves obliged to
use it: And consequently if one uses Force to make People profess a True
Doctrine or Religion, there are at least five hundred who would use it to make
People, contrary to their Consciences, profess a False Religion, either in
whole or part, than which there can be nothing more impious; nor would the
Matter be much mended, if the Magistrate forces Men to profess the True
Religion, which yet is certainly false to them whilst they believe it so. And
the forcing People to profess either a true or false Religion, is equally
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, and consequently upon that account equally
sinful; because when Men, by acting against their Consciences, are brought to
have no regard to them, they will not scruple to break those moral Duties which
all Religions teach, and in the observing of which Man's mutual Happiness
consists: therefore the Magistrate is so far from having a right to punish Men
for acting according to their Consciences, that it is his Duty to see they do
not violate them, tho supposed never so erroneous; and consequently all Force
is religiously to be abstained from; which, as Mr. Chillingworth (Chap. 5. n.
96.) observes, may make Men counterfeit, but cannot make them believe; and
therefore is fit to breed Form without, and Atheism within: Yet this is not the
only fatal Consequence of this Doctrine, but as I shall show in my next,

CHAP. IV.
Compulsion is inconsistent with all those Duties that God, for the sake of
Men's Temporal Happiness, requires of one toward another.

1. NOthing can be more diametrically opposite to all those Precepts of Love,
Charity, Kindness, Gentleness, Meekness, Patience, Forbearance, the Gospel is
in a manner composed of, than Men's ill using one another for different
Sentiments in things merely Religious. To pretend Love, Kindness, Friendship,
etc. and yet vex, oppress, and ruin, is no better than mocking and sporting
with the Miseries of those we have so treated. First to kiss and then betray,
is the basest Hypocrisy, if that can pass for Hypocrisy which openly proclaims
at how great a distance Men's Words and Actions are. The kindest Office one Man
can do to another is, if he thinks him in an Error, to endeavor to convince
him of it; who tho he continues in his former Opinion, yet the Obligation to
the other for his good Intention still remains, and this Benefit he may obtain
by it, that by examining the Reasons on both Sides, he is more likely to
discover the Truth; yet should he mistake after he has impartially examined the
Point, his Error would be wholly innocent, since he has done what he can to
find out the Truth, and God requires no more; but to cause a Person to be
persecuted for being instrumental in this, is the most unnatural and diabolical
thing that can be.

2. Object. It Is usually said, it is not want of Charity, but the greatest that
can be to hinder Men by Force from professing such Opinions as are destructive
to their Souls.

Answ. But I say, first, that it is against Charity for the Magistrate to do a
real Ill to his Subjects, when by it he (who is as fallible as those he
persecutes) is as likely to promote Error as Truth; because if the Error
ballanceth the Truth, it is doing Mischief for Mischief's sake: now since Truth
is but one, and Falsehood almost infinite, there is a prodigious odds; he
persecutes his Subjects to establish Error.

2dly. I answer, That Opinions merely as such, are not destructive of Men's
Souls; for God who has made Man liable to mistake, does not require an
Impossibility of him, never to be mistaken, but that he impartially searches
after religious Truth, and sincerely endeavors to discover it by those Helps
and Abilities he has bestowed on him to that purpose: He therefore that does
this, has the satisfaction of doing his Duty as a rational Creature, and may be
sure, tho he misseth Truth, he shall not miss the Reward of it, since he has
followed, as well as he could, (and no more could be his Duty) the only Guide
God has given him to judge of Truth and Falsehood. And if it be no Fault in a
Judge that condemns an innocent Person, if upon sufficient Evidence he appears
guilty; the same Reason will hold as strong for the Innocence of an Opinion,
that a Man after he has impartially considered embraces for Truth, and by
which he prejudiceth no Person. And if he that has lost his Senses, if it be
not by his own Fault, is not accountable for what he does; there is as little
reason that he should, who acts according to the best of his Understanding; for
it is the Sincerity of the Heart, and the Goodness of the Intention that God
wholly regards: And the ignorant and mistaken (if it be not their own Fault)
are as acceptable to him as the knowing and not mistaken; since it is he that
causes the Differences of Men's Understandings, as well as Circumstances, (which
last makes the Widow's Mite, tho very inconsiderable in it self) as acceptable
as the great Presents of the Rich. So that two Men that are of different
Religions, may be both in the right Way to Heaven, provided they do their
endeavor to find out the Truth. For it is inconsistent with Justice to give a
Being to any Creature that must necessarily make it more miserable than not to
be; which must be, if Men are to be punished eternally for unavoidable
Mistakes: But God who could have no other Design in creating our immortal
Minds, than that they should be happy, consequently has given them all (since
they are all equally from him) sufficient Means to make themselves so; so that
it is strangely absurd, as well as injurious to an infinitely perfect Being, to
suppose he is a respecter of Persons, or that he has made Men's Eternal
Happiness or Misery to depend on such Accidents, as being born in England,
Rome, Turkey, China, etc.

Promulgation is certainly essential to a Law; and therefore those that have no
opportunity of being convinced of the Truth of the Gospel, shall not be
accountable for not believing it, but shall be judged by the Law they know, and
not by that they did not know; nor shall those that do believe the Gospel, if
after a diligent search they are mistaken in some Points of it, be condemned
for it, because those Points cannot be said to be sufficiently promulgated to
them. To doubt of this, is to question the Justice of God; therefore I may
safely conclude, that whoever does what God requires from him shall be
rewarded; and that God requires no more from every one, but that he shall use
his honest Endeavor by all means, to know and understand his Will as perfectly
as he can, provided when known he does his best Endeavors to live up to it;
and consequently the greatest Charity the Magistrate is capable of doing, is
not to prejudice Men in their grand Choice by Punishments or Rewards, but to
leave them entirely at Liberty as the most likely way to find out the Truth; or
if they miss it, to make their Mistakes wholly innocent. But of that more
hereafter.

3. All the Uncharitableness, Animosities, Envy and Hatred that reigns amongst
dissenting Parties, are owing to Persecution, and not to the bare Differences
of Opinions, which of themselves are no more apt to produce these Effects, than
different Complexions or Palats; for to see a Man in an Error, is apt to create
Pity in us, a Passion very opposite to Hatred: Nor would there be the least
Grounds for Uncharitableness, if no Man was to be harassed in his Name, Goods,
or Person, for any speculative Opinion or outward way of Worship; but to use
one ill upon that account, sets him at perfect Enmity, and creates a Quarrel.

The Heathens, who had more and wider Differences about Matters of Religion
than the Christians, yet because they tolerated one another, had not those
irreconcilable Animosities, fierce Contentions and unnatural Wars, which have
frequently happened since the Propagation of the Christian Religion; which yet
without Impiety cannot be imputed to its Genius, which is pure, peaceable, and
inoffensive, and requires a universal Love and Charity for all Men of what
Profession soever. No, it is the Antichristian Doctrine of Persecution that has
transformed the mild and sociable Nature of Man into greater Ferocity than that
of Wolves and Tigers: for nothing (it is certain) can more exasperate the Minds
of Men, than to be ill used for following the Dictates of their Consciences;
for then every one of them, since they all suffer upon the same Account, will
be apt to resent, not only what is done to himself, but to the rest of his
Sect, who cannot but think their Persecutors their mortal Enemies, since they
not only use them ill without any manner of Provocation, but (as they cannot
but suppose) endeavor to force them to ruin themselves eternally; and they, if
ever they get their Persecutors in their Power, will in all likelihood double
or treble on them what themselves suffered: So by degrees Men arrive to the
height of Fury, Rage and Madness, and break through not only all the Ties of
Christianity, but even Humanity; tho whilst they thus furnish such powerful
Provocations to endless Discords, Hatreds, Factions, Wars, Massacres, etc. they
have nothing in their Mouths but the Good of the Church and Salvation of Souls,
not considering that without Love they cannot be Christ's Disciples, ( John
13.) and that all other Duties without Charity profit nothing. But what is more
opposite to these, than to tempt Men to make themselves miserable hereafter, to
avoid being so here? For either they must continue all their Lives under
Persecution, (which who can support?) or else they must buy their temporal
Quiet with the loss of their Eternal Happiness. But,

4. This Doctrine of Compulsion is not only inconsistent with Love, Meekness,
and suchlike, but directly contrary to the very Foundation of natural Equity
and Justice, in causing Men to do as they would not be done unto; for they that
are (when they have the Civil Power on their side) for judging for others, and
punishing them for not acting according to their Judgments, are unwilling that
others, when the Scales of Authority are turned, should judge for them in like
manner. Tho then there is nothing they can plead for themselves, but what before
they condemned in others; and it would be as ridiculous to request those that
they before ill used, to have regard to the common Rules of Justice, as it
would have been in those Scythians who sacrificed all Strangers to their Gods,
to desire others to have respect to the Laws of Hospitality.

5. It may be objected, That the Rule of doing as you would be done unto does
not hold, because one Magistrate is in the Right, and the other not; and
consequently he that is in the Right himself, has a Right to judge, but not vice
versa.

Answ. But since the Dispute is who is in the Right, it is ridiculous to say, he
that is only in the Right has a Power to judge, except there were some Superior
to determine which of them is in the Right; but there being no such Superior,
every Magistrate is to judge for himself, who to be sure will judge himself in
the Right, and consequently those that differ from him in the Wrong: And there
can be no reason why one Magistrate as well as another has not a Right to judge,
since that Right is founded in being a Magistrate, which is common to them all:
And there can be no Reason for the Orthodox punishing Schismatics, Heretics,
Mahometans, Jews, Pagans, etc. but what will equally oblige them, as long as
they believe themselves to be Orthodox, to punish those that really are so.
Therefore the Defenders of any Persecution are guilty of encouraging and
abetting all Persecution whatsoever, even that under which themselves suffer,
since they can frame no Arguments to justify the using Force to promote the
true Religion, but what will equally serve in behalf of any Religion that is
believed to be true: As we find the loose Harangues of Austin upon that Subject
are urged by the Patrons of Persecution, of what Sect or Denomination soever.
And since there can be no Argument to prosecute Error, but what will be turned
upon Truth it self, let the Persecutors themselves judge whether it is not better
to leave all such disputable Points to the only just Judge, than to take them
into their own Hands; who, were they wholly ignorant in what part of the World
their Station was to be, would be glad there was no such thing as Persecution,
rather than run the risque of being persecuted themselves, which shows that
even they look on it in general as an ill thing; and it is better certainly that
a particular Inconvenience (supposing Toleration to be such) should be
permitted, than such a Universal Mischief as Persecution is, should prevail.

It Is said, do as you would be done unto, is not properly a Law to warrant the
thing we are about, but only a Rule to direct us what Measures we ought to
observe in our acting with others, when the thing it self is lawful. Which
granting to be true, yet for a Man to judge which is the true Religion, and act
according to that Judgment, all agree is not only lawful, but a Duty, because
all agree themselves are obliged to act so; and therefore if I desire this
Liberty for my self, I ought not to deny it to my Brother, seeing he is a Man,
and I am no more, and therefore no more infallible than he, and for that reason
can have no more Right to persecute him into my Opinion, than he has to force
me into his; for between Equals there ought to be an equal Measure: Now by
Nature all Men are equal, and have an equal and natural Right of serving God as
they think best; and no accidental Difference as to other Matters, can deprive
them of this Right. In a word, there can be no reason to deny the Obligation of
this Rule in this Case, but what will equally destroy it in any other. But,

6. Persecution destroys not only natural Equity and Justice, but breaks all
the Ties of Kindred, Blood, Gratitude, Merit; because, let a Man be never so
nearly related to one of persecuting Principles, or have done him all the
important Kindnesses imaginable, or have never so much Merit, be never so
useful to the Public, or be never so exemplary in his Life and Conversation,
that will but the sooner expose him to suffer, not only because People are apt
to be influenced by such a one, but because according to the Persecutor's
Principles he is obliged to harass him sooner than another, out of pure love to
him, it being the kindest thing he is capable of doing him: So that without a
Figure it may justly be said of all Persecutors, that their very Mercies and
Kindnesses are Cruelties. But,

7. This is not all, this Doctrine of Compulsion annuls all Obligations of the
most Sacred Oaths; for if the Magistrate is obliged by God to use Force on his
dissenting Subjects, no Promises to indemnify them, tho sworn to with the most
solemn Oaths, ought to be kept, because all such Oaths are void from the
beginning, the Magistrate being under a prior Obligation to God (which is not
in his Power to dispense with) to punish them; which must make all Quarrels
between the Magistrate and his dissenting Subjects immortal, since there can be
no Security given that they shall not be punished for their Religion whenever
it is in the Magistrate's Power: and by the same Reason, all Articles and
Covenants that Towns or Countries make for Liberty of Conscience, upon their
submitting themselves, are null and void; and so are all the Promises which
Popish Kings have made to their Protestant Subjects, because they are obliged
to punish Heretics, (which they suppose Protestants to be) and consequently
cannot but think their Oaths unlawful. And all our late Laws for Liberty of
Conscience are in themselves void, because he that has the Power of the Sword,
is required by God's Laws (which no Human Ones can supersede) to punish
Dissenters from the true Church: And if all these Obligations are void in
themselves, what Reason is there that those between Sovereign and Sovereign
should be more firm, when either of them judge the breaking them will tend to
advance the Honor of God, since, as they cannot pretend to have so great a
tenderness for the Right of Foreigners, as of their own Subjects, so they
cannot but know that God is equally dishonored by false Religions in one Place
as in another? And it is but a poor Zeal for his Honor, that looks no farther
than such a Lake, River, or Mountain, the usual Boundaries of Kingdoms; which
would be the way to set all Mankind together by the Ears. But,

8. Suppose it should not always have that Effect, yet it must necessarily
destroy all Trade and Commerce between Nations of different Persuasions; for
who would venture into a Foreign Nation, except he were of the same Persuasion
with them, if they were equally obliged to punish Men for false Religions or
Doctrines, as well as for Theft and Murder, etc? which must necessarily
discourage all Commerce, and make Nations most inhospitable and barbarous: And
if Persecutors do not follow this Method, it is because they do not act
according to their own Principles,

9. Which root out all Mercy, and take from the Magistrate all Power of
pardoning any Crime whatever, and from all private Persons the forgiving their
Enemies: For if the Magistrate is not to act as the Representative of the Civil
Society only, but also to punish Offenses against God, merely as such, tho he
may forgive any Crime against himself, or pardon the breach of his own Laws;
yet these being also Sins against God, he is obliged upon God's Account to
punish Men for the Breach of them, as well as for Infidelity or Heresy: And all
private Persons, tho they must forgive their Brethren, not only seven, but
seven times seven, yet the not punishing them by this Doctrine is wholly put
out of their Power, because it obliges them to show their Zeal for God's
Honor, in getting the Magistrate to punish them, who by injuring their
Brethren, offend against God.

10. In a word, this Doctrine of Force is directly contrary to the main Design
of all God's Laws, wherein Men are concerned one with another, which is their
mutual Good: As for Instance; The forbidding Murder is intended for the
Security of Men's greatest Good, their Lives; which would be strangely defeated,
if the Supreme Powers were to punish with Death those they judge do dishonor
God with their false Worship, because it would not fail to fill the World with
Blood and Slaughter, since the Governors of it are as opposite in their
Judgments about these Matters, as in the Fable the Man's two Wives were, where
his old one plucked out his black Hairs, and his young Wife his gray Ones.

But suppose the Supreme Powers were not obliged to deprive People of their
Lives, but only of their Properties, (not to mention that even that would
destroy great Numbers by robbing them of the Necessaries of Life) the end of
all those Laws which forbid all kinds of Injuries, and require mutual
Assistance one toward another for their common good, would be in a manner
destroyed, since a great part of Mankind must be unavoidably miserable, by
being either at once, or by degrees, deprived of the means of subsisting
happily, and the rest would hold what they possess but by a precarious Tenure,
since it would depend on their Governors, (tho they had never so many
successively) or their own not changing their Opinions, (neither of which is in
their Power to hinder) whether they should enjoy any thing or not. Therefore it
shows the greatest Indiscretion in those (who tho they have a share in the
Legislature, yet are subject to the Laws themselves) to consent to any
persecuting Ones, because they cannot be sure but that they are contriving Rods
for their own Backs, or for their Childrens or near Relations: and I believe
there are few Persecutors (for all their Zeal) but would rather Speculative
Points were wholly left to the merciful and wise Judgment of God, than to have
their own Families or Friends ruined about them. But to return; In vain are the
Magistrates required not to tyrannize over and oppress their Subjects, if they
are to punish them for not being of the same Persuasion with them. It had been
much happier for Men in relation to their Temporal, as well as Eternal
Condition, to be in a State of Nature, than to let Tyrants deprive them of the
Comforts of this Life, for no other Reason than not daring to act contrary to
their Consciences in things not relating to this Life: And People, where they
oppress one the other, when the Good of the Society cannot be pretended, may
justly be reckoned in a worse State than that of Nature, viz. of War, which is
never at an end as long as there are Men who cannot comply with all those
things, that out of Ignorance, Superstition, Ambition, etc. are established as
necessary to Church Communion.

11. In a word; Can Men oppress, ruin and kill for God's sake, and destroy all
moral Honesty on pretense of Religion? which when it serves to no other end
than to inflame the Tempers of Men, and set a keener Edg on their Spirits, and
to make them ten times more the Children of Wrath and Cruelty than they are by
Nature, does surely lose its Nature, and ceases to be Religion; for let Men say
worse of Infidelity and Atheism if they can.

But if, on the contrary, the ruining those that do nothing against the Welfare
of the Society, becomes an Act of Piety, when it is made use of to extirpate a
false Religion or Opinion, there are no Crimes whatever but by the same reason
will become religious and virtuous Actions, if they are equally serviceable to
the same pious End; scelera ipsa nef asque hac mercede placent: and
consequently it would be an Act of Piety and Virtue to make use of pious Frauds
to calumniate, to lie, to bear false Witness, to murder, to assassinate even
the Magistrate himself.

12. Thus, whereas Religion has no other Design than the Advancement of Man's
Happiness, and God's Glory; this persecuting Humor is so far from being
serviceable to the former, that it is plainly destructive of it: for whereas in
order to that good End, the Scripture has directed all Stations and Relations
of Men so to act, as may best tend to Love and peace, (the true Basis of the
Happiness of the Society) this drives them all to contrary Motions; for
Magistrates are incited to ruin those for whose Good they were instituted.

Subjects are tempted to disobey their Governors, and retaliate Persecution so
much the more fiercely, by how much greater Influence their Opinions and
Actions have upon the Community.

Nor does it only destroy the Peace of a Nation within its own Bowels, but it
engages one Nation against another. And,

13. As it destroys all these Public Obligations, by the same reason all
private Ones (which are not so great as those owing to the Public) must cease;
so that it embroileth private Families, subverts the mutual Duties between
Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, etc. seducing
them into a belief, that the way to be serviceable to one another's Eternal
Interest, is by being cruel to their Temporal; and consequently the more
Charity they owe one another, the sooner they are to use one another ill. Nor
can there by any reason why the doing this of themselves is not as effectual to
promote each others Eternal Happiness, as the doing the very same at the
command of the Magistrate, (who is every whit as fallible as they) or why they
need more to expect a Command to use Force, than to give Advice, if one as well
as the other has a tendency to promote (which is every ones Duty) the Good of
Souls, and the Honor of God.

Now tho Persecution tends no less to the Dishonor of God, than the
Unhappiness of Man; yet because hitherto we see God's Honor no otherwise
concerned than indirectly and by consequence, I shall therefore show in my next,

CHAP. V.
That the Doctrine of Compulsion is directly contrary to the Honor of God.

1. THE only way that Men can render immediate Honor to God, is by worshipping
him according to that Method they think most agreeable to his Will: If
therefore the Magistrate punishes them for so doing, he sets himself in
direct opposition to the Honor of God: For then he must by Force endeavor to
hinder them, either from worshipping God at all, which is the way to make them
downright Irreligious, or else force them to worship him in a way they believe
he has forbid; which is adding to the neglect of worshipping him as they ought,
downright Affronts, and under pretense of appeasing his Anger, (which is the
Design of their solemn Devotion) provoking him by a notorious Dissimulation and
a mock-Worship. Therefore without setting himself against God, he cannot deny
them the entire liberty of worshipping him as they think best, and that
publicly too; for the more public the Worship is, the more it tends to his
Honor. To acknowledge that Men in private ought to worship God according to
their Consciences, and to deny it is their Duty to do so in Public, is very
absurd; or if it be their Duty, to pretend to have a Right from God to hinder
them from doing their Duty, is more absurd.

In short, what can show a greater Defiance of the Almighty, and relish more of
the Spirit of the Devil, than to persecute Men for expressing their Love and
Zeal for the Honor of God, which they can no otherwise do, than by worshipping
him according to their Consciences? And God will resent as done to himself,
whatever is done to a Child of his upon that account. And Persecutors do not
come much behind that Italian in Impiety, who made his Enemy blaspheme God, and
then stabbed him, when they make innocent Persons who are no ways their Enemies,
or have not done them the least Injury, not only once, but for all their Lives,
guilty of a most detestable Apostasy, in revolting from their Consciences, and
instead of honoring, offer God nothing but Indignities and Affronts, and ready
to commit (the Ties of Conscience once broken) all manner of Impieties and
Villainies.

2. Men can no otherwise honor God, than by entertaining such Conceptions of
him, as tend to make them love, reverence, and fear him. Now the more any
Nation does this, the more by it they honor him; and since what gives one a
higher Idea of God and his Perfections, may have a different Effect upon
another, Men may have different Ideas, and yet equally honor God. Therefore
it is very unjust in the different Sects to condemn each the other for
dishonouring God, when each Party prefer their own Opinions, because they
create in them the greater Esteem, Reverence and Honor for God; and the
Opposite they apprehend, in respect of their own, as injurious and
dishonorable to him. Therefore to punish Men for honoring God according to
their own Ideas, or to think they can honor him any otherwise, is very absurd.

3. Besides, this Doctrine of Compulsion reflects highly on the Honor of God,
in making him act inconsistently, by obliging Men to judge for themselves, and
honor God according to the best of their Judgments; and at the same time
requiring the Magistrate to judge for them, and to make them act according to
his, and not their own Judgments.

What I pray can be more injurious to the Justice as well as Goodness of God,
than to suppose he has exposed the truly Religious and Conscientious to be
everywhere ill used, whilst Men of no Religion will be sure to escape by
outwardly complying with that of the Magistrate's? so that none but the
Conscientious, and they too for being such, are subject to perpetual Misery.
Such an impious Doctrine is so far from having a Divine Original, that it could
owe its Rise to no other than the grand Enemy of Mankind, it being his
Contrivance to tempt Men to dishonor God by their Hypocrisy, or else gratify
his Malice on those that refuse. But,

4. It Is farther dishonorable to God, in making the two grand Commands, The
Honor of God, and the Good of Mankind, (which comprehend all Religion) to
clash one with the other: Because the Magistrate cannot promote the Honor of
God by using Force on all he judges to have wrong Notions in Matters of mere
Religion, without acting (as has been already proved) contrary to the Good of
Mankind. But God's Laws are so far from being inconsistent, that there is so
perfect an Agreement and Connection between them, that the breaking one is the
breaking all: Nay, the Love of God, and of our Neighbor, do so evidently imply
or include each other, that they are in effect the same. For as our loving God
is so absolutely necessary to our well-being, that without it we should be the
most miserable of all Creatures; so our loving our Neighbor (which includes
all those Duties we owe one another) is necessary to our loving God: For if a
Man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: For he that loves
not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1
John 4. 20. And it is impossible we should honor God more, than by making our
Love as extensive as all Mankind; because by it we imitate him whose tender
Mercies are over all his Works, and who designs that all Men, whatever their
Opinions are, should live in Love and Peace, (Romans 12. 18. As much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all Men) it being the only way to promote our mutual
Happiness, which is the reason we are required to believe in, and honor God.
For he who is infinitely happy in himself, and consequently incapable of
receiving any Satisfaction or Dissatisfaction from his Creatures, could have no
Motive in requiring any thing from us, but as it naturally tends to promote our
general Good; and therefore we can do nothing more agreeable to his Will, than
to use one another as it requires: Nay, so infinitely great is the Love of God,
that lest we should fail to be happy here, he has made our temporal Good (which
can only be procured by observing those Rules he has prescribed us) the Means
to obtain our Eternal. Hence it is that Love, which works no ill to his
Neighbor, is the fulfilling of the Law; and Charity is preferred before all
Virtues, even Faith it self, which ( Jam. 2. 20.) without good Works is dead,
and is no better than the Faith of Devils. But the Faith of a Persecutor is not
only without good Works, but the greatest Incendiary that can be to ill Ones,
since nothing can qualify a Man to do so much Mischief, as believing he does
God Service therein; therefore his Belief is worse than Atheism, or no Faith at
all. That Faith that must save us, is that which works by Love; but his Faith
destroys his Love. The Apostle James (Chap. 1. v. 27.) tells us, Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction. But his Religion is to bring Affliction to
Fatherless, and Widows, and every one else that has a different Persuasion from
himself.

In a word; If it were so great a Crime in the Jews, that it could not be
forgiven in this World nor the next, to impute the Miracles our Savior did,
when he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the
Devil, not to the Holy Spirit, but to that of Beelzebub; Can it be much less to
impute to the Holy Ghost a Doctrine which destroys the End and Intent of all
natural as well as revealed Religion, and can serve to no other End, than to
dishonor God, destroy Conscience, and confound Mankind? By what has been said,
I think it is plain that nothing can be more provoking to the Supreme Protector
of Mankind, than to pervert the Knowledge he has given us of himself for the
Good of his Creatures, to their ruin, and make the Honor of God a Pretense for
destroying the Welfare of Human Societies. Besides,

5. What can be more absurd, than that in judging of these matters wherein we
differ from Brutes, we should be subject to brutal Force? which is the highest
Indignity that can be put, not only on Reason, which is the Candle of the Lord,
but upon Religion it self, which is the highest and most exalted Reason; and
even upon the infinitely rational Nature of God, which can receive no
Satisfaction but in a Rational Service, which must be free and spontaneous.
Force has only a natural tendency, and therefore can only lawfully be used to
cure brutal Passions, where Men act contrary to their Knowledge, and in defiance
to their Reason; where the Inconveniences they suffer, may over-balance the
Pleasure they receive in indulging their unlawful Appetites. But he seems to be
void of all Understanding himself, who by Force attempts to inform the
Understanding. If Reasons and Arguments cannot convince, it is downright Madness
to think Fines, Imprisonments, or Tortures can.

6. The destroying Men, when the Public Good does not require it, on pretense
it is pleasing to God, what is it, but in effect imagining he delights in Man's
Blood, and Human Sacrifices? And as under the Law none were to be offered but
unspotted and clean Beasts; so here none are to be sacrificed but pure and
undefiled Men, who prefer the honoring and obeying God according to the best
of their Knowledge, before any worldly Advantages whatever, even the saving
their own Lives.

And as the Heathen Priests, amongst the most brutish and barbarous Nations,
introduced the sacrificing of Men, not so much to gratify their Gods, as their
own Ambition, there being no way more effectual to bring a Man (who otherwise
would be in danger to be marked for a Sacrifice) into perfect Subjection; so
the Christian Priests (who have given the World as little reason to suspect
their neglecting any Means that make for their Advantage) promoted the
sacrificing the Peoples Lives and Properties much upon the same account: For
they having obtained the Direction of the Sword, made it fall, with
unparalled Cruelty, on all that opposed or (by a Separation) disowned their
usurped Powers and Jurisdictions; by which means they made the People (on whom
they imposed what Doctrines they thought fit) absolute Slaves, and Magistrates
no better than their Executioners, who durst not refuse to put their Sentences
in force.

7. It may be said, That the Magistrate when he deprives People of their Lives
or Properties, does not offer them as a Sacrifice to God, but as God's Vicar in
Spirituals, executes his Wrath on those that offend him.

But if it be the Magistrate's Duty to punish those Offenses that relate merely
to God, it cannot be presumed but that God has sufficiently qualified him for
that Employ; which how can it be, whilst he is incapable of knowing, not only
the greatest part of the Actions, but all the Thoughts of Men, in which alone
consists by far the greater part of the Offenses against him?

Nay, to qualify the Magistrate for this Employ, it is not sufficient he knows
the present, but it is necessary he should discern the future Thoughts of Men,
and how God himself will deal with them: for if God, instead of punishing, will
highly reward those that come in at the Eleventh, as well as at the first Hour,
it would be unjust in the Substitute to punish, where the Principal (for whose
Sake alone he punishes) will not only pardon, but highly reward. But,

8. This is so far from being so, that the Magistrate is obliged to punish, not
only those that will be, but those that are actually innocent in the Sight of
God; otherwise he could punish no Criminal at all, because there is none but
will pretend he has truly repented of his Crime, and consequently is wholly
innocent in the sight of God. And the Magistrate being no Discerner of Hearts,
could punish none for fear of punishing such a One, had he not a Right to
punish those who with respect to God are entirely Innocent; so vice versa, had
he not a Power to forgive those that in relation to God are as Nocent, it would
not be in his Power to forgive any one. Nay, the Magistrate may justly be the
Occasion, even of the Death, not only of those that have repented of their
Crimes, but even of Innocent Persons, as he is by forcing his Innocent Subjects
into the Wars, where it is unavoidable but Numbers must be slain; and in
attacking Ships and Towns of Enemies, where Children that never offended either
God or Man, are very often destroyed; and this without any Fault in the
Magistrate, because protecting the Commonwealth being his indispensible Duty,
any lesser Good, in competition with that, ought to be looked upon sub ratione
Mali. All which sufficiently shows, that the only thing he concerns himself
with as Magistrate, is the Good of the Society; and that he rewards and
punishes his Subjects only as it tends to this End, without respect to their
being either Innocent or Nocent in the Sight of God; and that when he punishes
any Sin, he does it not as it is a Sin against God, but as it is prejudicial to
the Society; and consequently he does not act as God's Deputy in punishing
Offenses merely as they relate to him. But to make this (if it be possible)
more plain.

10. The Magistrate, as he has no Right, so he pretends to none to punish for
things that are owned by all to be notorious Offenses against God, and where
Men cannot plead Conscience to justify themselves, such as Pride, Ambition,
Ingratitude, breach of Promise, Lying, Uncharitableness, Envy, Ill Nature,
Covetousness, Prodigality; or indeed any thing else that does not invade the
Right of others, or is consistent with the Welfare of the Society. And if it be
unreasonable that he should harass Men about these things, (which have some
relation to the Civil Society, tho not sufficient to erect Courts of Judicature
about them) is it not much more so to molest them about nice Controversies,
Speculative Points, mere Ceremonies or Forms of outward Worship, in which the
Interest of the Society is not at all concerned?

In a word; If the Magistrate is to punish for some things in Religion, and not
for others, what other Rule can there be to know what belongs to his
Jurisdiction, and what not, but that about those things of Religion which
relate to the Civil Society, he is to use the Force of the Society, and that
what do not, ought wholly to be left to God and the Parties concerned? For as
it is absurd that the Force of the Society should be employed about things that
do not belong to it; so it is very unjust that a Man should not be suffered to
act as he judges best in those things, wherein no other has an Interest, but
his own eternal Good or Ill is only concerned.

11. God, who does not require of Men to be infallible, but to do their best to
discover Truth, can never be supposed to be willing that they should be
punished for invincible Error: But the Magistrate, who by reason of the
infinite Variety of Men's Parts and Apprehensions, does not know what Errors are
invincible, and what not, cannot but punish unjustly, since he cannot tell
whether the Person he punishes (supposing him in an Error) is in a Fault; or
if in a Fault, cannot know what degrees of Weakness or Wilfulness it has, or
how to proportion his Punishment according to the different Abilities of every
individual Person; which he ought to do, since where much is given, much is
required; and where little is given, as little is required: But as he is not
capable of doing this, so he cannot tell after he has done his best, but that
he has made them guilty of a much greater Fault than what he pretends to
correct, by forcing them to act against their Consciences. All which no less
than demonstrates, that the Magistrate is not qualified, and therefore not
ordained to punish such Offenses, but that they are to be left to the Searcher
of Hearts, the great and righteous Judge of all Men, who alone discerns all the
Powers and Workings of Men's Minds, when they sincerely seek after Truth, or by
what (if by any) Default they miss it; and who alone knows whom to punish, and
how to proportion his Punishments.

12. To suppose God has constituted the Supreme Powers to judge, not only
concerning Civil Crimes, (for which he has sufficiently qualified them) but
also merely Religious Ones, is inconsistent with the Justice, as well as Wisdom
and Goodness of God. For if we cannot suppose so very unjust and foolish a
thing of a King on Earth, as that he should constitute for his Vicegerents,
those of whom he certainly knew not one in a thousand but would punish his
Faithful Subjects, and that for no other Reason but because they were so, and
reward those that were not so; How then can we suppose so very absurd a thing
of the King of Kings, that he should appoint them for his Vicars in spiritual
Matters, and arm them with a Coercive Power to punish those Offenses that
relate solely to himself, who (as he could not but infallibly foreknow) would
make use of their Power, to encourage even their rebelling against him, by
setting up of false Gods in his stead? for Idolatry was every where quickly the
Public Religion of their Dominions, except amongst God's own People the Jews;
and even there very often it was the National Religion. And after their
Captivity until Constantine's Time, not one of God's (supposed) Vicars in
Matters of mere Religion, but were themselves Idolaters, and did all of them
discountenance, and several of them persecute the Worshippers of the true God:
And when the Christians (if Persecutors deserve that Name) made use of Force
upon Christians, what did it produce but Popish Superstition and Idolatry?

13. Persecution is so far from being a Means to promote the true Religion,
that it must necessarily hinder its progress, because the Infidels must think
themselves as much obliged to hinder the preaching of the Gospel amongst them,
as the Christians their Religion here: And in vain do we pray for their
Conversion, whilst we assert such a Doctrine as will not let us suffer them to
live here in order to their Conversion, nor them to suffer us to preach the
Gospel there. But this is not all, for had this Doctrine of promoting the true
Religion by Force been believed by the Heathen, it would have obliged them to
have extirpated the Christian Religion; and certainly that can scarce be
thought to be a Christian Doctrine, which if practiced, would have destroyed
the very Name of Christian.

14. It may be said, no Persecution could extirpate the Christian Religion,
because the severest Methods were so far from destroying it, that they were the
Occasion of its increasing the faster.

Not to mention if this were so, and the Magistrate was to persecute, it ought
to be the true Religion, because it is the way to make it increase, and by
Parity of Reason use a contrary Method with false Religions; I say that
Persecution, if it continues but a short time, will make any Religion to
increase and flourish the more, because the Bravery, the Courage of those that
suffer, prepares People to have a good Opinion of the Cause they suffer for:
But if it continue for an Age, or Ages, so that the old Professors are all
destroyed, the succeeding Generations will all be of the Religion they are
educated in. Thus we find Christianity, by the continued Cruelty of its
Enemies, rooted out of the greatest Part of Africa, and other Places it
entirely possessed.

And should the Persecution in France continue, the next Generation would be
all Papists, as they are in Spain and Portugal: So that the Reason why
Persecution had not the like Effect under the Pagan Emperors, was, because God
did not permit it to continue long at a time, and not without great
intermissions. But had all those Emperors been for promoting by Force, what
according to their Sentiments was the true Religion, they had utterly
extirpated the very Name of a Christian.

15. Nay, had the Heathen Emperors abhorred Persecution, (as all but what were
Monsters did) yet they had been under an indispensible Duty, as they valued the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind in general, and of their Subjects in particular,
to root out a Religion, which when it got Power into its Hands, would have no
other measure of Justice and Equity than its own Interest, and would deprive
Men, tho never so strict Observers of the Laws of Morality, and the Society, of
their Properties, and even Lives, (as the Christian Emperors did) for acting
according to their Consciences. And the Heathens, who in spite of their
Religious Differences, cultivated Peace and Friendship amongst themselves,
could not but have a just Indignation for a Religion that (had Compulsion been
a part of it) brought with it so many horrid Consequences, which were
sufficient to make them not only reject it as contrary to the Light of Nature,
but to treat the Professors of it as public Enemies of Mankind; who, like
Vipers, could make no other return to those that nourish them, but the sooner
to sting them. And it is for the sake of this Doctrine, that the Christians,
instead of propagating their Religion, have been so cruelly persecuted of late
Years in several Places: As in Japan, where it is evident they were not so
rigorously dealt with upon account of any aversion the Japoneses had to the
Christian Religion, for they suffered it quietly a good while to grow amongst
them, who were not so zealous for a Uniformity, since they had seven or eight
Sects as different, as the Mortality and Immortality of the Soul: No, it was
the Doctrines and Practices of the persecuting Christians, that made them
believe the Christian Religion was dangerous and destructive to Human Societies.

16. Were the Magistrate ordained by God to punish for Matters merely
Religious, the Heathen Persecutors, supposing they acted according to the best
of their Skill, were no more to be condemned for punishing the Christians, than
a Judge is, when he acts according to the best of his Knowledge, in punishing an
innocent Person. All that can be said they were faulty in, was, their being
governed by the Prejudices of their Education, and influenced by their Priests,
and not suffering the Christians, before they condemned them, fairly to
represent their Religion, nor themselves impartially to consider it.

If this were the sole Crime of the Heathen Persecutors, I am afraid the
Christian ones are as much influenced by their Priests, or prejudiced by their
Education, and do as little as they freely permit Men, before they condemn
them, to propose their Opinions, back them with their Reasons, and answer the
Objections of their Adversaries, that they may impartially judge whether they
ought to receive or reject them: And if it be their Duty so to judge, all their
Subjects ought to do the same; which is inconsistent with their hindering any
by Penalties, from instructing them in those Opinions, and the Reasons and
Arguments that make for them. If the Magistrate without thus examining should
condemn Men for professing even an erroneous Opinion, that would no more
justify him, than it would a Judge that condemns a Man, without hearing his
Defense; or a Person that swears a thing to be true, without knowing whether it
be so or no.

17. Those Matters about which Christians persecute one another, are generally
such as neither tend to the Honor of God, nor the Good of Man, and at the best
are but Appendices to Religion, and withal so perplexed, mysterious and
uncertain, that Men of the greatest Learning, Judgment, and Probity, are
strangely divided in their Opinions about them; and consequently they will not
admit of such Proof, as in Justice and Equity ought to subject a Man to
Punishment; for there should be as much certainty and evidence that the Matter
one is condemned for, is a Crime, as that he is guilty of it: But can the
Magistrate be as sure (supposing a mere Error to be a Crime) that not only his
Subjects are in an Error, but himself in the Right; as he is, that the causless
punishing them is Injustice and Tyranny? But could he be as certain, yet that
depends either upon Criticism in the Sacred Tongues, and Skill in the Customs
and Ways of speaking in use amongst the Jews, or in distinguishing between
genuine and spurious Readings, or upon Metaphysics, School Divinity, Fathers,
Councils, Church History, etc. which the Supreme Powers have neither
inclination nor leisure to study and examine; and consequently they cannot but
act most tyrannically in making Laws for condemning whole Parties of Men at a
venture, for things that, for ought they know, may be true, and which they do
not think worth their while to examine: And yet to see them act contrary to
their known indispensible Duty in ruining their Subjects about such Points, is
strangely unaccountable: All that can be said, is, Delirant Reges, plectuntur
Achivi.

18. To prevent the Magistrate's intermedling, God has expressly declared, That
he will have the Tares and Wheat grow together until the Harvest, or Day of
Judgment, where the Angels are the Reapers, etc. And the Reason is, lest the
Wheat be rooted up with the Tares; which relates not to Civil, but only to
Matters merely Religious, where Men generally (so grossly do they mistake) root
up the Wheat instead of the Tares; and the same Reason will hold, not only
against the rooting up, but any ways molesting them.

The Magistrate ought to render to God those things which belong to him, as
well as claim to himself what is Cesar's Due; but if he assumes an Absolute (
viz. a Legislative and Coercive) Power in Matters wholly relating to God, he
leaves nothing to him, but usurps his peculiar and inseparable Power and
Jurisdiction, and is as much guilty of Treason against the King of Heaven, as a
private Person in assuming a Sovereign Power over his fellow Subjects, is
guilty of Treason against his King: and it will no more excuse the Magistrate,
if he whom he punishes should have committed an Offense against God, than it
would the other, if his fellow Subjects had broke the Law of the Land: But the
Infinite inequality that is between the King of Kings and a King on Earth, must
strangely aggravate the Magistrate's Crime. If God wanted either Skill to judge,
or Power to punish those Offenses that concern himself only, there might be
some color for the over-officiousness of the Magistrate, if uncommissioned and
uncalled for, he offers his infallible Judgment and almighty Arm; otherwise
there can be no Reason, as Grotius (de jur. Bell. and Pac. C. 30. l. 2.)
observes, Cur non talia delicta Deo relinquantur punienda, qui ad ea noscenda
est sapientissimus, ad expendenda aequissimus, ad vindicanda potentissimus.

And this I take is sufficient to show that the Magistrate has not only no
Right to a Coercive Power in Matters merely Religious, but that such a Power is
directly contrary to the Honor of God, and most destructive of Men's Eternal
and Temporal Happiness, and consequently the greatest and most comprehensive of
all Sins whatever. But because this is a Point of so great a Consequence to
Mankind, I will most impartially examine the Reasons and Arguments (how
frivolous soever they are) that the Defenders of Persecution urge in its behalf.

PART II.
CHAP. I.
An Answer to Arguments from Scripture on behalf of Persecution.

I Having offered several, and (if I flatter not my self) concluding Arguments
against the Magistrate's using Force in other Matters than those relating to
the Civil Society, I shall now examine with all impartiality, the Reasons that
are urged in behalf of the contrary Opinion, from Divine and Human Authority,
and from Reason: But first as to Divine Authority.

1. All that can be urged from the New Testament, with the least color of
Reason, is contained in Romans 13. where it is said, Rulers are not a Terror to
good Works, but to the Evil: Will thou not be afraid of the Powers? do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. If thou do that which
is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain. Where, say they, by
Evil and Good Works, not only those Actions that relate to the Civil Society,
but those that are merely Religious are meant.

To make this out, they ought to prove,

(1.) That mere Errors of the Understanding are evil Works: So that those who
act justly in all Matters of a Civil Nature, and in all others according to the
best of their Understanding, are evil Doers.

(2.) That the Apostle means such here, which ought fully to be proved, because
without it the Magistrate's Jurisdiction is not to be presumed, much less Penal
Laws to be extended.

But not to mention, that they whose Opinions are no wise prejudicial to
others, are never for the sake of those Opinions termed Malefactors or evil
Doers, it is clear from the Text, that Evil and Good Works there spoken of,
relate only to Civil Matters; because otherwise the latter Part will not
consist with the former, where it is said, If thou will not fear the Power, do
good, and thou shall have praise of the same: Which, supposing Good and Evil
relate to Matters simply Religious, was so far from being true, that they were
at that time persecuted for doing Good, and encouraged in doing Evil; and
consequently the Apostle's Reasoning would be so far from being an Argument (as
he here intends it) for the Christians paying Obedience and Tribute to the
Powers in being, that it would have been a good one to the contrary, since they
bore the Sword worse than in vain, being only a Terror to good Works, and were
not God's but the Devil's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

The Primitive Christians (it is certain) would have been loath it should have
been taken in this Sense, since it would have given an unanswerable Argument to
Nero (to whom the Apostle here requires Obedience) and the other Emperors, for
punishing Christians, who according to their Notions, taking Evil in this
Sense, were the most evil Doers.

2. As to the Old Testament, that is positive, say they, that the Magistrate
ought to punish for Idolatry, (which is no Injury to the State, but an Offense
simply Religious) and consequently has a Right to use Force in those Matters:
For Job (Chap. 31. 28.) speaking of Idolatry, says, This were an Iniquity to
be punished by the Judge.

But to give no other Answer, it appears from the very Prints of our Bibles,
that to be punished by the is not in the Original, which only says, For this
might be accounted to me an Iniquity; and agreeable to the Hebrew the
Septuagint renders it, (...). It Is an easy thing to have Proofs, if Men when
they cannot find them are resolved to make them.

3. But they further add, That if by the Jewish Law Idolaters, and those that
denied the God of Israel, were to be put to death; by the same Reason
Christians, who ought not to be less zealous for the Honor of God, should
destroy all Idolaters and Blasphemers.

I answer; The Jewish Laws oblige no Nation but that of Israel, to whom alone
they were given: And if any of these Laws are now obligatory, it is not because
they were commanded them, but as they are Parts of the Law of Nature; for there
were several things required under the Jewish Economy, which are so far from
being now Obligatory, that they are utterly unlawful. Therefore to conclude,
that a thing which was binding to the Jews, is so to the Christians, it ought
to be proved to be part of the Law of Nature, or at least that they are under
the very same Circumstances; and there can be no reason why it should hold in
one Case, and not in another.

But whoever considers this Point, will quickly perceive as vast a difference
as can be: For the Jewish Commonwealth being a perfect Theocracy, God himself
was their King, and as such he gave them their whole Body of Politic Laws,
with no other Sanction but what was Civil, viz. Temporal Rewards and
Punishments; and did himself judicially determine Controversies of Legal
Rights, and other Matters of Moment: So that he was not to be considered by
them only simply as he was the Creator of all Men, but as their King, the Laws
established concerning the Worshipping of one God, being the Civil Law of the
Nation, and a Fundamental of their Constitution: So that none could be a Member
of that Commonwealth, without owning the God that brought them out of the Land
of Egypt; and they that revolted from him, by disowning him for their God, (it
being impossible to own him for their King, and yet disown him for their God)
were proceeded against as Traitors and Rebels: So that such a manifest Revolt
no-wise consisting with his Kingship, there was an absolute necessity that all
Idolatry should be rooted out of God's peculiar Kingdom, the Land of Canaan.
And that it was for this Reason, is evident from this one Consideration,
because in all other Places where the Jews extended their Conquests, none were
put to death, nor punished for their Idolatry, tho it were manifest all were
guilty of it; it reached only to the Members of the Jewish Commonwealth, who
as they were free People upon their coming out of Egypt, so it was not without
their express Consent ( Exodus 19.) that God became their King; and consequently
for disowning him, they were most justly treated as Rebels and Traitors.

But Christ, as he had no Civil Power himself, so he did not establish those
Precepts he was to deliver with any Temporal Sanctions. But as those of the Law
were merely Temporal, so those of the Gospel are purely Eternal; He that does
this shall live, and he that does it not shall be damned: Yea, Christ was so
far from bestowing a Temporal Canaan on his Disciples, that he foretold they
should suffer Persecution for his sake. And he, when his Disciples urged a
Precedent from the Jewish Dispensation to oblige him to destroy, severely
rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Spirit you are of; for the Son of Man is
not come to destroy, but to save Men's Lives: Which is far from being true, if
Men are to be punished with Death for Idolatry, or material Blasphemy; for then
the Christians would think themselves obliged to destroy the Indians and other
Heathens for Idolatry, in owning more Gods than own, and all Jews and Turks for
Blasphemy, in denying more than one to be God: And the Protestants the Papists,
for worshipping a bit of Bread; and the Papists them for blaspheming their
breaden God: And the different Parties of the Trinitarians, not only the
Antitrinitarians, but each the other, since they condemn one the other of
either Idolatry or Blasphemy.

But this is so far from being true, that the Gospel expressly requires the
Christians so to walk in Wisdom toward those without, that they give offense
neither to Jew nor Gentile; and is so far from justifying any violent Means
against them, that it requires we should not only allow them the narrow Measure
of Justice, but that Charity, Liberality, and Bounty must be superadded; we
must do good, not only to the Household of Faith, but to all Men. And if this be
the Method the Gospel requires Christians should observe to Infidels, it cannot
be presumed they ought to treat one another less kindly for lesser Differences.
And when the first Christians differed amongst themselves about the observation
of the Mosaical Rites, etc. the Apostle Paul was not so much concerned about
the Controversies themselves, as that they might not be the Occasion of any
Uncharitableness, Unkindness, Variance and Strife; therefore he frequently
recommends to them Love and Peace in the most passionate Terms, and tells them,
they must deal with one another in the Spirit of Meekness, bear one another
Burdens, otherwise they could not fulfill the Law of Christ: And that we cannot
walk worthy of our Vocation whereunto we are called, but with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love: And it is
evident, that the Unity of the Spirit, the Bond of Peace, Love and Concord,
cannot be preserved, but by the Rule the Apostle gives, that the Strong should
bear with the Weak, and the Weak not judge the Strong; and that every one is to
be fully persuaded in his own Mind, and not to judge his Brother, but to leave
him to the Judgment of God; and the Reason he gives is, because it is a Matter
that does not belong to his Judgment, but to God's, and a Man's own Conscience:
For what art thou, O Man, that judges the Servant of another? to his own
Master he stands or falls. And according to these Directions we find that
the Apostle is so far from requiring the Gentile Church to excommunicate the
Jewish for following their Superstition, (tho it did in a manner make void the
Death of Christ) that he orders the Gentiles to deny themselves in several
things, rather than give an Offense to their weak Brethren.

This way of managing Controversies ought to have been the Measure by which the
succeeding Ages of the Church (whether the Civil Magistrate was a Member of it
or not) ought to have formed themselves. And when the Apostle, who had an
infallible Assistance, thought fit to treat of these Matters in such an
obliging Method, as the only way to maintain Christian Charity, and to lead Men
into the Knowledge of the Truth; those who cannot pretend to such a Direction,
but are as subject to be mistaken as those they differ from, ought not
imperiously to dictate, much less urge the Magistrate to force their Dictates
on the Consciences of their Brethren, whom tho weak they are to receive, etc.

In a word; For the Magistrate to pretend to have a Right upon an
Ecclesiastical Account, as Head of the Church, to punish Men because they are
either Schismatics, Heretics, or Infidels, is to punish them for that very
Reason for which he has nothing to do with them, because the Churches Power
wholly consisting in putting Men out of her Communion, has nothing to do to
judge those that are without, and consequently cannot authorize the Magistrate
to use them ill: and indeed he is so far from having such a Right upon his
being a Christian, that the Apostle declares, that the Weapons of our Christian
Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual; and the using of Violence he makes the
Mark of a carnal and reprobate Mind; for it is he that is born after the Flesh,
that persecutes him that is born after the Spirit: But for such a one to
persecute, is impossible, because the Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Meekness, which are certainly inconsistent
with the Spirit of Persecution; which where it prevails, destroys the Fruits of
the Spirit; for it is naturally as impossible to love Persecutors, as
Persecution and the fear of Retaliation, makes Men hate those they ill use, as
much as those they are ill used by.

5. To evade the almost innumerable Texts that are levelled against
Persecution, and show after what manner we are to deal with those who differ in
their Sentiments from us, it is said, they concern private Christians only, but
do not hinder them from using contrary Methods when the Magistrate requires
them.

But how can the Magistrate, by becoming subject to Christ's Laws, have a Right
to oblige his Subjects to act directly against them? No, those Gospel-Rules are
eternally Obligatory, as being built, not only on the general Good of Mankind
(the only Foundation of all those Duties Men owe one another) but upon the
Honor of God; and therefore they that would rather obey God than Man, ought to
be no ways instrumental in putting any persecuting Laws in Execution, which are
null and void in themselves, as being contrary to the Laws of God: and the
Magistrate, and all that assist him in depriving any of their Lives or
Properties on this account, are as guilty of Murder and Robbery, as if they
should serve Men so for not committing Perjury, or any other Crime, that is
both against the Honor of God, and the Good of Man. Besides, this Supposition
renders the Christians, especially with respect to the Heathens, most vile and
scandalous Hypocrites, in being kind and obliging to them only, when they could
not well help it; but no sooner were their Circumstances changed, but the
Disguise is to be thrown off, and all their former most endearing Rules are to
be laid aside; and the poor Pagans, who before were to be used so tenderly, are
to be stripped, not only of their Properties, but even of their Lives.

CHAP. II.
Arguments from Humane Authority, answered.

It Is said, That the Christians ever since they had Power in their Hands, have
not only punished Blasphemers, and common Swearers, but the Erroneous, whether
in Matters of Faith or Discipline.

1. If by Blasphemers they mean those that are guilty of formal Blasphemy, it is
nothing to the purpose; because the Interest of the Society requires that they
should be punished, as well as Atheists, and that for the same Reason too;
which also requires that common Swearers, (who can no more pretend Conscience
than Blasphemers or Atheists) should be restrained by Penalties, because
otherwise Oaths which are the Bonds of Humane Society, will have but small
Force on those who by frequent swearing, run the risque of breaking them daily,
and beside give a pernicious Example to others.

But if Men out of Conscience worship false Gods, and are thereby guilty of
what is called material Blasphemy, the reason for punishing them wholly
cease, for Force cannot convince, but only make them false to their
Consciences; and they that are so, will never be true to the Public: therefore
the Magistrate is so far from having a Right to hinder them from honoring
those false Gods, that he ought to punish those, who whilst they pretend to
worship them, do dishonor them by Blasphemy, Perjury, or any other manifest
Contempt; nay, God himself will punish such Contempts as if done to himself,
and consequently will punish the Magistrate for hindering them from worshipping
those false Gods, when they believe them to be true Ones.

2. But as to Christian Magistrates punishing for Matters wherein Conscientious
Persons may and do differ, it shows their great Wickedness and Impiety in
acting contrary to the Light of Nature, and those Precepts and Practices of
Christ and his Apostles; and (if there be any weight in mere Human Authority) I
may add contrary to the Sentiments of the Primitive Church for the first three
hundred Years; who we do not find but were all unanimous in condemning the use
of Force in Matters of Religion; and had they been of another Opinion, nothing
could be more absurd than those frequent Addresses they made to the Heathen for
Liberty of Conscience: For then they could not deny that it was the Duty of the
Heathen Magistrate, as long as they rejected what he judged to be the true
Religion, to punish them; nor could they urge any thing for themselves, but a
shameless begging the thing in dispute, which the Magistrate (the proper Judge)
had determined against them. And to hear them acknowledge, that were the Power
in their Hands, they were obliged to serve them after the same manner, could
not but encourage the Heathen in their Persecution. But they were so far from
having any such Thoughts, that even when the Empire became Christian, the very
Heathen Worship (as the Bishop of Sarum observes in his most excellent Preface
to Lactantius) was not only tolerated for a whole Age together, but the
Heathens continued to be in the chief Employments of the Empire.

3. Compulsion was not only against the Sense of the Primitive Christians, but
the rest of Mankind: for tho the Differences amongst them were more in Number,
and wider than those amongst the Christians, yet we do not find that they used
Force to compel one another. Socrates (it is true) was put to death for his
Religion; but were not the People (tho still averse to his Principles) as soon
as their Fury was abated, sensible of the Crime they had committed, and of the
Injury done him? Therefore to make him what Amends they could, they erected a
Statue to his Memory; and most of those that set them on were so abhorred, that
this, together with their own Remorse, made them become their own Executioners.
But what the Sense of the Heathen was about this Matter, cannot be better known
than from the Sentiments of Gallio, the Town Clerk of Ephesus, Agrippa and
Felix, in the Acts of the Apostles. Nay so zealous Assertors of Liberty of
Conscience were the Heathens, that we find Themistius and other Philosophers
using all their Eloquence to persuade the Christian Emperors to give Liberty to
the different Sects of Christians, whilst at the same time the Bishops were
urging them to persecute their Brethren.

If the Heathens would have persecuted any, it would have been the Jewish
Nation, whose Religion they most disliked; yet we do not find they were so used
by the various Masters they were under, from their first being subject unto
Foreigners, until the Destruction of Jerusalem, and their being no longer a
Nation, but by the mad Antiochus, who at last grievously lamented that Crime.
Nay, Nero himself, the first Persecutor of Christians, durst not do it
barefaced, but pretended they were Incendiaries, and set Rome on fire, and
therefore were to be punished as Enemies to the State: And it was their being
so represented, that was more than any thing else the Cause of their
Sufferings. For Trajan, as soon as he perceived that they were Innocent, and
disobeyed no Laws of the Empire, but those that forbad their Worship, straight
commanded that they should be no longer enquired after. And Adrian, under
severe Penalties, forbad any to accuse them: The same did Antoninus Pius. And
Aurelius went further, and made it Death to inform against them. Nay, Commodus
himself, as great a Tyrant as he was otherwise, enacted the same most just Law;
so that it was then no less than a Capital Crime to cause any to be molested
upon the Account of Religion, tho supposed never so false.

4. Nay, I think I may add, that Persecutors act not only contrary to the Sense
of Mankind, but their own Sentiments: for ask any of them, why the swift and
sudden Increase of the Mohammedan Religion should not be as good an Argument for
its Truth, as it is for that of the Christians; they straightway answer, That
maugre its swift Progress, it is little less than a Demonstration of its
Falsehood, that it has the Character of Persecution annexed to it, and made use
of Violence as a lawful Means for its promotion. Which Answer of theirs shows,
that themselves believe Force an unlawful Means of promoting Religion; for how
else can that be an Argument of the Falseness of any Religion, if it be a Means
ordained by God to promote the True? And therefore the Mahometans may justly
say, How can the Christians condemn them for using that Method, which
themselves, as soon as they get Power into their Hands, (and the Mahometans
could do it no sooner) practiced with far greater Cruelty, even one upon the
other? Thus they give occasion for the Enemies of the Christian Religion to
triumph, and that so much the more confidently, by how much less Christians
suffer under them for Religion, than they do under one another.

5. Nay I may go further and add, that there is no Party of Christians but what
have, ever since Persecution has been in use, expressly condemned it, and have
writ in defense of Liberty of Conscience. And tho the Orthodox made use of
Persecution as well as the Arians, yet they not only condemned it, but thought
it so very odious, that they supposed it as great a Crime as they could brand
their Adversaries with. And Athanasius, in Epist. ad Solit. says, Persecution
alone is a manifest Proof that they (the Arians) have neither Piety, nor the
fear of God: For, adds he, it is essential to Piety, not to force any in
imitation of our Savior; it is the Devil that comes with violent Means. And the
Synod of Alexandria condemns all Force in Religion, and reproaches the Arians
as the Inventers and Promoters of it. It Is strange they should be so very
forgetful, as not to mind that the Nicene Fathers over-perswaded Constantine,
contrary to his Faith given in a Public Edict for Liberty of Worship, not only
to deprive and banish those of the Clergy that professed Arianism, but even to
put all Men to death on whom any of Arius his Works were found.

6. But it may be said, That if the Christian Priests in the first General
Council, and all ever since, have been for Persecution, there must be some very
good Reason to influence them.

I answer; Just as much as influences the Jewish Priests not to own Jesus to be
the Messiah: For as they were prejudiced against him, because he did not come
to advance their Temporal Power, so the Christian Priests have been as much
prejudiced against those Gospel-Methods of Love, Gentleness, etc. as being
wholly inconsistent with their Pride, Ambition, and that Dominion over
Conscience they so much affected; as is manifest by their own Histories, which
represent them after such a manner ever since Persecution prevailed, as one
would imagine he was reading a Story of Devils, rather than of the Successors
of the Apostles. But if there is Confusion, and every evil Work, where Envying
and Strife is, it is no wonder these should prevail in the highest manner, when
Barbarity and Cruelty are superadded. And not only Ecclesiastical History, but
the best of the Clergy, almost as soon as Persecution was in use, give a very
scandalous Character of their Body; as St. Jerome, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St.
Hilary, who in his Comment on the Psalms, scruples not to compare them to the
Scribes and Pharisees; and St. Gregory Nazianzen, who in his first Oration,
amongst other things, says, They are no better than Scribes and Pharisees;
that they looked on the Priesthood, not as a Ministry of which they must give
an Account, but as a Magistracy which is liable to no examination; that no
Charity was observed in them, but only Anger and Passion; that their Piety did
only consist in condemning the Impiety of other Men, whose Conduct they
observed, not to reclaim, but to defame; that they blamed or praised Men, not
because of their good or bad Life, but according to the Party they embraced;
that they admired in themselves what they sharply censured in another Party;
that they wrangled about Trifles, on the specious Pretenses of defending the
Faith; that they were abhorred by the Heathen, and despised by all good Men
among the Christians.

7. In a word; There can be no Argument from Human Authority for Persecution,
because that destroys any Argument that is built upon Authority, even in the
Judgment of the Persecutors themselves: For ask them why the Council of
Ariminum, which was double in number to that of Nice, and which even the Nicene
Fathers themselves subscribed, is not of any Authority; the Answer is, Because
they were not a Free Council, but were overawed by the Emperor. But if
Persecution destroyed their Authority, the Reason will hold against any other
Council or Meeting of Men ever since Force has been in fashion. And it is no
wonder that the Nicene Fathers who were so divided into Parties and Factions,
and full of Heats, Fewds, and Quarrels, (as Marvel in that small, but admirable
Essay of Creeds and Councils fully shows) should revenge themselves on their
Adversaries, on pretense of advancing the true Religion; or that the Arians,
when they had been so provoked, should serve them after the same manner; or
that the different Parties after these Precedents, which must necessarily
increase their Hatreds and Animosities, should be more and more for persecuting
one the other. But more than enough of Human Authority. And,

Now I shall examine what they urge from Reason, for the Magistrate's using
Force: Which may be concluded under these three Heads. 1. That it causes
People impartially to consider the Arguments and Motives that make for the true
Religion. 2. That it hinders the Propagation of Errors. 3. That the Interest of
the Commonwealth obliges the Magistrate not to permit different Professions
of Religion.

CHAP. III.
Object. That Compulsion tends to make People impartially consider, examined.

1. I Agree with them, that nothing can be more agreeable to the Dignity, and
more apparently the Duty of Rational Creaturs, than to make a strict
Inquisition, in their advanced and capable Years, into Matters of Religion; and
that of all the Uses Reason was designed for, the chief, no doubt, was in
relation to our Eternal Happiness: But how can we expect that Happiness from
the Hand of God, if what we are to believe or practice be by mere accident, or
for the sake of Worldly Interest, and not the Effects of our own Industry and
Reasoning? for God will judge us as we are Rational Creatures, and consequently
our Rewards from him will be in a just Proportion to the use we make of our
Reason.

This being premised, it is evident nothing can well be a greater Crime than to
hinder People from a free Exercise of their Reason in Matters of Religion,
which, I say, nothing can more effectually do than Punishments and Rewards: For
what can bias and prejudice more than Punishments on the one hand, and on the
other not only Protection, but the Prospect of Preferment and Advantages? for
as much weight as they carry in Men's Minds, so much will they be influenced by
them. And to put Discountenance and Punishment in one Scale, and Impunity and
Preferment in the other, is as likely a way to make a Man judge impartially for
himself, as it is to bribe and threaten a Judge to make him judge so for others.

In a word; What can be more absurd, than to suppose, that the way to make Men
consider calmly, and without prejudice of those things that require their
utmost attention, is to provoke them to Passion by ill usage, and to distract
them on one hand by the Terrors of Punishment, and to agitate them as strongly
on the other by the hopes of worldly Enjoyments?

2. It Is usually said, Men are careless and negligent, and of themselves unapt
to make a strict Inquisition into Religion; therefore are to be forced.

But Force will make them but more so, and instead of remedying, increase the
Malady: for Men will then be afraid to examine the Magistrate's Religion for
fear of finding it false, and any other for fear of finding it true; both which
will equally subject them to Punishment. In such Circumstances if they examine
at all, it will be very slightly and partially: for a small, a very small
Reason will make most Men profess a Religion on which their worldly Happiness
depends; and it must be a monstrous one indeed, that they will not make a shift
to own, rather than be all their lives subject to Punishment. In short; What
can be more unnatural than to imagine, that to terrify People into this or that
Persuasion, is a more likely way to induce them to examine impartially the
different Persuasions, than to let them freely examine, and as freely profess
what upon examination they are persuaded is the Truth?

3. If Men ought to be influenced in the choice of their Religion by no other
Motive than that of their Eternal Happiness, what right can the Magistrate have
to make them do otherwise by the Awes and Bribes of this World? To pretend to
establish a Church by Penal Laws, is inconsistent with the very Nature of it,
because it is essential to a Church to be a voluntary Society, that meet for no
other Intent than to serve God as they think most agreeable to his Will. If Men
therefore associate not for this Consideration, but because of Penal Laws, they
may be called any thing sooner than a Church.

4. If worldly Awes and Bribes were away, there could be little or nothing to
prejudice Men in their grand Choice; Education would not then make half so deep
an Impression: For it is Persecution that is the Occasion that People of
different Persuasions contract so early and so great an Aversion one for the
other, that it becomes in a manner part of their Nature; and makes it so very
difficult to persuade them to hear, with tolerable Patience, what their
Adversaries have to offer: but were they taught to have that Love and Kindness
which is due from different Sects to each other, and instead of being frightened
from, were heartily advised to examine, and impartially consider other
Persuasions besides those they were bred in, Education could create little or
no Prejudice in Men's Minds; who when they found themselves in an Error, (as,
what thinking Men do not discover some imbibed in their greener Years?) would
then as freely leave them for the sake of their Souls, as they do now their
Diet or Physic, when they judge the Health of their Bodies requires it; nor
would others then be more disturbed or concerned at the one than at the other:
I am sure there is more reason to change in one Case than in the other, since
the professing an Opinion one believes to be false, is so far from doing him
good, that that alone turns it to rank Poison; which is otherwise in Physic,
where a Man may be cured by a Medicine he has no Faith in. By what has been
said, it is evident that Force is so far from causing People impartially to
consider, that it can only serve either to prejudice them as they become
capable of judging, or else when they have chosen, make them act against their
Judgments.

5. But it is urged; That when the Magistrate is of the true Religion himself,
his using Force will contribute to make others to be so, by causing them to
consider (since it is their Interest so to do) the Reasons and Arguments that
make for the true Religion.

That the Magistrate's using Force when he is of the true Religion, tends to
make others profess it, there is no doubt; but that it is by making them
impartially consider, ought not to be taken for granted, since we find it as
effectual to make them embrace a false as a true Religion, (else the French
Tyrant had not forced above a Million to turn Papists); and therefore by how
much the Number of the Erroneous Magistrates is greater than of the Orthodox,
by so much more it causes the Profession of false Persuasions: And if we
should judge what may, by what has already happened, not only before but since
Christ's coming, it is as probable that all Magistrates may use Force to promote
Error, as that any one should do it to propagate Truth. It Is absurd to suppose
Persecution makes Men impartially consider, because they generally look on it
as so just a Prejudice against any Religion that uses it, that it tempts them
without any further looking into it, to conclude it wants Reason to support it
self, and therefore the Professors of it have recourse to brutal Force to
uphold it; and the way that Persecutors take to make Men hate their Persons, is
a very improper way to take off the Prejudices they have to their Opinions; and
as Suffering prejudices them against the Religion that causes it, so it
strangely endears to them the Religion for which they suffer, and makes them
apt to think, nothing but the Grace of God could cause them to adhere so firmly
to their Religion, and apply to themselves the Prophecies that foretell the
Persecution of true Believers. And in such a Case it is almost impossible to
convince them they have suffered for being in the wrong. And,

7. As to the Spectators, it will be very apt to produce the same Effects, and
fill them with Horror and Indignation against the Principles of such Men as go
about to ruin innocent Persons for serving God according to Conscience, and
make them judge as favorably of the Sufferers; for there is a natural Compassion
that follows all in Misery, which creates likeness of Affection, and this very
often likeness of Persuasion, especially when they suppose the Sufferers would
not expose themselves to those Punishments, which by a Compliance they might
easily avoid, were they not fully convinced of the Truth of their Opinions. And
it is very probable that the Quakers (to give no other Instance) had not been so
very numerous, had not the Sufferings, which they generally bore with more than
ordinary Resolution, created in many of the bystanders, not only an Aversion
for the Church that persecuted them, but a very great Esteem of them, and by
degrees of their Opinions.

8. That violent and rough Methods are not the way to make prejudiced Persons
impartially consider, is evident from the contrary Method that all Men take
when they endeavor to persuade: And they are but little acquainted with
Mankind, who do not know how absolutely necessary it is for a Man, by all
insinuating ways, to ingratiate himself with those he endeavors to persuade,
especially if it be of the falseness of an Opinion they have a long time
imbibed. Nay, I desire no body to go further than his own Breast for an
Experiment, whether ever Violence gained any thing on his Opinion; or whether
Arguments managed but with Heat, did not lose somewhat of their Efficacy, and
have not made him even the more obstinate in his Opinion: So much concerned is
Human Nature to preserve the Liberty of that Part wherein lies the Dignity of
Man, which could it be imposed on by Force, would make him but very little
different from a Beast. The properest Means to maintain any thing, are those
that first made it grow: if therefore the Gospel had owed its first Increase
and Progress to Force, that had been still the best Means to support it; but
since it was nursed, and grew up by fair Means, they must be the fittest to
preserve it. The Apostles, in conquering the almost invincible Prejudices of
the Jews and Gentiles, made use of all those endearing Methods that are so
directly opposite to Force. And St. Paul, the great Converter of the Gentiles,
became all things to all Men, that he might gain some. And he tells Timothy,
That the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle to all Men,
apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
God will peradenture give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth.
And if this be the way to make even the Obstinate acknowledge the Truth, the
contrary Method can but the more prejudice and harden them; and they must not
be the Servants of the Lord, but of another Master, that either practice it
themselves, or what is as bad, endeavor to persuade others to use it.

It Is said, that the Apostles could work on Peoples Prejudices and Passions by
Miracles, and that therefore they had no occasion for Force. But if whilst they
had the Power of doing Miracles, they were obliged to make use of all those
endearing Arts to gain on the Affections of those they designed to proselite,
there is much more reason now to do it, and even to double the natural Means,
when the supernatural Ones have ceased, as the only way that remains to cause
Men to hear and consider.

The contrary Method is so unlikely to produce such an Effect, that I believe
there can be no Instance given of any Man being sincerely brought over by it to
embrace any Religion; tho, no doubt, there have been several, who when they
have been forced to profess a Religion contrary to their Consciences, have at
last made a shift (so natural is it for Men to love their present Ease) to
stifle the Checks of their Consciences, and at last to believe it: But this is
evidently wicked, because it is doing a real Evil, on pretense that Good may
come of it.

9. It has been all along the Pretense of Persecutors, to justify their
Cruelty, that those they punished were obstinate and perverse, and would not
impartially consider. Upon this Head Antiochus (as Josephus in his Dominion of
Reason tells us) put to Death great numbers of the Jews, because they were so
obstinate to refuse what he judged an indifferent thing, the eating Swines
Flesh: And on the same Pretense of Obstinacy, Pliny (Epist. 2. l. 10.) murdered
a great many Christians. And the Christian Persecutors have all along made use
of the same Plea to persecute their Brethren. This is the chief Argument the
French Clergy used for Dragooning of Protestants: And the main Topic of our
late Persecutors was, that the Dissenters were obstinate and peevish, in not
complying in things they judged indifferent. If such Reasoners are in earnest,
it shows the height of Pride, Presumption, and Self-conceit, in supposing their
Reason the Standard of all others; and that none can differ from them, without
being guilty of a most criminal Inconsideration. In a word; Since the
Magistrate cannot know whether a Man has or has not impartially considered, to
punish him upon that Account is manifestly to usurp that Authority that can
belong only to the Discerner of Hearts: The most he can pretend to, (were this
Matter under his Cognizance) is to oblige those he thinks have not impartially
considered, to read the Reasons, or hear unprejudiced and judicious Persons
argue the Matter on both Sides; any thing more than this is evident Injustice,
and is nothing else than endeavoring to make Men act against their Consciences.

10. Another thing Persecutors agree in is, an Endeavor to disguise their
Cruelty in the softest Terms imaginable, which shows that the thing it self is
so very odious, that themselves are ashamed of it. The Inquisitors, when they
deliver over to the Secular Magistrate those they condemn to be burnt, they
entreat him after this manner;

Domine Judex rogamus vos cum omni affectu quo possimus, ut amore Dei,
pietatis, and misericordiae intuitu, and nostrorum interventu precaminum,
miserrimo huic nullum mortis vel mutilationis periculum inferatis. And the
French Tormentors, tho they highly condemn the Cruelty of the Inquisition, yet
they as much extol their own good-natured Tyrant for reclaiming Heretics by
Methods full of Mercy, Gentleness, and Sweetness. And our late Persecutors, tho
they abhorred the Devilish Cruelty of the French Dragooners, yet they greatly
magnified the Moderation and Gentleness of the Penal Laws, and wondered any
should be so disingenuous as to dislike them; which yet, with submission,
equalled, if not exceeded those of France they so much exclaimed against. To
mention no other than those made in the 23, 27, and 35 of Elizabeth; which
indeed are so very moderate, that they extend only to the loss of Estate,
Country, Liberty and Life. And Bp Burnet, in his Preface to Lactantius, very
justly tells those Hypocrites, that they let themselves loose to the Rage of a
mad Persecution; and adds, (a most charitable Advice) That they ought seriously
to profess their Repentance of this Fury, in Instances that may be as visible
and legible, as their Rage has been public and destructive.

But since the Protestants are forced to condemn the Severities the Papists
use, they have no way to justify their own Penalties, but by pretending they
are so very gentle and moderate, that they will not have those ill Effects the
others produce; that is, they will not cause Men to play the Hypocrites, nor
prejudice or bias their Judgments, nor even destroy their Charity, by causing
them to hate their Persecutors. But,

Punishment may be reckoned severe, either upon the Account of the Length or
Greatness of it.

11. As to the first; If a Man is to continue all his Life under any
Punishment, tho in it self but moderate; or which is all one, can see no hopes
of Redress, without ruining his Soul, that Punishment is certainly severe. And
since Men are not always alike upon their Guard, but the World is more apt to
make an Impression at one time than at another, there is a very great Danger,
that some time or other they may be tempted to free themselves by a guilty
Compliance. Who was more ready to lay down his Life for our Savior, than St.
Peter? Yet his Zeal was not constant, for we find him capable of Fear to the
last degree, so as to deny his Master with Oaths and Curses, when there was no
other Punishment for those that believed in Christ, but turning them out of the
Synagogue. Nay, at another time, he shamefully complied with the Jews to the
drawing aside of many; and this at Antioch, where the Jews had no Civil Power.
And if so great a Person could be so easily wrought on, who can be secure when
he lies under constant Temptations? And he who considers, that of the twelve
Disciples one denied his Master for fear, and another denied him for a paltry
Sum of Money, will not wonder that Punishments and Rewards, tho not excessive,
may have too great an Influence on others.

As to the second; Perpetual Imprisonment, and little less than Outlawry, which
are the inseparable Consequences of Excommunication, are severe in themselves,
as well as upon the Account of the Length of them, which can scarce fail some
time or other so to affect Men, as to make them desire their Liberty, tho at
the Price of their Consciences: And yet your Protestant Persecutors, for all
their Pretenses to Moderation, would be as loath as the Papists their
Excommunications should be without them.

As to punishing People in their Properties, considering the almost infinite
Variety of Men's Circumstances, there can scarce be any Fines or Mulcts so
small, but the constant paying of them must ruin great Numbers, and be grievous
to many more. There Is nothing can well be more moderate, than the Price that
Christians pay for Liberty of Conscience under the Mahometans; yet to avoid
that, great Numbers of them turn Mussulmen.

In a word; There is no such thing as Moderate Penalties in any persecuting
Protestant Country: And considering Men's Tempers, how much sooner some than
other will be wrought on by Punishment, or losing some temporal Advantage, it is
impossible to say what degree of Force will not make some act against their
Conscience, and prejudice others in their choice of Religion, and destroy the
Charity of most, since there is no where that Brotherly Love and Friendship
between different Sects, where Persecution prevails, as the Gospel requires, or
as there is where they tolerate one another. And where there is a Man whom
Force will not cause to act against his Conscience, or prejudice his Judgment,
or destroy his Charity, it cannot be presumed but that the Thoughts of future
Rewards and Punishments have made so religious a Person impartially consider;
so that the punishing him, tho but moderately, would be very unjust.

12. And yet if the Magistrate has a Right to use Force, to make People profess
what Religion he judges to be true, that degree of Force ought to be used that
is most effectual to that End, because where the End is a Duty, the Means that
are most conducive to it must be so too. Now it is evident, a greater Degree
will cause Men to profess, where a less will not; and consequently the greater
Degree will have the greatest Effect. Besides, what can the Magistrate do if
Men will still go on in a constant Defiance to his Laws, to assert Opinions he
judges do dishonor God, or not assert others that do honor him? must he not
at last come to capital Punishments, except he will see God continually
dishonored? And if mere Opinions are of that fatal Consequence to the Souls of
Men, (as Persecutors pretend) it is the highest Charity that can be, to destroy
all Promoters of such pernicious Opinions; for is it not better that a few (and
those too hated of God) should be cut off, rather than they should destroy the
Souls of a great many, (for who knows where such Opinions will stop?) not only
of the present, but of succeeding Generations? so that here is no room for
Clemency: For how can the Life of a Man counterpoise the loss of a Soul? And
since nothing can, at least so certainly, root out such Opinions, as putting
the Professors of them to Death, is it not the highest Charity to the Souls of
others to serve them so? Nay, it is more for the Safety and Interest of a
Nation, that a few should be destroyed upon the Account of Religion, than that
great Numbers by lesser Punishments, which suffers them to increase, should be
grieved and provoked; which must necessarily create Disturbances, Tumults,
Wars, etc. Nay, such proceeding will be the occasion of the Death of more
People; as it was here in the late Persecutions, where more were starved, or
otherwise died in noisome Prisons, than what are destroyed in the like
Proportion of Time, where the Inquisition is established. And how little it is
able to bring People to a Uniformity, may be judged from Charles the First's
Time, where the Church was so far from rooting out the different Sects by
Punishments, and those too not very moderate, that those Methods were the Ruin
of the persecuting Church; so that in respect of the good of Men, as well as
the Honor of God, all Sectaries, if they are not to be set wholly at Liberty,
are to be quite rooted out, for all middle Ways are both absurd and unsafe.

CHAP. IV.
Object. That the Magistrate has a Right to use Force, to prevent the Increase
of those Erroneous Opinions that a Toleration would produce.

IF Force prevents Men from running into Errors, Answ. 1.
it must be because it hinders Men from freely and impartially examining
Matters of Religion; which if Men would as freely do where Force is used, as
where it is not, it could no ways hinder the supposed increase of Errors,
because the not using it does no wise blind, nor the using it enlighten Men's
Understandings. And as Error, where impartial Diligence is used, is wholly
innocent; so where it is neglected, the accidental stumbling on Truth will not
justify or excuse the neglect of it: Therefore if it should tend to hinder
Error, by preventing Men from impartially considering, it would not give the
Magistrate a Right to use Force. But how can Force, in the Hands of Men as
liable to be mistaken as those they use it on, contribute to hinder Men's
falling into Error? There may perhaps be more Errors in a Country where there
is Liberty of Conscience, but not more in Error, because it is more than
probable, (as I shall fully prove hereafter) that where Persecution prevails,
they are all unanimous in the Wrong. But where will the Magistrate, using
Force, prevent Errors? only in that Place where the Persecutor's particular
Sect is established; in all other Places it will as much serve to promote and
immortalize them: So that except the Persecutor can find out a way that only
his Sect shall use Force, he cannot deny but that there are at least a thousand
Arguments to one, even upon this Head, against the use of it. But,

2. A free Permission from the Pulpit, or Press, for Men of different Opinions
to propose their Reasons to the People, that they may search into them in order
to discern the Truth, is so far from being the way to maintain and propagate
Falsehood, that it is the only way to destroy it; except we will say, That tho
God has given us Faculties to judge of Truth and Falsehood, and has commanded us
to make use of them in order to find the Truth, yet the more we do so, the
further we shall be from discovering it. To hinder Men from doing this, on
pretense they would be led into Error by it, what is it but to make our selves
wiser than God, and in effect to say, he is mistaken in the Method he has
proposed to us for our discovering the Truth? Therefore, say the Persecutors,
let us keep the People in Ignorance of any Opinion but our own, for fear lest
when they come to understand the different Opinions, and the Reasons that make
for one side as well as the other, they should be unqualified to judge of them.

3. It may be said, Upon supposition of this Liberty, Opinions, tho never so
absurd, may be published. But if every one is to judge for himself, he ought not
to rely upon another's Judgment, but examine himself whether they are so or
not; and it is probable that they that are against this Freedom, maintain such
Opinions: for the more they are afraid of having their Opinions examined, the
more absurd it is likely they are; and the more any Opinion is grounded in
Reason, the more willing the Professors of it are to have it undergo the Test;
it is only those with flaws in them, that (like cracked Titles) cannot bear a
Scrutiny. If the Bereans were for ever enobled by St. Paul for not relying on
what he said, (tho he had the Power of Miracles to confirm his Doctrine) but for
trying whether those things he affirmed were so or not; there is certainly as
much reason now to do it, otherwise we are Slaves where we ought to be most
free, in our noblest Part, our Understanding: And if in all other Matters, the
more any thing is scanned, the more the strength of those Reasons appears that
make for Truth, as well as the weakness of those that are pleaded in behalf of
Error; Why should it not be so in Matters of Religion, since we must judge of
their Truth and Falsehood, as we do of all other things, by their Agreement or
Disagreement with our common Notions, especially considering Religion is no
obscure and unintelligible thing, but so plain and easy, that it is suited to the
Capacity of the Simple and Ignorant, the Bulk of Mankind?

It Is to me wondrous strange, that any should have so ill an Opinion of the
Reasonableness of the true Religion, or else of the Impotency of those Rational
Faculties God has given Men on purpose to judge of Religion, as to suppose they
would not prefer it (were they not prejudiced by temporal Motives) before the
Inventions of Men.

It Is said, the Affectation of Singularity and Novelty is apt to cause a Man
(if the Magistrate by Force does not restrain him) to wander from the true
Religion.

But what Charms can there be, in being thought not only ignorant and mistaken,
but also despised and hated, as he too certainly is, that differs in his
Sentiments from his Neighbors? And therefore it is not only a sign that a Man
thinks of Religion, but that he is very hearty and sincere in it, when he
exposes himself to a constant Disgrace and Disrepute by it; for there is not
one of a thousand that is stiff and insensible enough to bear the perpetual
dislike of his Neighbors, and those he is forced to converse with: And
therefore there is no need of Force to make Men profess the Public Religion,
which (for no other Reason but because it is so) they are too apt to do. Hence
it is, that not only the Careless and Negligent, but the Immoral and Vicious,
are generally of the Religion established by Law, where they can best indulge
their Vices, as having the Countenance of the People, and the Favor and
Indulgence of the Magistrate.

5. Another Argument they usually urge is, that Men's Lusts and Passions would
make them prefer false Religions before the true, had not the Magistrate a
Right to hinder them by Force. But not to mention, that since the Magistrates
are as much governed, as their Subjects can be supposed to be, by their Lusts
and Passions, Force in their Hands will more likely promote than hinder false
Religions; I answer, As to the merely religious, or speculative Points of the
true Religion, Men's Lusts or Passions, since these are no way concerned how
those are held, do not incline them to prefer Falsehood before Truth. And as for
those Parts of Religion wherein Men's Lusts and Passions may be supposed to sway
them, those I own (as far forth as my Adversaries) do belong to the
Magistrate's Jurisdiction, and all Men, for the sake of their common Good, are
obliged to get them believed and practiced; for it is equally the Interest of
Governors and Governed, to embrace the true Religion, contrived by the
infinite Wisdom of God for the Benefit of Mankind: For God, as he could not
envy his Creatures any Enjoyment they are capable of, so he has forbad them
nothing but what naturally tends to their Ruin and Destruction; and were it not
for Persecution, and those Opinions supported by it, which interested Men have
tacked to the Christian Religion, there can be no doubt but that it had long
before now been the Universal Profession of Mankind.

6. As a free and impartial Liberty is the only way to promote Truth, so where
Persecution prevails, it is morally impossible but that Error, Ignorance, and
Superstition must do so too; because Men when they are hindered from exercising
their Reason, by being forced blindly to follow the Opinions of others, become
ignorant and superstitious, and are apt to take any absurd Impressions: And the
Priests themselves, where they are sure of the Force of the Magistrate to make
People profess what they please, will not much trouble themselves about Reasons
and Arguments; and consequently by degrees grow very ignorant and
superstitious, as we find it in Spain, Italy, Portugal, and other Popish Places
where the Inquisition is settled; tho in France (where till of late more
Liberty has been allowed) they have not for the generality been so grossly
ignorant. It Is very true what a late Author observes, That the Ministry is more
learned, more diligent, and more exemplary, where a Government carries it self
equally to the different Parties, than if one Party being absolute Masters,
should therefore (so much is Human Frailty more apt to be corrupted by
Prosperity than by all other Snares together) abandon it self to
Licentiousness, Ignorance, Idleness, and Superstition. And this holds not only
in Popish but Protestant Countries; also in which the less there is of Liberty,
the more Error, Ignorance, and Superstition abounds.

7. Besides, when Men shall be hindered from professing any Doctrine but what the
Priests in their Convocations shall decree, will not these be tempted to
establish such Opinions as shall tend to promote their own Power and Dominion,
tho to the destruction of true Piety? And this is no strange Supposition,
considering how fond in general Mankind are to advance their own Power and
Authority. And do not the Protestant Clergy own that Popery is nothing but a
Politic Design to advance the Power of the Clergy under the Bishop of Rome,
tho to the Ruin of Christianity? But as Rome it self was not built in a Day, so
it was not but by a long, steady and uniform Design for many Ages, that the
Clergy by degrees arrived to such a Power. And it is sufficiently evident, that
long before the Pope usurped such Superiority over the rest of the Clergy, they
were carrying on the Design of aggrandizing themselves, and tyrannizing over
those they call the Laity. In a word; It has been the Pride, Ambition, and
Covetousness of the Priests, and the Force and Violence that by their Means and
Instigation the persecuting Magistrates have used on the People to make them
pay a blind Submission to the Decrees of the Clergy, that has been the Cause,
not only of all the Mischief and Miseries that upon the account of Religion
have happened in Christendom, but of the great Corruption of Religion; which
being a thing so plain and easy in it self, and suited to the Capacity of the
People, would never have been so much and so universally depraved, had there
been an entire Liberty of Conscience: for tho upon several Accounts, such as
Prejudice of Education, mistaken Philosophy, Interest, etc. Errors might have
crept into the Church, yet had they not been established by Penal Laws, there
would have been some in all Ages, who not being under the like Prejudices,
would have opposed them; and consequently upon a free Examination, Error could
not long have withstood the Power of Truth.

Luther, Calvin, etc. were more successful than others, (who before them saw
the Corruptions the Clergy had introduced) only because they had better Fortune
in meeting with Princes that allowed them a Liberty that was denied to the
others.

10. One of the chiefest Means of corrupting Religion, was occasioned by the
Heathen Philosophers, those Pretenders to Science, falsely so called; who when
they thought it worth their while (tho few or none of them at first were
converted) to come into the Church, and became Governors and leading Men in
it, brought in with them (so hard it is to conquer the Prejudice of Education)
their absurd Metaphysical Notions, wholly inconsistent with the Plainness and
Simplicity of the Gospel, which they wrested to their preconceived Opinions;
and being then unwilling to make a meaner Figure, upon the account of their
Learning, than they did formerly, they blended together two very different
things, Christianity, and that vain Philosophy St. Paul so much cautions People
against. And they that succeeded them, made it their Business to render
Religion more and more mysterious and unintelligible, that the Laity should
admire them for their profound Knowledge in things past their own understanding,
and be wholly governed by them in Matters of Religion, as being above their
Apprehensions; and so get their Consciences, and consequently their Estates in
their disposal. Which Design succeeded accordingly, for we find that it was
wholly left to them to make what Creeds, impose what Opinions they thought fit
on the Laity; who, whenever they asserted their Natural Right of judging for
themselves, and acting according to that Judgment, were by the Magistrate's
Sword (always ready) forced to a Compliance. Thus it was that Priestcraft
began, and Persecution completed the Ruin of Religion. And if this was the
Method the Clergy took in the most early Times, what reason is there to
suspect, that in these latter Times they are less in love with Power and
Dominion?

9. It Is said, That the Magistrate's Force is necessary to preserve Religion;
because for want of it the World was quickly and universally overrun with
Idolatry.

I answer; A Right in the Magistrates to use Force, would in no wise have
prevented Idolatry, except they had been against it when the People were
inclined to it; which was so far from being true, that the Kings themselves (as
that great and good Man, the Author of the Letters concerning Toleration,
plainly shows) were the Promoters of Idolatry, by introducing their
Predecessors into the Divine Worship of the People, to secure to themselves, as
descended from the Gods, the greater Veneration from their Subjects; and
therefore erected such a Worship, and such a Priesthood, as might awe the
seduced Multitude into the Obedience they desired.

And it is much more probable, that Courts by their Instruments the Priests, and
by their Artifices, the Fables of their Gods, their Mysteries and Oracles,
should thus advance the Honor of their Kings amongst the People, for the Ends
of Ambition and Power, than that the People should find out those refined Ways
of doing it, and introduce them into Courts for enslaving themselves. And it is
no wonder that Absolute and Arbitrary Monarchs (as the first Introducers of
Idolatry were) could impose what they pleased on their Subjects, bred up in
Slavery, (and consequently in Ignorance); for where Men are poor and miserable,
(the necessary Consequence of Arbitrary Power) they have no leisure to examine
into Matters of Religion, their Time being wholly taken up in providing
necessary Subsistence; and consequently they must be grossly ignorant, and have
mean, low, and abject Thoughts suitable to their Condition: So that it is not
strange that these Emperors might by degrees impose on them the worshipping
their Ancestors, especially when they saw the Priests and Courtiers scarce
forbear adoring the present Monarch; which is almost unavoidable in Arbitrary
Governments, (witness the most fulsome and blasphemous Flatteries that are
offered up to the French King, even by his Christian Subjects). Nay, how many
Instances have we of such Monarchs, whose Impatience would not permit them to
stay till after their Death for Divine Honors, which then Custom had in a
manner made their Right? And,

10. One (and not perhaps the least) Reason why the generality of the Priests
are for preaching up absolute Arbitrary Power to be Jure Divino, is, because
that necessarily causes an Universal Ignorance, and thereby gives them a fair
Opportunity of imposing on the People what they think fit: For Ignorance, tho
it is far from being the Mother of Devotion to God, it is certainly so to the
Church, as the Priests call themselves; and therefore there is nothing they
dread more than a knowing Laity: and to show all the Arts and Methods they have
taken to keep them ignorant, would require a large History. And we find that in
those Places where the Clergy are most numerous, potent and rich, the People
are most ignorant and superstitious, as well as most enslaved; and where the
Clergy are fewest in Number, Religion abounds most as well as Knowledge and
Liberty. It was Piedmont, and some such barren Places, which could not well
maintain many Priests, and where it was scarce worth their while to advance
Priestcraft, that best preserved the Purity of the Gospel. And not to go so
far from home, as nothing made way so much for the Reformation as the depriving
the Priests of their Monasteries, and other ill-gotten Goods; so nothing has
since contributed more to the continuing of it, than those Possessions being
out of their Hands. And the Method by which they have generally corrupted
Religion, is by wheedling or forcing the People into a blind Submission to what
they impose on them. And it was by these Artifices that the Jewish Priests and
Rabbis imposed on that Nation the Traditions of Men for the Commandments of
God. And it is by this Method that the Mohammedan Religion supports it self,
there being no Debate nor Discourse allowed of what the Mufties shall teach the
People. And every body knows that the forcing People into an implicit Faith, is
the Bulwark of the Popish Religion.

And now having answered, and (I think I may say) retorted the Arguments for
Compulsion, upon pretense of advancing the true Religion, I shall next examine
what is said for it upon a Civil Account; but before I do that, I must beg
leave to show, (since it is for Protestants this Discourse is chiefly designed)

First, That this Doctrine of Compulsion is inconsistent with the very
Foundation of the Protestant Religion. And,

Secondly, To lay down the true Method, consonant to Protestant Principles, of
destroying (maugre all the Differences of Opinions) not only Schisms and
Heresies, but all Hatred and Uncharitableness, and bringing People to true
Christian Love and Friendship, which will in a manner prevent all that can be
urged for Compulsion upon a Civil Account.

CHAP. V.
That all Force upon the Account of mere Religion, is inconsistent with the
Principles of the Protestant Religion.

1. AS it was Persecution that advanced Popery, so it was Freedom and
Toleration that ruined it, and established Protestantism; the Essence of which
consists in every one's having an impartial Right to judge for himself, and
which is the necessary Consequence of it, acting according to that Judgment:
And therefore, as a very worthy Person says, A Persecutor is no where at Home
but at Rome. The Papists in persecuting, act consistent with their own
Principles: But Protestants, whilst they persecute any, condemn themselves. The
former pretend there are Doubts and Difficulties in all, even the most
important Points of Religion; and therefore there must be (say they) some
ultimate and external Judge to appeal to, by whose decisive Judgment all Persons
must be concluded, otherwise so many Men so many Minds, and the Church will be
filled with Controversy and Confusion.

The Protestants on the contrary say, That God has appointed no such Judge, but
that every one is to judge for himself, and to act according to that Judgment:
And therefore, since they judged the Terms of Communion with the Church of Rome
unlawful, they acted according to their Duty in separating from it, and in
forming Religious Assemblies of their own, and endeavoring to make as many
Converts as they could: And that they were obliged to do this when the
Government was against them, as well as when it was for them, in Q. Mary's Days
as well as Q. Elizabeth's; according to the practice of the Primitive
Christians, who held their Religious Assemblies contrary to the Commands of the
Heathen Government. Grant me these Principles, or by any other justify the
Reformation if you can, and show me then how any Man, or Body of Men, can
pretend to judge for others, and by Force endeavor to make them profess their
Sentiments. Nay, can the persecuting Protestants any otherwise justify
themselves against the Church of Rome, but by the very same Arguments their
Brethren (who desire but the same Liberty from them that they claim from the
Papists) make their Defense with, against whom they can alledg no other Reasons
than the Papists use against all of them? than which there can be nothing more
disingenuous. And what is it but mocking both God and Man, first to bid Men use
their Reason in Matters of Religion, then punish them if they will not act
contrary to it? To tell them they must judge for themselves, and act according
to that Judgment, and yet excommunicate, imprison, and fine them for so doing,
is a most fulsome Contradiction. With what Face can the Clergy tell their
Hearers, that they ought not to take things on trust, but impartially examine
the Reasons on all sides, and yet make it their Business to hinder the
preaching or printing of any thing but what makes for their own Side? The
Author of the Persuasive to an ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion says, (
Page 28.) They that have a good Cause, need no disingenuous Arts; they will not
fright Men from considering what their Adversaries say, by denouncing Damnation
against them; nor forbid them to read their Books, but rather encourage them to
do so, that they may see the Difference between Truth and Error, between Reason
and Sophistry, with their own Eyes. This is the Effect of a well-grounded
Confidence in Truth; and there is this Sign of a good Cause apparently
discernable in the Application of the Clergy of this Church both to their
Friends and Enemies, they desire the one and the other to consider impartially
what is said for us and against us: And whatsoever Guides of a Party do
otherwise, they give just cause to those that follow them to examine their
Doctrines so much the more carefully, by how much they are more unwilling to
have them examined. It Is bad Sign, when Men are loath to have their Opinions
seen in the Day, but love Darkness rather than Light.

Whether this last does not agree to that Church which endeavors to hinder any
thing from being preached or printed that is not of their own Side, as well as
to the Church of Rome; or with what Conscience he could make such a Panegyric
on that Church, whose Persecution in that very Book he attempts to justify, let
the Reader judge. And it would be very diverting (were it not on such a Subject)
to observe the miserable Shifts the Clergy make to condemn the Practice of the
Popish Church, and at the same time to justify their own, which, as well as the
Papists, claims a Legislative and Coercive Power in Matters of mere Religion.

2. But they say, The Papists sorbid the People from reading the Scripture, and
thereby hinder them from judging for themselves.

To which I answer: Which is worse, to give Men leave, by reading the
Scripture, to judge for themselves, and then use Force to make them act contrary
to their Judgments, or to make them follow their Guides with a blind implicit
Faith? The one tends to make Men ignorant and superstitious, the other
downright Hypocrites and Villains: if Men were above Force, they would neither
blindly follow their pretended Guides, nor act against their Consciences. But
however both Papists and Protestants use the Means that naturally tend to
effect these wicked Ends.

Besides, I ask these Protestant Persecutors, whether they think the reading of
the Scripture alone, without hearing or reading some learned Men of their
Party, sufficient to make them understand the controverted Points? If they own
they ought to hear them, why not the opposite Side? If they were to hear
neither, they would be more likely to form a true Judgment, than to hear the
studied and elaborate Arguments on one Side only. If the People are not to be
trusted to hear all that can be said on all Sides, for fear of taking a
different Opinion from the licensed Guides, why shall they be more trusted with
reading the Scriptures, which they may apprehend in a Sense different from that
of their Guides? except you say, that as long as these alone have the
interpreting of it, and have the Force of the Magistrate on their Side, they
may impose what Opinion they please on the People.

In short, did the Priests of any Protestant Party act consistent with their
own Principles, and had a mind that the People should not blindly follow them,
they would be so far from hindering them (by restraining the Liberty of the
Press and Pulpit) from examining the Reasonableness of those Opinions that are
contrary to theirs, that they would make it their Business to persuade them to
it, and obtain an entire Liberty for their Adversaries to preach and print what
they think good.

3. It was the Protestant Priests acting most apparently, and most shamefully
inconsistent with themselves, that put a sudden stop to the Reformation, which
at first, like a mighty Torrent, overturned all that opposed it: And here it is
that the Church of Rome insults, and says, That the Principles of the
Protestants, by which they endeavor to justify their Separation from her, are
so absurd, that themselves are obliged to act contrary to them, and do the very
same things they condemn in her. Thus the Persecution of the Popish Church has
been kept in Countenance by the Protestants following her Example, which
otherwise would have appeared so odious, that all must have abhorred her for
it, or else obliged her to grant that Liberty which would infallibly ruin her.

4. As Persecution was the chief Cause of hindering the further spreading of
the Reformation, so to that we must impute that this was not more perfect and
complete. For tho the first Reformers deserve very great Commendation for what
they did, yet it cannot be imagined, that being bred up in Popish Darkness and
Superstition, they should be able to discern, much less remove all those
Corruptions that had been so long a gathering, (that could only be the Work of
Time, or Men inspired); and therefore it is no wonder there were so many
different Opinions amongst them at first. But had those that succeeded them,
instead of paying a blind implicit Submission to their Decrees, and getting
them established by Penal Laws, taken the same Liberty in examining their
Opinions as the Reformers did their Predecessors, all Differences, at least of
any moment, would in some Time have been composed; which became impossible by
the Clergy, being obliged (as they valued their subsistence) to assert such
Opinions, right or wrong, as were established by Law, and by Persecution
causing such Animosities and Prejudices amongst the different Sects, that
instead of examining one another Opinions sincerely and impartially, they ran
daily further into Ignorance, Superstition, Narrowness and Uncharitableness.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Method to destroy not only Schisms and Heresies, but Hatred and
Uncharitableness amongst Christians, notwithstanding their different Opinions.

BUT suppose few or none of the different Opinions that are amongst
Protestants, had been composed by their acting consistent with their own
Principles; yet there could not well be any Divisions or Schisms amongst them,
which do wholly arise from that Antiprotestant and impious Practice in imposing
on others our own uncertain and dubious Comments as necessary Terms of
Communion, and requiring People to profess them on pain of Temporal or Eternal
Punishment; which is nothing less than making our own Opinions of Divine
Authority, and as necessary to Salvation as the express words of the Scripture;
which if Men did only make use of in any controverted Point in the public
Forms of Worship, they might be of the same Communion for all their variety of
Opinions. And indeed nothing seems more absurd, than that instead of the
Expressions the infinite Wisdom of God thought fit to make use of, Men should
be so zealous for imposing on their Brethren their own Conceits, especially of
things they confess to be inconceivable, and their own Explications of what
they acknowledge to be inexplicable, and their own Reason of what they own is
above their Reason, and their own meaning of what they confess their Words
cannot reach the meaning.

But it is no wonder that they that make themselves wiser than God in contriving
Methods, even opposite to those he requires, to make Men embrace the Faith,
should think themselves better able to express that Faith than God himself, and
therefore condemn those as Heretics who declare their Belief in the Terms of
Truth, except also they will admit their Expressions and Terms, from which it is
by no means lawful to vary; which shows that they put a greater value on them,
than on the Divine Word.

2. To this they say, they oblige People to use their Expressions in order to
discover Heretics.

But if God requires no more of a Christian than that he believes the
Scripture, and endeavors to find out the true Sense of it, and to live
according to it; he that does this can be in no fault, but is to all intents
and purposes as safe in respect to his Eternal Happiness as if he were
infallible, and consequently is far from being a Schismatic or Heretic. Tho
the Imposers are not only Schismatics, by causing a needless Separation, but
Heretics by their own definition of Heresy, which is erring in Fundamentals,
and erring obstinately against Knowledge; because when they have determined the
Holy Scriptures to be the only foundation of Faith, nevertheless they lay down
certain Propositions as Fundamental that are not in the Scripture; which is
declaring against their own Principles, and destroying the very Foundation they
have laid: so that instead of finding out others to be Heretics, they make
themselves such by requiring a Divine Faith to their own imagined Deductions;
which how clear soever they seem to themselves to be drawn from Scripture,
appear quite contrary to others. If a King going a far Journey, should give
certain Injunctions to his Subjects, and appoint no Judge to determine any
Dispute that should happen about interpreting them, but that every one
according to the best of his Skill should judge for himself, and not act until
he was fully persuaded in his own Mind; Would not they that do this, how much
soever they were mistaken in interpreting his Injunctions, have done all that
he required? And would not he be justly enraged at his return to see them, for
doing this, beaten and abused by their Fellow Subjects? And what Reason
therefore can there be urged why Christ should deal otherwise, at his return to
Judgment, with your persecuting Heretic Starters, and reward those Good and
Faithful Servants (the supposed Heretics) for following his Directions, in
judging of his Will according to the best of their Abilities?

3. If the Predestinarians and Antipredestinarians, who condemn one another
Tenets as most impious, may, and ought, notwithstanding their different
Sentiments, to continue in the same Church; or if the Orthodox can so
infinitely differ in Matters of Faith, that one Party of them shall worship but
one Infinite Almighty Being or Spirit, and another three such, and yet be of
the same Communion, and agree in the same Terms of Human Invention; Why may not
all (since it is scarce possible any should differ more widely) join together in
the same Communion, if nothing be mentioned in those Matters wherein they
differ, but in Scripture-expressions, in which they all agree? And is it not
the Imposers, that not only in the Arminian Controversy (which has caused a
Schism in the Protestant Countries beyond Sea) but in all others, that are
guilty of the Separation? For I do not see (as that very Honest and Judicious
Man Mr. Hales, in his Tract of Schism, observes) That Opinionum varietas and
Opinantium unitas are (...), or that Men of different Opinions may not hold
Communion in Sacris, or both go to the same Church. Why may not I go, if
occasion requires, to an Arian Church, so there be no Arianism expressed in
their Liturgy? and were Liturgies and public Forms of Service so framed as
they admitted no particular and private Fancies, but contained those things in
which all Christians agree, Schisms on Opinions were utterly vanished. And let
me add, that not only Schisms or Heresies, but all Hatred, Animosities, and
Uncharitableness would be destroyed: For then the Clergy, since it would be
their common Interest to unite together, would maintain Peace, Love, and
Kindness amongst themselves, and preach the same to the People, who would
never, were they but left to themselves, hate, or molest one another for merely
speculative Opinions (which make but little impression on them) especially too,
when they did not create any Divisions or Schisms amongst them; nay, then all
Opinions of Moment (I mean those which Men cannot neglect examining into
without a Fault) would, being handled without Prejudice or Passion, quickly be
rightly understood; and those of little or no Moment (which are chiefly kept up
by the Hatred and Animosities of the different Sects, and the Artifices of the
Priests) soon fall to the Ground. And this is the sense of the ablest Champion
that the Protestant Religion could ever boast of, the brave Chillingworth, who
tells us, Chapter 3. n. 8. If Men would be themselves, and be content that others
should be, in the choice of their Religion, the Servants of God and not of Men;
if instead of being zealous Papists, earnest Calvinists, rigid Lutherans, etc.
they would become themselves, and be content that others should be plain and
honest Christians; if all Men would believe the Scripture, and freeing
themselves from Prejudice and Passion, would sincerely endeavor to find the
true Sense of it, and live according to it, and require no more of others than
to do so, not refusing their Communion to those that do so, would so order
their Public Service of God, that all may, without Scruple, or Hypocrisy, or
Protestation against any part of it, join with them in it; who does not see,
that seeing all necessary Truths are plainly and evidently set down in
Scripture, there would of necessity be amongst all Men in all things necessary
Unity of Opinion, and (notwithstanding any other Differences that are or could
be) Unity of Communion and Charity, and mutual Toleration; by which Means all
Schism and Heresy would be banished the World, and those wretched Contentions
which now rend and tear in pieces, not the Coat, but the Members and Bowels of
Christ, with mutual Pride and Tyranny, would speedily receive a most blessed
Catastrophe. So, Chap. 4. n. 16. This presumptuous imposing of the Senses of
Men upon the Word of God, the special Senses of Men upon the general Words of
God, and laying them on Men's Consciences, under the equal Penalty of Death and
Damnation; this vain Conceit, that we can speak of the Things of God, better
than the Words of God; this deifying our own Interpretations, and tyrannous
enforcing them upon others; this restraining the Words of God from that
Latitude and Generality, and the Understanding of Men from their Liberty, where
Christ and his Apostles left them, is and has been the only Fountain of all
Schisms of the Church; and that which makes them immortal, the common
Incendiary of Christendom, Ridente Turca, nec dolente Judaeo. Take away these
Walls of Separation, and all will quickly be one: Take away this persecuting,
burning, cursing, damning of Men, for not subscribing to the Words of Men as
the Words of God; require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no
Man Master but him only: Let those leave claiming Infallibility, that have no
Title to it; and let them that in their Words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise
in their Actions. In a word, Take away Tyranny, which is the Devil's Instrument
to support Errors, Superstitions, and Impieties, in the several Parts of the
World, which could not otherwise long withstand the Power of Truth: I say, take
away Tyranny, and restore Christians to the just and full Liberty of
captivating their Understanding to Scripture only; and (as Rivers, when they
have a free passage, run all to the Ocean) so it may well be hoped, by God's
Blessing, that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom
to Truth and Unity.

But to add a greater Authority, even that of the Apostles themselves; who tho
they were to teach the People the Christian Faith before they baptized them
into it; nay, it is impossible any should be of the Christian Church, before he
knew the Faith that must make him a Christian; yet they required no more of
those that before believed the Unity of God, to qualify them to be Members of
the Church, than to believe Jesus to be the Christ, and that God has raised him
from the Dead, and the Doctrine of Repentance: And upon this Belief which all
Christians profess, they constantly admitted both Jews and Gentiles into the
Church; and consequently whilst this Belief remains, they are not unqualified
to be Members of the Church, except Men have a Right nowadays to disown those
for Brethren and Members of the Church that the Apostles owned as such. But
They are indeed (as Mr. Chillingworth observes) the greatest Schismatics, who
make the Way to Heaven narrower, the Yoke of Christ heavier, the Differences of
Faith greater than they were made at the beginning by Christ and his Apostles;
they talk of Unity, and aim at Tyranny, and will have Peace with none but their
Slaves and Vassals.

4. But it is said; A Heretic, after two or three Admonitions, is to be
rejected, or (more properly) avoided; therefore Difference of Opinions will
hinder Men from being of the same Communion.

By a Heretic is not meant one that through the weakness of Understanding is in
an Error, but an immoral Man that acts against his Conscience, for the Apostle
describes him as one that is conscious of his Crime, as being condemned of
himself, on whom Admonitions might have a good Effect; or if they should not be
sufficient, yet that the Trouble and Disgrace of being shunned by his Brethren,
might reclaim him; which Methods could have no such Effect, if his Fault had
been a mere Error of the Understanding: And Heresy cannot but be a Fault of the
Will, because it is called a Work of the Flesh, and damnable, which a mere Error
of the Understanding by no means is: And if the Apostle had meant, that a
simple erroneous Person was to be avoided, he would have contradicted himself,
since (as it has been already proved) he requires such a One to be born with.

5. But it is said, We are bid ( Romans 16. 17.) to mark and avoid those that
cause Divisions and Offenses.

To which I answer, That bare differences of Opinions do not cause them; for
what two Men, even of the same Communion, agree in all Points of Divinity? No,
it is Imposition that has been the unhappy Occasion of all the Offenses,
Schisms, Divisions, and Heresies, that have confounded the Church. Besides,
it is plain, the Apostle does not speak here of the merely Erroneous, because he
says they are those that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly;
and Philip. 3. where he renews the same Discourse, he describes them as Enemies
of the Cross of Christ, Whose end is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, who
mind earthly Things. A Character which generally agrees but too well with those
that are for Imposition, who thereby cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to
the Doctrine the Apostle taught them.

If Schism be (as it is pretended) so great a Crime, that every one that is
guilty of it is out of the ordinary way of Salvation; what can be more
Uncharitable and Impious, than to make so many things even of an indifferent
Nature, necessary to Church Communion, as tho it were on purpose to make
Schismatics?

6. In a word, To be shunned and avoided by every one as some Pest or Plague,
can be no small Punishment to so sociable a Creature as Man; and therefore none
ought to be so punished for an Error of the Understanding, an involuntary
thing, and no Fault at all, when also that Punishment does not tend to convince
him of his Error, but to make him act against his Conscience, and to cause
Uncharitableness, and most of those other pernicious Consequences (tho not in
so high a degree) that Force does. In a word, none can forfeit his Right to the
civil Converse and Familiarity of his Fellow Creatures, so that they shall
combine together to avoid him, but by his being a Man of no Conscience, or of
such Principles as engage him to break those common Rules which tend to their
mutual Happiness, and thereby is become their common Enemy. And if Christians
would not act against the Light of Nature in doing as they would not be done
unto, they ought to give to all Men (how different soever their Religion may
be) the same Freedom of Judging and Acting according to their Judgment as they
would desire from them, and impose no more on them than they would be willing
to suffer themselves were they in their Power; and require no more of their own
People who have the same Rule of Faith, than to endeavor to find out the true
meaning of it, and to live up to it; and of their Clergy, than their best
Diligence to discover the true Sense of it, and their Sincerity in instructing
others in it.

7. Without this Freedom it is morally impossible but that the Clergy must be
the chief Promoters, not only of Schisms and Heresies, but of Uncharitableness,
Envy, Strife, Fewds and Factions; since not only their Interest, but the Method
of their Education enclines them thereto. For Men that are bred in the World,
as they every Day meet with variety of Opinions, so they can with ease see
others differ from them, and freely give them the same Liberty they take
themselves: On the contrary, they that are educated (as the Clergy are) in
Cloisters or Colleges, where they come not to examine the Truth of such
Opinions as are established by Law, but to profess them as a Trade they are to
get their Living by, and consequently are all as to those Matters of the same
Opinion, when they come into the World, and set up for Teachers, they cannot
bear so unusual a thing as the least opposition; whereas were they left to
themselves to examine things in their own Minds, and after this to profess what
they judge to be Truth; this would teach them Patience, Modesty, and Humility,
by showing how subject, not only themselves, but even the most Celebrated are
to be mistaken; and that nothing discovers Truth like a free and sincere
examination; and consequently they must abhor any Restraint to the freedom of
judging. That this different way of Education has as different Effects on the
Minds of Men, is so very evident, that you will scarce find a thinking Man but
abhors all Imposition, and every thing that tends to hinder Freedom and Liberty
of judging. On the contrary, you shall scarce meet with one who has had a
different Method of Education, whose Reason generally lies in Authority, and
his Brains in his Commonplace Book, that can bear with any Opposition, but is
for imposing upon others by Force and Violence. And this proud imperious
persecuting Spirit betrays it self in all their Writings, where, without
respect to Christianity or good Manners, they stick at no Expressions, tho
never so scurrilous and abusive, that will but serve to expose and vilify their
Adversaries. And which not a little adds to this sort of Temper, is the
Arbitrary and Despotical Government in the places of their Education; for there
is none so insolent and assuming, so apt to insult and domineer, when he has an
Opportunity, as he that has been bred in an absolute Obedience, and a slavish
Compliance: and Experience shows, that the longer People have lived in such
Places, the readier they are to fly into Extravagance when they come abroad
into the World; and if they happen to influence the Counsels of the Magistrate,
they seldom fail to press him on to illegal Arbitrary Practices, or to practice
the same themselves in those Places of Power they are advanced to. And the
chief Reason that makes the Regular Clergy amongst the Papists so much more for
Persecution and Cruelty than the Secular, is, because the Government in their
Cloisters is more Tyrannical and Arbitrary than the others: therefore it
behooves all Government to take special Care that those Places where the Youth
receive their Learning, should be, what they are usually called, Places of free
and ingenious Education. But to return.

Can it be expected from Men thus educated, that they should by their Precepts
and Examples, persuade those of their own Party to any Charity and Benignity
for any other Sect that looks on them (as all Sects do on each other) either as
Schismatics or Heretics, and endeavors to persuade all People to do the
same? which strikes not only at the Power and Jurisdiction, but even the
Maintenance the People bestow on these Priests.

It Is no wonder that in this Case they possess the People with Hatred and
Animosities against all Dissenters, and are continually urging the Magistrate
to persecute them. But it would be as absurd for him to be governed by them, as
it would have been in the Town Clerk of Ephesus to have been ruled by
Demetrius, and the rest of the Silver-Smiths in punishing Paul, whose Preaching
spoiled their Trade.

8. Did the Clergy but consider the ill Effects that Persecution has all along
had on them, they would not be so zealous for it. As long as the Emperors had
the Power in their own Hands, there never was a Council but what was an
Imperial Machine, either for or against a Trinity, or worshipping of Images,
etc. as it seemed good, not to the Holy Ghost, but to those Emperors: and when
the Priests, by their cunning compliance in Matters of Faith, had by Degrees
advanced their own Power above the Emperors, and the Bishop of Rome, as their
Head, had the summoning of Councils; then they were mere Papal Engines, and in
their Synods voted and acted as they were influenced from the Vatican. But if
these things be too remote, the English History affords us fresher Examples in
the Reigns of Henry the 8th, Edward the 6th, Mary and Elizabeth; how easily and
how smoothly did the Clergy then change their Articles of Faith, and Forms of
Worship, nay every thing, according to the Inclinations of those Kings and
Queens? But we need not go so far back for Examples; let us but cast our Eyes
upon the present State of Religion in every part of Christendom, and we cannot
but see that the Opinions of the Clergy (as much as they pretend not to take
things on trust) are every where such as the Terms of Preferment (appointed by
the Laws of each Country) require of them. Are they not in Italy, and in all
the Dominions of Spain, zealous and through Roman Catholics? In France
Catholics, tho with reserve to the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the
Regalities? Or rather are they not whatever that absolute King will have them
to be, as we see by their acting with the Sea of Rome? And are they not in one
half of Germany Papists, in the other Protestants? In Denmark and Sweedland
Lutherans, in the Alps Calvinists, etc.? This is impossible should so
universally happen, if Interest had not too great an Influence over them, which
makes them very unfit Instruments to find out Truth; or if found, sincerely to
discover it. And how can they be fit Guides to others, who are not trusted to
guide themselves, but, right or wrong, are obliged to assert such Opinions, or
else to starve? which certainly destroys all manner of Argument from their
Authority, since interested Persons are of no Credit, and therefore are every
where repelled from giving their Testimony. But,

9. The Clergy had a quite different Design by such Imposition, viz. To keep
the People in a blind Obedience, and make them give an implicit Faith to what
they so unanimously agree in, whether Con or Transubstantiation, or any other
such Points; which has had the designed Effect: for, to speak the Truth, the
great Fault of the Laity has been in paying a servile and blind Deference to
the Opinions of the Clergy; or, as Mr. Hales, in his Tract of Schism, speaking
of the Laity even of the second Century, expresses it, Through Sloth and blind
Obedience, they examined not the things that they were taught, but like Beasts
of Burden, patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent whatever their
Superiors laid upon them. And thus much do the Clergy of each Sect object to
the Laity of those Sects they differ with: and tho the Laity are so much more
numerous, and it is their Business, as well as the Clergy's, to examine into
Matters of Religion in order to know what they are to believe or practice; yet
if we look into History, we shall find that most, if not all, the Errors,
Schisms, Heresies, that have confounded the Christian World, have had their
Origin and chief Support from the Clergy, and that the Laity have been with
much ado perverted; and as they have held out longest against false and absurd
Opinions, so they have been always the first and most forward for a Reformation.

10. It Is to the Clergy's being every where obliged to defend the established
Opinions, we in a great measure owe that in the Writings of Controversial
Points the Words there used are much more obscure, uncertain, and undetermined,
than they are even in ordinary Conversation, by which means they are enabled to
talk eternally in opposing or defending any Proposition, tho never so absurd;
for Men may wrangle perpetually if they affect an Obscurity and an Uncertainty
in the Use of their Words: and in truth, the whole Learning of the Schools is
only disputing about Words; there a Man may be furnished with several Words,
without Ideas annexed to them; and nothing so common as Distinctions without
any difference. But it had not been so intolerable, if this sort of Jargon had
been confined to things merely speculative, and had not obscured the material
Truths of Law and Religion, nor invaded the Concernments of Human Life and
Society, bringing Confusion, Disorder, and Uncertainty into all Affairs of
Moment.

But I shall say no more on this Point, only adding, that it was Imposition,
and the consequence of it, Excommunication for matters of Opinion, which first
brought in Uncharitableness, Envy, Strifes, Fewds, Factions amongst Christians;
and after that, Persecution not only heightened them, but was the occasion of
the prodigious increase of all other Wickedness, by forcing Men to break the
Ties and Obligations of Conscience: and it is impossible but that all manner of
Immorality must abound whilst Imposition prevails, which eats out the very
Heart and Life of Religion, and at the best makes Men profess, as a matter of
Form, whatever Opinions they find necessary for their worldly Convenience. And
this I think is sufficient to show the Execrableness of it, especially in
Protestants, whose Principles it is so inconsistent with.

CHAP. IV.
That the Good of the Society obliges the Magistrate to hinder different
Professions of Religion, examined.

1. AND now I am at leisure to examine the only remaining Pretense for the
Magistrate's using force in Matters of mere Religion, that without this Power
he would be destitute of the Means to prevent Tumults, Disturbances,
Commotions, Wars; etc. which are the necessary Consequences of a Toleration.

Not to repeat what I have said, Chap. 1.. 22. or Chapter the 4th, of the
horrible Mischief of Persecution; nor to mention that what is so directly
contrary to the Honor of God, and the Good of Souls (as I have proved it to
be) can no wise contribute to the Temporal Good of Mankind; I say, if the
professing of any Religion that in whole or part is different from that
established by Law, will cause these dismal Effects, then the Protestant
Persuasion in Popish Countries, and the Christian Religion in those of the
Heathen, will produce them. But if Persecutors cannot affirm this, it is false
to say that any Religion, merely because it is different from that of the
Public, tends to create Disturbances; therefore if they have any value for the
true Religion, they ought not to make use of such an Argument for Persecution,
which will make that criminal, and subjects its Professors to Persecution. And
if those wide and many Differences that distinguish the Christian from all
other Religions, will not cause any Commotion in Heathen Countries; why should
these fewer and minuter Differences that are among Christians themselves,
produce them in Christian Countries? Men's different Opinions, in mere Religious
things, are no more apt to create those Effects, than different Opinions in
Philosophical Matters, which certainly would equally cause Disturbances, did
Men persecute one another about them; and we see different Opinions in
Religious Matters do not, when Men for all their different Sentiments are
permitted to continue in the same Church* It Is said, it is not barely different
Opinions, but the Schism and separate Meetings caused by those Opinions, that
create Disturbances.

If Schisms have such Effects, they are in the fault that by Imposition cause
those Schisms. Yet there is no Reason why Men's meeting at different Places, with
different Forms and Ways of Worship, should sooner cause Commotions or Wars,
than their meeting at different Places with the same Forms and Ways of Worship,
did not Temporal Disadvantages attend one, and Advantages the other. In a word,
there are no Reasons upon the account of any Danger to the State, which forbid
Religious Meetings that are open and free to all, and where Men are so far from
Caballing, that they do not discourse together, but do more strongly hold
against all Meetings of any other sort. It Is said, those Meetings are composed
of Persons of the same Opinions; but being of the same Opinions (except they
are such as are prejudicial to the Government, and those I do not defend)
cannot be of any ill consequence to the Government. But this or any other
Argument that is drawn from what is common to all Religious Assemblies, will
make the Magistrates own Church as dangerous as any other; and it can be
nothing but the different Usage, that one is caressed, and the other
persecuted, that makes one dangerous, and the other not. In a word; there can
be no Reason drawn from the safety of the Society, for the different Sects of
Christians to condemn the Religious Assemblies of each other, if they teach
nothing that is destructive to the Civil Society, as seditious Conventicles, and
Nurseries of Rebellion, but what would have justified the Heathen for treating
all Christian Congregations as such. And if the differences in Opinion, and
number of Sects amongst the Heathens were far greater than those amongst the
Christians, and yet there was no Commotion upon the Account of Religion, there
can be no Reason but that the Christians, did they allow the same Liberty,
would be as free from any such Mischief, because as long as each Sect thinks it
their Duty to tolerate others, no Quarrel can possibly happen upon the Account
of a Toleration. It Is not therefore Error (as the Bishop of Sarum observes) or
Men's following the Dictates of their Understandings, that has caused
Disturbances, and broke the Peace and Order of their Civil Government, and of
the Church; but the Spirit of Imposing so commonly found in prevailing Parties:
the Erroneous, as the stronger side think they may call them, would have been
quiet if they had not been made to apprehend Inquisitions, or other Miseries,
or ill Usage upon the Account of their Opinions; but when they have cause given
them to fear bad Treatment for a bare dissent in an Article of Faith, the
natural and most just Principle of Self-preservation obliges them to combine
together for their necessary Defense. And from hence have risen all those
Convulsions that have so violently shaken Churches and Kingdoms.

2. Seeing this is evidently so, what can be more disingenuous, as well as
wicked, than to ill use and oppress People, and thereby render them justly
disaffected, and then make use of that as a Pretense for the punishing them? If
Men in such cases are disaffected, take away the Cause of it by forbearing to
use them ill (which is a very easy and natural Remedy) and you take away all
pretension of Dissatisfaction. It destroys all assurance of Human Affairs to
suppose Men will run the risque of losing their Lives, or being ruined by a
Civil War upon the Account of Religion, when they have all the Freedom in
Religious Matters they are capable of. For which unusual Obligation, they will
be ever studious to show a grateful Fidelity, and endeavor by all Services
imaginable to lay up a stock of Merit, to secure their future Quiet; and the
different Sects, as so many Guardians of the Public Peace, will be very
watchful over one another, and do their utmost to discover and prevent the
Designs of any Party whatever, that would be innovating or changing the Form of
Government, because by such Alteration they are likely to be losers, and they
can hope for nothing better than what they already enjoy; so that the more
numerous the Sects are, the safer the Government is like to be.

3. But on the contrary, where they want this Liberty, the Public Peace will
never be secure; for common Interest will oblige the persecuted Sects (tho
never so contrary in their Principles) to combine together against their Common
Enemy: and Men when they fight for their Religious as well as Civil Liberties,
do it with more than ordinary Resolution; and there is scarce any Party so
inconsiderable but what upon some Emergency or other may endanger a Government.
Therefore it is evident, it is the Magistrates Security, as well as Duty, to
grant an impartial inviolable Liberty of Conscience. The Truth of what has been
said, sufficiently appears by the different Conduct of the Dissenters, who (tho
widely differing from one another) did in the time of Persecution combine
together for their just and necessary Defense against their Persecutors; yet
since they enjoy Liberty of Conscience, are most entirely Loyal, Hearty, and
Zealous for the Government that grants it. And it is visible to all that are not
wilfully blind, that the quiet and peaceable Behavior of the Sectaries, (since
each Party worships God according as they think best, without endeavoring to
molest or disturb their Neighbors for doing the same) destroys all the
Arguments against Toleration upon the Account of Discord and Disturbances; and
the longer the Toleration endures, the more Peaceable and Inoffensive will the
different Sects be to one another; because by degrees all those remains of
Animosities and Hatred, that Persecution did produce, will wear off.

I believe there can be no Instance where ever a general and impartial
Toleration did produce any Disturbances and Commotions, much less that there
ever was any Government overturned by an Indifferency and Impartiality to
different Sects; but when that has happened, it has always been by a professed
Partiality for one side against the others: For the People will never be so
wholly void of all Humanity and Pity, as to be pleased to see their Relations,
Neighbors, and Countrymen barbarously used, for serving God according to the
Dictates of their Consciences. And there is no Person, where he has not a direct
Interest to the contrary (as the Body of the People have not) but would wish
that Men had the choice of serving God as they think best, rather than that any
one Way (even that which himself at present espouses) should be forced on them
by Penal Laws, because not only his own, but any of those Magistrates he may
chance to be subject to changing their Opinions, (neither of which is in his
Power to hinder) must subject him to Punishment; beside, the thing in general
being so prejudicial to the Public, must make them abhor it: therefore it is
Madness to suppose they are fond of any persecuting Laws, much less that they
will create a Civil War to obtain them; but on the contrary, by a Toleration,
all color and pretense is taken away from those that might be supposed to
desire Civil Commotions; and the more People are used to Liberty of Conscience,
the greater and more irreconcilable will their dislike be of Imposition, and
consequently will the more heartily unite in a general abhorrence of Popery as
the grand Promoter of it, and by no pretenses whatever will be brought to
endure the Thoughts of Popish Kings and Princes.

4. It may be urged, That tho the People of themselves will be content that
others should have the same freedom of judging for themselves, and acting
according to that Judgment; yet that the Clergy, by the great Influence they
have over them, may engage them in Commotions, etc.

Where Men have liberty to examine what the Priests teach, and dissent from
them, if they think fit, they will never be able so far to impose on them, as
to oblige them to act so directly contrary to their Interest: It Is Persecution
that chiefly supports a blind implicit Faith and Obedience, but an entire
Liberty will put a Necessity on the People (their Guides differing amongst
themselves) of judging and examining for themselves; and the longer Toleration
continues, the more will they be freed from a blind implicit Obedience: And in
these Days, where Light and Knowledge does so much aboud, it is impossible they
should be so grossly imposed on by the Clergy, whose Conduct, especially in
Points relating to their Interests, have given them too just an Occasion not to
give a blind Assent to what they affirm. And whoever does but consider with
what Zeal and Fury the Clergy are for persecuting Men for a dissent in
Speculative Points, or a Matter of Form, above what they are in Matters of Vice
and Immorality, nay, that they are for caressing even very wicked Persons, if
they appear but zealous for their Interest, will quickly see it is not a Sense
of Religion that hurries them on, and consequently how little Reason People
have to be blindly guided by them in those Points.

Besides, the Magistrate may make the Clergy be for Liberty of Conscience, by
not suffering them to enjoy any Preferment, except they will declare their
Abhorrence of Force in Matters merely Religious, and then they will be as much
for Liberty as now they are against it; except we can suppose that they will be
true to their Interest, only when that is against the Truth.

5. On the contrary; Let us suppose the most favorable that can happen to a
persecuting Magistrate, that he destroys all Sects but his own. All that he
would get by it, would be to make himself a Property to his Priests; to whom
then it would be too late to deny any thing, and who will not fail to advance
such Antichristian Doctrines as shall exalt them above all that is called God;
and make all the Bigoted and Superstitious (which would then be the greatest
part) of their Side: So that all the Magistrate would get by persecuting his
Subjects, would be to enslave himself. And what other, I pray, was the Effect
of the Christian Kings and Emperors persecuting their Subjects, but to make
themselves Vassals to the Pope the Head, and to the rest of the Clergy? And had
it not been for the Toleration (without which a Reformation was impossible)
that was allowed the first Protestants, they had been daily more and more
enslaved; so that it is owing to those Heretics the Popish Magistrates are for
extirpating, that the Chains are filed off from their Hands and Necks, and that
they no longer lie prostrate at the Feet of an insolent Priest, or are obliged
to hold his Bridle or Stirrup, etc. And tho since the Reformation, much of the
extravagant Pretenses of the Popish Clergy are abated; yet it is observable,
that in those Places where Persecution is highest, the Magistrates are most
subject to the Power of the Priests. And if the Magistrates themselves are thus
dealt with, what Usage must the People have, who are indeed made most miserable
and wretched Slaves, as tho Nature had intended them to be (what the Clergy
there suppose they are) Asini ad portenda onera Clericorum?

6. It may be said, This will only happen in Popish Countries. But if
Persecution was the Cause of these most pernicious Effects in the more early
Times of Christianity, when Men were supposed to be better; What Reason is
there to imagine, that in these latter and worser Times, it will not have as
bad if not worse Effects? And if the Protestant Clergy can persuade the
Magistrate to use Force to hinder People from examining, or even knowing any
Doctrine but what they have a mind to impose on them, a thing so contrary to
the Light of Nature, the Gospel, and their own Principles; what is there that
by their joint Endeavors they could not, or would not introduce when it served
to promote their Interest? Nay, have not the Protestant Clergy been every jot
as much, if not more zealous and industrious than the Popish, to enslave the
People, and promote Arbitrary Power, and have preached up absolute Passive
Obedience even as much as Faith in Christ, as knowing that the only way to
secure Tyranny in the Church, was first to get it established in the State;
because Tyranny, by bringing the generality to Poverty and Slavery, must
depress their Minds, and debase their Thoughts, and make them ready blindly to
submit to the Determinations of the Clergy? And tho some would be in better
Circumstances, yet what they enjoy would be so precarious, that they could not
be secure without they comply with the Religion of the Prince; who if he be a
great Bigot, (as the Clergy would do their utmost to make him so) would be sure
to use all the Violence Arbitrary Power could give him to force Men to profess
the Court Religion: Or if he should turn to the other Extreme, and instead of
being Superstitious, should have little or no regard for Religion; yet if he
should sometime or other be troubled in Conscience, (as even the most vicious
often are) the Clergy would be sure to persuade him, that the only way to
expiate his former Guilt, would be to promote the true Religion, by depriving
those that are not of it of their Possessions, and investing the Church (that
is, themselves) with it. And to speak the Truth, it is to such that the Clergy
have been most obliged, either for destroying their Opposers, or else for
endowing them with vast Riches. In a word; It Is not merely Speculative Matters,
or Forms, or Ceremonies, wherein the Papists differ from the Protestants; but
those things (which I have now mentioned, and wherein they agree) that make
Popery and Slavery inseparable: Nay in Church Matters, do not the Protestant
Clergy (even those that own the Magistrate, under Christ, to be, no Causes or
Persons excepted, Supreme Head or Governor of the Church) claim, as well as
the Papists, a Supreme Power, and assert themselves Independent and Absolute
Governors of the Church? And consequently, since there cannot be two Supreams
in the same Matters, they can extend that Power, as occasion serves, even
further than the Pope does, since they and not their Subject the Magistrate,
will be Judge of the Extent of their own Power. And have not the Priests of the
different Parties, as occasion served, enlarged their Pretenses? witness the
Kirk, which as it had an Opportunity, exercised as great a Power, and with as
high a Hand as the Pope himself. And had Laud and that Party conquered, there is
no doubt but the People had been as much enslaved to them, as they are in other
Countries to the Pope. In short, could any one Party have extirpated by
Persecution the others, (it being the Division amongst the Clergy, which of
them should lord it over God's Heritage, that has hindered each others Attempts)
we had long before now been under as great a Tyranny as the Papists; especially
had they those Revenues, which in a manner enabled the Popish Priests to effect
what they had a mind to, and which our Clergy think so much their due, that
they look on it no less than Sacrilege that they are hindered from enjoying
them. But,

7. This is not all the Mischief that attends forcing the People to a
Uniformity in all those Points the Priests get to be established as necessary
to Church Communion; because where People are wise, knowing, and have any Value
for Religion, they will be sure to employ their Thoughts about it; which if
they do, it is morally impossible that they should be of a Mind in all those
Points: Therefore such a Uniformity is only practicable in a Nation overrun
with sottish Ignorance and gross Stupidity. But what can be more prejudicial to
a Nation, than want of Knowledge, which is necessary to preserve a State, and
increase its Strength and Riches, by promoting all useful Arts and Trades,
which we see by Experience will not thrive but where there is Liberty of
Conscience?

Besides, where Ignorance and Superstition, the necessary Consequence of
Persecution, prevails, it is almost unavoidable but that Men, either of
themselves will run into, or else by designing Persons be persuaded into
several Opinions prejudicial to the State, as amongst the Papists so many
Holy Days are; or, which is much more prejudicial, such prodigious Numbers
going into Orders, (by which the Clergy are enabled to carry on the Common
Interest, and therefore will every where design it) which oppresses the
Commonwealth with so many useless Persons, who no-wise contribute to the
Support or the Increase of the Riches of a Country; who also, considering how
they must be maintained, will be more burdensome than a standing Army of double
the Number. These, or other as prejudicial Superstitions, are scarce possible
to be avoided where Persecution reigns.

8. But I need mention no other Effects of Persecution than the Disorders,
Tumults, Confusions, Wars, Desolations, which are the immediate and necessary
Consequences of it, and which have always happened in persecuting Countries;
which to relate, would be to write a History of those Countries, and which
alone is sufficient to convince any one how fatal it is to Human Societies.

It was Persecution that so weakened and ruined the Roman Empire, that it
became an easy Prey to the Barbarians: And it had done the same to the Germans,
had not the Treaty of Munster put some stop to it; since which time the Papists
and Protestants (taught by woeful Experience) are content to allow one another,
in several places, not only their distinct Congregations, but to meet in the
very same Churches; and (which is more to be wondered at) the Preferments of
those Churches are enjoyed by them alternately with the greatest Quiet and
Peace imaginable. But if we have a mind to have a nearer prospect of the
Advantage of Liberty of Conscience, we need not look farther than the Province
of Holland; which tho a very small Tract of Land, laboring under a great many
natural Disadvantages, and in which, before a Toleration was indulged, were
only a few small scattered Villages and Huts of Fishermen, is now crowded with
vast Numbers of People, filled with immense Riches, and adorned with many
stately and magnificent Cities; and all this in a manner owing to its receiving
those Saints and Confessors, (for so I must call them, whatever their Opinions
are) who for their Love to God, and Zeal for his Service, were forced to leave
their Country, and fled there for Protection. And it is to this (the greatest
and noblest Charity) that Amsterdam (in a peculiar manner the Care of Heaven)
ows its Greatness. Here especially it is that the Prophecy of Esaias seems to be
fulfilled, that the Wolf shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the
Kid, etc. each Sect striving to outvie one another in promoting the Interest of
the City, and in being charitable to those that want it; no Differences of
Opinions causing the least distrubance to the Public, or hindering the
Friendship of private Persons; tho it was otherwise, not only in this City, but
in all Places of the United Provinces, when they had the unhappiness to be
influenced by the Clergy, and the weakness to call a Synod on pretense of
composing the Arminian or Quinquarticularian Controversies: Which, as it
usually happens, only increased them; and which is worse, created not only
Animosities and Rancour in the Minds of Men, but Discontents, Disorders,
Tumults, to almost the Ruin of the Commonwealth; whilst in England, the
Government neither condemning or censuring either Party, the Contention had no
mischievous Effect, but of it self died away. Had the Nation acted as wisely
with respect to those foolish Controversies about Ceremonies and other Trifles,
how much Blood and Treasure had it saved, and how happy had it been, tho now it
has (grown wiser by Experience) clearly perceived that nothing but Liberty in
those Points could quiet and compose the Minds of the People, or preserve the
Nation so much exhausted by Persecution.

9. We need not look abroad for Arguments for a Toleration, since we never made
a step toward it, but what has been of happy Consequence to the Nation;
witness the mighty Advantages we gained by the Liberty allowed the Walloons,
and other Dissenters from the Church established by Law. What was it that made
Norwich, (which in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign was so desolate,
that it was often debated in Council, whether it should be demolished as being
a Receptacle of vagrant and idle Persons, and therefore dangerous to the
Government) become so very considerable for its Riches and Trade, but the
granting Liberty to the Flemins (whom D'Alva's Cruelty had forced to fly their
Country) to settle there, and set up their Manufacture of Stuffs, as they did
at Colchester their Bays, to the infinite Advantage of the Nation? And there is
no Reason why we may not expect greater Advantages by those Manufactures and
Trades the French Refugees (if well encouraged) may set up with us. On the
contrary, Persecution has been as prejudicial to the Nation, by driving not
only the Traders and Trades themselves beyond Seas, (as it has happened with
respect to those Woollen Manufactures wrought in Sussex and Essex, which those
that by Persecution were forced to leave their Country, have set up in Holland
and other Places, to the almost ruin of our Trade of those Woollen Manufactures
in the Places within the Sound) but by hindering great Numbers (of which many
Instances can be given) who had they Liberty to exercise their Religion, would
have settled here to as great Advantage to the Nation as any it has permitted
to inhabit here. But it would be endless to mention the great Mischiefs
Persecution has caused, even in the Memory of Man, by either driving great
Numbers of our most useful People beyond Seas, or by starving them, or causing
them to perish in noisome Jails, or by imprisoning or beggaring them, and
thereby depriving them of the Opportunity and Means to carry on their Trades.
To give no other Instance but in Bristol, where, by reason of the Persecution
in Chapter 2d's Time, the Customs of that Place were diminished by almost three
parts in four; and it is no wonder, for Men will not then expose themselves by
Trading, but hide their Heads to avoid Persecution. And it is owing to
Toleration, that our Trade is in so good Circumstances as it is. But nothing
was so fatal to England as that unnatural War in King Charles the 1st's Reign,
chiefly caused by Imposition and Persecution, fatal at last to the Persecutors
themselves. And the King after he had seen the great Encourager and Promoter of
them brought to condign Punishment, was himself publicly executed before that
Palace from whence he issued out his persecuting Orders; yet his Son Charles
the Second, to the unspeakable Prejudice of the Nation, took the same Method of
persecuting his Protestant Subjects, even those that were the chief Instruments
of his Restoration; which however ungrateful as well as unjust it was in him,
yet in respect of several of them, it was but a just Judgment, who, when it was
in their own Power, were themselves Persecutors. And it is more than probable,
that that King (who had no other design in causing the Protestants to persecute
one another, but that they might more easily become a Prey to the Papists) was
taken off by those very People whose Interest by it he designed to promote. And
as to the late King (the chief promoter of Persecution in his Brother's Time)
the Nation was very sensible, for all his prevaricating, what a dreadful
Persecution he intended them, and therefore it is not strange they would not
trust him.

10. It Is no wonder that God brings down signal Judgments on the Heads of
Persecutors, since they, like the Giants of old, make War against Heaven it
self, and endeavor to deprive God of his peculiar Empire over Conscience,
which obliges him (if I may so say) to assert his Right by making Examples of
such bold and impious Men. And Examples of this Nature are so frequent, that
Men begin to wonder at the long uninterrupted Prosperity of the grand
Persecutor, the French King. But let it be considered, that Persecution is much
more odious in Protestants in general, as being directly contrary to their
Principles, but with all the aggravating Circumstances in these Nations, if
upon their being freed from the danger of Popery, they should themselves
practice the worst part of it, in persecuting those they judge to be Heretics,
which is the very same thing they so loudly exclaim against in the French King.
And let it be remembered, the Supreme Power is every where the same, and that
they have as much right in France to judge who are Heretics as any where else.
Therefore may it not be feared, that instead of the French King being made an
Example of God's Anger, he may be made an Instrument to punish others?

11. The great Advantage the Nation has gained by the Liberty that has been
allowed, might, one would think, destroy all the remains of a persecuting
Spirit, since it is that which has preserved Church and State; else it had been
impossible that the Nation could have supported it self under such Calamities
as a War and a general Persecution. And it is the securing to the People their
Religious as well as their Civil Rights, that has made them with so much
Patience and Contentedness undergo all hardships, and in the midst of them be
so very zealous for the Government. And for my part, I doubt not but it is owing
to Providence, that so signally declares it self for Liberty of Conscience,
that in the Course of this War we have had so many signal Mercies and
miraculous Favors: and certainly we ought not to provoke God to repent of his
Mercies, by persecuting any Sect whatever.

12. By a partial Toleration we act inconsistent with our selves, for either
the Magistrate ought to punish, or ought not to punish those that err in
Matters merely Religious. If the first, why are there so many of the Erroneous
exempted even from the least Punishment? If the last, why are not all exempted?
Where shall we find a Rule to punish some and not others, nay with the same
Punishment, if the End of it be, as it is pretended, to make Men impartially
consider?

I do not mention this so much upon the account of a small Sect that is still
liable to the lash of the Law, but for the sake of all Sects in general;
because whilst that Doctrine of using Force upon the Account of Matters merely
Religious, is not wholly abhorred, no Sect can be safe. For,

13. If any one Sect is to be punished upon a Civil or Religious Account, it
will involve all: for as to the first, the Arguments from Discord and
Disturbances will equally affect all that dissent in Matters simply Religious.
And as to the last, there is no Reason to excuse Schisms, and punish Heresies;
since, as it is owned by all, a Schismatic cannot be a Member of the Church of
Christ, which is but one, and consequently he is out of the ordinary way of
Salvation; and a Heretic, nay an Infidel can be but so; and the Ancient
Church, as Mr. Dodwell has sufficiently proved, made no difference between a
Heretic, and a Schismatic that pretended to justify his Schism upon
Principles.

14. Besides, the greater Moment any Point is of, the greater Reason there is
for Liberty of Conscience, because Men ought not by Punishment to be hindered
from examining into it, which if they do sincerely, and should be mistaken (as
we are all fallible, very fallible Men) that Mistake will never be imputed to
them. And if all that are mistaken in these nice abstruse Points of Belief
should be punished, it would involve the greatest part of the now Orthodox
Clergy, who are so much divided amongst themselves in these Points, that
there is no one Party equal to all the rest, and yet there can be but one Party
in the right. And it ought to be observed, that the Arguments any one Party of
the Dissenters formerly urged for their own Liberty, tho otherwise
unanswerable, were easily evaded by saying, they would equally hold for
allowing Liberty to Heretics as well as them; so that it is evident, except
Persecution is wholly abhorred, any little Accident or Turn may hazard the
Liberty of any Sect whatever.

CHAP. VIII.
Some few Reasons for the Dissenters not taking the Sacramental Test but in
their own Churches, and for a General Naturalization.

1. BEFORE I conclude, I must first beg leave to add a word in behalf of all
the Dissenters in general, that hold no Opinions destructive to the Government,
disown all Foreign Power, acknowledge the King to be Rightful and Lawful, and
contribute equally to the support of the Government, that they may be capable
to enjoy all Places of Trust and Profit: for how is it consistent with that
Justice and Impartiality the Government ought to have for all its Subjects, to
deprive any of them of the Privileges of their Country to which they are born,
(and for the discharge of which they have no ways incapacitated themselves) for
no other Reason, but because their Consciences will not permit them to receive
the Sacrament after the manner of the Established Church, which is a Matter
wholly foreign to Civil Power, and a Dispute about a thing in it self
indifferent? And since the Parliament has made them Legal Churches in other
respects, why should not the receiving the Sacrament in their own Meetings
qualify them as well as at any others? The denying it them can only hinder the
truly Conscientious (of which there never was a Nation that had more need) from
supplying Places of Trust. And as this (with humble Submission) is a very great
Hardship on them, so it is as great a Prejudice to the Public, not only as it
tends to discourage the Loyalty and Affection of those that have such marks of
Suspicion and Disgrace fixed on them, but as it depriveth the Government (which
at this Time especially has need of the Hearts and Hands of all its Subjects)
of the Service of no small number of the most useful, who in spite of all the
Disadvantages they lie under, are most hearty and zealous for the Government.
Had they sworn to bear true Allegiance to the King, and yet looked on him as a
Usurper, or (which is all one) a King de facto, and had made use of such
foolish Equivocations, Distinctions, Reservations, (as would even shame a
Jesuit) to evade the Force of their Oaths, and underhand act against the
Government, there might be some preten^^ to exclude them from these Advantages;
but otherwise there can be no Reason for it, and those that will be disobliged
by the granting it, are as much so already, as they well can be by the Liberty
that is given them.

In short, no Government can be well served that makes any thing a Condition of
obtaining an Advantage but what evidently contributes to its Establishment, or
any thing a means of Exclusion but what tends to its Ruin: and as Capacity and
Fidelity should be the only just Titles to advance Men, so Incapacity and
Infidelity to debar or exclude them. But when the being of this or that Sect is
a step to Preferment, they will be sure to prefer the Interest of that Sect
before the Public; and Men will be more considered for their Zeal to a Party,
than for their Ability to serve their Country. And when they shall be
commended or condemned, favored or opposed, not according to their Merits, but
as they are of this or that Sect or Party, it must fill all Places, even the
chief Council of a Nation, with Confusion and Faction, and make them influenced
by indirect and sinister Ends, instead of the Public Good.

But if all Sects were equally and impartially dealt with, there would be no
other than a noble Emulation amongst them who should do most good to the
Public, and be most serviceable to their King and Country, and with respect
to one another, a most laudable Contention to outvie each other in all Acts of
Charity and Kindness, and all other good Offices, and a pious Strife who should
be most exemplary in their Lives and Conversations, as the best way to support
themselves, and gain Credit and Esteem to their Party; which must needs bring
an unexpressible Happiness to the Nation, and restore again the Golden Age, by
reviving amongst us the true Spirit of Christianity.

By what has been said, I think I may easily conclude, that a universal,
impartial, inviolable Liberty of Conscience, (except where the Principles of
any sort of Professors tend evidently to the Prejudice of the Community, and
the Ruin of the Government) is the true Interest and great Duty, both of
Governors and Governed. And,

If to this Liberty a General Naturalization was added, it could not fail of
causing an infinite deal of Good to the Nation, and quickly repair the Loss we
have sustained, either by the War, or by Persecutions: For the Excellency of
our Constitution and Laws (not to be equalled in any other Country) and the
Happiness of the Climate abounding with so many natural Advantages, especially
for Trading, will tempt, not only great Numbers of useful Handicrafts-men, but
also of Merchants and trading People to settle here, and bring their Effects
with them; by which Means we should have no reason to doubt of our being
Masters of those Trades we want, and improving those we have already, by making
the Manufactures either cheaper or better. And then, and not till then, we
shall have a sufficient number of Hands to carry on the Fishing Trade, and not
want them any where else; by all which means we should so increase our Seamen
and Shipping, that we could not fail of being Masters at Sea, tho all Europe
should combine against us. And since the Success of a War does now in a manner
wholly depend upon the Riches of a Nation; and they that have most Money, are
almost certain to have the better of it; the Riches that must flow into the
Nation by this Means, would enable them (tho they stood alone) to be a Match
for their most potent Enemy, when perhaps otherwise we may sometime or other be
in danger of being oppressed by him. And when a troublesome Neighbor increases
in Riches and Strength, we are very much wanting to our selves, if we do not to
our utmost endeavor to do the same. All that the Government would suffer by a
Naturalization, would be to have not only the Number of its Subjects (in which
consists the Riches and Strength of a Nation) increased, and them also under as
strict an Obligation of Loyalty and Duty as any of the Native Subjects, but its
Revenues also augmented, by not only more of the Exciseable Commodities being
consumed, but by the vast Increase of Trade, which must proportionably increase
the Customs. All the Disadvantage the Natives would receive by such an Act,
would be, that by a quick Vent and Consumption of the Products of the Country,
the Value of all home Commodities would be raised, Land and Houses yield
greater Rents, and Money by its Increase and quick Circulation be plenty; and
those that have a mind to dispose of their Estates, would (the Number of the
Chapmen being so much increased) sell to a much greater Advantage; and all the
Purchase-Money the Foreigners give, would be an additional Treasure to the
Nation.

But it requires a just Treatise to show, (what I have not as much as time to
hint at here) all the Advantages we should receive by a Naturalization Act:
Therefore I shall only answer an Objection of some, who tho they cannot but own
that it would be advantageous to the Nation, yet are against it, upon an
Apprehension it may be prejudicial to Religion. But I think I have already
proved, that no Part of Religion can be opposite to, or inconsistent with the
Good of Societies; but on the contary, the promoting the Public Good is the
chiefest Part of it. And if to supply the Wants of the Poor and Needy be the
greatest Duty, viz. of Charity, and to visit the Fatherless and Widows, in
order to relieve their Necessities, be pure and undefiled Religion, it must be
so in the highest manner, to prevent Peoples falling into Want and Poverty: And
whatever contributes to this, (especially when it tends to the Support, not
only of a few, but of a whole Nation) must be the Duty of every one to promote
that is a lover of his God, his King, and his Country. And whatsoever is
inconsistent with doing this, is so far from being a Matter of Religion, that
it must be either sinful in it self, or by the Circumstances that attend it
become so, and therefore by no means is to be opposed to the Good of a Nation.
And indeed nothing can be more strange, than to suppose God has commanded any
thing inconsistent with the Public Good: Yet without this Supposition, not
only Persecution, Humane Sacrifices, and absolute Passive Obedience, (the most
pernicious Doctrines that can be) but no other destructive Ones could have
prevailed. And it is this monstrous Absurdity that Jacobites are guilty of, in
thinking they are obliged to sacrifice the Peace and Happiness of a Nation to
the Interest of a particular Person.

But I shall conclude, only adding, That I hope what I have said will not
displease the Magistrate, since I have no other Intent, than to hinder him from
committing one of the greatest Sins Humane Nature is capable of, and which
cannot but turn to his Prejudice here, as well as hereafter.

And as to the Clergy, This cannot displease those that have what the Bishop of
Sarum (in his Preface to Lactantius) calls Lay Pity, since I have endeavored
to show how much they are in the right in abhorring Persecution, and how
causlesly they are for that Reason hated (as generally they are) by their
Brethren: And for those that are for Persecution, the greatest Kindness I could
do them, was to represent, as fully as I could, in so short a Discourse, the
fatal Tendency and Consequence of that Doctrine, that they may repent of it;
which if I any ways contribute to, I think my Pains happily bestowed; if not, I
yet hope a Reward from him who accepts the hearty sincere endeavor of those
that do their best to promote Peace and Charity: which if any hinder or
obstruct, it is the Duty of all good Christians to pray that God would abate
their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound their Devices; that there may
be Glory to God on High, Peace on Earth, and good Will toward Men.

A POSTSCRIPT concerning the Letter to a Convocation-Man.
I Must beg the Reader's pardon for further trespassing on his Patience, in
making some Remarks on a Pamphlet entitled, A Letter to a Convocation-Man; I
mean, as to that part of it which (under the Pretense of giving Reasons for the
Sitting of a Convocation) rails at a Toleration in Matters simply Religious,
and endeavors to deprive Men of the Right of Judging for themselves about
Religious Doctrines and Opinions.

1. The Author of this Letter ( P. 3.) affirms, That the Indifference of all
Religion is endeavored to be established by the Pleas for the Justice and
Necessity of a Universal unlimited Toleration. Which Assertion, were it true,
would make the King and Parliament indifferent whether they were Quakers, since
they have given them a Toleration: But it is so far from being true, that there
cannot well be a greater Demonstration of Men's not thinking all Religions
indifferent, than a desire to be tolerated in the Profession of that they judge
the best. Did they suppose all Religions equal, it would be indifferent to them
whether there was a Toleration, since they would be sure to avoid all
Persecution, by being of the Magistrate's Religion.

2. The Author ( P. 19.) says, Tho the Clergy have no Power of changing,
adding, or diminishing the Law of God, yet the applying this Law to particular
Cases, explaining the Doubts that may arise concerning it, deducing
Consequences from it in things not explicitly determined already by that Law,
and the enforcing Submission and Obedience to their Determinations, are the
proper Objects of their Power and Jurisdiction, who are to act by ordinary and
natural Means, such as Assembling, Debating, and by majority of Voices
Deciding. But here I must demand, Who shall judge whether what the Clergy thus
determine, be either adding, changing, or diminishing the Law of God? If the
Priests, to be sure they will not say their Determinations are so: But if I
must judge, then I ought to reject their Determinations, if I believe them not
consonant to Scripture; but if I think them agreeable to it, then I must
believe them (not for the sake of their Determinations, but) because I judge
them to be so; and consequently I must be guided by my own Reason in all things
of Religion.

If by the Doubts that may arise, be meant any thing that admits of dispute,
there is scarce any thing so clear but what may, or does; and if in all such
Cases I am obliged to submit to the Determinations of the Clergy, I may be
forced to believe what I judge is either adding, changing, or diminishing the
Law of God, as it is manifest all Sects, by believing it to be of their own
Side, do judge their Adversaries do add, etc. But if it be meant, that the
Clergy have a Right to make me believe a thing whilst I doubt of the Truth of
it, that is impossible; and so it is to change my Mind, before I see Reason for
it. It may be said, tho it is not in my Power to believe as they will have me,
yet I may do as they command, even whilst I doubt of the Lawfulness of the
Action: But then to obey them, would be the ready way to damn my self; for he
that acts when he doubts, is damned.

No Law, whether of God or Man, can scarce be of any use, without applying it
to particular Cases, and deducing Consequences from it, and explaining Doubts
that arise: But if the Laity must be determined by the Priests in all such
Cases, they must become Brutes, and renounce their Reason, where they ought to
make the most use of it.

Our Author, I confess, says not that a Man should rest in the Determinations
of the Clergy in deducing Consequences in things explicitly determined by the
Law of God: But what is meant by things explicitly determined, I do not well
understand; for tho Words are explicit, yet the Things implied in those Words,
are certainly implicit: And if the Clergy can oblige Men to follow (right or
wrong) their Determinations in deducing Consequences in things implicitly
determined by Scripture, they may oblige Men to add, change or diminish the Law
of God in most Points.

3. The Popish Priests never carried their Pretenses higher than this Author
does; they have not the Impudence to assert, they can oblige People to believe
contrary to the Law of God; but that for the sake of the Church's Peace, they
have a Right to determine those Controversies that may arise among the
Faithful; and when they have done so, none ought to begin to examine those
Points again. In a word, there is no Medium between the Protestant Doctrine of
every one having a Right to judge for himself, and the Popish one of being
obliged to believe as the Church does. But this Author is much more absurd than
the Papists, in making Truth and Falsehood to be decided, not by an Infallible
Pope or Council, whose Decrees are to bind the Catholic Church, but by the
casting Voices of a Fallible Convocation in every Nation; which may in Spain
oblige the People to believe Transubstantiation, in Sweden Consubstantiation,
in England the Real Corporeal Presence; so that a Man may be bound to change
his Sentiments with his Habitation, and the Difference of a Degree or two may
oblige him to opposite Opinions. And yet, as absurd as this is, since the
Clergy are so infinitely divided amongst themselves, the Laity must either do
so, or else judge for themselves, if it were but to know which of the Clergy
were in the Right. But,

4. The Pamphleteer supposes this impossible, and (page 18. where he speaks
out) he roundly tells the Commons of England, That it is a little too much to
suppose Country Gentlemen, Merchants, or Lawyers, to be nicely skilled in the
Languages of the Bible, Masters of all the Learning of the Fathers, or of the
History of the Primitive Church, which they must in some measure be, who sit
Judges of Religious Doctrines and Opinions, which ought to be left to their
proper Tribunal, a Convocation.

Had People at the Reformation been of this Mind, we might still have groaned
under the Popish Yoke; for the Majority of the Clergy, not only in England, but
every where else, were as averse to this Reformation (which may justly be
called a Lay one) as the Jewish Priests were to that of Christ and his Apostles.

If to be Masters of all the Learning of the Fathers, be necessary to the
judging of Religious Doctrines, it is as necessary the Laity should understand
them, because the Clergy are strangely divided amongst themselves about them,
each Sect pretending they are on their Side; which shows that either the Clergy
are not to be trusted with giving us the Sense of those Fathers, because they
make them say any thing according as it serves their present Interest; or that
the Fathers talk forward and backward, contradict themselves as well as one
another; which if so, shows great disingenuity in the Clergy not to own it: and
if we may trust Mr. Chillingworth (a Man unsuspected of the least Priestcraft)
he tells us, Chap. 6. That he sees plainly, and that with his own Eyes, that
there are Councils against Councils, some Fathers against others, the same
Fathers against themselves, a Consent of Fathers of one Age against a Consent
of Fathers of another Age, the Church of one Age against the Church of another
Age.

5. The Apostles were so far from requiring the Christians to give up their
Judgments to any Number of fallible Men, that they command them all to make use
of their Reason in judging of Religion, commend those (as the Bereans) that did
so, and blame those that did not; Why have you not judged these things of your
selves? And if Men were then obliged to try the Spirits, because there were
many false Prophets gone out into the World, there is certainly much more
reason to do so now. But having spoken fully to this Point in Chapter 2. Par. 1. I
shall only add, that it is a Rule authorized by common Sense, not to consent to
any thing till we are capable of judging of its Truth; nor can we, without
renouncing our Reason, suppose God will have us believe any thing without
seeing good Reason for it: And nothing can reflect more on the Wisdom and
Goodness of God, than to suppose that he, who would have all Men come to the
Knowledge of his Will, should yet make it so obscure, that not one in a thousand
is capable of knowing it, because it depends upon Skill in Fathers, Critics,
Church History, etc. A Man may therefore justly conclude, if there be any such
Doctrines pretended, (as there are in most Systems) the impossibility of the
Peoples judging of them, alone demonstrates they come not from God; who as he
was able, so his Goodness made him willing to express Truth so clearly, that
all who are not wilfully blind may understand it in order to practice; and it
would seem strange that God should choose Fishermen, and such simple Persons, to
preach a Religion intelligible only to the Learned and Philosophers. There Is no
need of running to Fathers, Critics, etc. For he that will do the Will of God,
shall know (as our Savior, John 7. says) of the Doctrine whether it be of
God; that is, if it be such as tends to make me love, reverence and honor God,
or is beneficial to Man; and a Doctrine cannot show it self to be of God any
otherwise than as it has this Mark and Character stamped upon it. Hence it is
that God, Heb. 8. speaking of the Gospeltime and Covenant, says, I will put my
Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts: And they shall not teach
every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for
all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. And to interpret this Law
(which is written in our Hearts, and which we cannot from the greatest to the
least fail to discover, if we attend to our own Minds) by Fathers, Councils,
etc. is to interpret a Rule that is clear and evident in it self, by what is
most obscure and mysterious. If the Gospel be hid from any, it is not the Poor,
the Babes, the Simple, but the Pretenders to vain Philosophy, and Science
falsely so called, the Wranglers and Disputers of this World, who would fain be
thought to be the Wise and Prudent; and as it was their Prejudices and
Prepossessions made them esteem the Gospel the foolishness of Preaching, so it
afterward made some of them corrupt the foolishness of Preaching with their
wise unintelligible Philosophy; and their Successors, by following the
Tradition of Men, made void the Commandments of God. The first Reformers
despised any Authority but that of Reason and Scripture; and had those that
succeeded them followed their Example, they had no doubt destroyed Popery,
whose chief Support consists in Human Traditions, as Fathers, Councils, etc.

6. The Subject of this Book shows how little is to be relied on the Authority
of those Men, on which they will have every thing to rely: for tho the Light of
Nature, by placing Man in such a helpless Condition, that he cannot subsist
without the Assistance of others, does oblige all Men (except he that is
Orthodox to himself is Al sufficient for himself) to be most kind, loving and
friendly one to another; and agreeable to this, the Scripture most passionately
recommends the Love of our Neighbor, but most frequently and zealously when we
differ from him; and tho the observance of this Command has at all times been
absolutely necessary, the Christians from the beginning being divided in their
Sentiments; yet for all this, there never was a Convocation of Priests, but
what notoriously broke this Rule, by not only most uncharitably anathematizing
and damning those that could not comply with their Sentiments, but by obliging
Men to abstain from all Commerce and Converse with them, and (as soon as the
Christians had the Power of the Sword) to treat them most inhumanely and
barbarously: And by degrees the Clergy so intoxicated the People, that they
were persuaded that this Branch of the Fundamental Law of Nature and the
Gospel, (so absolutely necessary in this State of Ignorance and Darkness) was
one of the greatest Crimes imaginable. The Author of the Letters concerning
Toleration, is (if not absolutely the first) the first that amongst us has
ventured to assert the Justice and Necessity of a Toleration in its due and
full Extent. An Author that on more Accounts than one, is to be esteemed a
Patron of the Liberties of Humane Nature, and a Guardian of the Happiness and
Safety of Civil Societies, and who has by his Writings been most serviceable to
Mankind, in enlightening their Minds, and in improving their Understandings, for
which he must never expect forgiveness by Men of the Pamphleteer's Principles.

7. But to return: Tho our Author supposes it no small Crime (P. 15.) for the
Parliament to judge of Matters of Religion; yet he grievously complains, that
notwithstanding the urgency of the Occasion, no Relief has been effected that
way; and tho the Commons have a standing Committee for Religion, nothing (as I
remember) has since the Revolution been done by them in behalf of it.

But what can Men in a Legislative Capacity do more for Religion, than (besides
punishing Vice and Immorality) to protect every one in worshipping God as they
judge most agreeable to his Will, and give them the best Opportunity of
informing themselves of his Mind? And have they not done this, by granting a
Toleration, and by refusing a Bill for restraining the Liberty of the Press?

8. In short; when the Clergy had corrupted the Christian, as much as the
Heathen Priests had Natural Religion, it pleased God, out of his great
Goodness, that the Noble Art of Printing should be discovered, whereby Men
could with ease communicate their Thoughts to the World; and some free-spirited
Men (who durst judge with their own Understandings) doing this, and Copies of
their Works being dispersed, it caused many to perceive how miserably they had
been imposed on by their Spiritual Guides, which (as it may well be imagined)
strangely alarmed the Kingdom of Darkness, of which I shall give but one
Instance.

Cardinal Woolsey (Lord Herb. Hist. of H. 8.) in a Letter to the Pope, tells
him, That his Holiness could not be ignorant what diverse Effects the new
Invention of Printing had produced; that it had brought in and restored Books
and Learning, and had been the occasion of those Sects and Schisms that daily
appear in the World, and chiefly in Germany, where Men begin to question the
Faith and Tenets of the Church; that if this were suffered, the common People,
besides other Dangers, might come to believe there was not so much need of the
Clergy. The Priests, to secure themselves from any harm from this new
Invention, did their utmost to hinder any thing from being printed but what was
on their own side, and by that means to turn this dreadful Engine on their
Enemies, which as far as it was quickly and steddily put in Execution, had its
desired Effect in preserving of Popery; but in those Places where (by the
Connivance of the Government, or otherwise) this Method was not strictly
observed, the People threw off the Popish Yoke, and the generality of the
Clergy were forced to comply; yet loath to forgo their beloved Empire over the
Consciences of Men, they quickly endeavored to make the People pay the same
Obedience to their Determinations as they formerly did to the Romish Clergy;
and as they made use of the same Arguments and the very same Method to enslave
them, so they were no less zealous to hinder the Liberty of the Press (which
puts me in mind of what Le Clear observes at the latter end of the Life of
Nazianzen, that tho Theology is subject to Revolutions, as well as Empire, and
has undergone considerable Changes, yet that the Humor of the Divines is not
much altered;) but the Powers the Clergy claimed to themselves being
inconsistent with the Principles of the Reformation, and in England with the
Oath of Supremacy, and that Power the Laws have invested the King with, there
is nothing so contradictory as their pretended Power, and that which they are
forced to own does belong to the Magistrate: So that our high Churchmen are
not consistent with themselves, no not in one Point, but (what is worse) assert
such Principles as make the Reformation it self criminal; and which must
unavoidably oblige a Man that acts agreeable to those Principles, to return to
the Popish Yoke, as shall be demonstrated in my next Discourse. It was these
Principles that made the most judicious Person the Church could ever brag of,
the famous Chillingworth, return to the Church of Rome, and continue there a
long time: But what his Principles were upon leaving it, and how inconsistent
with that of High Church, may be learned by what I have quoted of him. And I
could give an Instance of one who in the late Reign going into the World from
the University, (where he had a long time imbibed these Notions of the Power of
the Clergy) and meeting with the Romish Priests, who then were very busy, they
quickly showed him the Inconsistency of the Reformation and the Protestant
Religion with these Powers; which had that Influence over him, as to cause him
(who did not then suspect the falseness of those Notions owned by both
Churches) to join with them, who are consistent with themselves in the Powers
they claim, until so many particular Absurdities in their Practice made him
happily examine these Notions; which had like to have cost him dear, for
refusing to join with them after Candlemass 87, and receiving the Sacrament the
next Opportunity, the Easter after, in his College Chapel, it exposed him to
the Malice and Revenge of the Popish Priests, (then in the height of their
Prosperity) who of all Men will the least spare a relapsed Heretic. But why do
I instance in Particulars, since it is these extravagant Notions of the Clergy's
Power the support the Romish Cause, and make thousands embrace that Religion;
for Men with scorn and contempt reject contradictory and inconsistent Opinions.
But of these things more fully in my next Discourse, where I doubt not to
demonstrate, as far as a thing of such a Nature is capable, that the Clergy are
so far from having these Powers by the Law of God, that there is no Power or
Jurisdiction whatever belongs to them by that Law. But to return;

9. I Will demand of this Author, Should a Convocation determine contrary to his
Judgment, (which may easily enough be supposed, since he says, P. 7. That
there is no Order, Degree, or Place amongst us, wholly free from the Infection
of undermining or overthrowing the Catholic Faith) whether he could, or (were
it in his Power) would renounce his Faith for the sake of the casting Voice or
Voices in a Convocation? If he dares not say he will prostitute his Belief at
so vile a Rate, Why should he suppose others either should or would do so? Tho
I believe he may assure himself that there is none amongst those he calls
infected, so little Christians and Protestants, but what think they ought to be
able to give a better Account and Reason of their Faith than the Determination
of a Convocation now-a-day, especially when they know that not only Particular
but General Councils, have constantly made their Market of their Faith, and
always sold it to the fairest Chapmen; and that it was a mere Accident that
established the present Orthodoxy; Theodosius being bred that Way, and so
resolved to force his Subjects to be of the same Sentiments, and his living a
long time so as to survive most of the Heretics, was the Cause that there were
no more Emperors to make the Christian World become again Arian: And the
Cruelty used to establish Orthodoxy, would at the same Rate have established
Mahometism: So that the mere Authority of a Convocation can no ways influence
Heretics, who by being out of the Church, show how little they value the
Authority of Churchmen. And for any Power, by which they might be forced, he
very honestly owns the Church has none over them: For ( P. 27.) you pretend not
to meddle with those without, nor to exercise any Act of Jurisdiction over
them, but only to frame Rules and Decisions that shall hold within your selves,
and to govern and judge your own Members. And the Design of a Convocation is, it
seems, to censure some of the Church, and make them retract their Opinions:
For, ( P. 13.) as long as these Books pass uncensured and unretracted, under
the Style and Name of Men of great Place and Character in the Church, the
Mischief which the Authority they have yet left with some Men may be able to
do, is not sufficiently prevented, nor the Scandal wiped off from our Church
and Nation. But what can be more scandalous to the Church and Nation, than to
force People to lie both to God and Man, by making them retract those Opinions
they believe to be true? And nothing can be more abominable than this constant
practice of the Clergy, in making Men solemnly and publicly disown what in
their Hearts they still believe: and this is generally done without the least
color of convincing them, nay without giving them any new Arguments, or any
further Time to consider; and lest they should relapse, as they call it, that
is, dare to be no longer Hypocrites, they threaten them with greater
Punishments, and even Death it self. So that if this be the Business of a
Convocation, I know not a more compendious way of making Men Villains.

I have been the longer insisting on this Point, to show that the very End and
Reason that the Author pretends for the Sitting of a Convocation, and the
Powers, he says, belong to them of judging of Religious Doctrines for the
People, and enforcing Submission and Obedience to their Determinations
concerning them, are Antiprotestant and Antichristian, and consequently not to
be permitted in any Protestant Country.

10. It Is one of the most important Duties incumbent on the Clergy (as I have
shown, Par. 2. Chap. 6.) to take care that Differences of Opinions (which in
this State of Darkness and Ignorance are unavoidable) should not destroy Love
and Charity, nor disturb the Peace of the Church, by erecting Schisms and
Divisions: But the Pious Clergy, so far from doing this, have made the direct
contrary their almost sole Business, by imposing their own Conceptions (instead
of the Word of God) on the People, and by industriously contriving such
Expressions as are the likeliest to create Divisions, and then cursing,
damning, persecuting, and ruining them for those Divisions themselves were the
sole Cause of; and this has been their constant Practice in their Synods and
Councils. And therefore it is not at all strange that that Great and Good Man,
the late ABp should say (what, P. 8. of the Letter, is objected to him) That he
never knew any Good come from those sort of Meetings: But he is not the only
Person has said it; for Gregory Nazianzen (Epist. 55.) has long ago said, (when
Heresy was more universal than now it is) That he was resolved to avoid all
Assemblies of Bishops, because he never saw a Synod that had any Success, but
what did rather increase than lessen the Evil; without any Exaggeration the
Spirit of Dispute and Ambition is so very great in them, that it cannot be
expressed. And this was not spoke in a Heat, or dropped carelessly from him, for
he repeats it, not only in his 65th, 71st, 72d and 74th Letters, but in his
Poetical Pieces, P. 80. where he says, He will never go to any Synod, because
there is nothing to be heard there but Geese and Cranes, who fight without
understanding one another: There one may see Divisions, Quarrels, and shameful
Things which were hid before, and are collected into one place with cruel Men.

And Basilius (in his 102 Epist.) is of the same Mind, in resolving carefully
to avoid all Assemblies of Bishops, of whom he says most severe things, even
worse than Nazianzen. It cannot be supposed that these Good Men (and I might
add, all that had any Ingenuity amongst them) would say so very shameful things
of their Brethren, were there not very great Disorders amongst them: But I need
not mention the Opinions of particular Persons, when the Church History
sufficiently shows there can scarce be more Scolding, Wrangling, Disorder and
Confusions in a Bear-Garden, than there has constantly been in those sort of
Meetings: So that one would be apt to think there was some Ground for what the
Great Episcopius says in his Institutes, That the Bishops led on by Fury,
Faction and Madness, did not so much compose as huddle up Creeds for the
Christian World. And considering the Heats and Animosities, as well as
differences of Opinions amongst the Clergy, no better Effect at present can be
expected from a Convocation, which instead of destroying, will in all
likelihood increase Divisions, widen our Breaches, heighten our Animosities,
and rend and tear the Church, by excluding all those (who are no contemptible
Number) that could not agree with the Sentiments of the prevailing Party, and
treating them (according to usual Custom) as Heretics. And what Thoughts
(prejudicial to the State as well as the Church) this Disgrace, and the loss of
their Preferments, may inspire them with; or what a Ferment by their
instigation it may cause in Peoples Minds, cannot well be imagined. The
Confusion was so great after the Council of Nice, that the good Emperor begs of
his Bishops to vouchsafe him peaceable Days and quiet Nights, that he might
continue his Expedition against the Infidels, and not be obliged to return to
keep them in order. And in all probability, the Consequence of a Convocation
would be a great interruption to the King's prosecuting the War against the
Enemies of our Religion and Liberties, tho I hope our Author has no such Design
in seeming so very zealous for a Convocation; yet who can think him in earnest
when he supposes ( page 7.) The next Age will not believe a Religion revealed
by Heaven, except the Convocation make such a Declaration? Which is so far from
being true, that nothing would more expose revealed Religion than the Heats and
Quarrels, and other Irregularities that would happen in a Convocation. If
Synods are so necessary to preserve the Christian Religion, how comes it that
Mahometism (propagated at first but by a private Man) should in spite of
frequent Councils get in most Places so much the better; and that in others
nothing but the Name of the Christian Religion should be left, the Councils
having destroyed the Essence of it, by introducing Ignorance, Superstition,
Uncharitableness, Persecution, Popery, and Idolatry. And no considering Man can
doubt, that had Convocations ever since the Reformation, not only met, but
debated of Religious Matters as they thought fit, as frequently as our Author
pretends it is their Right, the Clergy long before now had assumed to themselves
a Papal Power; or if since the Revolution only, a Toleration as well as all
other Religious Matters had been left to a Convocation, which was to sit as
frequently, and to debate Matters as freely as the Parliament does, but it
would have caused such a Ferment both in Church and State as would have
destroyed both: so that nothing has shown the Prudence and Wisdom of our
Protestant Ancestors more than not allowing them those Powers our Author so
zealously pleads for.

11. Nothing more preserved the Church in the late King's Reign, than the
Dissenting Gentry and Nobility unanimously refusing to join with him in taking
off the Test and Penal Laws, for which the Churchmen were not wanting in words
to express their grateful Acknowledgment, and to promise them upon the first
Opportunity all the Kindness imaginable; which when it was in their Power, and
the Convocation was desired to come to some Accommodation with the Dissenters,
they thought (notwithstanding their former Obligations) that Faith was as
little to be kept with Schismatics, as the Council of Constance did with
Heretics: But this is not the worst.

A great many, it is to be feared, of our high Churchmen were so dissatisfied
with the Government's depriving them of the Power of persecuting their
Brethren, (which is almost as great a Grievance as to be persecuted themselves)
that they have ever since hated the Government, and have endeavored, as far as
they durst, to subvert it; tho they cannot but be sensible that at the same
time they attempt the Ruin both of Church and State, and of themselves into the
bargain. But where will not some Men's Spleen and Revenge carry them? And it is
plain, it is for want of their beloved Persecution they are thus prejudiced, for
none were more zealous (notwithstanding the Oxford Decree) than these
Churchmen to Associate in defense of their Legal Rights, and for the Security
of the Prince of Orange's Person, and did several other things more
inconsistent with their former Notions, than any they now pretend to scruple;
but none seems more inveterate than this Author, who (knowing nothing endears
the King to the People more than his Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and
securing to them the quiet Enjoyment of it with the daily hazard of his Life)
has endeavored to take off their Affections, by maliciously insinuating as if
his Majesty were a Person of no Religion: For not to mention his Hints and sly
Insinuations, as P. 27. That those that were against the Sitting of a
Convocation, were Enemies to all Religion, and the Professors of it; and, P.
23. to this effect, as if Men whispered that it was not the King's Judgment and
Piety that inclined him to be present at the Service of the Church, and a great
deal more to the same purpose; he speaks out more plainly, P. 22. where he
takes occasion, (nothing to the purpose) after he has said, As for his
Majesty's good Will, we do not, I say we will not in the least doubt it, to
add, Tho some, who would be thought to understand his Mind best, and to be most
in his Interests, are pleased in all Companies to admire and celebrate a Prince
of no Religion as the best of Governors: Which is more malicious, than if he
had said it himself in direct Terms, since it is the likeliest way, not only to
make it the more creditable by laying it at their Door who pretend to know the
King best, and to be most in his Interest, and to make them as well as his
Majesty, be thought Men of no Religion, for not only once or twice, but in all
Companies admiring and celebrating a Prince of no Religion as the best of
Governors, but to make the King discharge his Friends from any Trust about him
when he hears they suppose such dishonorable Things of him, and to employ his
Enemies, Men of our Author's Principles: So that Fenwick, it seems, is not the
only Person the Party has put on this hellish Contrivance of aspersing those
that are most in the King's Interest, knowing they have no way of doing their
Business like creating in his Majesty a Jealousy of his true Friends. And our
Author, that he might not be thought to speak without Book, endeavors to make
the King guilty, not only of a Breach of his Declaration, but of his
Coronation Oath, in not causing the Convocation to sit and act as frequently as
he has done the Parliament. It Is true, after this he says, with his usual way
of Hypocrisy, P. 63. We are sure his sacred Majesty did never oppose their
Sitting and Acting. But how could he oppose it otherwise than by not calling
them to sit and act, which our Author says by his Coronation Oath he is bound
to do? Which brings me to his Law-part, in which (as I shall show in a few
words) he is as much mistaken as in his Divinity.

12. He asserts, First, That the Convocation is the highest Court of
Judicature, having Jurisdiction in Crimes Ecclesiastical.

Secondly, That a Convocation is not only to meet as often as the Parliament,
but has the same Right to debate as freely of Ecclesiastical Matters, as the
Parliament has about Temporals.

Thirdly, That a Convocation is as necessary and essential to the Church and
Constitution, and does bind all People in Ecclesiasticals, as a Parliament does
in Civils.

As to the first: If a Convocation be a Court of Judicature, they must have
Cognizance of Original Causes, or of Appeals. If they had to do with any Causes
in the first Instance, they would have a greater Power than either House of
Parliament claims; and our Author dares not assert that a Convocation has
greater Power belonging to it than a Parliament. Besides, by 23 H. 8. none is
to be cited out of his own Diocese except in some few Cases, whereof Heresy is
one, for which the Archbishop of the Province, and he only, can summon a Man
out of his own Diocese; by whom (24 H. 8.) Causes were finally to be
determined, except Causes touching the King, his Heirs and Successors, for
which there was an Appeal to the Prelates, Abbots, and Priors of the Upper
House, (and this excepted Case confirms the Law in the non-excepted:) And by a
Statute made the next Year, ( C. 19.) All manner of Appeals, of what Nature,
Condition or Quality soever they be of, or what Cause or Matter soever they
shall concern, shall be made according to 21 H. 8. with this further Proviso,
That there lies an Appeal from the Archbishop's Courts to the King in
Chancery, from whence no further Appeal is to be had or made. Which cuts off
all Pretenses from the Convocation of having any Jurisdiction now, whatever
they had in the Popish Times.

13. As to the second; Whether a Convocation is to be summoned as often as a
Parliament; tho he has offered nothing that looks like a Proof of it, yet that
I shall not dispute with him at present, but I shall whether they have a Right
to confer about making any Canons without a special License from the King:
Which tho he asserts, he cannot bring one Lawyer of his Opinion, they being all
against him, as is the constant Practice of the Clergy, as zealous as they are
to maintain their Privileges, who never since 25 H. 8. attempted the making any
Canons without the King's License first obtained under the Broad-Seal of
England; which our Author supposes to be but a mere Compliment, and a bare Mark
of Respect: And he affirms, To say otherwise, is to wound the Liberties of a
Parliament through those of a Convocation.

But is there no difference between the Commons desiring, by the Mouth of their
Speaker, Liberty of Speech (that is, that the King would not be displeased with
their Freedom in speaking of those things they have a Right to debate) and a
solemn License under the Broad-Seal of England, to enable the Convocation to
confer about such or such particular Points? It Is ridiculous to suppose the
Broad-Seal is used with so much Formality for the sake of mere Compliments, to
convey nothing but a Right the Convocation had without it: The Broad-Seal is so
necessary to enable the Clergy to make Canons, that all that is done without it
is null and void; and so would it be in respect of Parliaments themselves, if
they were to have such a License to debate of any particular Point, in order to
make it a Law. As for Instance, by an Act made 10 H. 7. called Poining's Act,
it is provided, That all such Bills as shall be offered to the Parliament in
Ireland, shall be first transcribed hither under the Great Seal of that
Kingdom; and having received Approbation, shall be put under the Broad-Seal
bear, and so offered to that Parliament: And if a Parliament be held contrary
to this Form, it shall be deemed null and void. And in Scotland the Parliament,
until this Revolution, could debate of nothing but what the Lords of the
Articles had first agreed should be debated.

The Act of 25 H. 8. (which we say forbids the Clergy to confer about making
any Canons without the King's License first obtained) was made at the Petition
of the Clergy, and in the very words of that Petition: And certainly they were
good Judges of the Sense of their own Petition, and how far they meant to
restrain themselves. And we find that the Clergy Dr. Burnet 's Hist. Reform.
Part 1. Col^ect. N. 17.
being assembled in Convocation not many Years after, 1 Ed. 6. (therefore
several of them the same Persons at whose Petition the Act was made) do most
humbly desire, that the King's License for them may be obtained according to
the Effect of the said Statutes, (25 and 27) authorizing them to attempt,
entreat and commune of such Matters, and therein freely to give their Consents,
which otherwise they may not do upon pain and peril premised, that is, of being
fined and imprisoned during the King's Will.

And now we come to the Act it self, which recites in the Preamble the Petition
and Submission of the Clergy, wherein they promise, in verbo Sacerdotii, That
they never from henceforth would presume to attempt, alledg, claim, enact, etc.
any new Canons, Constitutions, etc. unless the King's License may be to them
had, to make, etc. the same, and his Majesty do give his most Royal Assent and
Authority in that behalf. And be it enacted according to the Submission, etc.
That the Clergy shall not presume to attempt, etc. unless they have the King's
most Royal Assent and License to make, etc. So that it is evident the King's
License is antecedently necessary to their making, or even attempting (which
includes all conferring or debating in order to the making) any new Canons; and
that they are to be punished, unless they have the King's Authority on that
behalf. And none but our Author can be so absurd as to think the King's
confirming the Canons the Convocation has made, is a License to them to make,
or attempt the making new ones: Is the King's signing an Act a License to the
Parliament to make a new one? But the Author's Ingenuity in reciting this Act,
and his Reasoning upon it, is much alike.

14. The Author demands, Why are the Clergy called to a Convocation, if when
they come they are not to act?

The Convocation was once a Limb of Parliament, and the Writ they are now
summoned by, is not much different from that of the Commons; and no doubt did
then meet, were Adjourned, Prorogued, Dissolved with the rest of the
Parliament; and this continued till H. 8. when they lost all their
Parliamentary Rights but of Taxing themselves, for the doing of which they were
still summoned according to the Ancient Form; and tho they have now lost that
Right too, and so the Reason of summoning wholly cease, yet the Writs are
issued out still after the same manner. It is not their being summoned by this
Writ that alone makes them a Synod for Ecclesiastical Matters: for in the
Popish Times they were always summoned with the rest of the Parliament, yet
they were not a Synod, nor could not act as such without Authority from the
Pope; and instead of any such Authority now, the King makes them a Synod, and
gives them Power to enact Canons by License under the Broad-Seal: and this with
Submission I take to be the true state of the Case.

15. As to the third, that a Convocation is as essential and necessary to the
Church and Constitution, and binds all People in Ecclesiasticals, as a
Parliament does in Temporals: I answer.

If the Clergy have another Right to make Canons besides the Will of the
Legislative Power, viz. a Divine Right, their Canons would be valid without the
King's confirming them; nor could an Act of Parliament abrogate or annul any of
those Canons made by a Spiritual Authority; which is so far from depending on
theirs, that the Parliament it self is subject to them in those Matters; nor
could they hinder them from sitting when, and as long as they had a Mind to,
because they that have a Divine Right to make Ecclesiastical Laws, must have
the same Right to sit in order to make them, which is but necessary to the
making them: and in a word, they must be as absolute and independent in all
things relating to Ecclesiasticals, as the Lay-state is in Civils; but there
cannot be two Independent or Legislative Powers about the same or different
things, for then People would be obliged to obey contrary Commands about the
same things, or different Commands at the same Time, which is impossible; but
that Power which can annul the Commands of the other, must be able to command
in all Cases, and be alone Supreme, because as great a Power is required to
take off as to lay on. If therefore the Civil Power can annul any
Ecclesiastical Laws, the Convocation can have no Power but what is dependant on
theirs, which they can abridg, curtail, or annul, as they think fit; therefore
it is absurd to pretend that a Convocation has the same Rights or Privileges, or
is as essential to the Constitution as a Parliament, without whose Authority no
Laws relating to Church or State can be made. And a Convocation is so far from
being necessary to make Laws for the Church, that it is usurping the Rights of
the English Churches, or Christian People of England, who are to be tied up by
no Laws about indifferent things (which alone are subject to humane Empire)
whether of a Civil or Ecclesiastical Nature, but by their own Consent given in
Parliament. And I know no Law of Christianity that deprives them of this Right,
which from the first spreading of the Gospel here they have always claimed.
There were no Laws in the British and Saxon Times that concerned the whole
Church, but (as our Historians testify) were made by the same Power that made
the Temporal Laws, and were put in execution by the same Persons. The tearing
the Ecclesiastical Power from the Temporal was the cursed Root of Antichrist;
those Powers were not distinct in England, nor in most Nations, till the Sea of
Rome got the Ascendant; then, and not till then, did the Clergy attempt to bind
the Laity by those Laws they never consented to: but their design was never
brought to perfection, for such was the Genius of a Government built upon this
noble Foundation, That no Man ought to be bound by a Law he does not consent
to, that as muffled up in Darkness and Superstition as our Ancestors were, yet
that Notion seemed to be so strongly engraven in their Nature that nothing
could deface it; and accordingly we often find them protesting that this and
the other thing does not bind them because done without their Consent Rot.
Parl. 40 Edw. 3. Number. 7, 8. Rot. Parl. 5. Edw. 3. Art. 46. Rot. Parl. 6 Rich.
2. Number. 62.
; that they would not be bound by any Ordinances of the Clergy without their
Assent; that they would not subject themselves to the Clergy no more than their
Ancestors had done: And 25 H. 8. cap. 21. they tell the King, that besides Acts
of Parliament, The People are bound by no other Laws but what they have taken
at their free Liberty by their own Consent to be used amongst them, and have
bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the observance of the same.

No marvel if we find this People submitting to nothing in Religion, but what
was ordained by themselves. De majoribus omnes, was one of their Fundamental
Constitutions before they came hither Tacitus de Moribus Germanorum, C. 11.
, and so it has continued to this Day; and Matters of Religion were amongst
their Majora, even before they received Christianity. And what neither the
Pagan nor Popish Priests could cheat or scare them from, our Author will find a
hard Matter to harangue them out of. If no Canon is valid that is contrary to
the Custom or Law of this Realm; How can a Canon oblige contrary to this most
ancient Custom and Fundamental part of the Constitution of the Peoples being
obliged by no Laws but of their own making? What Is become of the boasted
English Liberty, if they may be excommunicated, and consequently imprisoned for
Contempt or Disobedience to a Law they never made?

This, I think, is sufficient to show the Frivolousness of our Author's Reasons
for making his Majesty guilty of the breach of his Coronation Oath, in denying
those Rights to the Convocation he pretends are their due; which I think I have
proved to be contrary both to the Law of God and the Realm. I shall therefore
conclude, praying that the God of Patience would grant that no Priests of this
Man's Principles, in or out of Convocation, may hinder Men from being
like-minded one to another, nor disturb the Peace of Church or State.

FINIS.
Books sold by Andrew Bell, at the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhil.
A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers: Containing an Account of the Authors
of the several Books of the Old and New Testament; and the Lives and Writings
of the Primitive Fathers; An Abridgment and Catalogue of all their Works, etc.
To which is added, A Compendious History of the Councils, etc. Written in
French by Lewis Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon. In seven Volumes. Fol.

A Detection of the Court and State of England during the four last Reigns, and
the Interregnum. Consisting of Private Memoirs, etc. with Observations and
Reflections: And an Appendix, discovering the present State of the Nation.
Wherein are many Secrets never before made public; as also, a more impartial
Account of the Civil Wars in England, than has yet been given. By Rog. Coke,
Esquire The third Edition much corrected, with an Alphabetical Table.

Advice to the Young; or the Reasonableness and Advantages of an Early
Conversion; In three Sermons on Eccles. 12. 1. By Joseph Stennett.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. John Belcher.

Scotland's Sovereignty asserted. A Dispute whether the K. of Scots owes Homage
to the K. of England. Written in Latin by Sir Tho. Craig. Translated by Geo.
Ridpath, with a Preface against Mr. Rymer.


