THE Unreasonableness and Mischief OF ATHEISM. A SERMON Preached before the
QUEEN At WHITE HALL, On Friday the 30th of March, 1694.

By W. Talbot, D. D. and Dean of Worcester.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

London, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1694.

Psalm. XIV. Ver. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God --
THAT there is no God, no infinitely Wise, Powerful, Just, and Good Being, that
at first made this World, does still administer and govern it, and will finally
judge the rational part of it: That there is no First Cause of all things which
is of it self, but that either there has been an infinite Succession of Natural
Causes, or they have produced one another in a Circle; that is to say,
according to the former, There have been infinite Men in the World before there
was ever a one; and according to the latter, That David was not only the Father
of Solomon, but the Son of Solomon also; nay mediately and remotely the Father
and Son of himself.

Or, if there were a First Cause, that 'twas a necessary, brute, and unthinking
Cause, which yet has produced rational, free, and thinking Agents, Effects
which have Excellencies in them which were no way in the Cause from whence they
proceeded.

Or, that this World was produced by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, That this
Vast and Noble, Beautiful and Regular Structure, wherein all things are made
according to Weight and Measure, all act orderly and constantly for some end,
wherein appears the wisest Contrivance, both in the Fabric of the several
Parts and of the whole, and the disposal of all for the attainment of their
several Ends, is the Work of blind Chance, which can neither see, nor Design,
nor dispose.

Or, if there were an Intelligent Being that first created it, that he
abandoned it as soon as he made it; and having once shut it out of his Hands,
took no farther care, but left the Administration of it to Fortune or Fate.

Or, if he does concern himself in the Government of it, will never rectify
those Abuses which he sees and permits in it; That he has no Rewards in store
to bestow hereafter on those who love and obey him, whom he yet suffers to be
evilly entreated, and miserable here, and many times so for his Sake and
Service; nor will ever call to account, or punish those who daily affront and
provoke him, who yet meet with no other Returns for their Villainies here than
Security, Prosperity, and the good Things of this Life.

These are things so irrational and extravagant, that one would think it hardly
possible to find any that are Fools enough to believe or say them, and would
not expect to meet with any Discourses against such, for the same Reason that
there have been no Laws made against some Crimes, which have been of so heinous
a Nature that none could be supposed capable of committing them.

But the Scripture supposes there are, and may be such Fools, and our own
unhappy Times afford too many Instances of them, who ridicule a God, and
Providence, and Judgment to come; either deny his Existence, or allow him to be
no better than the Gods of the Heathens, that have Eyes and see not, Ears and
hear not: One, to whom Elijah's Sarcasm concerning Baal may be applicable; that
he is Talking, pursuing; in a Journey; or, peradventure, he sleeps, when he
should observe the Actions of Men, or attend to the Services of his Votaries;
who, having vilified their Maker, no wonder, debase his Workmanship, believe
themselves to be made up only of Matter, that as they live they shall die like
Beasts; their Bodies shall moulder into Dust, their Souls be dissolved into
soft Air, and there is an end of them: Who have not only defaced in themselves
all Notions of Spiritual Beings, but make it their business to blot out all
such Impressions in others; and as they have debauched, and corrupted their own
Reason and Faith, to assert and believe those wild Opinions which their Lusts
and Appetites suggest, and to acknowledge nothing in being besides Matter and
Motion, so labor to make a Party, and gain Proselytes to their absurd Opinions
and Practices: They conceive Wickedness; and, when they come abroad, they tell
it; it rests not in their hearts, but with their tongues they spit about their
Poison; and, with their infected breath, endeavor to spread the deadly
Contagion where ever they go: Who, to gain reputation and followers, pretend to
be the only free and impartial Reasoners, the great Abettors of the Liberty of
Humane Nature, that have no other end to serve, but the discovering the
Weakness, and breaking off of those Chains wherewith designing and interested
Men had enslaved it.

Now if Fools will be setting up for the only Masters of Thought; If the most
absurd Notions shall be vented for Oracles of Reason; If, not content to have
fooled themselves in a Matter of the greatest Concern, they are industrious to
delude others; and, like the great Abaddon, restlesly endeavoring day and
night to bring others into the same Condemnation with themselves: It is
certainly an Act of the greatest Charity to them, as well as others, to make
their Folly manifest to the World, to show that they are the most unthinking
Creatures that live in it; and that, whatever specious Characters they aspire
to, or would be known by, there is none so justly belongs to them as that which
the Spirit of God has given them in the Text: And the attempting this is my
present Province.

I shall not go about to show the Folly of disbelieving a God and Providence,
by proving, That they are, or by answering the Objections to the contrary; not
that the former are not fairly demonstrable, or the latter too formidable to be
encountered; but, I think, too frequent Undertakings to consute these, are too
great an honoring of them, and make them look more considerable than they
really are, as too frequent Attempts to prove those may possibly be not of the
best Consequence to Religion: And besides, the Doctrines that assert them have
been so firmly established, and the contrary Whimsies so shamefully baffled,
both by Ancient and Modern Christians, and, particularly, in some Discourses
published in our own Language, That whosoever can now complain for want of
Evidence and Conviction, and call for more, will still do so after the utmost
that can be given him, and plainly declares he will not be satisfied.

And if Men are so resolved, resolved to be skeptical as long as they can start
any little Cavil and ridiculous Scruple, and to submit to no Conviction, but
such as the things to be proved are not capable of: If they will not believe a
God unless we can demonstrate him a priori! Nor acknowledge an Eternal,
Independent, and Self-existing Being, unless we can prove him from his Causes:
If they will not believe Matter of Fact, which happened long before their Time,
without Evidence of Sense; If they will not believe Spirits and immaterial
Substances, unless they can see and feel them: the Man that should attempt to
prove them upon these Terms, would deserve the Character of him that denies
them. That therefore which I intend, is to show,

That although all the Arguments that are urged for the proof of a God, a
Providence, and a future Judgment, should not be allowed to come up to a
Demonstration: Though the Atheist has his Arguments against them, and the
Sceptick his Scruples, which they think are not satisfactorily answered: Though
they are not convinced of them, yet it is a very great Folly not to believe
them, and to say, and persunde others that there are no such Things.

I speak of a practical Belief, such as influences and governs the Life and
Actions; for I do not think that a bare notional Belief of these Things would
mend the Matter; or, That the Man that should assent to them in Speculation,
but deny them in practice, would be at all a wiser Man than he that with heart
and mouth denies them: Nor he that is really convinced that there are no such
Things (if Nature affords such a Monster) is not more so, than he that
professes to believe them, but contradicts his Profession by his Life.

For the Object of this practical Belief, I have added a future Judgment to the
Existence of a God and his Providence; not only because these do infer that,
but because this Judgment is the only thing the Atheist would get rid of, and
the other are denied merely for the sake of this, because if they were
admitted, this would follow; otherwise, I doubt not but he could be very well
contented to allow of a God that made the World, if he concerned himself no
further with it; and would, without difficulty, give up his eternal Matter, his
Fate, or Chance, or any of his lewd Schemes; nay, he could permit him to
administer the World too, if he did not take notice of Humane Actions, in order
to bring them to an after Account: He has no Quarrel with a Providence for its
governing the World, as is plain from his Argument against a Providence; which
is, That bad Men, such Wretches as himself, are suffered to prosper, and be
very happy; but this is a wrong he could easily forgive him, and could
willingly submit to, and acknowledge God's Government here, if he had nothing
more to say to him hereafter: But that he should see and keep a Register of his
Actions, that he should be privy to his most Secret, Closet, Curtain,
Bosom-sins, that these should all be written in his Book; and, that for this
end, That he may bring them all into Judgment: This is what he cannot bear the
Thoughts of; and therefore being resolved not to admit of this Doctrine, to him
so ungrateful and terrible, he is obliged to deny the others from whence this
would necessarily follow. So far is Fear from being the first that introduced a
God into the World, that Fear rather first made Atheists, I mean Fear of a
Judgment to come, and the Eternal Retributions to be dispensed in another Life:
To which Judgment, and Eternal Rewards and Punishments, I shall have a special
respect in the proof of the Proposition I have undertaken; which is,

That whether a Man be convinced, or not, of the Being of a God, of a
Providence, and Future Judgment; yet not to believe them with the heart, so as
to practice and live according to such a Belief, and to say with the mouth,
That there are no such Things, and infuse such Notions into others, is a very
great Folly.

The Subject in this Proposition, is a Man not convinced of the Being of a God,
a Providence, and Future Judgment; and a Man may be said not to be convinced of
these Things, who is in doubt concerning them, whether they be or not: He sees
Reasons and Difficulties on both sides, that he cannot fully assent to either;
or, he may be said not to be convinced of the Truth of one part of the
Contradiction, who is fully satisfied and persuaded of the other; the former
Sense is more agreeable to the common way of speaking, but the other is
justifiable by a very usual Figure.

That which is affirmed in the Proposition of this Man, consists of Two Parts.

1. It Is a great Folly for him not to believe practically the things therein
specified.

2. A great Folly to say there are no such things, and to endeavor to persuade
others so.

1. In arguing the former of these, I will consider the man as not convinced in
the first Sense I proposed, as being in suspense whether there are such things
or not, the Arguments and Objections appearing to him as strong on one side as
the other, and prove him to be a Fool if he does not so believe them himself,
as to practice accordingly as such a Belief will direct and oblige.

2. In speaking to the second, I will consider him as not convinced of these
things in the other Sense, i. e. as being fully, and without doubt assured of
the contrary, and prove, that for such a one to infuse his Notions into others,
and endeavor to make Proselytes is a very great Folly.

1. I will consider him as in suspense, and doubting whether these things are
or not; and this must be the Case of any Atheist that can think, and does do
it: For although he will not allow that we can demonstrate these things, he
cannot deny that we have very probable Arguments for them; and that is at least
as much as he can produce to the contrary: For will he say, that the Arguments
taken from the Frame and Origin of the World; from the Structure of Man's Body,
and the Faculties of his Soul; from the Beauty, Order, and Harmony of their
several Parts, and their constant acting for some end and attainment of them;
That these do not make it very probable that there was some Thinking and Wise
Being, that made, designed, and disposed them for their respective Ends? Will
he say, That his contradictory Notion of the Eternity of the World, his
senceless Hypotheses of Necessity or Chance, are a more likely account of them?
Will he say, That the Arguments taken from the Miracles that have appeared in
the World, the Works far exceeding the Bounds and Power of Nature, from the
Prophecies which have distinctly foretold the most contingent and arbitrary
things, with their particular Circumstances at the greatest distance, and have
been punctually fulfilled, from the Testimony, I believe I may say, of each
particular Man's Conscience, from the Terrors which even Atheists have felt and
owned at the approach of Death or imminent Danger, from all Religions in the
World, which however silly and idolatrous, are an undeniable Argument of the
Faith of the Professors of those Religions in these things? In short, from the
universal Consent of Mankind, will he say, That these Arguments are not of
weight enough to put in the Balance against the trifling Cavils of some few
Scepticks in an Age, and able at least to keep the Scales even? Be it so then,
that there are Arguments on both sides so equally poised, that the Man knows
not which will turn the Beam, the Affirmative and Negative equally likely,
there may be one that sees his Actions, and will eternally reward or punish him
for them, just as probably as there may not; and yet he is manifestly a Fool if
he does not believe there is, whether we consider his future State, which may
be, or his present Condition in this World, which is certain.

I. Consider first the Future State which may be; and this is Twofold; either
1. A State of Happiness: or, 2. A State of Misery.


I. Let us begin with the Future Happy State, and the Rewards thereof. Now if
it should prove, that there are such a State and Rewards, yet if a Man does not
believe that there are, and practice accordingly, he cannot possibly have them;
and therefore he must resolve either to believe and practice for them, or to
quit all Pretenses to and Hopes of them.

To make a true Judgment then, whether it be or be not a Folly not to believe
and practice so, we must enquire what those Rewards are, and what damage or
hazard such a Belief and Practice may expose a Man to: For if there be
something certain to be parted with, or adventured for something uncertain, and
the thing to be parted from be very valuable, and that for which it is to be
quitted, be not so, or not much more so; in such a Case it is a madness to
venture: But on the contrary, where there is a vast Advantage on the other
side, where the uncertain Gain is great, and the thing certain to be hazarded
comparatively inconsiderable, there not to venture is Folly according to the
common Sense of Mankind. All Trade and Commerce in the World are a Proof of
this: if it were not so, the Husbandman would never commit his Seed to the
Ground, the Merchant his Ship and Cargo to the Seas; the Tradesman trust out
his Goods, or the Gamester venture his Money, for they all venture something
certain for uncertain Gain.

It may be said indeed, that in some of these Cases the things themselves are
certain, though they are not so of obtaining them; whereas, according to my
Supposition, the Rewards themselves of another Life are uncertain: And this is
very true. But what is the difference as to me and my venturing for it, between
my being certain to obtain a thing, if such a thing there be, but uncertain
whether it be or not; and being certain that such a thing is, but equally
uncertain whether I shall obtain it or not? The Hazard I run in both Cases is
just alike. And I dare say the uncertainty of the Weather and Winds, the
Casualities of the Sea, the want of Ability in some Men, and of Honesty in
others, and the difficulty many times of discovering either till too late, are
better and stronger Arguments to prove the uncertainty of the Husbandman,
Merchant, or Tradesman's obtaining their respectively proposed Gains, than all
the Arguments the Atheist has or ever will produce, are to prove the
uncertainty of the being of Future Rewards: And yet, notwithstanding these
Uncertainties, Men think they act very rationally in pursuing the aforesaid
Employments and Trades. If then the Rewards of another Life be of much greater
value and consideration than all we are to forego or suffer for the hopes of
them, it will be Folly in the general Opinion of the World not to venture for
them.

And that they are so, if they are at all, will appear from hence, That they
are provided by an infinitely Wise, Powerful, and Good God; and by him proposed
as the Sanctions of his Laws, in the doing, or forbearing of the Things
commanded, or prohibited; in which Laws all that is to be born or lost, in
order to the obtaining them, does consist; I say they are what a Wise Being has
proposed as a means to secure Obedience to his Laws, from whence 'twill
evidently follow, that they must be more worth than all which that Obedience
will cost us; for otherwise they are not a proper means for the obtaining that
end, nor can he be a Wise Being that proposes them as such: Nay, they must be
not only of greater value than all the Things to be exposed or foregone for
their sakes; but of so much greater value, as to be able to balance the
Advantage which the presentness of the other gives them over the futurity of
these; yea, and to turn the Scales in the impartial Judgment of a rational
Creature, if they are proposed by a Wise Lawgiver, as a Method to engage the
Service and Obedience of such Creatures: Thus much we may gather from the
general Notion of such a Reward, and the proportion it ought to bear to the
Service, the hazards and losses thereof to which it is annexed.

But we are not left to conclude the Excellency of these Rewards only from such
general Considerations; for they are proposed to us as ineffably great and
glorious, beyond our Conceptions as well as Words; they are represented under
the most affecting Metaphors of Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, Thrones, Rivers of
Pleasures; and these not temporary, fading ones, but immarcessible and eternal
Enjoyments; not checkered with disappointments and dissatisfactions, but pure
and refined from all disquieting Alloy. The future Happy State is set forth as
full of the most exalted Satisfactions and Bliss which an immaterial Soul and
glorified Body, purged from its dross and spiritualized, can be capable of,
where there will be an immunity from all manner of Sorrow, All Years shall be
wiped away, and the perfect fruition of all that is good and lovely; of Joys,
which nothing can take away, nor any Accident disturb; of Pleasures, our
desires whereof shall increase by the Enjoyment, and neither have end or
period: In short, an eternal freedom from all Evil and Weakness, and an endless
Enjoyment of all Good and Perfection.

And now what present thing can there be imagined which any Man in his Wits
will not venture, upon the probability of obtaining such a glorious State?
Suppose even Life it self, and all the Comforts of it, were that which my
belief and pursuit after this future State should engage me to lose; alas, What
are they? But short perishing things, which I must, whether I will or not, very
soon, I know not how soon, part from; and will not the probable prospect of
that which is infinite and eternal, compensate for the hazard of that which is
but finite and temporal?

And yet, indeed, there is no such hazard that the Belief of a God, and Future
State, do ordinarily oblige a Man to; neither Life, nor any of the true
Satisfactions thereof, unless in some rare and extraordinary Cases, are thereby
lost or endangered; so far from it, that they are rather the things which
shorten Life, and disturb the real Pleasures of it, which this Faith lays a
restraint upon: None but such shameful, and only seeming Satisfactions, are
prohibited by it, which, bating the after-Consequences, a Man's much happier
without than with.

But were there some true and real Satisfactions obstructed by this Belief; yet
a Man's very Belief and Expectation of these Future Rewards, must needs fill
his Heart with far greater Joy than any they rob him of, although they gave him
but a probability of enjoying them.

For who is there that does not prefer the Satisfaction, that arises from the
hopes of enjoying a large and noble Estate, after the Death of a rich Relation,
before the gratifying of a present Inclination? Who that does not willingly
deny himself in some things, and break his own Humor, in compliance with the
morose Temper of the other; and, at the same time, enjoy greater pleasure in
his Mind from the prospect of what he expects, than he loses by that he has
denied? And yet his Expectation can be no more than probable: His Relation may
outlive him, or may change his mind; may take offense at him, how careful
soever he may be of giving none; or may meet with some other, whom he may take
a greater fancy to, and think he has more reason to make his Heir: These, and
many more Accidents, may interpose between the Expectant and the Estate: So
that though a thing be but probable, we see the expectation of it can outweigh
the present uneasiness, the uncertain hope abundantly satisfies for the certain
loss; and this, where there is no great disproportion betwixt the Satisfaction
denied, and that hoped for; this as well as that being but finite; how much
more must it do so, where the disproportion is no less than between finite and
infinite, imperfect and perfect? Especially if a Man has embraced a true and
firm Faith of these Things, and evidenced it to himself and the World by a
suitable practice; what Transports, what Exstasies of Joy must he feel? His
Faith, that is such, does as infallibly assure him of the Being, the Truth, and
Reality of these Rewards, as if they were proved to him by Evidence of Sense
and Demonstration; and from a reflex view of his Life, and comparing it with,
and discovering its Conformity to the Terms upon which these Rewards are
proposed, he finds his own Title to them more firm and better assured than any
Conveyancer in the World could have made it; and then his expectation must be
less only than the fruition, by that he antidates those future Pleasures and
Glories, and enjoys one Heaven here though he should meet with never another
hereafter. What a madness is it then, if it be but as likely, that there shall
be such Rewards as that there shall not, not to endeavor by belief and
Practice to secure an Interest in them; when, if any such there shall be, they
will so very well deserve all we can do or suffer for them, and when this
belief and practice are at present accompanied with no real damage, but rather
attended with so much satisfaction and pleasure?

2. Consider we now the other Future State that may be, the Punishments of
another Life; and we cannot doubt but if there be a Judgment reserved for bad
Men in another World, it will prove a Judgment worthy of God; and indeed the
Miseries thereof are represented to us to be as great and durable as the Joys
prepared for good Men: Now whether a Man will believe them or not, he must
within a short time be removed from this present State and Life; and if there
be another, and he has not by belief and practice seriously endeavored to
secure the Rewards of it, the Everlasting Punishments and Miseries thereof must
be his Portion; and, in the mean while, what present Fears and Torments must he
be perplexed withal? For knowing that Hell must be his Lot, if there be one;
and not being satisfied that there is none, he must as often as he gives
himself leave to think of these Things, be liable to the most severe and
disquieting Reflections imaginable: He is sure of nothing in relation to these
Everlasting Torments, but that such there may be; and if they be, he must be
for ever miserable in them. Atheism indeed he chooses, and flees to, as an
Asylum to shelter him from these melancholic Reflections: But the Misery of it
is, his disbelieving a God will not make him cease to be, if there be one; his
damping and extinguishing the Thoughts of a Hell, will not quench its Flames,
if a Hell there be; if such things there are, they will be whether he believe
them or not, and this he cannot but know; and therefore how effectually soever
the Opiats of Wine and Company may operate upon his mind, it is not possible for
him to secure himself from the most terrifying and amazing Fears in his sober
Intervals and private Retirements.

But above all, when a mortal Distemper seizes him; when he is going to take
his great leap in the dark; when Death arrests him to appear, for ought he
knows, before the dreadful Tribunal of that Almighty Judge, whose Being he has
denied: When in a few hours, it may be minutes, he must be taken hence; and
may, for any assurance he can give himself to the contrary, be conveyed
thither, where he shall be experimentally convinced of the reality and Severity
of those Everlasting Punishments which he has ridiculed, What Agonies must he
then undergo? O, the Horrors of mind which the Atheists feel at the approach of
Death! Would they but speak out, as some of them have done, they would own that
one hour of that Torment they then endure, is too great a price to pay for a
whole Life of sensual and sinful Pleasures. This then is the wise choice and
resolution of an Atheist, in relation to the Everlasting Torments of Hell: He
is not assured but such a State there may be; yet he chooses to disbelieve it,
and, to run the hazard do I say, nay to ascertain to himself an Everlasting
Habitation in those unquenchable Burnings, if any such there shall prove to be;
and whether there be or not, in the mean time to make sure of an earnest of it
here, to make a sort of an Hell within himself, and his own Conscience his
Tormentor: so wisely does the Atheist act in relation to the future State that
may be: But it is possible there may be no grounds for these fears and lashes of
Conscience; and the after-reckonings, which are the occasion of them, may prove
mere shams: Be that admitted, and let us see how prudently he acts in relation
to his present Condition in this World by disbelieving them.

I suppose I need not prove that the Faith and Belief of these Doctrines of a
God and Future State, do engage a Man to the practice of all Moral Virtues,
with respect to himself or others, and to the performance of all those Duties
which belong to the several Relations he stands in; or that the neglect of
these, and the doing the contrary, are owing to the disbelief and want of due
consideration of them. Let us try then who is the wisest Man as to the Purposes
of this World, he who lives in the practice of such Virtues and Duties, or he
that gives himself up to the contrary; Who is in the Happier Condition here,
the Man that holds a hand over his sensual Appetites and Lusts, or he that
looses the Reins, and lets them have their Head; he that keeps the mastery over
his Passions, or he that makes himself a Slave to them; he that maintains the
just Authority of the Man over the Beast, or he that suffers the Brute to ride
the Man?

The sober man, that by a strict practice of Temperance and Continence, if not
increases, at least preserves his Estate from decay, maintains his body in
health and vigor, keeps his mind serene and clear, and prolongs his Life and
with it a just sense and relish of the true Pleasures of Life; or he, that by
Ryoting and Drunkenness, by Chambering and Wantonness, consumes his Estate,
enervates his Body, clouds and weakens his Understanding, offers all these a
Sacrifice, and falls himself an untimely Martyr to his Bottle or Strumpet?

The meek man that can bend before a Storm, and suffer it to blow over him; or
he that by standing up against, and stiffly resisting it, increases its Force
and violence, and exposes himself to its fury; he that is not disordered and
ruffled by every affront and little injury, but is so truly great as to
overlook one, and to forgive the other; that suffers not foul and reproachful
Language to discompose his mind, or provoke an acknowledgment that he is galled
by revenging it on him that gave it; but by the undisturbed calmness of his
breast, which shows it self in his Words and Actions, convinces him that he has
thrown away his Dirt upon one on whom it will not stick, and confutes the
Calumny by despising it; or he that lets every trivial, it may be only supposed
wrong, disquiet him and raise his Passion, every breath of a foul mouth blow up
a Storm within him, hurry him on to indecent, and many times dangerous
expressions of his resentment, who for having been called a Fool will expose
his Life in revenge of the affront; and by hazarding what is most valuable upon
so trifling an occasion, justifies his Adversary's Words, and proves himself
really to be what he was called?

Who does best consult his Ease and Satisfaction; he that is content with his
Condition and State of Life, which he endeavors to make comfortable by a
moderate use of the good things he enjoys, or he that is querulously
complaining and repining at his present Lot, anxiously solicitous for the
future, that spends all his Time and Strength in scraping together and heaping
up of Wealth, which when he has laid up in never so great abundance, he cannot
find in his Heart to be ever the better for, but will starve in the midst of
Plenty, and though surrounded with Bags and Coffers, endure all the uneasiness
and miseries of Poverty, and live poor only that he may die rich?

Who best consults his Profit and Advantage, he that uses a conscientious
Industry in an honest Profession or Calling, that lives within Bounds, is
virtuously frugal, and prudently manages what he has to the best advantage, or
he that spends his time in Sloth and Idleness, in Luxury and Extravagance, in
Rioting and Gaming?

Who best consults his Reputation and Honor, he that lives in the exercise of
Justice and Probity, Temperance and Sobriety, Beneficence and Charity,
Courtesy and Affability, and that does all the Good he can, according to his
Circumstances and Condition of Life, Virtues that make a Man shine, and give
him a Luster in the Eyes and Opinions even of those who do not practice them,
or he that gives himself to Oppression and Cheating, to Lust and Debauchery, to
Sordidness and Incompassion, to Moroseness and ill Nature, Vices, which they
that are guilty of them, are glad to disguise and varnish over, and ashamed to
own in their genuine Complexion?

These are things that will not bear a dispute, but a Verdict must be given for
the former, at the very first Appearance at the Bar of Impartial Reason. Since
then those virtuous Practices, which the Belief of a God and future State, will
engage a Man in, are so very advantageous in this Life, that he that throws off
that Belief, does at the same time part with not only all hopes of Happiness
hereafter, but also with the great and only certain Instrument and Procurer of
Happiness in present, we may conclude, that he that believes, that in this Life
only he has hope, is even as to this Life of all Men the most miserable: and
therefore he that chooses so to believe, when there are not wanting as strong
Arguments on the other side to persuade him to believe otherwise and be happy,
has certainly the justest Title to the Character in the Text; unless perhaps he
may lay a better Claim to it, that says, not only in his Heart, but with his
Mouth, That there is no God, and labors to persuade others so: For,

2. He that does that is a very great Fool, although he were fully satisfied
himself, and without all doubt convinced that there is none.

A Man so convinced has nothing to restrain his Appetites, and check his
Inclinations, or hinder him when he has Power and Ability from serving them,
but the fear of the Penalties of Humane Laws, and of what Men may do unto him;
and therefore may gratify and indulge himself in every thing he desires, which
he can compass with security from them: No Sense of Duty in any Relation
Occonomical or Civil, can oblige him to the Offices of it, but whenever he is
out of the view of the Law, he may break through them as his Interest or
Inclinations direct: In short, whatever he has a mind to, though never so
unjust or barbarous, if Power, Opportunity, and Privacy favor him, if he can
order it that Men may not see nor question him for it, he may without any fear
or remorse do it; and the Man who is thus free to follow his own Inclinations,
will doubtless count himself a happy Man: But I Am sure he is a very great Fool,
if he endeavors to persuade others to be such happy Men for that is to teach
them in their turns, when occasion serves, to take the same Liberty with
respect to him, and not to stick at any the greatest Injury to him, that may
promote their Advantage, when they can do it without danger of Discovery; so
that how fully soever he be persuaded of his own Liberty, that those invisible
Fetters, of a God, a Providence, and Future State, are but as Threads burnt
with Fire, mere Pretenses, and nothing else, yet it is his Interest that others
should think themselves bound by them, and consequently his Folly to labor to
undeceive them.

Let us a little consider this Atheist in his several Capacities and Relations;
in his House, instructing and seasoning his Family with his excellent
Principles; and we may suppose him discoursing to them to this purpose, telling
his Servants, That he expects only Eye-service from them; That there is no Tie
upon them to work or be honest longer than he sees or knows what they do; and
that whenever they can without his Privity do it, they may safely loyter away
their time, abuse his Goods, waste his Provisions, purloyn and cheat him of his
Money. Telling his Wife, That she is a Fool to think there is any Obligation upon
her from her Marriage Vow to respect him, or be true to his Purse or his Bed,
but whenever she can with Secrecy do it, she is at Liberty to abuse either at
her Pleasure. Telling his Children, That there is no Engagement upon them from a
God, a Conscience, a Heaven, or a Hell, (those Bugbears that their Nurses use
to scare them with) to reverence or obey him; That all the Duty they owe him is
grounded merely upon what they fear or hope for from him; and that whenever
they are out of his Power, if they can expect to get nothing by him, they may
disobey and despise him as they please; or if there be an Estate to descend to
them after him; if they think he lives too long, they may sasely wish for his
Death, and if they can handsomely and privately do it, procure it too. Let us
consider him making Proselytes of those he trades or converses with, and this
is the effect of his Discourse to them, That they are not so wise as they
should be, if they do not, whenever they can without discovery, overreach him
in bargaining, put ill Goods, and false Weights and Measures upon him,
circumvent and cheat him in all their Dealings with him; That there is nothing
he has which he values most, but if they have a mind to it, and can by open
Violence, or by the more secret, but no less effectual Methods of Perjury or
Forgery, Corruption and Bribery, take from him, and carry the matter so that
the Law shall not take Cognizance of it, they are at liberty to do it, and
Fools if they think otherwise. Let us consider him in his Politic Capacity, as
a Member of the Community, and see how wise a Man he is as to that relation, in
spreading abroad his Principles; by so doing he does what in him lies to make
Governors tyrannize and oppress whenever they have Power: For if there be no
Superior invisible Being to restrain them, what should hinder them from
exercising that Power to what purposes they please? There is not near so much
danger of persuading Princes to rule arbitrarily, in telling them they are
accountable to none but God, as in telling them There is no God for them to be
accountable to. This is likewise to encourage Subjects upon any discontent or
dissatisfaction, if they are strong enough to rebel; for if they can overpower
their Prince, they have nothing to fear here from him; and if there be no God,
there is no Damnation to be received hereafter: This is to break and dissolve
all Bands, and Cement of Humane Society; that which is in it self a most
likely, and has, generally speaking, been an effectual method for the
discovering and confirmation of Truth, the ending of Strife, the obliging Men
to the Duties of their respective Offices, and creating among them a Confidence
and Reliance upon one another, is utterly rendered useless by these principles:
For though the Man that believes a God, a Being of infinite Knowledge, Truth,
Justice, and Power, can hardly be supposed in a matter which he knows to be
false, or never intends to call such a one to attest the Truth of what he
asserts or promises, and to punish him eternally if he prevaricates in either:
Yet it is ridiculous to think this method can be of force to any good purpose
among Men persuaded that there is no God; or that they can look upon themselves
obliged to speak truly, or perform what they promise, by calling one to be a
Witness of their Truth, and Revenger of their Falsehood, whom they look upon to
be what St. Paul says of an Idol, nothing in the World. What a distracted,
wild, uncomfortable, and dangerous place must a Nation be where such Principles
should generally prevail? What a constant Watch and Guard must Men necessarily
be upon? What continual Fears and Jealousies, and distrusts of each other must
they be perplexed with? What Security can a Man have for his Property, or Life,
or any thing he enjoys? I mean a Man of these Principles: for he that believes
a God, and lives accordingly, has a Security to trust to, even among a Society
of such Devils; for he knows that God that Rules and Commands the infernal
Spirits, can govern and restrain these; and if he does his Duty, he can safely
trust himself and all his Concerns in his Hands: But the Atheist who has no God
to hinder him, when he has opportunity, from invading what is another's, has no
Providence to secure him from the Reprisals which others like himself may make
upon him.

If then what I have now offered be the genuine interpretation and necessary
consequences of these Discourses and Principles, as certainly they are, then he
who makes it his business to propagate such Discourses wherever he comes, and
instill such Principles into others, does very ill consult his Interest in this
Life; and he that believes there is never another Life, and acts so contrary to
his Interest in this, may very well pass for a Fool.

I will only beg leave to make two or three brief Inferences from what has been
discoursed, and so conclude. And,

1. From what I have now said of the ill influence of Atheistical Discourses
and Principles upon Kingdoms and Societies of Men, we may infer the great
Obligation that lies upon Princes, and all in Authority, to use their utmost
Endeavors for the suppressing of such Discourses, and the rooting out of such
Principles among those under their Government: And if the Disease be become
incurable in any who have long received the Contagion, and in whom it is grown
inveterate, at least to set a Mark upon such, and restrain them from infecting
others, as we shut up persons infected with the Plague, and clap a Cross upon
their Doors; and this not only for the vindication of the Honor of that God
whose Vicegerents they are, and whom they represent, but also for the security
of their own Just Authority, and of the Properties, Peace and Happiness of
those committed to their Charge; all which are struck at by the direct and
immediate tendency of these Principles.

He that teaches Men to be subject to the higher Powers, not for Conscience
sake, but only for Wrath, teaches them to resist and rebel whenever their
strength and numbers and secure them from any dread of that Wrath; and he that
persuades Men, That there is no Obligation to abstain from what is their
Neighbors, but what the Law lays upon them, no restraint, but want of Ability
or Opportunity, does throw down all the Fences, and lay open ever Man's
Property, to the invasion of as many as hearken to his Suggestions, whenever
they are out of the view and reach of the Law, and have Power, and a fair
Occasion favors the Attempt. There Is no Conspiracy so dangerous to Sovereign
Princes as a Combination of Atheists, to spread abroad their desperate
Opinions, and make Proselytes in their Kingdoms; and they whom Necessity drives
to rob Houses, or upon the Highway, are but puny Offenders against particular
Men's Properties, and the Peace of the Community, in Comparison of them, for
they teach Men whenever they can securely be so, to be Traitors, Thieves and
Murderers upon Principle.

2. If the Character of a Fool does so justly belong to the Atheist, that
whoever says a Man is an Atheist, says at the same time he is a Fool; this
Consideration I should think, if nothing else, should be of force to keep all
those whom their Birth and Estate, Quality and Circumstances as to this World,
have raised above the common level from being Atheists, at least from owning
themselves such, and boasting of it: These are generally more jealous of their
Reputations, and sensible of any thing that touches their Honor than other
Men; and commonly they are not more tender in any thing, nor do feel any
reflections more quickly than those that are made upon their Understanding: To
be called a Fool is an affront they cannot bear, nor is it to be expiated with
less than the Blood of him that gave it; and can they be content to do that,
And is it a thing to be gloried in, which will prove them the greatest Fools,
according to the infallible Oracle pronounced by him who cannot be deceived,
and with whom it is to no purpose, at least to no good purpose to be angry?
Which will also render them so in the Opinion of all wise Men, who are the only
Men capable of Judging? And this Atheism effectually does. How industrious and
zealous then should any that have unhappily labored under it be to clear
themselves from so foul an Imputation? And with what Scorn and Indignation
should all that value their Reputations reject the Proposals and Persons of
such perfidious Wretches, who by infusing A theistical Principles into them,
are robbing them of their Honor, and treacherously betraying them into the
greatest Scorn and Contempt? He does not injure a Man's Reputation half so much
that calls him Fool, as he that persuades him to be one.

3. Lastly, If it be Folly for those who are not convinced of the Being of a
God, and Providence, and Future Judgment, not to believe those things
practically, How great must their Folly be who being convine'd thereof, yet
live as if they were not? If speculative Atheism be Folly practical, Atheism is
Phrenzy and Madness: Let us not then be wise only in belief, and Fools in
practice, let us not contradict, but show our Faith by our Works.

We profess to believe that there is a God, and we do well; let us not give the
Lie to our Profession by disbelieving what he has revealed, by ridiculing his
Word, abusing his Name, profaning his Day, despising his Worship, and
disobeying his Laws; but let us evidence the truth of our Faith by paying a
religious Reverence to every thing on which his Name is called, by making it
the business of our Lives to promote his Honor, and by endeavoring what we
can that his Will may be done by us and by all Men.

We profess to believe a Providence that sees whatever is done throughout the
whole Earth, even in the most dark and private Recesses, without the
appointment or permission whereof nothing falls out, and which takes care of
all things here below, let us not deny it by encouraging our selves in
Wickedness, and crying none shall see us; by being guilty of Deeds of Darkness,
and saying Peradventure the Darkness shall cover us; by misimputing the Good or
Evil that happens to us to wrong Causes; by forgetting, or repining at the Hand
from whence they come, by desponding anxieties for the future, as if there were
none that took care of us, by using indirect Methods to gain or keep
sufficiency our selves: But let it appear that we are in earnest persuaded of a
Providence, by always acting as in the view thereof; by doing every thing as in
his Presence, with whom the Darkness is no Darkness, and the Night as clear as
Noon day; by looking whenever the Rod is upon us up to him as the wise Manager
of it, humbly submitting to and kissing it; by thankfully acknowledging him as
the Author, whatever is the Instrument of all the good we enjoy, by doing our
Duty, and then faithfully in every Condition depending, and casting all our
Care upon him who cares for us.

We profess to believe that we have some nobler Principle than Matter in us,
even spiritual Substances, which cannot die; Let us not contradict this belief,
by making our Bodies the chief Objects of our care, and spending our time and
labor in looking after carnal and sensual Delights, which no more belong to
immaterial Souls, than Sound^ do to the Eye, or Colors to the Ear; but let u^
justify it, by raising our selves above the little satisfactions of Sense, to
a Contempt of all those Pleasure^ which Brutes may share with, and excel us
in; an^ by resolving to lose the whole World rather than no^ save our own Souls.

We profess to believe that God has appointed a Da^ wherein he will judge the
World in Righteousness by tha^ Man whom he has ordained, who shall come in the
Cloud^ of Heaven in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels^ to take an
account of, and render to every one according to his Works; to those who by
patient continuance i^ well doing seek for Glory and Honor, and Immortality^
Eternal Life; but to those who obey not the Gospel, Eternal Tribulation, and
Anguish, and Pain. Let us no^ betray the Hypocrisy of our Profession, by
neglecting to provide against the coming of our Judge, by acting as though we
never expected to be called to a^ account; by saying with the evil Servant Our
Lord delays his Coming, and by smiting our Fellow Servants and eating, and
drinking with the drunken; or by sleeping with the foolish Virgins, and
slumbring while the Bridegroom tarries; but let us prove the Truth of it, by
being upon a constant Watch, by behaving our selve^ like Men that wait for
their Lord, being continually employed in his Work and Service, having our
account^ always stated, and our Lamps burning, that at wha^ Watch soever he
comes he may find us ready, an^ we may enter into his Joy.

Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TWO Sermons, lately Published by the same Author: One, at the Cathedrol at
Worcester, being a Fast-Sermon -- The other, A Len^ Sermon, at Whitehall.


