THE SPIRIT of POPERY TRIED, Whether it be of GOD.

A SERMON Preached before the KING at WHITEHALL, upon the Fifth of November,
1699.

By the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of OXON.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1699.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. del. the first Line, and to the word Faith in the 2d Line. p. 8. l.
17. for Burnings, r. Fumings. l. 26. for Zeal, r. real. p. 14. l. 28. after
enjoyed, add who suffered. p. 17. l. 3. r. Campanella's.

THE Spirit of Popery tried, Whether it be of GOD.
1 John iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they be of God.
THat by this Caution, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they be of God, is meant, give not up your Faith to the Doctrine, nor your
selves to the Conduct of every Teacher and Guide, that shall pretend to
instruct and govern you, till you have examined and proved, whether his
Commission and Doctrine be of God, is evident from the Reason wherewith the
Apostle inforces this Advice, in the latter part of the Verse, viz. because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. And truly if this Reason could
justify the pertinency and usefulness of our Apostle's Exhortation at that
time, the pressing of the same Advice will appear, upon the same Grounds, to be
no less seasonable and necessary in this Age, wherein the great Author of Lies
and Divisions has showed himself such a Master in his Art, so successfully
employed all his Stratagems and Instruments to corrupt the Faith, and break the
Unity of the Church; that not only ancient Heresies are revived and improved,
but new ones broached, and the seamless Coat of Christ torn into so many
Shreds, his mystical Body broken into so many Sects and Parties, that it is
almost as easy to reconcile, as to number them: And each of the different
Parties (all of which cannot be in the right) would engross Truth to
themselves, confine it to their own Division, and exclude those that differ
from them from any title to it.

It might be of good use to bring these several Pretenders to the Test laid
down in the Text, to try the Spirits whether they be of God: But to examine
them all, would be the Work not of a piece of an Hour, but of a whole Year. The
Time usually allotted for such Exercises as this, will not allow me to try more
than one of them; and the Day points out which I should pitch on. That bold
Monopolizer of Christianity, which unchristians all the World besides her own
Communion; anathematizes, excludes from Heaven, and damns to Hell, all that
will not renounce their Reason and Senses, and blindly submit to her
Usurpation; who sticks at no Methods for the extending of her Tyranny, whether
of Fraud and Treachery, or Violence and Cruelty: Witness that fatal Design,
(fatal in the Event to the Authors of it, but intended so to this Church and
Nation,) which was as on this Day to have been put in execution, the never to
be forgotten Powder Plot: A Plot, which, say some of the Soberer of their own
Authors, Posterity will not believe for the Horror of it. Horror indeed! if
there must have been so many Thousand of Men, Women and Children, as one of
them says it was computed, cut off at one Blow, had it taken effect. A Plot
surely hatched in Hell, that Lake of Sulphur, and formed in the dark Parts of
the Earth, and discovered by him only to whom the darkness is no darkness, and
whose hand can find out those that dig down into Hell. And so much (though Faux
when he was taken, cried out, that the Devil, and not God, was the Discoverer)
is owned by some of their own Party, who have acknowledged the Discovery to
have been from God.

To express our grateful Sentiments of which miraculous Deliverance, as also of
another from the Designs of the same Enemies which we have more lately received
on the same day, and to pay our Just Tribute of Thanks and Praise to the Great
God for them, is the end of our present Meeting, to which, I hope, I shall do
Justice; and that my Discourse shall not labor of Impertinence, or
Unsuitableness to the Text or Day, if instead of relating the Story, (of which,
after so many Annual Returns of this Day, no one can be supposed to be ignorant
or forgetful) or proving the Truth of the Facts, which is as unnecessary,
habemus confitentes reos, I rather choose to bring that Religion, which by
these, and other such ever to be abhorred Methods, they restlesly labor to
propagate, to the Trial, advised to in the Words I have read.

And if, upon Examination, it appears to be not of God; as,

I. Imposing Doctrines and Practices, that derogate from, and undermine the
Great and Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion.

II. As being in a great measure contrary to the Nature and Design of the
Christian Religion.

III. As having bid very fair for the weakening those Grounds and Motives of
Credibility, whereby the Divinity of the Christian Religion was asserted, and
it recommended to the World. And,

IV. As supporting and spreading it self by Methods directly opposite to those
by which the Christian Religion was propagated, and even to the Dictates of
Morality and Nature.

I suppose I may, with good reason, endeavor in my Application to excite in
you,

1. A due Aversion to, and just Abhorrence of, that Religion.

2. Gratitude to God, who has so often discovered and defeated the Designs of
our Adversaries, and rendered their Attempts for the introducing and
establishing that Religion among us hitherto insuccessful. And,

3. A willingness and readiness to comply with those means which may most
effectually secure us against them for the future.

I am then to try the Religion taught and professed in the Church of Rome,
whether it be of God; and it will appear not to be so, for these Reasons.

1. Because it imposes Doctrines and Practices, that derogate from, and
undermine the great Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion; which is
this, that Jesus is the Christ. This our Apostle does in several Places of his
Writings make the distinguishing mark to try the Spirits by, by confessing of
which they would appear to be of God, and by denying it of Antichrist.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, cap. 5. v. 1. But
cap. 2. v. 22. Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He
is Antichrist denying the Father and the Son. And in the Verses immediately
following my Text: Hereby know we the Spirit of God: Every Spirit that
confesses Jesus that is come in the Flesh to be the Christ, is of God. And
every Spirit that confesses not Jesus that is come in the Flesh, to be the
Christ, is not of God, but is that Spirit of Antichrist.

So I construe that Proposition, (...), making the Predicate to refer to his
Offices as the Messiah, and not to his Incarnation, which is supposed in the
Subject. And this Interpretation is not only agreeable to the Original, but to
many parallel Places, where St. John expressly makes the Predicate the Christ,
and to the general Sense of Commentators upon this Place.

Now it is known that Christ signifies Anointed, and that Jesus is so called
with relation to his Offices.

The Ceremony of Anointing with material Oil has been anciently very usual in
the designation of Persons to the Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King. And our
Lord Jesus being to take upon him those three great Offices: (For Moses
foretold of him, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up, Deuteronomy. 18.16. And
the Psalmist, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedek, Bsal.
110.4. I have set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6. He being to
execute those Offices, was Anointed thereto with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power; and, for that reason, is called The Christ: Or, The Anointed.

By virtue of his first, his Prophetical Office, he was to reveal to us, and
instruct us in the whole Will of his Father; so Moses predicted of him, in the
forecited Place, he shall be like unto me, and him shall ye hear in all things.
And we read in Heb. 3.2. that he was faithful as Moses was, faithful in all his
House. And he himself tells his Father, Joh. 17. that he had finished the Work
he gave him to do, had manifested his Name to Men, 4, and 6, and in the 8th
Verse; the Words which thou gave me, I have given them, and they have
received them.

By virtue of his second, his Priestly Office, he was to offer Sacrifice, and
intercede for us: The former of which he did upon the Cross; when as the
Apostle in Heb. 9.14. says, he offered himself through the Eternal Spirit
without spot to God: And that Offering he tells us was to be but once made, in
several places of that and the following Chapter, and gives Reasons for it;
First, because it could not be oftener made; for then he must often have
suffered, Chap. 9.26. And, secondly, because it was needless to be repeated;
for he had by that one Offering perfected for ever them that were sanctified,
Chap. 10.14.

As to the other part of his Priestly Office, that of interceeding for us, the
same holy Penman tells us, Chap. 7.25. that he ever lives to make Intercession
for us. And Romans 8.24. Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes
Intercession for us; and there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.

By virtue of his third, his Kingly Office, he was to rule and govern his
Church as Head thereof, to prescribe and give Laws to her: So St. Paul, Ephesians.
5.23, 24. Christ is the Head of the Church, and the Church is subject unto
Christ. And Col. 1.18. He is the head of the Body the Church, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence. And St. James tells us, in his fourth
Chapter, that he is that one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy.

We have now seen why Jesus is called the Christ, or the Anointed, and what he
does in virtue of those Offices he was anointed to. Let us than examine how the
Doctrines and Practices, imposed by the Church of Rome, comport with this
Account which the Scriptures give of Christ and his Offices.

And here it is obvious, at the first View, that his first, his Prophetical
Office, by which he was to reveal to us the whole Will of God is struck at by
those Doctrines of theirs, which assert that the Holy Scriptures in which he
has discovered that Will, are not a perfect Rule of Faith; that the Holy
Scriptures in which he has discovered that Will, are not a perfect Rule of
Faith; that the sense of them is not clear and perspicuous, but dark and
uncertain; that they are like a Nose of Wax, or leaden Rule, liable to be
turned and bent any way, and therefore are to be pieced out with the addition
of Traditions, and not to be read or received without the Expositions of the
Church; for what kind of a Prophet or Teacher is that, who has neither
revealed to us all that it was necessary for us to know, nor clearly explained
what he has revealed?

And as to his second, his Priestly Office, by which he was to sacrifice and
interceed for us, how is that affronted by their frequent Sacrifices of the
Mass, which they assert to be true, proper, propitiatory Sacrifices for the
sins and wants of the Dead, and of the Living; and by those multitudes of
Intercessors, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, whom they join with, or, as
one would be tempted by their Practice to judge, prefer before him? Which must
necessarily argue that he has neither fully satisfied, nor does effectually
intercede for us; for if he had completely satisfied, or did sufficiently
intercede, what need of other Sacrifices, or other Intercessors, to be added to
him? but if he has not fully satisfied, nor does effectually intercede, what
sort of a Priest or Mediator will they make of him?

Touching his third, his Kingly Office, by which he was to rule his Church, as
Head thereof, and to give Laws to her: We know who he is that assumes to
himself the Title of Head of his Church, and who they are that have pretended
to a Power of dispensing with his Laws, their own Council of Constance will
inform us; which though it freely confesses that our Savior and King instituted
the Sacrament in both kinds, has yet, with a non obstante to the Institution,
declared it should be given to the Laity but in one. And then since they have
in all these Instances given too plain proof that they believe our Lord Jesus
has not sufficiently discharged those Offices which belong to the Christ, they
must not blame me, but St. John, if I conclude that their Spirits, their
Religion, is not of God; for it is his Assertion, that every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus is the Christ, is not of God.

2. The Religion taught and professed in the Church of Rome is in a great
measure contrary to the Nature and Design of the Christian Religion. As for the
Nature of the Christian Religion, it was manly, spiritual, plain, not made up
of those Rudiments and beggarly Elements, by which as by a Schoolmaster the
Jew, being but a Child, was to be tutored and led to Christ; not clothed with
that multitude of outward Observances, nor adorned with that gaudy Pageantry
and Show, with which the Mosaical Dispensation was. But now let any one look
into the Church of Rome, view (...) ^ultiplicity of Ceremonies and Shadows, the
variety of (...), their frequent Crosses, Burnings, Sprinklings, etc. (...)
lord, how their Religion is almost wholly made of onew and Pageantry; and let
him tell me whether the outward Circumstances have not eaten up the inward
Substance, and whether the Complaint may not justly be applied to them, that
the Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies was more tolerable than theirs?

And then for the Design of the Christian Religion, which was to advance Virtue
and Piety, to make Men truly good, and to lead them to Happiness by the Paths
of Zeal and sincere Holiness; how well the tendency of that Religion answers
those ends, we need look no farther to be informed, than into their Doctrines
of Penance, Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. which must necessarily encourage Men
to be wicked? For why should a Man fear to indulge himself in all manner of
sinful Enjoyments, when he has no more to do to obtain an Absolution, than to
confess himself to a Priest, and be sorry that he has exposed himself to
Sufferings? At worst, it is but giving some of his Money for his Transgression,
and some of the Product of his Estate for the Sin of his Soul; and why should a
Man doubt to defer his Repentance and Amendment in present, as long as he has
hopes of an after-Game in Purgatory? And then let any judge whether a Religion
that abounds with such ungodly Doctrines, can be of God, can lay any claim to
that Character which St. Paul gives the Christian Religion in his first Epistle
to the Thessalonians, where he calls it a Mystery of Godliness, and whether it
has not a juster Title to that other which he gives the corrupt Doctrines of
Antichrist, in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, where he terms them a
Mystery of Iniquity.

3. The Church of Rome has bid very fair for the weak'ning those grounds or
motives of Credibility, by which the Christian Religion was attested and
recommended to the World. The chief of those grounds or motives of Credibility,
were the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought; by these he was as St.
Peter speaks, Acts 2. (...), pointed out, declared by God to be the Christ,
they were the Credentials he brought from Heaven. This is plain from his own
frequent urging of them to beget Faith in his Hearers, Believe me for the Works
sake; and I have greater Testimony than that of John, the Works I do, bear
witness of me; from the Effects they had upon many that became his Converts,
who seeing the Works that Jesus did, believed on him; and from the Testimony of
his very Enemies, who when they saw how his Miracles wrought upon the People,
cried, if we let him alone, do not something to hinder or discredit these Works
of his, all Men will believe on him; and therefore they endeavored to possess
the People, that he did them by the assistance of Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils: So that it is clear the Miracles which Christ wrought, were a main
Method which he used to affert the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine, and gain
Proselytes to his Religion.

And it is no less clear, that nothing can tend more to blast the Reputation, or
weaken the Authority of these Miracles, than a Society of Christians receiving
with these multitudes of other Miracles, which are false, or at best, suspected.

Now to make good the Fact in this Charge against the Church of Rome, I appeal
not only to those little piae Frauds, which if we will believe Eyewitnesses,
are to this time made use of to amuse the Ignorant, and impose upon the
Credulous; but to those strange Miracles which have been seriously urged to
establish or justify some of their Doctrines and Worship, as Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, and Relicts, etc. and solemnly owned
in their Public Service; few of which are so attested as to gain Credit from
any unbiased and thinking Man, and of some they themselves have been ashamed:
It Is easy to see what Advantage the Romanist has hereby given the Deist, what
an Argument ad hominem he has furnished him with. Indeed a Protestant may
fairly and truly reply to it, that there is no just arguing from the Falsehood
of these Romish Miracles against the Truth of the Christian, as I could easily
show had I time, and were it my present husiness; but here is too plain and
plausible a Pretense given to the Enemies of our Holy Religion, to be over
looked or neglected by them: And however we may in Charity believe that Church
did not design, it may be foresee the Consequences of such a Conduct; yet since
she has eventally contributed to the weakening of the Force of the Christian
Miracles, and that by pretending false ones of her own, she has come too near
to another Character of Antichrist, whose coming was foretold to be, after the
working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders.

4. Lastly, The Religion of the Church of Rome is supported and spread by the
methods quite opposite to those by which the Christian Religion was propagated,
and the dictates of Morality and Nature. The Methods by which the Christian
Religion was propagated were, like the Author of it, meek and gentle,
charitable and loving: The first Planters of it watered it with no other Blood
but their own: The Gospel had no consuming Heats, but kindly cherishing
Warmths; the Preachers of it did not make Converts with Sword and Pistol, but
by conclusive Arguments, and moving Persuasions; they did not enlighten Men's
Understandings with Fire and Faggot, but with bright and evident Reason. Our
Lord severely rebuked those Disciples, who, out of zeal to their Master, whom
the Samaritans would not receive, would after the Example of Elijah have called
for Fire from Heaven upon them, with ye know not what Spirit ye are of; not of
mine, not of the Gospel Temper. What Spirits then are they of, that fetch Fire
not from Heaven but Hell, to destroy not Samaritans but Christians; and that
not for refusing to receive Christ, but his aspiring Adversary, that is
rivalling and justling him out of his Throne; who, being of a much more furious
Spirit than Elijah, would have sent the King, Lords, and whole representative
Body of this Nation, as he went in a fiery Chariot, but not to Heaven, but as
they must believe of them being Heretics, to Hell; who, for the propagation of
their Religion, can put a Corban upon the most sacred Duties Men owe to their
several Relations, disturb Societies, unhinge Governments, ruin Families and
Kingdoms, form hellish Plots, set up merciless Inquisitions, encourage bloody
Massacres, make Converts by Plunders, Rapes, Prisons, Galleys, Gibbets, and
unheard of Torments, to which Death would be preferable. Blessed Jesu! thou
meek, gentle Lamb of God! thou that did never strive nor cry, but were all
Love and Compassion even to thy very Enemies, do thou own these Proceedings,
or these wretched Murderers of thy Saints and Servants, who have so dipped thy
Coat in the Blood, not of wild Beasts, but thy dear Martyrs, that it can
scarcely be known to be Joseph's Coat? No, surely, they have a nearer Relation
to the Woman described in the 17th. of Revel. who was arrayed in Purple and
Scarlet color, whose Garments were tinged with the Gore, and who was drunk
with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

But it is time to divert from this ungrateful, though necessary Task, to take
my leave of these Persons, and apply my self to you. From the Particulars which
I have very briefly touched upon, time not permitting me to enlarge, it does but
too plainly appear, that the Religion of the Church of Rome cannot bear the
Trial of the Text, that it is not of God.

By way of Inference then.

1. What a just Aversion should this give us to it, and at what a Distance
should it keep us from it? Can we, without Resentment, behold that Church, with
bold and daring Doctrines, affronting our Blessed Messiah, and reflecting upon
him, as not having made good that Character, by sufficiently discharging the
Offices belonging to it, as we observed in the first particular?

Can we, without Resentment, behold her changing the Substance of the Religion
he taught into Shadows, and contradicting the Designs of it, exposingt he holy
Author of it, as if he were a Savior, to save Men in and not from their Sins,
by giving Men too great encouragement to indulge themselves in all loose
Conversation, as we observed in the second particular?

Can we, without Resentment, behold her shaking the Grounds upon which he
asserted the Divinity of it, and furnishing the Enemies of it with Arguments
against it, as we observed in the third particular?

Can we, without Resentment, behold her Persecuting, Banishing, Tormenting,
Killing our Brethren, as in the fourth particular?

How long, Lord, holy and true, do not thou avenge the Blood of thy Saints?

But let not our Resentments carry us to take any Revenge our selves, to any of
those Practices which we so justly condemn in them: God forbid that any of
their Provocations, even their late base and notorious Misrepresentations of
their Treatment in Protestant Countries, should ever prevail with us to change
our Christian Conduct toward them; or that any of them should suffer in Person
or Estate merely upon the account of their Religion.

No; may we rather be in the State of our Suffering Brethren, than in the
Condition of their Persecutors; we are assured, that Blessed are they that are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, but read of no blessing for those that
persecute.

Let us overcome their evil with good, and as we have opportunity return to
those of that Religion all kind and Christian Offices, for their Persecutions
and despiteful Usage of those of ours; and for their Anathema's and Curses,
Blessings and Prayers to our merciful God, That he would bring into the way of
truth all such as have erred and are deceived; That to those of them that see
not the Errors and Dangers they are in, he would vouchsafe Light to discover
them to them; and to those that are sensible of them, the Honesty and Courage
to acknowledge their Conviction, and come out of that Communion.

Yet sure it is no breach of Charity to be upon the defensive, to guard our
selves against their Attempts; for the Civil Power to check the Boldness of
their numerous Priests in this Town, and restrain them from that Liberty they
take to invade in many Instances our Ministers Office; and on all Occasions to
attempt the perverting of their People, or for us, who minister in holy Things,
to arm our Hearers against their Seduction.

And no other Weapon do we desire, or need we to put into their hands, than the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, which, if rightly applied, will
make them proof against all their Assaults; for since by that Word it appears,
that their Religion is not of God, what Methods of allurement or terror can be
of force to draw or drive those to it, who make that Word their Rule?

What Allurement can be presented, that that Question of our Savior, Matt.
11.26. will not answer, What shall a Man be profited if he shall gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul?

What Terrors and Affrightments can be offered that his Promise in the 19th. of
this Gospel, ver. 29. will not support Man under; Every one that has forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands, for my Name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and inherit
everlasting life?

I shall conclude this Head with the Words of a Romish Writer in the late
Reign; which, though used by him in ridicule, shall be applied by me in very
good earnest; That the Martyrs recorded by Fox, that past the fiery Trial in Q.
Mary 's Days, and I will add all others that shall suffer the like upon the
same Account, had, and shall have, a glorious Cause on it; and I doubt not, as
he continues, but the Crowns of Glory which attend such in Heaven, are not
inferior to those which they enjoyed under Decius and Dioclesian.

2. What Obligations of gratitude do we lie under to our most gracious God, for
not only raising up our holy Reformers, who cast off that insupportable Yoke,
which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, rescued this Church
from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and purged it from the Idolatry and
Superstition of that Church; but has also preserved it hitherto from being
again corrupted and brought into Bondage, has defended the House swept and
garnished, notwithstanding all his Atempts, from the return of the evil Spirit.

Whoever reflects upon the Strength and Riches of the Church of Rome, the
Number of her Members, her Interest with, or rather Authority over too many of
the Princes of Christendom, whom she has made drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, and bewitched with her Philters, to lay their Heads in her Lap, and
give up their Power to her.

How her Principles will give her leave to do any Evil, that so great a Good
may come of it, as extending her Tyranny, and bringing heretical Nations into
subjection to her.

How she truly looks upon this Church to be the greatest Obstacle in her way,
that hinders her extirpating the Northern Heresy.

How often, being thus provided with Power and Principle, and strong
Inclination to destroy this Church, she has attempted it every Reign since the
Reformation.

Whoever reflects upon all this, and adds, that we have not always been so
strictly upon our Guard against her as we ought to have been; but have always
had a treacherous Party within us, ready to betray us to her, must acknowit to
be Of the Lord's mercy that we have not been long since consumed by them; and
that, If the Lord himself had not been on our side, when Men conspired and rose
up against us, they had swallowed us up quick when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us: And how ought we then to add, Praised be the Lord, who has
not given us over as a Prey unto their Teeth.

How should we say of this Day in particular, That this is the Day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it: How memorable ought is to be
to us, as I hope it will be to our latest Posterity, on which God has twice
appeared so wonderfully for us; once in the timely and strange Discovery of the
Powder Plot in King James the First's Time; and again, in that great
Deliverance from the no less dangerous Designs of the same Enemies in the Reign
of King James the Second, which I must date from this Day, on which the happy
Instrument of it Landed in this Kingdom; of which Deliverance I would not
desire to raise any one's grateful Sense higher, than in proportion to those
Apprehensions of our danger; which however some are willing to forget now,
every thinking Man had then.

Adored be the Majesty of Heaven, who has so often commanded Deliverance for
us, blasted the Designs and Attempts of our Enemies, that had evil will to our
Sion, and not yet suffered them to devour Jacob, or lay waste his dwelling
place.

3. How ready and willing should we be to comply with, and pursue these
Methods, which will effectually secure us against their Attempts for the
future? There is a remarkable Prophecy in the Mss. of a great Antiquary of our
own, That Popery should decay about the Year 1500, and be restored about 1700,
and that most likely by means of our Divisions, which threaten the Reformation,
etc.

What credit soever this Prediction may deserve, as to the Thing it foretells,
the Restitution of Popery, and the Time it prefixes for it, yet the Methods by
which it says it will most likely be brought about, are so reasonable and
probable, That, I think, without pretending to the Spirit of Prophecy, a Man
may venture to say, that if ever Popery (humanly speaking) comes in upon us, it
must be at those Breaches which we our selves make.

It Is known who they are that first caused, and are still somenting our unhappy
Divisions; and sure we have been long enough Tools in their Hands, for the
working their Ends, and our own Ruin.

Whoever looks into Campanella^'s Treatise of the Spanish Monarchy, the Scheme
he has there drawn, for the subjecting of this Nation and Church to the Power
of Spain, and Tyranny of Rome, will find that the Method he proposes are the
embroiling of Scotland, the dividing of England, and the instigating the
Bishops and Calvinists, as he calls them, against one another; and whoever
compares this Project with the Practices of Rome, in relation to us, which our
Chronicles or Memories may inform us of, will be satisfied that the latter have
been an exact Comment upon the former.

But this Maxim, Divide and Impera, they might have learned from the old
Romans; would to God we could learn from them one Principle too, which Nature
taught them, and Revelation has more forcibly recommended to us, that of a
public Spirit, and a hearty Concern for the public Welfare, which would beat
down and triumph over all little private Interests, and private Piques, and
dispose and engage us to that Peace and Union, both Civil and Ecclesiastical,
which would be under God our securest Guard against all the Designs and Attacks
of our Enemies.

As to the former; would we lay aside our Passions for a while, and suffer our
cooler Reason to advise, it would tell us, That a Kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation, that every particular must suffer in the public
Destruction.

That in our Case it is evident to a Domonstration, That if ever our Enemies
prevail over us, there is no quarter to be expected by any; that even those who
shall have served them most faithfully, by being unfaithful to their Country,
cannot look for better Treatment than what they will have highly deserved.

That it is the height of Phrensy and Madness, for the gratifying an angry, or
serving a covetous Passion; for the reaking our Spleen against any we dislike
at the Helm, or for the promoting a private mistaken Interest of our own, to
contribute to the sinking of that Vessel on which we our selves are embarked,
and must with it go down to the Bottom.

And as to the other, Union in Religious Affairs; I would, in the Spirit of
Meekness, desire such as scruple, fixed and constant Communion with our Church,
for a time calmly to lay aside their Prejudices, and to suppose that it is
possible for them to have mistaken, or been misled; and therefore to resolve to
examine Matters carefully themselves, not to take Things upon trust, or think
it a sufficient Reason for their Separation from us, that they have been
educated another way.

Let them impartially consider, Whether the established Church be not the only
Communion in which there is any likelihood, or indeed possibility, for us
generally to unite against the common Enemy: Whether she did not appear to be
the only Bulwark against Popery in the late times of Danger and Trial: Whether
her Members did not bravely defend the Protestant Cause, when some that that
had reflected upon them, as Popishly affected, did not venture to appear
publicly in vindication of it: Whether they did not boldly oppose the Methods
that were then used to introduce Popery, while the others did too easily comply
with them.

Let them consider, Whether there be any Dangers they can run by joining with
this Church, which can balance that apparent one, which the whole Protestant
Interest is in, by their Division from her.

Let them examine her as nicely as they please; let them bring her to the Test,
she refuses not, she has no Reason to be afraid of it, she can bear the Test of
the Text: Let them try whether she be of God, or not; Let them examine her by
his Word, and see if she wants any thing to make her a true Church; or abounds
with any Thing that may make her a corrupt one: Let them try if she has not
Bishops and Pastors duly commissioned for their respective Offices; if the
whole Doctrine of Christianity be not professed and taught in her, if the
Sacraments of Christ's Institution be not administered and received, and if she
have not a public Worship for us to offer up our joint Homage and Prayers to
God in.

Let them try whether she suffers those that Minister in Holy Things to be
Masters of Men's Faith and Consciences, or to exercise any Superiority more than
the Holy Ghost, who has made them Overseers, has committed to them; whether she
allows them to deprive their Flocks of the sincere Milk of the Word, and to
feed them with lying Legends instead of it; whether she does not require them
to preach the Gospel, to be instant in season, and out of season, and to do the
work of Evangelists, that they make full proof of their Ministry.

Let them try whether she corrupts her Faith by receiving humane Traditions
into it, or Articles destructive of true Piety; whether she teaches any
Doctrines that may encourage Men to sin, in hopes of pardon upon easy Terms,
or to defer their Repentance in present, in prospect of any after-Game; or any
but such as lay the most forcible Obligations upon all to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in the present World.

Let them try whether she adds to, or diminishes from Christ's Institutions;
whether she makes any thing to be a Sacrament which he has not made so, or
mutilates and halves any that he has.

Let them try whether she veils her Worship in a strange Tongue, which the
Ignorant cannot say Amen to; whether she choaks it with Ceremony and Show, or
makes it consist in external frivolous Observances, and not in weighty
substantial Acts of Devotion.

Let them try whether she divides her Service betwixt God and the Creature, and
does not confine it to him alone to whom it is due.

In short, let them try whether there be any Term of Communion which she
imposes upon her Members, either as to Belief or Practice, which can be proved
to be sinful by the Scriptures; and if they can find nothing enjoined by her
which can make it a sin to communicate with her, let them examine whether it be
not a sin to divide from her?

These things let them examine with that impartiality and sincerity, that
becomes Men that are truly conscientious and afraid of offending God; (they
that are such will be as fearful of sinning on one hand as on the other) and
then we may hope that we may go up together to the House of God, and with one
heart, and one mouth, glorify him in the great Congregation.

But after all, if any cannot satisfy all their Scruples, at least let them
unite as far as they can, whereunto they have attained, let them walk by the
same Rule with us, and mind the same things; and for those Particulars wherein
they shall be differently minded, let them maintain a Spirit of Christian
Charity toward us, not censuring us, not endeavoring to possess others with
their Scruples, or to harden themselves in them, but disposing themselves to
receive and submit to a Conviction when it shall be offered; and may God, in
his due time, reveal even those things unto them.

I am sure this which I have been now pressing upon them, is no more than what
the Protestant Interest, not only in this Kingdom but all over Europe, calls
for from them.

As for us who have the happiness to be Members of this Church, let us walk
inoffensively and charitably toward those that are yet without, pitying and
praying for them, bearing with, condescending as far as we may to their
Infirmities, and endeavoring to restore them in the Spirit of Meekness.

Let all bitterness, and clamor, and evil speaking, be far from us: Let us
labor to work upon their Affections by all Instances of Love and Kindness, and
upon their Understandings by good Reason and Argument.

Let all of us consider that we are Brethren, have one God for our Father, own
one Lord Jesus Christ, profess the same Reformed Religion as to substance, why
then should circumstances hinder us but that we unite together for our common
defense against our common Enemies?

But if we would effectually secure our selves against them, we must further
engage God on our side: He has frequently delivered, and hitherto preserved us
from them; but how should we expect he should go on to do so, unless we live
like a People saved by the Lord, and in some measure answer the Ends for which
he has spared us.

He has wonderfully secured to us a Reformed Church and Religion, but surely he
thereby calls upon us to adorn that Holy Religion with reformed Lives; A
Religion free from those Corruptions in Doctrine and Worship which that of Rome
labors under, but certainly he with good reason expects that we also should be
free from their Corruptions in Life and Manners; A Church pure in all her
Administrations, but sure at the same time he requires us to be pure and holy
in all manner of Conversation.

Labor we then after Peace and Holiness, after Union with one another, by Love
and Charity, and with our God, by Repentance and Newness of Life.

Let there be no other Strife among us, but who shall be most zealous in
promoting the Glory of God, and the Public Good: Let us consider one another
to provoke unto Love, and unto good Works, not forsuking the assembling of our
selves together, but endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace.

And may the God of Patience and Consolation grant us to be ^ike minded,
according to Christ Jesus, may his Peace rule in our hearts, conquering and
subduing all Malice and Envy, all Prejudice and Partiality, all private
Interest and corrupt Designs, and whatever may hinder us from godly Union and
Concord; inclining us to be kind and tenderhearted one toward another, and
disposing us to lay aside all Disputes among our selves about lesser Matters,
and to contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints.

If thus our Jerusalem were as a City that is at unity in it self, if the
Tribes went up together to worship to the House of the Lord, if we heartily
joined in praying and laboring for the Peace thereof, she would be terrible to
her Enemies as an Army with Banners.

If there were among us a Spirit of Reformation, of Sincerity and Honesty, of
true Holiness, and the Fear of the Lord, we might hope to invite him to dwell
among us, and to rejoice over us to do us good.

We might then reasonably expect that he will go on to defend us from the
destruction that wastes at noonday, and from the evil that walks in
darkness, from all the open Attempts and secret Plots of our Enemies; that he
will continue to us the Blessings of our great Deliverance, and preserve that
sacred Life in which they are so much concerned; that he will bless him, and us
in him, with a long and prosperous Reign over us, till he shall have so
established the thing he has wrought for us by him, that the happiness of our
present excellent Constitution in Church and State, may be transmitted to our
Childrens children, and all the Generations that are yet for to come.

FINIS.

