AN ESSAY CONCERNING OBEDIENCE TO THE Supreme Powers, AND THE Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions. WITH Some CONSIDERATIONS touching the Present Juncture of
Affairs.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCIV.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I. Of Government, and the Origin of it. ibid.
CHAP. II. Of Passive Obedience. 8. CHAP. III. Of the Public Good. 15. CHAP.
IV. Of God's Laws. 22. CHAP. V. Of the Law of Nations. 26. CHAP. VI. Of the
Obligation of Human Laws. 29. CHAP. VII. Objections answered. 34. CHAP. VIII.
Of Conquest. Page 37. CHAP. IX. Of Possession. 24. CHAP. X. Of Protection. 44.
CHAP. XI. Of Oaths of Fidelity. 54. CHAP. XII. Of the Act of Parliament of the
11 of Hen. 7. 56. CHAP. XIII. Of Proofs of Scripture concerning Obedience to
those that actually Administer Government. 59. CHAP. XIV. Some Considerations
touching the Present Affairs. 66.
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
MErcury; or the Secret and Swift Messenger. Showing how a man may with privacy
and speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The Second
Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of
Chester. Printed for Rich. Baldwin, where are to be had, The World in the Moon;
and Mathematical Magic.

Bibliotheca Politica. Or a Discourse by way of Dialogue on these following
Questions: 1. In what sense all Civil Power is derived from God, and in what
sense may be also from the people. 2. Whether His present Majesty King William,
when Prince of Orange, had a just Cause of War against King James II. 3.
Whether the Proceedings of His Present Majesty, before he was King, as also of
the Late Convention, in respect of the said King James, is justifiable by the
Law of Nations, and the Constitution of our Government. Collected out of the
best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern. Dialogue the Eleventh.

A Compendious History of the Taxes of France, and of the Oppressive Methods of
Raising of them.

An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses that England has received
since the beginning of this present War with France.

Berault's French Grammar.

The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the common sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwood
Shepherd Esquire Part I. The Second Edition.

A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency, and Corruption; with some
Reflections on Shakespeare and other Practitioners for the Stage. Both by Mr.
Rimer, Servant to Their Majesty's.

Truth brought to light; Or the History of the first 14 Years of King James I
In four parts, etc.

Travels into diverse parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's
Order, to discover a new Way by Land into China. etc.

Liturgia Tigurina; or, the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usually practiced,
and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapels of the City and Canton
of zurick in Switzerland, etc.

The Works of the Famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, Doctor in Physic. Treating of
the Lives, Heroic Deeds and Sayings of Gorgantua, and his Son Pantagruel
Translated from the French. To which is added Rabelais's Life; and a new Key to
the whole Work.

Letters of Love and Gallantry, and several other Subjects. All written by
Ladies. With the Memoirs, Life, and Adventures of a young Lady; Written by her
self, in several Letters to a Person of Quality in Town. Vol. 1.

Memoirs concerning the Campaign of Three Kings, William, Lewis, and James, in
the Year 1692. With Reflections upon the Great Endeavors of Lewis the 14th to
effect his Designs, of James the 2d. to Remount the Throne, and the proper
Methods for the Allies to take to hinder both.

AN ESSAY CONCERNING Obedience to the Supreme Powers, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
THE Design of these Sheets (which one would think should be no difficult
Task), is to persuade People to act for the Good and Prosperity of the
Community they are Members of, and in which their own is included; and to
convince them, That it is their Duty as well as Interest, to bear True Faith
and Allegiance to the present Government. Which Design, that I may the better
perform, it will be necessary to premise somewhat about Government in general,
and the Grounds and Measures of Obedience to it; by which I hope I shall be
able to show, What is the Duty of Subjects, not only in the present Juncture of
Affairs, but in all Changes and Revolutions.

CHAP. I. Of Government, and the Origin of it.
GOvernment is, as it is usually defined, The Care of other Peoples Safety;
which consists in Protecting and securing them from being destroyed or
oppressed by one another, as well as by Strangers; and redressing the
Grievances of those that are injured, and preventing the like for the future,
by punishing Offenders. In order to which, the Governor must have a Right to
command the Natural Force of those that expect his Protection, to enable him
the better to put his Laws and Decrees in execution. Tho without Power
Government cannot consist, yet Power and Government are not one and the same
thing; a man may be in the Power of another, and yet may not be governed by
him; it is necessary that this Power be made use of for Protection, without
which it is impossible to be protected; so that Protection and Government are
the same thing; for where people are not protected, they are still in the state
of Nature, and without Government.

It is Government alone that gives the Form, Life, and Unity to a Civil
Society, or Body Politic, by which the several Members have their mutual
Influence, Sympathy, and Connection; so that to be a Member of a Civil Society,
and to be under Government, is the same thing; and to be without Government,
and to be in the state of Nature, are reciprocal, and predicated of one
another. None can pretend to be or claim any Civil Rights as a Member of a
Society, without owning the actual Government that makes it a Society; and they
that disown the Government of the Society they live in, do outlaw themselves,
and virtually declare themselves no Members of it; because they have reduced
themselves to a state of Nature, by disowning there is amongst them a common
Judge, who has a Right to decide their Controversies, and redress their
Injuries, and in whose Determinations they are obliged to acquiesce.

God, who is the Author of every good thing, may be said in a more special
manner to be so of Government, because it is absolutely necessary to the
Well-being of Mankind; and He, by the Law of Nature, which obliges mankind to
act for their good, has instituted it, and has since by his Positive Law
ratified and confirmed it; yet He did not constitute any particular Form of
Government, but left mankind at liberty to dispose of themselves, as they (when
they instituted Societies) thought fit. God was so far from taking this Liberty
from any Nation, that when he was pleased to take upon himself the Office of
King over his own People the Jews, he first required their Consent; and a
Contract between God and the People (as is plain by the 19th. of Exodus) was
the Foundation of the Theocracy. And since it is not by God's Positive Law,
That one Form of Government, rather than another, is any where established,
there can remain no other way by which any Government can be erected, or that
one man can have a Right to command over others, but by the Law of Nature, or
by the Consent of the Parties concerned: But there is no Law of Nature for any
one Form of Government, so as to make the rest unlawful; or that one person,
rather than another, should have the Sovereign Administration of Affairs: Nor
can there be any one Law of Nature urged, why any particular person should have
a Power over so many Millions of different Families, with no manner of relation
and dependence one upon another, and who are by Nature equal, being of the same
rank, promiscuously born to the same Advantages of Nature, and to the use of
the same common Faculties: And therefore it remains, That Government must be
derived from Consent.

Object. Men are not by Nature free; because they are born subject to their
Parents, (who by the Law of Nature have an Absolute Power over them): Therefore
they could not choose Governors for themselves.

Answ. The Power that Parents have over their Children, does not extend to
their Lives or Properties, or hinder them from being free, tho they are born in
a condition which makes them for some time incapable to exercise their freedom.
It is the duty of those by whose means they come into the world, to take care
and provide for them until they are able to provide for themselves; which Duty
Parents cannot effectually discharge, except they have a Power to correct and
manage them as they think fit.

Children are obliged to take the same care for their Parents, if they chance
by losing their Reason to fall into the same helpless Condition; which they
cannot perform, except they have also in their turn, a Power to govern them
too, and even to use Forcible means, when they think it necessary.

Whoever has the Charge of educating a Child, whether he be his Father or a
Stranger, must have the same Power over him; and this a Child, tho an Absolute
King, must be forced to submit to. The information of his mind, the health of
his body, and even the necessities of life, make it absolutely necessary: And
if this be not inconsistent with Sovereign Power, much less is it with Freedom.
A man may be said to be by Nature Free, as well as Rational, tho he be not
capable of exercising both, until such an Age; and the same Age that sets him
free from the Power of a Tutor, sets him free from the Power of his Parents,
tho nothing can set him free from that Reverence (which is not inconsistent
with the state of Freedom) which he must for ever owe them.

But that Filial Reverence does not give his Father or Mother (to whom by the
Law of God and Nature he is obliged to pay equal Honor and Reverence) a Power
over his Life and Properties, or any Jurisdiction over him: (Whilst he is part
of the Family, it is true he must be subject in matters that concern the
Family, because there can be but one Master in a Family). If Parents had an
Absolute Regal Power, all Civil Government would be unlawful, because it would
deprive all Fathers of that Paternal Regal Power, which by the Law of Nature
(which is superior to all Human Laws) does (upon their having Children) become
their Right, and which the Government could no more justly deprive them of,
than of that Duty and Honor which Children by the same Law of Nature are
obliged to pay them; and which too, if Government were nothing but Paternal
Power, must belong to it. But if this Notion were true, this would not give
Governors a Power over Parents themselves, or over those who have no Parents in
being, because Paternal Power can affect none but Children: And the Supreme
Magistrate, who does not beget his Subjects, can have no Natural nor any other
Right to it, but as it is conveyed to him by Consent; except the Firstborn
from Adam (which the Asserters of Paternal Power do affirm) has an Universal
Hereditary Right, (the Absurdity of which Opinion has sufficiently been exposed
by a late most Ingenious Author); supposing which to be true, it is plain that
no other can have the same Right; so that until that mighty Monarch prove his
Claim, all the Civil Power that is now in the world, must come by Consent; and
there is nothing but that, can give another a greater Power than Parents
pretend to over their Children; and which Children are obliged to obey, even
contrary to their Parents Commands; and which gives them a Power of Life and
Death over their Parents, as it frequently happens in Elective Governments;
which Governments it is visible have their Power from the People; and this way
too at first must come the Power in all Hereditary Governments; for the first
of a Family could not have an Hereditary Right.

Object. The Power of Government could not come from the People, because they
have no Power over their own Lives; and therefore could not give that to
another which they had not themselves.

Answ. It is true, men having no power over their own Lives, could not part
with a Power they had not; yet Governors will have all the Power which is
necessary for the Ends of Government, by the Peoples giving them that Power
which by the Law of Nature they had over the lives of one another; for by that
Law every one had a Right to take away the life of another, if he could not
otherwise secure his own, or what was in order to the supporting it; and might
do the same in defense of any innocent person, and could punish any one for
injuring him or his neighbors, because by it he acted for his own and their
security: And if Punishment ought then to be inflicted, some one must have a
Right to inflict it; and if any one had a Right, all being by Nature equal,
every one must have the same Right; the exercise of which Right men have parted
with to their Governors; so that they alone have now the only Right to punish
with loss of life, or any less Punishment, in all cases, except in those where
upon the suddenness of the danger, Protection cannot be had from them, or where
they wholly neglect, or are incapable to protect them; There men's Natural
Liberties still remain, and they may in Defense of their own Lives, or what is
necessary to support them, justly take away the lives of the Aggressors. And
any Law which should take this Power from the people, would be null and void,
because the people never did or could give the Magistrate such a Power as
should hinder them from acting for their own Preservation, when necessity
required it.

The Magistrate having then his Power from the People, it is very certain he
can have no more Power than they were capable of giving him, or did give him;
who, because people (who had no Arbitrary Power over the Lives of one another)
were not capable of giving it him, can have no right to take away the life of
any person, except it be for the Public Good. Nor can men, though at the
Command of the Magistrate, without being guilty of Murder, deprive any of
their lives, when the good of the Society does no way require it. Nay, by the
mutual Assistance, which by the Law of Nature Mankind owe one another, they
might, if he should endeavor to destroy any, when it is evident it is no way
beneficial to the Public, justly Oppose the Magistrate, if Opposing him would
not be a greater Damage to the Public. As men could not give the Magistrate a
greater Power than they had over the lives of one another; so the Power they
gave him was not only for the defense and safety of their Lives, but to secure
them in the enjoyment of their Properties, and to judge concerning them by
known and impartial Laws. Men having no Power to destroy what was beneficial to
others, could not give him a right to Waste, or Impoverish, (which is the
necessary effect of Arbitrary Government, where the Uncertainty of the
Enjoyment destroys all Labor and Industry) what God has ordained for the
Necessaries, or Conveniences of Life. They that Assert the Magistrate has more
Power than the People could or did give him, must prove he has it from God, who
alone could give it him; but God, except to the Jews, gave no other Law about
Government, or any other matter, but those of Nature. And Christ, whose Kingdom
is not of this World, did not give more, or take away any Power from the
Magistrate: So that what ever Power was given him by Man, he still enjoys the
same without any addition or diminution.

CHAP. II. Of Passive Obedience.
THerefore it is very evident, That whatever Rights or Liberties men did not
part with to their Governors, those they have still retained in themselves; and
no person can have a right to their Obedience in those things wherein they have
given him no right to command; nor are they (which otherwise would be the
consequence) obliged to pay him more obedience than they owe him, but may
defend their Rights against any that has no right to take them away.

In the most Absolute Hereditary Government, if the Governor should endeavor
to alienate it, or any of the essential parts of it to a Stranger, he may be
justly opposed, because the People have not given him such a right, nor is a
right to dispose of a Government, necessary to his governing them; but such an
endeavor shall be interpreted so far good (because Acts are not so to be
interpreted as to be of no effect) as is in his power to make it good; it shall
be esteemed a good Resignation.

By the same, if not greater Reason, the King in a mixed Government may be
opposed, if he should endeavor to alienate any of the parts of the Government,
which are by the Legislative Power annexed to the Crown, as in England the
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters is; There the People may oppose the King,
if he should attempt to separate the Supremacy from the Crown, especially if he
should endeavor to make the Pope Supreme; because, if they did not oppose him
in that Attempt, they must either be guilty of High Treason, in owning the
Pope's Supremacy, or be destroyed when the Pope's Supremacy is established, for
refusing to be guilty of High Treason; it being Treason by the Laws to own his
Supremacy. Whoever owns the Pope's Supremacy, is incapable of being himself
Supreme in Ecclesiasticals; and he that cannot be Supreme in Ecclesiasticals,
cannot be Supreme in Civils, because being united by the Legislative, they
cannot be enjoyed apart.

In a mixed Government, where the Legislative Power of King, Lords and Commons
(which is the only Supreme Power, because it gives Laws to all) is divided,
part in the King, and part in the People; if either part invadeth the other's
Right, the usurping part may be justly opposed, because it invadeth what is the
Sovereign Right of another.

None can have a share in the Legislative Power, but who must have a right to
defend that Power; because any other than a Sovereign Right to the Legislative,
to which all are Subject, would be nonsense; and whoever has the Executive
Power, if he had not a share in the Legislative, would be subject to it. And he
that is entrusted with the Execution of the Laws, can have no more Power than
the Legislative has given him; and where the People have a share in the
Legislative, they have the same Right to their Privileges, (viz.) the Laws of
the Land, as the King has to his Prerogatives; because the Consent of both is
equally necessary to the altering the Laws, as it was to the making of them.

In a mixed Government, a King, beyond the Limits of his Kingly Power, is so far
from having a Right to Obedience, either Active or Passive, that by assuming
such an Unlimited Power, he loses all his Legal Power, which consists in
Governing according to the Laws enacted by the Legislative; and by it abdicates
the Government; for he that ceases to govern according to those Laws* by
governing Arbitrarily and contrary to Law, ceases as much to govern in the eye
and intent of the Law, as he that ceases to govern at all; and by governing
Arbitrarily (the Constitution admitting of no such Governor) destroys the very
Essence of his Kingly Power, and renounces (the only Right he has) his Legal
Right. For no person can have at the same time a Will to rule according to Law,
and a Will to rule contrary to Law; and he that wills the latter, cannot will
the former, and so willingly renounces his Legal Government; and by making his
Will the Law, he assumes the whole Legislative Power to himself, which wholly
destroys the former Government; for a new Legislative is a new Form of
Government; and if the whole be destroyed, the share the King has in it must be
so too, except a part can subsist, when the whole, by which and in which he
enjoyed his part, is dissolved.

Wherever people have established a mixed Government, they are presumed to
grant all that is necessary to maintain that Government; which could not be, if
one part had not a Right to hinder the Encroachment of the other.

It is Nonsense to brag of the Happiness which people enjoy in living under a
Limited Monarchy, if it had no other Limits than the Will and Pleasure of the
King; because then he would be as Absolute as the French King or
Grand-Siegneur, and his Subjects would be as mere slaves as the vilest of
theirs, since they would hold their Lives and Properties by no other Tenure,
than the Pleasure of the King who is absolute.

But it may be asked, Who shall judge between them, if either should usurp the
Right that belongs to the other?

I answer, None can judge as a superior in whose sentence both sides must
acquiesce, because that would suppose some one superior to the Supreme
Legislative Power: Or if the Judges of the Land should have an Absolute Power
to determine in these matters, and people should be obliged to submit to
whatever they decr^e, they could make either Party the Supreme Legislative
Power, or themselves, by declaring themselves to be so.

None, as a Superior, can call him to an account who has a share in the
Legislative; but he may be resisted as well as any other, that should invade
the Sovereign Rights of others, with which he has nothing to do.

Where people have not parted wi^h their Rights, it must be presumed they have
retained a Power to judge whether those Rights are invaded, or else the design
of preserving those Rights would be to no purpose.

But it may be objected, Tho it be no Treason, or any manner of Injury* or
Injustice, for People to defend their Rights against a King that has no Right
to take them away, yet for their own sakes people are obliged to submit to his
Arbitrary Government, because opposing him might create a War more destructive
than all the effects of his Arbitrary Power. But what King would resign his
Government, rather than oppose a Rebel? And if a single person thinks he is not
obliged to part with his Civil Right, how can he expect, that Millions (were it
possible it could be for their common good) should part with theirs? Since too,
every one of them has the same Right to their Privi^eges (the Laws of the Land)
as he has to his Crown, why should they be more obliged to suffer their own
rather than a Foreign Prince to destroy their Rights? Since the attempt is a
greater Crime in him, because he breaks his Oath, and the Trust that is reposed
in him, and is guilty of the highest Ingratitude to the People who have given
him so much Power.

By the same Argument, good men ought not to resist Robbers and Pirates: And if
a man should be obliged to quit all for fear of bloodshed, how bravely would
the good of mankind be promoted, and what a blessed Peace would the world
enjoy? which would consist in Violence and Rapine, and which would only be
maintained for the interest of Robbers and Oppressors.

Whoever does but consider the Poverty, the Misery, the Hardship people undergo
in Absolute Monarchies, where the generality not only want Conveniences, but
even the Necessaries of Life, and how by Tyranical Government the Richest and
most Flourishing Countries (as for instance, those under the Turkish Empire)
are depopulated and almost turned to deserts, so that the Inhabitants are thin
and few, as well as wretched and barbarous; and whoever compares them with
those that live under Mixed Governments, where the Inhabitants are generally
above twenty to one to what the others are, abounding with all manner of
Conveniences and Pleasures of life; or does but consider the happy condition
that Greece and a great number of other places enjoyed when they were Free
States; and what they now suffer; or has but read Bp. Burnet's Remarks on
Italy, Rome, and Switzerland, must be convinced, That it is not the Interest of
a Nation to let their King be Arbitrary; and that they cannot pay too dear for
preserving their Liberties. In making themselves Absolute, Kings act against
their own Safety, as well as the Good of the People, because a Mixed Government
is not only best for the Subjects, bnt for the Security of Kings, They being
oftener Deposed and Murdered (as all the Histories of the World do testify) in
Absolute than in Limited Monarchies.

Can any one think, that the United Provinces (in spite of the long War they
had to maintain their Privileges) are not as Populous, Rich, and Potent, and
upon all accounts in as flourishing a condition, as they would have been, had
they been possessed with the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and tamely
submitted to the Encroachments and Arbitrary Power of Spain?

Had the Doctrine of Passive-Obedience been all-along practiced, Mankind would
have been in a more slavish condition than any now are, that live under the
most Tyranical Governments; it is the fear that people may by ill usage be
provoked to violate this Doctrine, that keeps the greatest Tyrants within some
bounds, and makes them govern more mildly and moderately than otherwise they
would. It is, I think, no great Argument of the Goodness of an Opinion, when
the not observing it, or even the very probability of breaking it, has
preserved mankind in a much better condition than they would have been, had the
Supreme Powers been certain, that that Doctrine would have been inviolably
observed.

The English, who are the freest Nation in the world, cannot consider the
Happiness they enjoy, in comparison of those that live under Absolute
Monarchies, without having a just Veneration for their Noble Ancestors, who
have (tho not without the expense of their best blood) secured to them those
Liberties* they now enjoy: And the present Age would have strangely
degenerated, had they not been as zealous to have transmitted the same down to
their Posterity.

Most of the European Nations were once Masters of the same Freedom the English
still enjoy. Those great Swarms of people that came out of the North, and
subdued most part of Europe, upon settling themselves in the Countries they
conquered, made their Generals Kings, and their Chief Officers their Concilia
Magna, or Parliamenta, without whose Consent no Laws were made, or scarce any
thing of Importance done: Which Government the English have best preserved,
being a Nation too tenacious of their Liberties to be Complimented out of them;
and (as they to their Cost have found, who have attempted it) of too great a
Courage to be Forced out of them.

It cannot then justly be concluded to be against the Public Good of the
Nation to oppose Arbitrary Government, because more lives might perhaps have
been lost by it, than by the Tyranical Government of all the Kings since the
Conquest; because those Kings were not Absolute, and when they endeavored to
be so, were always opposed. But had it not been thought lawful to oppose them,
and they had been as Absolute as the Doctrine of Passive Obedience would have
permitted them, I would ask whether then (for that is the true state of the
question) the Nation would have been as Populous and as Rich as it is at
present by preserving its Liberties, and opposing all Usurpation? There is, I
think, no reason to doubt, if Arbitrary Government had prevailed, but that the
Country would have been reduced to as poor and as beggarly a condition, and
would as much have been depopulated as any Province under the Turkish Empire.

There can be no greater Argument than the universal Consent of the Nation,
that what they so unanimously concurred in, was not against their Common Good;
and nothing but a Danger as Universal as it was great, could make all people so
desirous of a Revolution: And there could be no pretense from the Public Good
of not resisting, when Slavery it self was not the end, but only in order to
extirpate an Heretical Nation; which all Popish Princes by their Religion are
obliged to do; and there was no reason to suppose the late King (had not the
Design been so notorious) less zealous than his Neighbors Where it is
notorious that a King has a Design to enslave the Nation, there can be no great
danger in opposing him; because it is impossible for him, (the Lands and Riches
being in so many hands), to be able to influence so great a Number of the
Gentry and Nobility, as shall be sufficient to oppose the Common Interest.

There is nothing more pernicious to Government, than to encourage those that
publish such Doctrines as tend to destroy the Rights and Privileges of the
people: Who are quick-sighted enough to find out the weak side of such
Arguments as tend to their hurt; and it makes them suspicious that some sudden
Designs are carrying on against them, and prepares their minds to receive any
ill impression against the Government. What happened in King Charles the
First's time, is an undeniable Instance of this, where the encouraging and
preferring almost none but such as preached up that Senseless Doctrine, created
such Jealousies, Fears, and Mistrusts in the minds of the People, of whom too
many were irritated by Persecution (for Passive-Obedience and Persecution, like
Brethren in Iniquity, go hand in hand) that nothing but the Ruin of that Prince
could satisfy their Jealousies. That Doctrine had like to have produced a more
fatal Consequence in his Son's time, by encouraging him (who had the weakness
to think, that those who when uppermost were Bigots for it, would submit to it
when they themselves came to suffer) to invade the Rights and Liberties of the
People.

CHAP. III. Of the Public Good.
THE Consideration of the Public Good, which is the Supreme Law by which both
King and People ought to guide their Actions, does oblige Subjects to obey in
all things that are in the least disputable, and even to acquiesce in whatever
a King does, if in the whole he promotes the Public Good. It is not barely the
breaking a Law, or stretching the Prerogative, in this or that Point, can do
any great mischief; except it be done with a Design to subvert the Liberties of
the People, and establish Arbitrary Government. In many cases the good of the
Whole may require the Laws to give place to the Executive Power, because it is
impossible upon the account of the infinite variety of Accidents and
Circumstances that attend Human Affairs, to foresee, and by Laws to provide for
all the Necessities that concern the Public: Laws can only respect what does
generally happen; there must be a vast number of Particulars, where a rigid
Observation of Law must be hurtful; and it will be necessary that a Power to
Dispense with the Penalties of the Laws, should be lodged with the King, whose
Power cannot be too large, if he uses it for the Public Good.

The only Enemies to the present Government (at least amongst the Protestants)
are the Asserters of Passive Obedience; who tho they think it for the Public
Good to suffer a King to inslave a Nation, rather than oppose him, yet are so
absurd as to think they are obliged in Conscience to disturb the Government
that protects them, and raise a Civil War (tho the consequence should be never
so fatal) to restore a Prince, whose Return would, if the War did not, complete
the Ruin of the Nation. The Falseness and Absurdity of which Opinion, I shall
endeavor to make manifest: And to show, That it is the Indispensable Duty of
all that are Protected by a Government, to bear True Faith and Allegiance to it.

I suppose I need not spend many Words, to show the Absolute Necessity of
Government, for the Good and Well-being of Mankind; or that it was for no other
reason that men parted with their Liberties (for what else could be an
Equivalent?) but for the mutual Defense and Security which they receive by
Government, which is the sole Design and End of all Laws, Punishments, and
Rewards. As this Reason was at first the sole Motive for submitting to
particular persons, so it is the only reason still for continuing Allegiance to
them; and when this Reason cease, Natural Liberty does return, and then men
are obliged for the sake of their own Safety and Preservation to pay Allegiance
where it is most for their own Interest and Advantage.

Obedience is due to Government, and not to the Person that governs but upon
the account and for the sake of it* otherwise people might be obliged to pay
Allegiance to a King after he had resigned his Regal O^fice. It is impossible
for a King to lose his Government, and not lose the Allegiance of his Subjects,
because they are Relatives; and according to the nature of all Relatives, one
cannot subsist without the other.

Natural Relations, as that between Father and Son, last as long as both
Parties Live; but Artificial ones, (if I may so term them) as those between
Master and Servant, King and Subject, may be destroyed during their Lives; and
when these Relations cease, all Obligations* on both sides cease. The Relation
between Sovereign and Subjects is destroyed, when the Sovereign will no longer
Protect his People, and so freely withdraws from the Government, or when he is
deprived of the Power of Protecting them, and so is driven from his Government;
which, as to the People, (for whose sake Government was Instituted) has the
same effect; and they equally lose that Protection and Defense, for the sake of
which alone Allegiance is paid, whether the Sovereign will not, or cannot any
longer Govern them, and is forced to leave his Government in the hands of
others; whereby those that were his Subjects are as incapable of paying him
Allegiance, as he is to Protect them; and the same Force that will justify his
leaving them, will equally justify their Transferring their Allegiance: And
since no Society is able to subsist without having Justice Administered, and
enjoying those other blessings that are derived from Government: Either they
must by living without Government become a prey to every one, or else there is
a necessity of preserving themselves by paying Allegiance to the new Government.

If Obedience were due purely to the Title, Subjects would be very great Rebels
in refusing to pay Obedience to a Madman with a Legal Title, and in placing
another in the Throne: What other reason can be assigned for removing him, but
that the good of the Commonwealth requires Obedience to be paid to a Person
that can Protect them; which since a Madman cannot, it is their Duty to pay
Obedience to another that can. Is not a Person that has lost his Government, as
unable to Protect the People, as he that has lost his senses? And would not the
endeavoring to restore him by violent means, be more pernicious to the
Public, than suffering a Madman in the Throne? For though the incapacity
proceeds from different Causes, the one being a Natural, the other a Moral one,
yet the reason, the Public good, is the same, for not endeavoring to Restore
one, as it is for Deposing the other.

Though the next of Kin may have a right to be a Guardian to a Minor, yet if
admitting him would prejudice the affairs of the Minor, he ought to be denied
that Right, or rather that Right cease, because it is against the interest
and advantage of the Minor, for whose sake alone he was appointed Guardian: So
in matters of Government, (which is an Office that had no other grounds for its
being instituted, but the good of the People, who are always in their
Minorities, and such Sovereign Curators are constantly necessary for the
management of their Affairs): Any particular Person's Right to that Office must
cease, if he cannot be admitted without great prejudice to the Minors; and as
the number is disproportionate between one and a whole Nation, and as the lives
of a number of Persons are to be valued before the interest of a single Minor;
so much stronger will the Argument hold in behalf of the People, and the
greater will the Crime be in attempting to admit any Person into that Office,
when it cannot be done without involving the Nation in manifest Ruin.

Therefore in most cases where one King has Power enough to turn another out of
his Kingdom and get into his Throne, it is highly probable he will be able to
keep it against any Opposition from the Person he Conquered: So that they who
set up for his Interest, expose themselves to certain Ruin and Destruction. But
though it might so happen that they might succeed in the Attempt, yet since it
could not be done without a manifest injury to the Nation, by Disturbing the
Peace and Quiet of it, by causing the Effusion of so much Blood, Rapine,
Desolation, and those intolerable Calamities which Civil War does produce, it
would be so far from being a Duty, that it would be a sin of the first
magnitude to Attempt it; it would be contrary to the greater and prior
obligation which they owe to the Public.

For none can have a Right inconsistent with the Public Good, which is the
only Fundamental Law of all Societies; contrary to which, no Law (and
consequently no Legal Right, which is built upon Law) can be valid; to which as
to a center, each man's Actions ought to tend, because the more universal any
good is, the more it ought to be embraced; and Societies could not subsist, but
must necessarily fall into a state of War and Confusion, if every man should
prefer the advantage of any particular Person before the Good of the whole.

As every particular Person's interest must yield to the general Good of the
Society; so must that of a particular Society submit to the more universal Good
of all Societies; and no Principles can be true (however they may serve a
particular turn) that, if generally practiced, would be against the Good of all
Societies; but nothing can be more destructive and pernicious to all human
Societies, than those Principles which assert that Allegiance must be only Paid
to him that has a Legal Title; because it must oblige vast numbers in all
Revolutions to be destroyed for the sake of a single Person, rather than submit
to another who is in the same station and by whose Power they might be Governed
and Protected.

It is a Doctrine of most dangerous consequence, and if embraced would destroy
the best part of Mankind, and fill the whole world with Blood and Confusion;
for in such Revolutions (which frequently happen) what Government will suffer
its Enemies (the more still the more dangerous) to enjoy equal privileges with
its dutiful Subjects? thereby enabling them to destroy that Government, which
by all ties of Conscience they must think themselves obliged to, as Subjects to
its Enemies.

The safety and quiet of their peaceable Subjects, as well as self
preservation, will oblige the Supreme Powers to extirpate them, for it is
impossible for men of these Principles, if they act accordingly to live quiet
under a Government which they suppose has no Legal Right, because their actions
are not in their own power, but in that of the Dispossessed Prince, who has the
same Indispensable Right to Command them, as he had before he was outed of the
Throne. Therefore they are obliged, whatever they promise, or whatever specious
pretenses they make, to act contrary to them, when either his Interest or
Commands do require it.

Can it be supposed, that when men submitted to Government, (because it was
absolutely necessary for their Preservation) that they submitted on such terms,
as should oblige them in so many cases to run into those inconveniences which
they desired to shun, rather than live in peace and quiet under a Government
which does actually Protect them?

Nothing can justify such Principles, except the Misery and Destruction, not
the preservation of human Societies, be the Supreme Law; or that it is a sin to
act for the general Good of a Society, and a Duty in the People to expose
themselves to certain destruction, rather then act for their own good, in a
matter which was solely Instituted for their good.

A man may be obliged to suffer rather than act against his Duty, but that he
should be obliged to suffer rather than do his Duty in promoting the general
good of the Nation, is to me a strange Paradox. If it be a Duty to act for the
Public good, and the general interest of a Society; and if the more Universal
the good be, the more it ought to be sought for; then the means that are
necessary to this duty, or end, must be as necessary as the end it self,
because the end prescribes the means.

So that if the paying Obedience to the Present Government* be for the good and
happiness of the Nation, it must be a Duty in every one to do it; and on the
contrary, if endeavoring to disturb the present Settlement, and to Restore the
Late King be (as I think no Protestant can doubt it) to the disadvantage, and
against the good and interest of the Nation, it must be a sin. And can there be
more dreadful consequences (than what in all human probability, must happen
upon Unsetling the Present Government,) to our Estates, Liberties, and Lives,
and what ought to be dearer than all, to our Holy Religion? Except Popery, and
French Tyranny, which include in them Slavery both of Body and Soul, are to be
courted at the expense of a Civil War.

The paying Obedience to those that are in Possession, is a Doctrine that tends
so much to the interest of human Societies, and of all the particular Members
thereof, that even those who Oppose it, if they consulted their own happiness,
must wish it were true; and what greater Argument can there be of the truth of
it, than that it is so conducive to the good of Mankind?

And that common Objection, or rather Reflection, That it is interest makes
these Tenets, which require Obedience to the Present Government, so universally
embraced, which (howsoever* it be uncharitably designed) is so far from
destroying the credit of them, that it is a demonstration of their truth;
because they are for the Good of Particulars of which the Public is made up.

CHAP. IV. Of God's Laws.
THE Public Good of Societies, is not only the foundation of all human Laws,
(upon which all Legal Rights depend, which cease to oblige, and are null and
void, when contrary to it) but is even the foundation of God's Laws, which
concern men with relation to one another.

For God, who is infinitely happy in himself, could have no other motive in
creating man, but to make him happy in this Life, as well as that which is to
come; and accordingly if mankind would follow those Rules that are prescribed
by God in order to their behavior toward one another, in what happy, blessed,
and flourishing State wonld they be in? And what misery and confusion even in
this Life does deviating from those Rules create, besides the Punishment they
receive in the Life to come, for acting against their good in this. Do not the
circumstances as they tend to the advantage or disadvantage of human Societies,
make things good or evil? And are they not the only rule to judge of God's Laws
by; as for instance, the Commandment declares in general terms it is not
Lawful to Kill; yet it is a duty in the Magistrate to Kill, because it is for a
Public good, which is the only rule by which to distinguish between Murder
and Justice. Even a private Person may kill in his own defense; and such a
Liberty is for the Public good; nor do Christ's Precepts, which forbid all
manner of Revenge, and require Forgiving of Injuries, hinder any from punishing
those that injure them by Legal courses; because the punishing them tends to
promote the Public Interest of Mankind.

It is unlawful to take what is another without his consent, yet if it be for
the Common good, it is not only Lawful, but a Duty, as Blowing up of houses in
case of Fire, against the consent of the Owner, or digging in a man's Ground to
prevent an Innundation; if a Ship be in danger to be lost, it is the Duty of
those that are in it, in order to preserve the Ship, to throw any man's Goods
over Board, though contrary to his consent; and if a Ship wants Water, She may
Lawfully, even by Force, take some from another Ship, if that Ship in all
likelihood has enough to carry her to the next Watering-place.

In case of necessity it is Lawful for a private Person to take from another
what is necessary for his Subsistence, if he whose it is, be not in the same
want; nay, even what is Devoted to God in such cases it is Lawful to take; and
Christ makes David's eating the Consecrated Bread, an Argument a Fortiori, to
justify what his Disciples in their Hunger took from man; in such cases the
Natural Right of self-preservation returns, and though People are sometimes
punished for taking from another in their necessities, yet that does not prove
it Unlawful, but the Punishment is inflicted only to prevent a gap being laid
open to Libertinism, which would be inconsistent with the Public good and
convenience; for the sake of which a Person ought sometimes to suffer, though
it be undeservedly.

What is more inviolable then a promise to return what one is entrusted with?
Yet none are obliged to return a Sword to that Person who designs to Attempt
his own Life, or that of another; much less ought we to endeavor to give any
one the Power of the Sword, tho he has never so much Right to it, if the
Attempt would prove fatal to a great number of lives, and contrary to the good
of the Society, for whose sake alone he has that Right; nor can any one be
obliged to ruin or prejudice a Society for the Right of a particular Person,
when the Right which that Person has, was only for the preservation of that
Society. What is more sacred then Truth? Yet even that is dispensed with, when
it is evident the contrary is for the good of those to whom it is spoken, and
no prejudice to any other Person, as in the case of Melancholy and Sick
Persons, and Children, or such like instances If Untruths were forbid, not
because they were Injuries, but barely because they are Untruths, all Parables,
Fables and Novels would be Unlawful.

What can be more unjust than to take away the Life of an Innocent Person? Yet
if it be for the Public good, it is so far from being Unjust, that it is a
Duty in those that have the Public Administration of Affairs to do it. And all
Governments act no other ways when by force they compel Innocent Persons to the
Wars where it is unavoidable, but that great numbers must be slain: Tho it
seldom happens to be for the good of a Society that an innocent Person should
suffer, yet the only thing that Government looks after in punishing, is the
Common good, and it may justly cause an innocent Person to suffer, if it be for
the General good; because the lesser (the particalar) which is then considered
sub ratione mali, must give place to the greater, the General good. Not only
the Public, but a Private person has a Right to take away the Life of an
Innocent person, if he cannot otherwise preserve his own. And most Casuists are
of Opinion, that a man (if parting with his Life should happen to be beneficial
to the Public) ought, as Codr^s did, freely to lay it down; but they all
agree, that a man ought to part with any thing that is less than Life, or not
endeavor to recover what he has been deprived of, if he cannot do it without
detriment to the Public, much less ought any to assist him in the Recovery.

In short, There is no Law that wholly relates to Man, but cease to oblige,
if upon the infinite variety of circumstances which attend human Affairs, it
happens to be contrary to the Good of man.

But in things of a higher nature, and which are Moral in themselves, and
relate to the Worship and Honor of God, it is not Lawful upon pretense of
Temporal interest, to dispense with any of those Duties, because it is not
Lawful to do evil that good may come; and the Temporal good, which is the less,
ought to give place to the greater the Eternal: Though even in these cases,
things which relate to God's Worship, if merely positive, must yield to the
good of Particular men, because they are (as Christ speaks of the Sabbath) made
for man, and not man for them. But in things designed for the Temporal interest
of mankind, the standard of Good and Evil* is the Public good, and things are
Commanded or Forbidden, as they are either good or hurtful to Mankind, and what
in some circumstances may be a Duty, in others, if it prove inconsistent with
the Public good, would be a Sin, and the contrary a Duty; and then acting for
the Public good, would not be doing Evil that Good might come of it, but by
the circumstances altering the case, it would cease to be Evil.

The design, end, and intent of all God's Laws, is the Worship or Reverence
that is due to the Deity, and the Love that is due to man. The love of God and
ones Neighbor, our Savior says, are the Two grand Commandments, on which
hang all the Law and the Prophets, (and in a much more eminent manner does the
Gospel, whose Precepts, as they teach the mutual Duty of man toward man, are
nothing but Love and Charity)* So that it is evident, that no Doctrine can be
true that is in the least inconsistent with these Two Commandments, the Love of
God and of ones Neighbor: But how can he be said to love his Neighbor, (which
is an indefinite word, and carries the sense of an universal) who will have
vast Numbers sacrificed to the interest of a Single person? Or how can it be
presumed, that God, who has declared he is no respecter of Persons, and has
made all men by Nature equal, should act so inconsistently with himself, as to
require that great Numbers should lose their Lives, and be exposed to all
manner of Misery, for so inconsiderable a trifle, as the advancing a single
Person to a Post, which is attended with as great Cares and Troubles, as
Honors and Riches; or that he should prescribe about Government (which could
have no other ground for its Institution but the good of the Society) I say,
that he should prescribe such rules, as in most Revolutions must tend to their
Ruin and Confusion?

CHAP. V. Of the Law of Nations.
UPON this foundation of the General good of Societies, have certain Rules and
Customs been observed by Nations in their intercourse with one another, which
are called the Law of Nations (without which no Correspondence either in Peace
or War could be maintained) which only by tacit consent, and general practice
of Nations, upon the account of their evident utility, and common profit, have
obtained the force of Laws, and are looked on as sacred. The Supreme Powers,
neither by themselves, nor Representatives, ever met, or enacted such Laws, nor
have other Nations Power to oblige any Sovereign Independent State, which
cannot be bound to observe these Customs, or Practices, but as they tend to the
General good and advantage of all Societies.

Every Nation is at Liberty to appoint what Government, Laws, etc. or manage
its own Affairs within its self, as it thinks best. The Laws of Nations relate
only to their Commerce, and Correspondence one with another, and Princes are no
other way concerned by the Law of Nations with one another, but as they have
the Power of making Peace or War, and all other Leagues for those Nations they
Rule.

It is not at all material what Right they have to this Power, it is sufficient
the Nations then own them for their Sovereigns, and have entrusted them with
this Power; it would be an endless, as well as useless task, for Ambassadors
before their admission, to prove the just Right their Masters have to those
Titles and Powers they assume to themselves.

All Treaties, except they appear to be merely Personal, though made with
Usurpers, will oblige Legal Princes, if they succeed, and so vice versa, and a
League made with a Nation, when under a King, will oblige that Nation (provided
they continue free) though the Government should be changed to a Commonwealth,
because Leagues are National, and made with Princes only upon the account of
the Nations they are Representatives of. But when they lose this Power, and the
Nations are no longer concerned in their Acts, they lose all manner of Right
that did belong to them by the Law of Nations; because these Privileges are (as
Grotius calls them) bona Regni, and did belong to them only as they were the
Public Persons, or Representatives of their respective Nations, which when
they cease to be, they have no more Right to them, then they had before they
were these Public Persons.

But because the same intercourse between Nations will always be necessary,
which cannot be maintained, but with those who have the Supreme Power; and they
that have that Power, must have a Right to those Privileges, upon the account
of the Nations they Represent; and the Dispossessed Princes, must with their
Kingdoms lose their Right to them, because more than one at the same time,
cannot have the same Right for the same Nation: And though some Princes (out of
design, or hatred to their Enemies) may allow outed Princes some of those
Privileges that belong only to those that have Summum imperium, yet they have
no Right by the Laws of Nations to claim them, but they, as well as those that
follow their broken fortunes, can be esteemed no other than Subjects, during
their stay, to those Kings in whose Dominions they abide; where they are so far
from having a Power of making Peace or War, or any other National Contracts,
that they cannot, without License first obtained from those Princes in whose
Dominions they are, send any to treat with other Princes, or receive any sent
by them; much less allow them those Privileges which are due to Persons of a
Public Character. And it would be unreasonable that Sovereigns should be
obliged to allow them, or any sent by them, those privileges, when they are
incapable of returning the same. And with as little reason can any Prince in
another Dominions pretend to grant Commissions to private Men of War, to
disturb the Trade and Commerce of any Nation, because he cannot claim in
another Prince's Territories a Power (which can only belong to the Sovereignty
of those Dominions) to Judge, Condemn, or Restore according to the Maritime
Laws, the Ships and Goods which are taken by those that act by his Commission.
So that the Privateers themselves would be their own Judges, whether what they
take was Lawful Prize, which in effect would be a power to rob whom they had a
mind to. Therefore by the Law of Nations, all who act by such a Commission, are
esteemed as Pirates.

CHAP. VI. Of the Obligation of Human Laws.
ALL Writers allow, That the Leagues and Contracts which Princes make with one
another, do oblige them to one another, no longer then they are in possession
of their Kingdoms, because the sole reasons of making these Leagues, were upon
the power each Kingdom had to afford mutual Assistance and benefit to one
another; and if this be a constant practice with Kings, that their Treaties
oblige them no longer than when each King has Possession of his Kingdom; Why
will they not allow the same reason to hold for Subjects, that they should be
free from all Obligations to Princes, when they no longer receive any
Protection from them? Seeing that was the only ground and sole cause of their
paying them Allegiance; and in truth they cannot be any longer obliged, then
the reason for obliging them holds: For why should People be obliged, when
there is no reason they should be so? no Laws can bind any longer, than the
reason for Enacting them holds good; and when the sole reason that made them
Laws, cease, the Laws themselves must so too; much more must any particular
Law be null and void, when not only the reason of keeping it cease, but the
keeping it does thwart the general intent and design of all Laws, which is the
good and happiness of the Societies; to which all Laws are but means; and there
is no reason that the means should oblige, when the end for whose sake the
means were ordained cannot be obtained by those means, much less when they
become destructive of the sole end for which they were ordained.

If there were a Law that Ships should sail on such aside of the Channel, and
the sole reason, whether expressed or not, were for avoiding the dangerous
Sands that were on the other side; if the Sands should chance to be removed to
the safe side of the Channel, the Pilot would be so far from being bound upon
the account of that Law, to run his Ship upon the Sands, that he would break
the Law if he kept to the Letter of it, and would observe the Law by going
contrary to the Letter: So again, if a Law that required Obedience to one
particular Person, should happen to be destructive of the Public good, and of
fatal consequence to the Community, the Letter of the Law would oblige no more
in one case than in the other; nay, the reason of not observing the last would
be stronger upon the account of the disproportion of the number: But the true
meaning and intent of the Law would in one case as well as the other, oblige
People to act contrary to the letter of the Law; and people would be as much
bound to pay Obedience, where it would be for the Public Good, as in the other
case, the Ship would be to sail on the safe side of the Channel.

The occasion of not a few Mistakes in this important Controversy, arises
from men's judging by the same rules, (tho the reasons are extremely different)
in cases which concern the Supreme Powers, as they do in those which relate to
private Persons. In cases between private Persons, there is a Superior to
decide all controversies, and to do right and justice; for which end he was
made their Superior: So that if any one by Fraud or Violence possesses himself
of another's Right, the Law is open, and redress may be had without any danger
to the Public; nay, The Public Safety consists in having private men's wrongs
redressed.

But as to the Supreme Powers, whatever Right or Titles they have, people are
obliged to submit to those in Possession, because there is no Superior Court
(as in case of private persons) to judge of their Rights; and Possession, by
all Laws, gives a man a Right, till he be legally dispossessed; and if a man
cannot be turned out by Course of Law, (as it is evident he that is in
Possession of the Government cannot), he ought still to enjoy what he
possessed: For it is against the Nature of all Civil Societies to appeal to the
Sword, to prevent which they were instituted: Besides, Force can never decide
Civil Controversies, nor can the Sword be a proper Judge of Wrong or Right; it
can only determine who is the strongest, not who has the best Cause; and the
pretended Remedy would be infinitely worse than the Disease; for Civil War, as
long as it continues, destroys all Civil Rights.

If the next Heir, whether Brother or Son, should get Possession of the
Government by Murdering his King, the people (instead of giving him that
Punishment which by the Law of Nature, and God's Positive Law, is due to such
Crimes), are obliged to pay him Obedience, to which he can have no other Right
but Possession; for whilst his King was alive, and in Possession of the
Government, he could have no Right; and certainly an Action so barbarous as
murdering him that was (suppose) both his Father and King, which is against all
Right, Law, and Justice, could never give him any Right or Just Title, because
it is against all Conscience and Reason, that a man should reap any advantage
by an Act so monstrously wicked; and any Law that should allow a man any
benefit by so enormous a Crime, would be as sinful it self: Nor can a man in
any other case reap any advantage by his own Turpitude; but here, because there
is no superior to punish him, nor can Obedience be refused him without Injury
to the Public, it is peoples Duty, instead of punishing him, to pay him
Obedience. And certainly the same Reason will hold for paying Obedience to any
that get Possession of the Government, since none can get it more unjustly.

All Legal Rights must depend upon the Laws, and all Laws, for their Authority,
upon the Government; and when that Government is at an end, all the Laws that
concern it must be so too, and can no more oblige than the English Laws can in
a Foreign Country; because a Power to put Laws in execution (whereby people
are protected) is essential to all Laws, because it is essential to all
Government, on which the Laws depend; and without such a Power no Civil
Society, and by consequence no Civil Laws can subsist.

No particular Law can bind in those circumstances, where all Laws would cease
to bind; and there is no reason that some Laws should oblige, when all Laws
would have no obligation; as they would not oblige if there were no Power to
put them in execution; because men, when there is no Power to restrain them
from acting as they have a mind to, would be in the state of Nature, and
consequently without any Laws but those of Nature.

Without a Coercive Power, the Laws become a dead Letter, or at best but
Advice; so that there can be no Laws that can oblige people to act against the
present Powers, because by being against the present Powers they cease to be
Laws.

If a Law that should oblige people not to pay Obedience to the actual
Possessors of the Throne, had they not a Legal Title to it, were not in its own
nature null, or could subsist after that Government to which it required
Obedience, was destroyed, it would be void upon account of its Impiety; because
as long as the Legal Princes continue dispossessed, which might extend to some
Centuries, it would overturn all Government, and all Civil Society, which are
instituted for the good of mankind, and which Nature has qualified man for, by
making him a Sociable Creature.

Can any man in his senses think, that a particular Prince's Interest can stand
in competition with the very Being of Human Societies, and the Preservation and
Safety of the People? Is it not absurd to suppose, that Legal Rights that owe
their Being to Civil Societies, should oblige people to put an end to Civil
Societies; and that Laws that are but the Rules of Government, should destroy
Government it self, or that Human Laws should be able to destroy the Law of
Nature, or take away that Natural Right which people have to act for their own
good and preservation, which is a Right that is superior to all Human Laws, and
for the sake of which all Human Laws were made.

All Human Laws are made cum sensu humanae imbecillitatis; nor do Legislators
themselves design they shall oblige in case of great and pressing
Inconveniences, but allow that a moral Necessity does destroy the Virtue and
Force of them.

The Good and Interest of the People, is the Supreme Law, to which the Rights
and Titles of Princes must submit; and where it is for the good of the Nation
that they should be governed by such a particular person, That person best and
most Legal Right, because it is built upon the Supreme and Fundamental Law of
all Societies. And whoever designedly breaks this most Sacred Law, may justly
be accounted a Rebel; and as the Crime would be greater in them than others, if
they who are hired by Travelers to protect them from Robbers, should rob them
themselves; so if Princes, who are entrusted by the people with Power, in order
to Protect the Society, should make use of that Power to the Detriment of the
Society, the Crime in them would be so much the greater, by how much more they
are obliged to act otherwise.

CHAP. VII. Objections answered.
Object. UPON supposition that the Good of the Society is the Grand Vltimate
Law, yet these Principles, which require Obedience to the Possessor, cannot be
true, because they are against the Peace and Happiness of Nations, by
encouraging Rebellion against all Princes, in obliging people to pay the same
Allegiance, even to those that unjustly depose them.

Answ. These Principles are so far from being destructive to the Peace and
Quiet of Nations, or encouraging Rebellion against their Governors, that they
require Obebience to all in Possession, upon pain of Damnation; but if neither
the fear of Eternal Punishment in the life to come, nor the severest that can
be afflicted upon them in this, can secure people from rebelling, I must
confess my Ignorance, I know nothing that can. It is the Duty of all Subjects
to do their utmost to defend the Government; that is but a just return, and
what is due for its protecting and defending them: But if by the Chance of War,
or any other way, it should lose the Power of Protecting them, they are not
obliged to have their Throats cut, rather than pay Allegiance to that
Government, by whose Favor and Protection they subsist, and enjoy what they
have. And that Prince is very unreasonable, and acts against the rules of
Humanity, as well as Charity, who when he is able no longer to Protect the
People, would rather have them destroyed, then own that Government that can.

Nothing can justify such an inhuman and barbarous Opinion, except it can be
proved that men entered into Societies barely for the sake and interest of a
single Person; and that if his pleasure or profit require it, Millions of Lives
must be indispensably sacrificed. This is to place Men in a worse condition
than the Beasts are; if they are in Conscience obliged to lose their Lives to
gratify the unlimited Pride, Ambition, Revenge, or Interest of a single Person.

It is strange that any Englishmen, who are the Freest Nation in the world,
should have such Notions of themselves, that they are no other then the King's
Properties: Though it is but reasonable that men who design to bring the most
insupportable Slavery on themselves, should qualify themselves for it by
Notions and Principles so much below the dignity of human Nature.

These Principles are so far from being any ways prejudicial to Mankind, that
it is they alone which in all Revolutions can secure human Societies, and make
Governments easy and safe both to Kings and Subjects* by putting an end to
those otherwise endless Disputes of Titles. And Princes may without Fears or
Jealousies mind the Public good, because it secureth them who are in
Possession against all Pretenses.

The most that can be Objected, Is that a Prince that has once lost his
Dominions, may by these Principles chance to lose the hopes of ever recovering
them again.

A Prince that is unjustly expelled, ought to acquiesce if he has no way of
Recovering his Kingdom but by disturbing the Peace and Quiet of a Nation; he
ought not to make use of such Unlawful means for the Recovery of his Kingdom;
and certainly others can have no reason to act against the good of the
Community for his Interest, when he himself is obliged not to act.

The interest of a Prince is only more Sacred then another's, when that of the
Public is involved in it, but when that is no longer concerned in his actions,
he cease to be the Public Person, and is but upon equal terms with other
private men, and ought as well as any other to acquiesce, rather than disturb
the Quiet or Peace of a Nation. And there is then the same reason for not
endeavoring to Restore him, as there was at first for not turning him out.

All the ill consequences that can happen in this case, are that the less hopes
Princes have of being Restored by such Unlawful means, the more careful (it is
hoped) they will be in Governing the Commonwealth, and more afraid of Arbitrary
Illegal Practices.

Object. If all Persons how unjustly soever they get a Crown, have the same
Right (their Consent) to the Obedience of the People, then there can be no such
thing as an Usurper.

Answ. He who without any just Cause destroys the Right that any Prince has to
the Allegiance of his Subjects, by making him incapable to Protect them, and
Protects them himself, may be called an Usurper: Though the People by the
former Prince's losing his Power to Protect them, are reduced to the State of
Nature, and by consequence free from any Allegiance, and may Lawfully or rather
are obliged (every one else being out of a capacity to Protect them) to consent
to be Governed by him, who has the Power to Protect them, who being so Chosen,
has the only Right a King can have, the Consent of the People, who are as much
obliged to Obey him, as they are any King whatever. The former King is so far
then from being their Legal King, that he is no King at all, nor has any manner
of Right to their Allegiance. It is true the Usurper having done him an Injury
ought to make him satisfaction, and (if he can without any damage to the
Public) ought to place him in that condition he was in before he made him
incapable to Protect the People; who then, for the sake of Protection which
they receive from him, are obliged to pay him Obedience. The having a Right to
be restored by the Usurper, is the only Right a Prince that is unjustly
Deprived of his Regal Office can pretend to. And when I speak of his Legal
Right, I mean nothing but this by it; Amongst the Jews, though none could have
a Legal Right but one of their own Nation, because they were obliged by God
himself to choose a King from amongst their Brethren, and God afterward, 2 Chronicles. 23. 3. entailed the Crown upon the Posterity of David, yet when these
were disabled to Protect the people by their being in the Power of Strangers,
it was so far from being a Crime, that it was their Duty (notwithstanding the
Divine Legal Right any of their Brethren could pretend to) to pay Allegiance to
them, though for the most part they were Usurpers, having no just Cause to
conquer them.

CHAP. VIII. Of Conquest.
IF the Supreme Powers upon the suddenness of the Attempt, or by any other
reason become incapable of Defending or Securing to them the Lives and Goods of
their Subjects, they are, as to those particular Cases, in the state of Nature,
and by their own Authority may justly take away the Lives of any that Assault
them. There can be no reason why (if in all other cases no Protection can be
had from those they have consented to be Protected by) they are not in the
state of Nature, and by consequence at Liberty to pay Allegiance to those who
have a Power to Protect them. And this is consonant to the sense and practice
of Mankind ever since there has been Government in the world, who when their
former Governors had lost the Power of Protecting them, thought themselves
notwithstanding any Ties, Oaths or Laws that might be pretended to the
contrary, free from any Obligation as to them; and because they could not
subsist without Government, they have always consented to pay them Allegiance
who had the Power to Protect them.

And there are no Nations in the world, but have seldomer, or oftener,
practiced it; and this is, perhaps the foundation of all the Governments which
are now extant. And this practice does not only obtain as to whole Nations, but
even to less places; as to Towns, and Castles, which never scruple to pay
Allegiance to their new Masters, though they change them more than once in a
Campaign.

I wonder what powerful Reasons (never before discovered to the world, and for
ought I can see by their Writings, still undiscovered) have now obliged private
persons to deviate from the universal practice of Mankind, in refusing to pay
Allegiance to the present Government, which alone has the power to protect them.

The answer to this is, That Conquest gives the prevailing Powers a right, and
that people submit to them as to Conquerors; but the English are no conquered
Nation, which (though it is nothing to the purpose, as I shall immediately show)
is, I confess, a great truth.

The King was so far from invading and conquering the Nation, that it was to
secure their Rights and Privileges, that he exposed his Sacred Person to such
dangers: But according to their own Principles, one of these two they must
grant (for there is no medium), That the Late King either freely parted with
his Government, and if so, there can be no manner of pretense for paying him
Allegiance; or that he was driven out by a Superior Force, which in other terms
is being conquered: So that then (according to these Principles) His Present
Majesty must have a right to whatever King James possessed.

Conquest in it self, and barely considered, can give no manner of Right; for
what obligation can lie on a Nation to pay obedience to any one for battering
down their Towns, killing their Inhabitants, destroying their Country; and in
short, for doing all manner of Outrages? Must a Nation, as a grateful return
for these kindnesses, be obliged to pay him all manner of obedience? Can any
man in his senses think these Injuries can give the Actor of them a title to
peoples obedience? or that mere force can give a right? for then every one that
was stronger than another would have a right to govern him.

Conquest, by destroying the power the former King had to protect his Subjects,
sets them at liberty from any obligation they owed him; because they owed none
to him, but upon the account of being protected by him: The Conqueror does not
by this get a right to their Allegiance, because to free people from the power
of another, and to have a right to command them himself, are different things.
They being once free from Government, and by consequence in the state of
Nature, nothing can give the Conqueror right to their Allegiance, but their own
Consent. By which it appears, that Mankind has been often in the state of
Nature; and considering the often Changes, and Revolutions, there could be few,
or no legal Governments in the world, if in such Circumstances, all ties to
their former Governors were not absolutely dissolved.

But here it may be objected, That their Consent was not voluntary, but forced;
and therefore could not ob^ige them, or give the Conquerors a right.

The conquered may in a sense be said to be forced to what they did, because
they are bound by a moral Necessity to act for their own preservation, and
happiness; and for that reason they were obliged to leave the state of Nature,
and be governed by him that had the power to Protect them; none are forced to
be Protected against their own Wills, they by the former Government's
dissolution, were reduced to a state of Nature, and if the Prince under whose
Power they are, will not afford them his Protection, they would still remain in
that state; but they by claiming civil Rights, (which they can only enjoy by
his Governing them) and referring their common Differences to be decided, and
their Grievances to be redressed by him, or those that Act by his Authority,
have put themselves out of the state of Nature, and have freely owned his
Government by their Actions, which were voluntary, for they were not forced to
have recourse to him for Protection in their Natural Rights, or obliged to
claim any Civil ones; and this is looked upon by Mankind as a free and
voluntary consent, the most part of whom have no otherways than by their
actions owned any Government.

Though their consent was obtained by forcible means, yet that would not
destroy the validity of it: It is true, in a Civil Society, all Contracts
obtained by Force are void, but then the Force ought to be proved, for the
presumption is against it, and Judges declare for a validity of a Contract, if
the Forcible means which were used to obtain it, are not proved.

But between Independent Nations, where force on one side is lawful; where
there is no superior Judge to determine the differences, or to judge whether
force were justly imposed, both sides either thinking or pretending they are in
the Right, all Leagues and Covenants, by whatever forcible means obtained, are
valid, and the Good of Mankind (which is a sufficient Reason) does require it
should be so, otherwise Wars would be perpetual, or not to be ended but by the
utter Ruin of the Weaker, or Conquered Party; because there could be no manner
of Agreement, or Peace between them, if they had a Liberty, under pretense of
Force, of breaking their Promises whenever they had an opportunity.

In all such cases it is Lawful to Promise, there being no Superior (as amongst
private persons) to take from them the Liberty of making such Contracts; and
the Good of Mankind does oblige People to fulfill those Lawful Promises. They
cannot properly be said to be forced to Promise, because it was in their power
to avoid Promising: Nor is their Consent Conditional but Absolute, and it is
their greater Good (either presumed, or real) that obliges them to make such
Contracts. For the same reason all Prisoners of War are obliged to stand to
their Paroles, and to pay whatever they promise for their Liberties.

The reason is the same for paying Allegiance to the New Government, whether by
a just or unjust way the old one was dissolved; and Mankind have all along
equally submitted to Conquerors, whether the Cause of Conquest were Just or
not: As few Conquerors have had a Just Cause for all the Mischiefs they have
done. The reason for Submission is not how one Man gets others into his Power,
or whether he had a just Cause of destroying the former Prince's Power, but
whether they consent to be Governed by him after they are in his Power. It is
for their own sake, and not for his, that they submit to his Government: They
may act against their own Good in not submitting to the Conqueror, but they
deny him no Right if they do not submit: It is not the Conquest it self, let it
be never so just, but the after-consent that makes them Subjects.

A Just Cause of War may make it no injustice to Dethrone a King, becanse he
gave sufficient Provocation; but how can one Prince's injuring another, absolve
Subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance? and give the Injured Prince a Right to
Command them; who, if he has any Right besides their Consent, when he has put
them into a capacity to Consent, must have it before the Conquest; for mere
Force cannot give or take away a Right, it can only put him in Possession of
his Right; and if he had any Right to their Allegiance before Conquest, I
cannot see but that in Conscience they were bound to Transfer their Allegiance,
and join with him against their former Prince, who by giving a just cause of
War had Forfeited his Crown.

Though the Nation be not Conquered, yet no reason can be urged for submitting
to Conquerors, but what will hold as strongly for paying Allegiance to the
present Government. Has not the Late King as much lost his Power to Protect the
People, as if he had been driven out by Conquest? Is it not the Present
Government alone that makes the People a Civil Society? Is it not by it that
they are Protected in their natural Rights, or can claim any Legal ones? which
are the only reasons which oblige People to submit to Conquerors. And are not
they that endeavor to disturb it, as much within the power and reach of the
Government, as if they were Conquered? And has not the King and Parliament as
Absolute a Power as any Conqueror?

The only difference is, That without feeling any of those fatal Miseries which
attend Conquest, they enjoy the Protection of the Government, and owe their
Preservation to it; and the Nation instead of losing any of their Rights and
Liberties, enjoy greater, and are secured from the worst of Slaveries, which
otherwise they had inevitably fallen into: So that they have infinitely
stronger obligations to pay Allegiance, than if they had been Conquered; to
which their Zeal and Loyalty ought to be proportionable.

CHAP. IX. Of Possession.
ALL Writers, I think, allow, That after a Possession of a long continuance,
(though they extremely differ how much time is necessary) a Right does accrue
to the Possessor, though there are some of the Right Line still in being. If it
be unjust to pay the first Possessor Obedience, I cannot see how a long
Possession can alter the case. A continuance in an injustice may make the
injustice greater, but not alter the nature of things, and make the greatest
Wrong to be Right. Though all things are done in Time, yet Time it self
operates nothing.

This Mistake (as a great many others are) is occasioned by the parallel men
draw between private Persons (who are tied up by Laws that are Enacted by the
Supreme Powers) and the Supreme Powers themselves. By the Laws of most Nations,
if private men neglect to make a Legal demand of their Rights in a certain time
appointed by the Laws, they lose them, and a Right does accrue to the
possessor; but this depends upon a Law Enacted by the Supreme powers, who have
a Right to dispose of private Estates as they judge best for the public good;
whose Laws can oblige none but their own Subjects. But what authority have the
Subjects, or the possessor to dispose of the Legal Prince's Rights? Besides, it
might justly be imputed to a private man's own neglect, if, when the Law is
open, he does not recover his Right: It may well be presumed he has
relinquished it. But that cannot be said of a Prince who has no Court of
Justice to appeal to, or any other likely way to recover his Right, yet by
bearing the Arms and Title, and by other ways still asserts his Right.

How numerous are the instances of Princes possessed of Territories belonging
to others, and who have been so for a great many years? Yet none dare affirm
the Subjects that pay them allegiance, are, and have been all along Traitors:
To give but one instance amongst hundreds; The Kings of England have a Right to
the Kingdom of France, and have constantly claimed it by causing themselves to
be styled Kings of France, and by bearing the Arms of that Crown; yet none will
condemn the French as Traitors, who have all along paid allegiance to the
French Kings. But if the Kings of England by tract of time have lost their
Right to the Obedience of the French, and before that time it was Treason for
those of that Nation to pay allegiance to the French Kings, I should be glad to
know what Month, or Year, it ceased to be Treason; for it is a thing of mighty
consequence to know how long it is Treason to obey a King in possession, and
when it becomes Treason not to obey him. In short, if a King can have a Right
to a Country, and it be no Crime in those of that Country not to pay him
allegiance, it demonstrateth that allegiance is not annexed to the Title, but
that it is due to the person that does protect them.

Object. Though Time does not give a Right, yet the Acts, or the no Acts, that
is, the omission of some, may in time amount to a resignation of the Right of
the Legal Prince to the Usurpers.

Answ. I grant a man's mind may be expressed by acts as well as words: yet it
would be a very hard cafe to condemn all those of Treason who have paid
allegiance to the possessors, before they had sufficient grounds to believe the
Legal Prince or his Heirs had by their acts (if such acts could destroy the
Right of the next of Kin) resigned their and their Legal Successors Right to
the Usurper. In how few cases is there reason for such presumption? If till
then all people should be obliged to be destroyed rather than pay allegiance;
what a Destruction would it make in the World? Would it not in most cases
expose, at least the Good and Conscientious to certain ruin? And others could
notpreserve themselves without a Sin, whose reward is Damnation.

Long possession is not at all necessary to justify the peoples Obedience; for
that very moment the people receive protection and defense from the new Powers,
they ought to pay them the same allegiance as if they had been in possession of
the Government a Thousand Years. The less time a Nation has been settled, the
more need it has of rest and peace, and the more dangerous would any violent
Revolution be.

CHAP. X. Of Protection.
BY Opposing those in possession of the present Government, the ill affected
act not only against the preservation and happiness of the Nation, but are
guilty of the basest and foulest ingratitude, by endeavoring to destroy those
persons to whose protection they owe their preservation, and the safe enjoyment
of what they have. Who else secureth them from being stripped and plundered of
all they have, their Wives and Daughters Ravished, and perhaps they and their
whole Families Murdered? What better usage could they expect, if they were
left to the mercy of the Rabble, or to the discretion of every one to use them
as they pleased? Can any man in his Conscience think he is obliged to destroy
those persons from whom he receives such benefits? Is it not Serpent-like to
sting that bosom that warms them? Is this all the grateful returns they can
make to the Father of their Country? For if that Command of Honor thy Father
and Mother extends to Governors; since they do not beget their Subjects, it
must be for protecting and defending them, that that Title is due: Therefore it
can be due to none but those in Possession, for none but they do protect and
defend them.

Could they justly blame the Government if it did not protect them, who make it
their business to ruin it, when too without their being protected, they would
quickly be reduced to a Condition of not being able to give it the least
disturbance? What favor can they justly expect, when they not only disown the
Government, but think themselves obliged in Conscience to make War upon the
Society that owns it? Nay, they are actually in the state of War, and only
watch for an opportunity to fall on. What excuse can a Government have for
endangering the Commonwealth by protecting those who are no part of it, but are
professed Enemies to it?

It is a cruel Mercy to endanger a whole Nation for the sake of its Enemies.
Nay, why should they have more favor than Foreign Enemies? It is so far from
being an excuse, that it aggravates their Crime, that it is to their own Nation
they are Enemies, and that it is in their own Country that they are
endeavoring to raise a Civil War. Though they were still Members of the Body
Politic, yet, as a man is obliged to cut off any of his Limbs to preserve the
Body Natural, so the Government is obliged to do the same for the Body
Politic, if it be necessary for its preservation.

It is frequently urged by the Jacobites and their Favorers, That what they
do, is upon the account of Conscience, and therefore they ought not to suffer
for it; which is but a sorry Reason to hinder the Government from taking all
necessary means to preserve it self, and to prevent the ruin of the Nation. But
this Argument looks very odly from them who were so zealous to persecute others
about things, in which neither the Honor of God, nor the Good of the
Commonwealth were concerned. It is as absurd as sinful for any to persecute
their Brethren on pretense of Religion, for things which they themselves own to
be no part of Religion, but merely in themselves indifferent. But to return,

If they will not be thought Enemies to the Society, but part of it, ought they
not to act equally with the rest, for the Peace and Quiet of it, and submit to
the Head, that rules and governs it? How can they pretend to be Members of the
Society, and consequently claim any Civil Rights by being so, without owning
the actual Government that makes them Members of the Society? Do they not, by
disowning the Government, renounce the benefit of the Laws, (which only can be
put in execution by the Government) and Outlaw themselves? How can they have
any more right to the protection of the Government, if they Out law themselves,
than if the Government, by putting them out of its protection, had Outlawed
them? So that it is wholly by the favor of the Government (for they have no
true pretense to them) that they enjoy any Legal Rights. If they think they
should be severely dealt with, if the Government did not protect them, why do
they not what is necessary to enable the Government to protect them? If they
will the Consequence, the protection of the Government; ought they not to will
the Antecedent, all that is necessary to it? And if it be lawful to desire and
to receive the Advantages which flow from Government (which I suppose no
Jacobite will be so hardy as to deny) why must not the means that are necessary
to obtain these Advantages, be so too?

How can they that are willing to be protected by any person, be unwilling
(except they desire Contradictions) that that person should have a power to
govern them, because without such a power he cannot protect them; and they that
are willing to receive an universal protection, are presumed to be willing to
pay all obedience that is necessary for that end; which is an Obedience as
universal as the Protection they expect. It is evident, That he that is willing
to receive an universal Protection from a Government, is willing that the
Government should have a coercive Power over all others, to restrain them from
injuring him; and that it should have sufficient Authority to do justice, and
oblige all people to pay obedience to the Laws, when they are put in execution
for his sake, because in it wholly consists his Protection; and he that is
willing the Government should have power over all other people upon his
account, ought to be willing the Government should have the same power over
him, for the sake of others, except he would be the only man in the Nation
without Government; and is unwilling to do that himself, which he would have
all others (whatever their Principles are) to do.

If the Nonjurers do desire to be protected, and do actually receive the
protection of the Government, (though at the same time they pretend it is
against their Consciences) it is manifest they do own the Government, and by
their Actions consent to submit to it; and what force can a Protestation have
against their own Acts?

Do not the Jacobites upon all occasions ^^y for protection to the Government?
and apply themselves to those Ministers, as Legal Officers, who act by no other
Authority than their Majesty's? And have they not constant recourse to the
Courts, whose Proceedings are in their Majesty's names and authority? Do not
all Writs run in their names, and do they not Prosecute people in their
Majesty's names as acting against the Crown and Dignity of our Sovereign Lord
and Lady King William and Queen Mary, etc. And do they not apply themselves to
the King's Ministers for the benefit of those very Laws which are enacted by
the present Government, and by consequence own the Authority that makes them?
How then can they own the Ministers, and not own the Authority by which they
act? and if the taking a Commission from the King for the administration of
public Justice, or in defense of the Kingdom, be owning the Authority of the
King, why must not the complying with them, as such, be owning the Authority by
which they act? but if they don't own the Ministers to act by Lawful Authority,
then they must confess their Sentences are so many Robberies and Murders,
because they have no just Authority for what they do, and they make themselves
accessory, since it is at their request they commit them. Is it not esteemed by
all Laws owning the Authority of a Court, to appeal to it? Is it not owning the
Pope's Authority, to appeal to him, or any Commissioned by him? Is it not by
the Law of Nations, and an universal consent of Mankind, an acknowledging a
Government, to receive Protection from it?

Do not all that go into a Foreign Prince's Dominions, during their stay, by
receiving the Protection of the Government, own themselves subject to it
(except Ambassadors, over whom Sovereigns have agreed to suspend the exercise
of their Right) and are they not obliged equally with the Natives, to pay
Allegiance; and a* like guilty of Treason; and so tried, if they attempt any
thing against it* And upon this head, all private attempts upon a Prince in his
own Country, have been abhorred by all Nations; and those that designed any
thing of this Nature, have not been treated as just Enemies, though in time of
War; because the presumption is, They enter as Subjects into the Dominions of
that Prince that protects them.

If applying to a King, as such, for his protection, and receiving it, be not
owning his Authority, Princes have but a small security for the obedience of
the greatest numbers of their Subjects, who have no otherwise obliged
themselves to own their Government, but by receiving protection from them.

The denying, That addressing to a Government for protection, and receiving it,
is owning That Government, lays a mighty gap open to Rebellion, by destroying
the obligation of all Allegiance, but what is built upon verbal Promises; So
that Men of those Principles ought to be looked upon as Enemies of all Order
and Government.

By examining what it is that gives Government a right to the obedience of men,
who are by nature free, it will the better appear what right the present
Government has to the Allegiance of those it protects.

The reason that is usually given, why people are obliged to obey any
particular Government, is (no Prince being so ridiculous as to pretend a right,
as the Firstborn in a direct Line from Adam or Noah) because it was the intent
of those who first formed the Society, that such persons, and their Successors
(if they made the Government Hereditary) should have a right to govern the
Nation for ever. But how could they, whose Authority with their Being ceased so
long since, oblige the Consciences of those who were not then in being? or how
could any Acts or Compacts of their Ancestors take away the natural Liberty of
those that were born so many years after, and who have the same right to
freedom as they had? Or how could their Compacts oblige those that are not
descended from them, but come from other Countries into the Society, and make
it a sin in them not to obey the present Governors of any Society, upon whose
Authority alone, and not upon the Founders of the Society, depends the validity
of all former Laws, which can only bind, because it is the will of the present
Powers they should; otherwise no Laws could be repealed, if their very being
did not depend upon the pleasure of the present Supreme Powers, who design they
shall oblige, until they declare the contrary.

Others say, That being born in a Country, makes one a Subject for all his
life to the Government of that Country; but why should being in a Country, by
being born in it, make one become a Subject, more than being in the same
Country at another time. Besides, common Experience shows this to be false,
because whoever is born in a Country where his Parents are Foreigners, may, as
it is allowed by all, leave that Country when he pleases. But perhaps it may
be said, he is a Subject to that Prince where his Parents were born. What if
they were born under the same Circumstances? or suppose his Parents are of
different Countries, as if a Dutch Woman and an English Man have a Child in
France; since France does not pretend to him, which of the Nations can claim
him for their Subject? or must he be divided? So that the difficulty still
remains, how people come to be obliged to obey any particular Government? which
I think can only thus be solved.

Every person, though he be born free, yet he is for the sake of his own
safety, obliged to part with his Liberty, and put himself under the protection
of Government. Nor can he be secure in what he enjoys but by it. Nor can he
have a right in a Country (that is already possessed) to any thing, but by
owning the Government of that Country. And by pretending to the Privileges
the rest of the Society enjoy, he has owned himself a Member of the Society,
and a Subject of the Government of it. And this is the only way that any
(except by verbal Promises) consent to become subject to Government.

The consent of particular persons being separately and singly given,
unthinking people take little notice of it, and suppose they are as naturally
Subjects, as men; and consequently, that they have no more right to free
themselves from their Subjection, than from their Human Nature; nay, must
suffer themselves to be destroyed rather than endeavor it.

But it may be objected, If a man is no-ways bound to a Government, but by his
own Consent, and if the Acts of his Ancestors no way oblige him, he is not
bound to stand to their divisions of the Lands, but he may, pro virili, put in
for a share, as he might, when all things were in common.

Ans. If it would be injustice in any one to go into a Foreign Country, to the
Laws of which he is not bound, and seize any Land in it, on pretense that the
divisions of the Land were formerly made by people whose Acts could not oblige
him, and therefore he had as just a right as any of the Inhabitants, to a share
in the Land; if this were injustice in him, why would it not be so in one that
is born in that Country? What Right can he, that comes from no other place,
but from Nothing, pretend to, more than he that first came from another
Country. If a Country be wholly possessed, and occupied, (which by the Law of
Nature, antecedent to all Human Laws, gives a right) by being improved and
cultivated by the labor and industry of the Inhabitants, who are so very
numerous, that the Land does not produce without vast labor, sufficient to
maintain them, what right can any that comes into this Country, either by
being born in it, or any other way, have to their labor, by usurping any part
of this Land, which was long since possessed, and divided amongst the the
Inhabitants, who having a full power over their own Properties, might subject
them to what Laws they pleased, (and which the Legislative Power may still
continue) and permit none to have a right to them, or enjoy any advantages by
them, or so much as to be in the Country without owning the Government of it?
And it is highly reasonable that no Government should suffer any to remain in
its Dominions, who will not own its Authority, or be subject to the Laws of the
Country. If it were unjust, before Lands were divided, to have robbed any one
of the Fruits of the Earth, that he by gathering had made his property, why
should it not be as much injustice to seize upon that Land, which is now as
much another's Property, as the gathered Fruits were then? But I shall speak no
more upon this Subject, because it is, in his Essay of Government, so fully
handled by that wonderfully Ingenious, and Judicious Author, whose Works of all
sorts one cannot enough commend.

Whatever Society people chance to be Members of, whether it be their Native,
or any other, they are, during their stay, equally obliged, for the sake of the
protection they receive, to Pay Allegiance to the Governors of that Society. It
is not material, whether they enjoy Properties for their lives, years, weeks,
or days, the greatest part of the Natives have no more Properties, or enjoy no
greater Advantages by the Government, than Foreigners, yet they are obliged to
pay the same Allegiance the rest of the Society do.

But here it may be objected, That there is a natural Allegiance due to the
Governors of the first Society Men are of, (which cannot be due to any other)
without whose consent they cannot leave the Society, and when abroad, are
obliged, when they command them, to return.

Man being born free, (that distinction of legal and natural Allegiance being
wholly groundless) is still Master of all that Liberty he has not parted with;
and if the Laws of the first Society, to which he has consented, by being a
Member of it, have not obliged him not to leave the Society without the consent
of the Governor, he is at liberty to transport himself into what Country he
pleases, and to stay in it as long as he pleases. It is for the interest of
Mankind that they should not be debarred the liberty of living where it is most
for their interest; and because Nations could not maintain any Trade or
Commerce one with another, if people that went from one Country to another,
had not a power to return when they had a mind to it; that Liberty, by the Law
of Nations, is equally allowed to all: They, it is true, who have left a
Country, whether it was that they were born in, or any other, yet as long as
they enjoy any Property in it, are obliged, if they intend to save their
Property, to leave all other Countries, when commanded. Men oftener having
Properties in their Native, than in any other Country, has given occasion to
some to conclude, That there was a natural obligation on them to return, when
commanded: But there can be no reason assigned from Nature, why more Allegiance
should be due to the Governors of that Country in which they were born, than
to the Governors of that Country they afterward voluntarily go into; where
for the Protection they receive, they are obliged to pay the same Allegiance as
they did when they were in their Native Country. And if a Foreign Prince
should get the power of protecting them in their Native Country, they would be
obliged to pay him the same allegiance, as they did when they were under his
protection in another Country: Because in each Country the protection is the
same.

Though they that reside in a Foreign Society, are equally subject with the
Natives, to the Laws of it; and by opposing the Government, would be equally
guilty of Treason; yet if during their stay, any alteration happens in the
Government, contrary to the Laws, they never scruple to pay allegiance to him
that gets possession of the Government, though his Title be never so illegal. I
see no reason why they should not do the same in their first Society, since
whatever Society they are in, during their stay, they are equally obliged to
obey the Laws of that Society.

Are not these Reasons as strong for paying allegiance to the present
Government? Can any man enjoy the Privileges of the Society, without being a
Member of the Society? or can any one be a Member of a Society, without owning
the Head of it, or paying their allegiance to him? or is there any other Head
that rules and governs the Members, but the present King? Is it not by his
Authority, that the Members of the Society receive an universal Protection, as
to their Lives, Liberties and Estates, under whose Government they are, or else
they are under none, but in the state of Nature? And there is no Reason, or
Law, to oblige people to remain in a state so inconsistent with their
happiness. And it would be injustice for any to remain in that state, because
they would be their own Judges in all the Disputes they had with others, who
were willing to refer their Differences to a standing impartial Judge; nor have
any been guilty of it, but all, not excepting the Jacobites, by making use of
the protection of the Government, have left the state of Nature, and have owned
themselves subject to it. After this, what pretense can any Member of the
Society have of refusing to pay their allegiance to a King, whom they have all
along by their actions owned, and by whom they have been secured from groaning
under the worst of Slaveries, which had been to them the more intolerable,
because of the great liberty and freedom they before enjoyed; so that all the
Reasons that can well be imagined to oblige people firmly and entirely to any
Sovereign, do all conspire to tie them up in the strongest bonds of allegiance
and fidelity to the present King and Queen.

By what has been said, I think it is evident, how absolutely necessary it is
for the good of Mankind to submit to those persons that are capable of
protecting them, and that applying to them for protection, is acknowledging
their Government, and Authority, and that the Jacobites, in using the
protection of the Government, and at the same time opposing it, as far as they
dare, act basely, treacherously, ungratefully and inconsistently.

But they that oppose the Government, after they have sworn to be true to it,
break all Ties both Sacred and Civil; for if neither their Oaths, nor the good
of the Society they pretend to be Members of, nor the duty they owe the
Government for protecting them, can oblige them; no bonds whatever (for these
are the most inviolable) can hold them: How can any Prince, or private person,
trust them, since they have destroyed all manner of security, trust, and
confidence men have in one another? All the answer to this is (I mean of the
Non-swearers, for the others are not capable of giving any) That they act upon
the presumed consent of the outed Prince, who (they suppose) is willing, that
they should obey the present Government in all things which are for the good of
the Society, and their own preservation, provided it be not contrary to his
interest. Which answer is not at all to the purpose, because it supposes they
are still obliged to disturb the public Peace, and raise Civil Commotions for
his interest, and notto own the present Government, though it should be
absolutely necessary for their preservation.

Can any Civil Society be preserved, if private Men are obliged not to obey
those that actually Govern it, except they think it for the interest of a
person who is a declared Enemy to the Society? and when every thing that tends
to the support and advantage of the Society, because it makes the present
Government more potent, must be against his interest? What if the late King has
no other way to regain his Throne but by the Ruin and Confusion of the Nation?
must the Jacobites assist him in Ruining the Nation? as it is plain by their
Principles they are obliged to do; for if once they think that they are obliged
to act against the good of the Society by raising a Civil War, it is certain
there is no mischief, provided it be for his interest, that they ought to stop
at. And it is plain by their rejoicing at any public Calamity that happens to
the Nation, that they are ready if they thought it at present for his interest,
to fire all the Towns in England, or act any more horrid Villainy. But if they
disown these Principles, and say they are obliged to act for the preservation
and good of the Community contrary to his Interest and Consent, then they are
obliged to obey the present Government, because that is for the good of the
Community, and for the safety of particular persons, who if they have the Late
king's Consent to do such acts as necessarily infer the owning the authority of
the Government, they have his Consent to own and obey the Government. And then
according to their own Principles, they can have no pretense of denying
allegiance to it. If such acts do not amount to an owning the authority of the
Government, then most people never owned the Late King's authority, because
they owned it no other way then by receiving protection from him.

It is strange that not only those that receive protection from the Government,
but even those that have thrust themselves into places of the greatest Trust,
and consequently have the greatest Obligation to bear true allegiance to Their
Majesty's, should own they have no Right to it; and the greatest Compliment
they can give them, is, That they are King and Queen de Facto; which in other
words is calling them Usurpers; and is, even whilst they are their Servants,
owning themselves Subjects of the Late King. Men of such Principles cannot
accept of Places of Trust, but for verybase ends; for they must either design
to act against their Consciences in acting against the interest of him they
esteem their Lawful and Rightful King, or else they must design to betray their
Trust in acting for his interest; which, when it is their own interest too, and
they may have what Price they demand for betraying their Trust, there can be no
doubt but they will endeavor to serve him who they think has the Right Title
to their allegiance. The fatal consequences that have happened to the Nation
upon trusting men of those Principles, have too well demonstrated the truth of
it. But to return,

If doing all those acts the Malcontents do in order to the securing their
Persons and Properties, be not owning themselves Subjects of the Government,
there was no reason for Mankind to have submitted to, and owned any Government;
since according to their Principles they could have all manner of protection
and defense without any Government; because they (as they pretend) enjoy
protection from the Government without owning its authority over them, or any
duty in them to obey.

CHAP. XI. Of Oaths of Fidelity.
PErhaps it will be said, Tho upon supposition that there is no reason why
people should pay Allegiance any longer than they are protected, yet if they
have otherwise tied themselves by their Oaths, they are in Conscience obliged
by those Oaths. But I answer,

Such Oaths (if ever such were imposed) would be so far from binding, that they
would be null upon the account of the sinfulness of them, as being directly
against the good of human Societies. In all Promises and all Oaths concerning
things that are not Moral, this tacit condition is always included, of their
not being, or upon alteration of the Circumstances becoming contrary to the
public Good; and this is without all doubt to be observed about Government,
because it was instituted for no other reason but for the public Good.

Oaths do not alter the nature of allegiance, or make it due where it was not
before, or any ways extend it, but only add a new tie to pay that allegiance
which is due upon the account of protection; he that lives under a Government,
though he has not Sworn to it, owes it the same allegiance as he that has; and
if he should deny his allegiance to it, would be equally guilty of Treason,
though not of Perjury. It is evident by the universal practice of Mankind, that
no Subjects ever thought themselves obliged by their Oaths of Fidelity, which
Governments have constantly imposed on them, when they ceased to be protected
by them. The Legislative power, especially where the people have a share in it,
are presumed to recede as little as possible from natural equity, and to design
by imposing such Oaths, the good and preservation of the Society; whose
interest it is, that they that have the public Administration of affairs
should not be disturbed. But it is not at all material whether this or that
man, provided they are well managed, has the direction of them: Nor can it
without the greatest absurdity be supposed, that such numbers of men as
Societies are composed of, who are by nature equal, should oblige themselves by
the most solemn Ties to become most miserable, by living without protection;
nay, to lose even their lives rather than own the Government that can protect
them, for no other reason, but barely an extraordinary fondness to one of their
Number, to give him, not the Necessaries or real Conveniences of Life, but only
an Office (for Government is no other) which is but an imaginary happiness; for
if Government were a real happiness to the Persons that possess it, several
upon their parting with it would not have found themselves happier then before.
That people should be true to those that have the administration of Civil
affairs, is all that Oaths of Fidelity require: and it is evident by the words
of it, that the late Oath of Allegiance required no more, and to extend it
further then the King in Possession, is not reconcilable with the reason, end,
and design of paying obedience; which is the peace and happiness of the
Society, which can never be maintained if people may, for the sake of a single
person, disturb him that has the Administration of their common affairs; and it
would require impossibilities, because a private person is incapable of paying
allegiance to a King when out of possession of the Government.

CHAP. XII. Of the Act of Parliament of the 11 of Hen. 7.
BEsides no Act of Parliament ought to be so interpreted, as by bare
implication to destroy a former Act, as such an interpretation would the
Eleventh of Hen. 7. Chap. 1. a Law still in force, which does declare, It is
against all Law, Reason, and Conscience, that Subjects, etc. any thing should
lose or forfeit for doing their Duty and Service of Allegiance. Be it Enacted,
etc. That no person that attends upon the King and Sovereign Lord for the time
being, and does him true and faithful Service of Allegiance, etc. shall not
anywise be molested. What can be plainer then that it is the duty of every
Subject to bear true says and allegiance to the King in being? And to
encourage them in their duty, the Laws does secure them from any manner of
Molestation for the time to come, and declares it against all Law, Reason, and
Conscience that any should suffer upon that account.

The people would be in a most miserable condition, should they be in danger of
being Hanged for not obeying the King in being, or for obeying him, to be
punished by the succeeding Kings as Traitors.

The endless quarrels, almost to the utter Ruin of the Nation, between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, made the necessity of such a Law very evident:
Tho this then was no new Law but only declarative of the ancient Law (for they
supposed it before to be against all Law, as well as Reason and Conscience,
that, etc.) By which Law it is plain, that a King in possession has the same
Right to the Peoples allegiance, as any King whatever; because no King has any
other then a Legal Right to the peoples obedience, which this Law declares is
the Right of all that are in possession of the Government. And accordingly it
has been the opinion of the Lawyers, that Treason cannot be committed but
against a King in possession, and there can be no Treason committed but against
him to whom allegiance is due; and Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of
such Kings (though not confirmed by succeeding Kings) are valid, and oblige the
Subjects, as much as those made by such as are usually called Legal Kings.

But it may be Objected, That if they who were instrumental in a Rebellion, may
not endeavor to restore their Legal Prince, they put themselves out of a
possibility of making restitution.

Answ. Those that unjustly deprive a King of his Crown, ought no doubt to
Restore him; but if another has got possession of the Government, by what has
been said, I think it is plain they ought to obey him. There can be no dispute,
but they that were no way instrumental in the Revolution, but did their Duty in
Defending him in the possession of his Crown, were free from any obligation as
to him, when he had lost the power of protecting them; and were bound for the
sake of their own preservation to pay allegiance to him from whom they received
protection, and obliged to defend him to the utmost; but if the rest of the
Society who receive protection from him are obliged to oppose him, then the
Society must be divided, and of necessity run into Civil Wars, which is against
the nature of Civil Societies, and inconsistent with the duty of
self-preservation, which obliges men not to expose their lives but to obtain a
greater good than their lives, which can only be the public Good, not the
single Interest of any one person.

They that were instrumental in raising a Rebellion, were no doubt guilty of a
very enormous crime, but that which made it so, was not barely the injury they
committed against the Prince (to whom, if alone considered, the breach of a
promise in refusing to pay obedience to him, could be no greater crime than a
breach of a promise to another person) but the fatal mischief and irreparable
damage they did the Commonwealth: And a new Commotion, in all probability,
would be more destructive; and a Nation by being so much weakened by the former,
would be less able to bear a new War. It is a greater sin, if the persons
themselves are only considered, to take away the life, of one man, than to
deprive another of any worldly advantage; it is only the public that makes it
otherwise, but the public in both cases is equally concerned, and the
consequences may be as fatal in disturbing the Usurper's Government, as that of
a Legal Prince. That which makes the Crime of Rebellion of so deep a dye, is,
because Rebels put it out of their power to make reparation for all the misery
and destruction a Civil War creates; nor is endeavoring to bring the same
Calamities upon a Nation, a proper way to make them amends. If there be no
other way to make reparation to their injured King, but by engaging the Nation
in Civil Wars, they ought not to attempt making him reparation by such unlawful
ways.

The not restoring a Person to the Crown that he is unjustly deprived of, can
only be considered, when the public is no longer concerned in his Actions, and
the Affairs of the Nation are managed by other hands, as an injury to a single
person, and the greatness of the injury, is to be judged not by the value of
the thing it self, but what he that is unjustly deprived of it, suffers by the
loss of it. What is absolutely necessary for the subsistence of one person may
be but superfluities to another; and as the Widows Mites were greater Charity
than what the Rich out of their Abundance gave; so the Robbing her of them,
because she could less spare them, would have been a greater injury, and
consequently a greater sin, than Robbing a Rich man, that could better spare
it, of a thousand times as much.

Tyrants, it is true, rob great numbers of the conveniences, and very often of
the necessaries of Life; but Usurpers only hinder single persons from enjoying,
not the necessaries or conveniences of Life, but Superfluities, because all the
necessaries, and even conveniences of life, can be had without a Crown. Yet the
Usurpers, without all dispute, if they can without any injury to the public,
ought to restore the Government to those from whom they do unjustly wrest it;
but if they do not, Subjects for the sake of Government, to which Sacred
Ordinance, Obedience by God himself, as well as man is annexed, ought to
submit. Christ and his Apostles make no distinction, but command Obedience to
all in possession, by annexing God's Authority to the Office of Governing.

CHAP. XIII. Of Proofs of Scripture concerning Obedience to those that actually
Administer Government.
CHRIST in the Directions he gave, Mat. 23. to his Disciples, and to the
multitude about their Behavior to the Scribes and Pharisees, requires
Obedience to be paid them only upon the account of Possession; saying, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do: and gives no other reason for this great
Obedience in doing and observing whatever they command, but because they sat in
Moses's seat; that is, were possessed of Moses's Authority, who in the
Theocracy was the Chief Magistrate. Not that the Scribes and Pharisees had so
great a power as Moses, but as far as they did enjoy his Seat, Throne, and
Authority, so far they were to be Obeyed: They were then the greatest, as well
as chiefest part of the grand Sanhedrin, which in all causes where the Romans
had left the Jews to their Liberty, had the Supreme Power both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical matters. (There were not in the Jewish Republic two distinct
independent Powers, one for Civil, another for Ecclesiastical Causes). If the
people were then obliged to pay so great Obedience, barely upon the account of
Possession, why may not the same direction serve for a standing rule to the
multitude in all times? And not only to the Inferiors, but even to the Supreme
Magistrate himself Christ requires Obedience upon no other account but that of
possession. If Caesar be in possession of the Empire, as it did appear by his
Coining of Money and Stamping his Image upon it, that being a mark of
Sovereignty and Empire, but not of any Legal Title to it; then Caesar is to
have Tribute and all other parts of Allegiance paid him.

And St. Paul in express terms requires Obedience to the powers that be, and
declares there is no Power but what is from God. The Jews being influenced by
the Priests and Pharisees, who because they were obliged by their Law to place
no Stranger over them, scrupled to pay obedience to the Roman Emperors, because
they were Strangers and not capable of a Legal Right, not considering the Law
did not oblige them but when it was in their own choice, and not when they were
under the power of the Romans, to whom for the sake of protection they were
obliged to pay obedience; St. Paul, to take away these scruples, assures them
all Powers are from God. If St. Paul had only meant Legal Powers, since none
but Jews were capable of being such, he had confirmed the Jews in their Error.
But the reason why St. Paul obliges men to submit, will demonstrate that all
actual Rulers are meant and none but they, because they alone are a Terror to
evil works, and a Praise to the good, none but the actual Ruler is a Minister
of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, or a Minister of
God for good. What can more fully demonstrate that the reason of obedience is
for the benefits men receive by Government? And what makes the Crime of
Resisting them so great, is, because men Oppose those by whom they receive so
many advantages? It is because they have the power of the Sword (which
includes all manner of Punishment) by which they secure and protect their
Subjects from all manner of injury and violence of ill men; and being Ministers
of God for good, includes all the good they receive both to their Persons and
Properties; for which cause you pay tribute also, for they are God's ministers
continually attending upon this very thing. It is their dispensing these
advantages to Mankind, that makes them God's Ministers and God's Ordinance (the
Scripture affirming those things that are necessary for the good of Mankind to
come from God, as plowing and sowing, Isaiah 28. from Verse the 23d. to the
29th.) If it once be known (as the discovery cannot be difficult) who it is
that bears the Sword, who administers Justice, who Rewards, and who
Punishes; if the Apostle's word is to be taken, subjection is not only due to
him for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake: and the same Apostle exhorts, That
prayers be made for Kings, and all in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. These reasons can only concern
those that have actual Power and Authority, by whose protection those that live
under them may lead such lives; and if it be our duty to pray that we may lead
such Lives, it must be our duty to enable them that have Authority over us, to
secure us in the enjoyment of a quiet and peaceable Life. Do the Principles or
Practices of the Jacobites suit with this Doctrine? who instead of Praying for
those in Authority, make it their business by opposing them, to destroy not
only our Quiet and Peace, and even all Godliness and Honesty too, by
endeavoring to set up again a Popish Governor, and by consequence, to
introduce a Religion, whose Principles are destructive of true Godliness and
Honesty, as well as the Peace and Quiet of the Professors of them. And St.
Peter for the same reason requires people to submit to the Supreme Magistrate,
whom he calls the Ordinance of Man; so that it is plain, that God by approving
this Human Ordinance, approves it as Human, and requires obedience to it for
the same Reasons that men at first instituted it. And it is the power Governors
have to do Good that makes them to be not only God's Ordinance, and God's
Ministers, but even Gods; for since they are not Gods by nature, (tho by some
peoples arguing one would suppose they though them such, or at least Beings in
themselves superior to the rest of Mankind) it must be for the protection they
afford, that they are termed so; who when they do no longer protect the people,
cease to be a Human Ordinance, and then too they cease to be a Divine one: And
the same Reasons that obliges people to submit to them, when they act for the
good of the Society, does as much oblige people to oppose them, if they design
to ruin and destroy them. It cannot well be supposed, that God who has obliged
Mankind to preserve their lives, and consequently to use the means that are
necessary for that end, should require People to suffer themselves to be
destroyed, to gratify the Lust, or Barbarity of a single Person, or a few; who
are by Nature but their Equals, and only above them by being in an Office which
they erected only for their Convenience.

Obj. St. Paul makes no manner of exception, but declares, Whosoever resists
shall receive damnation.

Ans. The Apostle requires obedience to Parents in all things; so he requires
obedience to Masters, Husbands, Pastors, without mentioning any Exceptions; so
here the Apostle (which was sufficient for his purpose) declares all people
ought to obey the Supreme Powers, without mentioning this exception, which from
the nature, end, and design of Government, and even from those Reasons which he
gives for Obedience, does necessarily flow.

It cannot be presumed that Christ gave Authority to his Apostles to make
Slaves of Mankind, by giving the Emperors a new Power, who before by no Law of
God or Nature had such a power over peoples lives. All the Power the Roman
Government had, was immediately from the people; who, as it is plain in History,
by their mutual Consent erected that Commonwealth; and what power the Emperors
had, was given them too by the people, who by the Lex Regia conferred it upon
them.

All that can be deduced from Scripture, is, That obedience is due to those
that protect the people; and nothing can be plainet than those Texts which
require it: By which plain and ignorant people may know their duty, as well as
the learned and wise. It would have been inconsistent with the Goodness of God
to have required obedience on the greatest penalties, and yet leave it so
uncertain, as the Jacobitish Principles would render it, to whom obedience is
to be paid. What can be more uncertain than generally Titles are? And are there
not innumerable intricate difficulties, about long Possession, presumed
Consent, a just cause for a total Conquest, etc. If about these Points the
Learned do so extremely differ, as any one may perceive, that gives himself the
trouble to examine what Authors have writ upon it, who give good Reasons for
destroying one another's Hypothesis, but none for confirming their own, but
what are liable to equal Exceptions; what means or possibility have almost all
Mankind, the unlearned and common people, of knowing their duty?

But it may be objected, Though the common people should be mistaken,
invincible Ignorance will excuse them.

Ans. Not to dispute how far such Ignorance will excuse them; I am sure it is
inconsistent with the Infinite Wisdom of God, to give such Rules, as almost all
Mankind are utterly incapable of understanding, or guiding their Actions by.
But whoever considers these Texts of Scripture, will see the falseness of
such impious Reflections, and must admire the Goodness of God in laying down
Rules so plain, that a well-meaning man cannot mistake them: But if men will be
wiser than God himself, and not be content with those Laws he prescribes them,
but will invent new Rules, and new ways; or by following the Tradition of the
Jewish Priests, will disturb the peace and quiet of Human Societies, by
opposing the Powers that be: If by so doing they incur the severest Punishments
here, as well as Eternal Torments hereafter, with those damned ill-natured
Spirits, the grand Enemies of Mankind, who at first possessed men with these
Maxims so pernicious to Human Societies, they must thank themselves, and their
too great Subtilty.

The Primitive Christians all along complied with the Revolution of the Empire,
and whoever was in possession of it, without examing his Title, paid him
allegiance, and thought him invested with God's Authority: And as the Goths and
Vandals, and other barbarous Nations on one hand, and the Saracens, Turks and
Persians on the other, without any just cause overturned the Roman Empire; the
Christians were so far from disputing their Titles, or refusing to transfer
their Allegiance to them, that they never scrupled to own their Government. If
these Pharisaical Notions had then been believed, or practiced, those Nations
would have extirpated all the Professors of Christianity as Enemies to
Government and Order, instead of being converted to their Religion, as most of
the Northern Nations were. Nor do the Christians, that now live under the
Dominions of the Infidels, vary from this Primitive Practice, or scruple to
transfer their Allegiance to any that gets possession of the Sacred Office of
Governing, tho the Legal Prince be still alive. Did not the Jews, though they
were commanded by a Divine Law to take a King from amongst their Brethren, and
God himself had intailed the Crown on the Posterity of David, practice the
same, as they fell under the power of the four great Empires? And did they not
submit to Alexander without endeavoring to oppose him, when Darius, to whom
they had sworn obedience, could no longer protect them?

I shall add but one Instance more, and that shall be of David, who thought it
not unlawful, when Saul designed to take away his life, to transfer his
Allegiance, and fly to Achish King of Gath for protection, who made him Keeper
of his Head, or Captain of his Guard; and whilst he was under his protection,
he thought it his duty to pay all manner of Allegiance to him; and (tho
contrary to his Interest, and the hopes he had of being King after Readiness
death) even to join with the Uncircumcised to invade his own Country, and to
sight against the Lord's Anointed, his late King and Father-in-law; and as
appears by the 1 Samuel 29. 8. was much grieved, and humbly expostulateth with
the King for not permitting him to attend him in the Battle; But what have I
done? or what have thou found in thy servant, so long as I have been with thee
until this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my Lord the
King? Saul by designing to destroy David, had freed him from the Allegiance he
owed him; for he that designs to destroy a person, cannot have a mind to govern
that person he designs to destroy; and if he will not govern him, he is free
from his Government, and at liberty to pay his Allegiance where he thinks best.
And if David expected from the King of Gath an universal protection from all
his Enemies, he ought to pay the King an universal obedience.

If a private person be free from the Government that designs to destroy him,
the Argument will hold as strongly in behalf of a Nation that is designed to be
destroyed; and whoever attempts it, does not only renounce the Government of
the Nation, but puts himself in a state of War, and declares himself an utter
Enemy to them, who are as much obliged to resist him, as they are any other
Enemy.

Upon this Head the Jews, in the time of the Maccabees, took up Arms against
their Legal King Antiochus, (whom they all along acknowledged as such, and who
was Successor to Alexander, who had the same right to their obedience as the
Persians or Assyrians had,) who was resolved to extirpate them if they would
not turn Idolaters. And it is manifest, that God by the miraculous assistance
he gave them (for what they did, must be imputed to more than Human Force) did
approve of their design. And the same Reasons will justify any Nation for
opposing that Prince, that does endeavor upon a religious, or any other
account to destroy them.

By what has been said, I hope it is plain, that by the positive Law of God,
by the Law of right Reason, by the Law of all Nations, and the universal
practice of Mankind, and the express Law of the Land, obedience is due to the
King who does actually govern the people; and therefore to the present King and
Queen, though they did not enjoy the Crown (vacant by the late King's
Abdication) by any Legal Right; which Right I think has been sufficiently
demonstrated by those that have writ on that Subject, at least to Lawyers, and
men that are competent Judges in such Points, of which a great many are no more
competent Judges, than they are of Mathematical Demonstrations, which are
nevertheless Demonstrations; but none can be mistaken who they are that do
actually govern the Nation; and if obedience for that reason be due to them,
other inquiries are needless.

Therefore I shall only add, That nothing could be more Just, more Glorious,
more Meritorious, than the Prince's coming over to rescue three Nations from
Slavery and Ruin, by obliging the Late King (which by all possible Ties he was
bound to) to govern according to Law: To which he was so averse, that he was
resolved not to govern at all, if he could not govern Arbitrarily; which when
he plainly saw he could not effect, he threw up the Government: Which, whatever
Force may be pretended, must be esteemed a voluntary Action, because he might
have prevented it by governing according to Law; according to that known Axiom,
Involuntarium ex voluntario ortum habens moraliter pro voluntario habetur.

The Throne being actually vacant by his deserting it; What Reason could hinder
the Prince from accepting what was his Right, when offered him by the
Convention of the States of the Kingdom? Who, (when the Throne is actually
vacant, and it is not clear whose Right it is) are, and have always been, the
sole proper Judges to determine to whom it belongs; whose Judgments must give a
Legal Right, because all Legal Rights are held by no other Tenure, than the
Decree of the Supreme Judges.

But supposing the King had no Legal Right, and that the Convention were not
Legal Judges; yet if they were chosen by the Nation, to determine, upon the late
King's leaving it, what was necessary to be done for the preservation of the
Nation, it being necessary that somewhat should be resolved on; that necessity
would give them a sufficient Right to do whatever they found necessary for the
preservation of the Nation: Because no Nation can be brought to that condition,
but it must have a Right to act for its own safety; which it cannot do, if it
have not a Right to appoint Judges to determine what is to be done, and oblige
particular persons to stand to their Determinations.

And the Convention ought, if they thought it (of which they were appointed the
Judges) for the safety of the Nation, wholly to exclude the Late King. And why
might they not, if they thought the Nation could not be safe if he should
return, be wholly against his return, as well as the Jacobites themselves (for
there were none of another Opinion then) be against his return, but upon such
Terms, and Conditions, as they thought necessary for the safety of the Nation?
And the same necessity that will justify the Late Archbishop for consenting to
put the Sovereign Administration of Affairs into the Prince's hands, will
justify the Convention for continuing it in the hands of the King, who alone
could secure the Nation; and who had saved them before he ruled them, and to
whom it was owing that they could call any thing (even their Lives) their own.
Which, if it be not the best Title to a Crown, yet at least is the best Title
to Peoples Hearts and Affections, when he is possessed of it; especially when the
chief advantage he gains by it, is but to expose his Sacred Person for the
Security of the Nation: And the enlarging his Empire has only increased his
Cares and Concerns for the Safety of those he governs: And all the satisfaction
he reaps (which to a God-like Mind is the greatest) is the power to oblige, and
to do good. The Nation is happy in having a King whom they can trust; not only
because his Interest is the same with theirs, but because, as all the Actions
of his Life have demonstrated, no Consideration of his own could ever divert
him from acting what was best for the Cause he was engaged in; and who is as
famous for being true and just to his Word, as his Enemies are infamous for
breaking their most Sacred Oaths, and Solemn Leagues. In a word, He is a Prince
that has the Virtue, the Fidelity, the Integrity of Cato, as well as the
Bravery, the Courage, and Conduct of Caesar. Never did the happiness of the
best part of Mankind depend more upon a single Life, than now. Nations of
Religions, and all things else, different, do unanimously agree in
acknowledging him to be their chief Support, the Head, the Heart, the Hand of
the Confederacy; and to him they confess that it is owing, that the Chains that
have been ready to setter Europe, have been more than once broken. To be the
Preserver of Europe, is a much more glorious Title, than to be the Conqu^^^^ of
it: To which may be added, the most excellent of all Titles, The Defender of
the Faith; which (tho others have claimed of course) he best deserves; since to
him it is owing that the true Faith is publicly professed any-where, and in
these Nations (which is a Blessing cannot be bought too dear) without Cruelty
or Persecution; For a Nation is constantly in a state of war within it self,
where one Party is persecuting and ruining another, about things which are in
themselves indifferent, and no ways tend to promote the Public Good. In short,
There can be no advantage, but what the Nation may justly expect from a King so
zealous to promote their Good, and so able to perform what he undertakes.

CHAP. XIV. Some Considerations touching the Present Affairs.
BUT it may be objected, How can the Nation propose any happiness to themselves
by this Revolution, since by it they are at so great Expenses to maintain a war
against so powerful an Enemy?

Answ. The more powerful the Enemy is, the greater was the necessity of this
Revolution; for if now the Consederates are scarce an equal match for France,
how easily would they have been overrun, if England (which is the most
favorable that could have been expected) had stood Neuter? And when they had
been subdued, what could have hindered the French King, being then so Potent
both by Sea and Land, from Conquering this Island? What opposition could the
Militia, joined with a few raw and unexperienced Troops, (for it is this War
has made them otherwise) tho headed by a Commander of so invincible Courage as
the Late King, make against his regular and numerous. Troops? But suppose the
French King, who is so famous for keeping his Royal word, would not have
Conquered England when he might; what could have hindered the Late King,
assisted by France, from using this Nation as his Cruelty, Covetousness,
Bigotry, or Jesuits, could have inspired him? The French King, had he been
defective in so fundamental a point of Religion, would have obliged him, as he
did the Duke of Savoy, to have Extirpated all the Heretics. England would have
been perhaps by this time a rendezvous of French and Irish Apostolic Dragoons,
or what is worse, a nest of Priests and Jesuits. And what milder usage can the
Nation expect, if the Late King, who is under such obligation to France, and
incensed by (as he thinks) ill Treatment, should return? Ought not they, except
they are ambitious of being Roasted by a Smithfield Fire, or are in love with
the manly exercise of Rowing in the Galleys, to do their utmost endeavor to
stop the farther Progress of France? which only prevails because their Armies
are more numerous? If there were more Forces raised (the Nation is so far from
wanting men, that it can spare about Thirty thousand by easing the Parishes of
those Idle People who are burthensom to them) sufficient to equal those of the
French; there is no reason to doubt but the English would beat them, as they
have always done, when the Numbers have been any thing near equal, and force
them to quit other places as shamefully as they did Ireland.

The misfortune is not, that we have now a War with France, but that it was so
long delayed; and whatever the Nation now suffers, they wholly owe it to the
Two Late Kings, who instead of hindering, when they might, the growing greatness
of France, did underhand assist and contribute, as far as they durst, to
increase the exorbitant Power of that Kingdom. Though the Charges of the War,
it is true, are burdensome, yet they are common to almost all Europe; nor are
they so great as some people represent them, since it does cause little or no
alteration in Peoples way of Living; the same excess in Apparel, and every
thing else, and the Interest of Money being as low as ever, (at least it would
be so, did not the King's taking up such large Sums at so great an Interest,
raise the Interest of Money even amongst others) are a demonstration of its
plenty: And the Native Commodities of the Country bearing a much better Price
than Formerly, chiefly by reason so much is taken up for the King's use upon
account of the Army or Fleet, must more than repay the Country for what it
contributes to the War. The Taxes themselves are not so much a burden, as the
unequal way of raising them, and obliging people to pay so much Money at one
time; which cannot well be prevented but by an Excise, which would make them so
easy, and so equal, that they would hardly be felt. But if they were more
burdensome then they are, then paying of them for some time is absolutely
necessary to preserve their All for ever.

In the Primitive times, the Christians (especially the Clergy) would (...)
dispose of their own, but even what was Dedicated to Pious Uses, and sell the
Place that belonged to the Altar to redeem a Soul from Slavery: Why should they
not be now as Zealous to secure Milions of Souls, Three Nations, and their
Posterity, from a Bondage both Spiritual and Temporal worse than Egyptian; or
at least encourage people by their precept and example freely to contribute to
a War upon which depends the safety of the Church as well as State * a War so
holy, that if the Cause alone could make them Martyrs, all that dye in it are
such.

But to conclude, I hope, I have demonstrated, That it is the duty of all
People to bear true Faith and Allegiance to the present Government, by Reasons
and Arguments which are as firm as Government it self, and which will endure as
long as it, because built upon the same foundation, The Good of Societies; and
which may serve for directions in all Changes and Revolutions, as well as for
the justification of that happy one, which (by the Blessing of God upon His
Majesty's Heroic Endeavors) preserves us in the enjoyment of all our
Happiness both Spiritual and Temporal.

FINIS.

