A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of Worcester, Upon the Thanksgiving
Day, April 16. 1696.

By W. TALBOT, D. D. and Dean of Worcester.

Published at the Request of the Mayor and Aldermen of that City.

LONDON, Printed for T. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCVI.

To the Right Worshipful Nicholas Fayting, Esquire; Mayor, and the Worshipful the
Aldermen of the City of Worcester.
Gentlemen,
THE general Joy and Thankfulness which have appeared throughout the Kingdom,
upon the discovery and defeat of the late Designs of France against Us, make me
hope that the Eyes of this People, which some have been so busy to put out, by
all the Dust they could raise, are at last cleared; and that many well-meaning
Persons, who have been misled by the Cunning of such as lie in wait to deceive,
do now begin to see that after all the pretenses of Honor on the other side
the Water, and Conscience on this, the Question is come to this short Issue,
Whether we will live like a Free-People under our English Laws and Government
which have been so bravely asserted by our Ancestors, and enjoy our Reformed
Religion, which has been sealed with the Blood of Martyrs, of our Spiritual
Fathers and Brethren in Christ; or, Exchange these for a French Servitude and
Papal Bondage, and bring a Yoke upon our selves and Posterity, which neither we
nor our Fathers have been able to bear?

This You and your Worthy Citizens were certainly sensible of, when upon the
late Thanksgiving-Day for the Deliverance of His Majesty and these Kingdoms
from the designed Assassination and Invasion You appeared in such Numbers in
the House of God, and expressed your respect to it in such Instances as have
scarcely been paralleled, upon any occasion, in this place.

I heartily wish, That my Health and Leisure would have permitted me to have
made that part of the Solemnity that fell to my share of a Piece with the
others; and that when all the rest deserved to be set in as bright a Light as
that with which You illuminated your Streets upon the Evening of that Joyful
Day, it only might not have wanted a Veil to cover it.

But, however needful it may be, I am sure I must not offer at any Apology for
making it public: None can be made on my part, but what may be answered in
those words of St. Peter to Ananias, While it remained with thee was it not
thine own? And as to You, Gentlemen, Now it is yours (though You may wish that I
had made such a return to your Commands as the Elder Brother did to those of
his Father in the Gospel, who said, Sir, I go, and did not, rather than with
the second, professed my unwillingness to comply, and afterward repented and did
it) You must be contented to account for it, to take it wholly upon your
selves, and not expect that I should say one word for it, for that would be
unwarily to entitle my self to its Defense, when I can so fairly rid my hands
of it, and lay it at your Doors.

If any of those good Ends shall be served by Printing it, which You spoke of
when You honored me with a Visit the Day after it was Preached, I shall think
it but reasonable that the acknowledgments thereof should be made only to You,
who must bear all the ill Consequences of it, as having commanded it from me by
your Authority, which I do own is very great over,

Worcester, Apr. 20. 1696. Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, and Faithful Humble
Servant, W. T.

PSALM. CXXIV. 6, 7, 8. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey to
their Teeth.

Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is
broken, and we are escaped.

Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.


The former Part of the Psalm is thus: If it had not been the Lord who was on
our side, now may Israel say:

If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when Men rose up against us:

Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

Then the Waters had overwhelmed us, the Stream had gone over our Soul.

Then the proud Waters had gone over our Souls.

Blessed, etc.



THE Title of this Psalm shows the Author of it to be King David, and the
occasion of his composing it, was certainly some signal Deliverance either
Personal or National, which God had bestowed upon himself or his People.

Whether it were his Deliverance from the several Designs and Attempts upon his
Life, of his Father-in-Law King Saul, or from the Conspiracy and Insurrection
of his Son Absalom, or from the Philistines who came up to seek him upon their
hearing that he was anointed King over Israel in Hebron, or from the Ammonites
afterward with their hired Succors, the Syrians, or whatever the particular
Mercy was, that the Royal Prophet had an Eye to when he made this Eucharistical
Song, it is most admitably contrived and fitted for the Use of any Nation or
People, professing God's true Religion, upon any eminent Deliverance of
themselves, or their Prince, from the wicked Designs of the Enemies thereof.

I say of themselves or their Prince: For David here makes this grateful
Recognition of the Divine Goodness in the Name of Israel, as if his People had
been in great danger, and very narrowly escaped; when yet, according to good
Commentators, 'twas a personal Deliverance from a Design against himself that
he here commemorates; and indeed not without Reason, for the Head and the
Body-politick are very nearly related, what touches the one must affect the
other, and if when one Member suffers another Member suffers with it, when the
Head is hurt the whole Body must sympathize with it: I speak of such a Head as
has that tender Care for the Members which that relation calls for, that looks
upon himself as exalted above them, only that he may the better watch over
them, and more essectually provide for the Security and Common Good of the
whole; that is a true Father of his Country, and treats his Subjects not as
Slaves but Children; that is a good Shepherd, and feeds his People according to
the Integrity of his heart, and guides them by the Skillfulness of his hand, as
was said of David, he does not defraud them of any thing that is their due,
much less does he butcher and make havoc of them; no, that is the Character of
the Robber, who climbs into the Skeepfold only to steal, and kill, and destroy:
The good Shepherd is as careful of the Lives of his Sheep as of his own; nay,
so much more so, that when the Wolf comes he leaves not the Sheep, but exposes
himself in their Defense; and rather than that Beast of Prey should catch, and
scatter, and tear his Flock, he ventures his own Life for them, proving himself
thereby to be no Thief or Hireling, but the true Shepherd, whose own the Sheep
are: He leads them with Care and Tenderness, he feeds them with Prudence and
Kindness, and sights for them with Zeal and Courage: Such a Prince as considers
and endeavors to answer the End of the Institution of Government, the Good of
Mankind, that is joined with his Subjects in the same common Interests, both
Civil and Religious, that has no base Designs of Ambition, Avarice, or Cruelty,
no unworthy private Ends to serve, but thinks he then only consults his own
Advantage when he promotes the Good of the whole, that is no Persecutor of his
Subjects for their adherence to the true Religion, but professes the same Faith
and joins in the same Communion with them. In short, that is a just Guardian of
their Civil Rights and Liberties, and a zealous Defender of their Faith and
Religion; such a one is so intimately united to his People, that he is in the
Scripture Language the Breath of their Nostrils, and to Assassinate him is to
Massacre a Kingdom; and therefore when David was delivered from the hurtful
Sword of his Enemies, well might all Israel say, Blessed be the Lord who has
not given us over as a Prey to their Teeth.

But whether this Psalm was at first made upon occasion of a personal
Deliverance of the King of Israel, or not, is not certain; but this is, that it
has been looked upon, and used both by the Jewish and Christian Church as a
proper Hymn of Praise to God for National Mercies and Deliverances.

Thus amongst the Jews, the Levites were appointed to sing it after their
Return from their Captivity in Babylon; and thus our Church has ordered it to
be sung or said for the Office for the Fifth of November, which we observe
yearly in remembrance of our Deliverance from the Designs of our Enemies of
Babylon Mystical; and she has appointed it likewise in the Evening Service for
this Day, which we are commanded by Authority to observe as a Day of Public
Thanksgiving to Almighty God for our late wonderful Deliverance from the no
less barbarous and bloody Designs of the same sort of Enemies, the same I mean
as to the Principles and Religion they profess; for I would fain hope that not
many of any other Communion were engaged in, or privy to the blackest part of
this villainous Conspiracy, that few that call themselves Protestants could
join with Papists in their worst Doctrines and Practices, or will ever rob that
Church of her peculiar Honor and privilege of Assassinating Princes, of
Consecrating Daggers for their Murder, and Canonizing the villainous Hands that
employed them.

And how reasonably this Psalm makes a part of this Day's Service will appear,

I. By considering the two general Parts of it. The former whereof gives an
Account of a great Deliverance vouchsafed by God to Israel. The latter contains
the Returns which Israel made to God for it.


II. By taking a View of the occasion of our present Meeting; and if our
Deliverance be as great as that of Israel's, 'twill be but fit that we should
join with them in their Returns to God, and make the same Acknowledgments of it.

First, Let us consider Israel's Deliverance. I have already said, it is
uncertain what particular occurrence the Psalmist referrs to, and therefore
shall only take notice of those general Accounts which we have in this Psalm of
the Enemies that were conspiring against them, the Mischief they intended, the
probability and nearness of their Success, with the happy defeat of them, and
rescue of Israel, by the seasonable interposition of Divine Providence.

As for the Enemies that were conspiring against Israel, the 3d Verse tells us,
they were such whose Wrath was kindled against them; they were, it should seem,
highly incensed by some Provocations which they had received, which so heared
them, their Blood boiled up within them, and nothing could allay the Ferment
but the letting out that of Israel's; they were spurred on by Rage and
Resentment, and violently bent to wreak their Fury and Malice upon them by all
the Methods they could put in practice.

But Anger without Power hurts no body but the miserable Subject of it; but
alas these Men's Power was equal to their Rage; they are represented, V. 4. by
Waters, which may denote how numerous they were, a vast Conflux or mighty
Collection of them; and at the end of that Verse, by Streams or Torrents,
violent Interruptions, which bear down all before them; and at the 5th by proud
Waters, or, as it is in the other Translation, deep Waters of the proud, so
that there was no wading through them, nor standing against them, the Stream
was so rapid and the Waters swollen so much above their depth.

The Mischief they intended against them, was no less than their utter ruin,
they were for overwhelming or swallowing them up, as we may read in the 3d and
4th Verses, for making a full end of them, rooting them out, that the Name of
Israel might be had no more in remembrance; and this not leisurely, or by
degrees, but all of a sudden, they would swallow them up raw or quick, either
as some hungry Beast does his Prey, or as the Sea did Pharaoh and his Host, and
to this end they rose up against them, V. 2. and to make sure work of it, added
cunning to their strength, V. 7. they laid Snares or Grins for them, attempted
them both by open Violence and Secret Treachery.

And so near were they to accomplish their Ends upon them, that they had as
'twere seized their Prey, and were possessed of their Game, the rapacious
Wolves had got the poor Lambs into their Clutches, and they had no power to
resist or rescue themselves; they were like silly Birds taken in the Nets or
Springs of the Fowler, they had neither strength to break them, nor Skill to
extricate themselves out of them, the more they fluttered the more they were
entangled, the more they strove, the faster the Grin held them.

This briefly was Israel's Case, their Enemies were mighty, and raged horribly,
they were unmoveably resolved upon their utter Destruction, they wanted neither
Policy nor Power to effect it; they had proceeded so far, and were so near
doing it, that no humane Means or Power could have prevented or opposed them.

But then God interposed, and then indeed the Scene was wonderfully changed.
How sure soever their Enemies thought themselves in triumphing in their
Overthrow and Extinction, yet the Advantage was plainly then on Israel's side;
for it was God that was on their side, and they were but Men that rose up
against them; and all the Cunning and Power of Men, when opposed to the Divine
Wisdom and Strength, is but mere Folly and Weakness: He can make the Counsels
of the Wise of none effect, and take the Crafty in their own Wiliness: He can
bassle all the Attempts of the Mighty, and turn their own Forces upon
themselves: And here he broke the Jaw Bone of the Lions, and delivered the Prey
out of their teeth; he broke the Snare of the Ungodly, and let the oppressed
Captive go free. Great Reason therefore had Israel for such a miraculous
Escape, to make these Acknowledgments and Returns to the Author of it, which we
here see they did, namely,

1. To ascribe their Deliverance wholly to God, as the doing of that right hand
only, which brings mighty things to pass: If the Lord himself had not been on
our side, we had been swallowed up quick, and the Stream had gone over our
Souls.

2. To give him the Praise due unto his Name for it: Blessed be the Lord who
has not given us over as a Prey to their Teeth.

3. And Lastly, to declare their Confidence in him, and entire reliance upon
his Power and Goodness for the time to come: Our Help stands in the Name of
the Lord who has made Heaven and Earth. That God who manifested his Power and
Goodness, by Creating the World out of Nothing by a Word of his Mouth, and
giving Being to all the Creatures in it, has as evidently shown forth those
glorious Attributes in our strange Preservation and Rescue out of the Hands of
our formidable and implacable Enemies; there will we therefore place our
Confidence, not fearing what Man can do unto us: On God we will depend, He only
is our Rock and Salvation, our Defense and Refuge, through him we shall do
valiantly, and he shall tread down our Enemies.

This is that short Account of this Psalm, of Israel's imminent Danger, their
wonderful Deliverance from it, and grateful Behavior thereupon.

I proceed now to take a View of our own Case: It will not, I suppose, be
expected that I should go about to prove the Plot, That there has been a most
Horrid and Hellish Design on-foot against the Life of our King, and the Laws,
and Religion of this Kingdom. After the voluntary Depositions of several that
were to be concerned in it; and these confirmed from abroad by the visible
Preparations that were made on the French Coasts for a Descent upon us; a great
number of their Forces drawn down thither, and Vessels ready to bring them
over, when the Signal, an Account of the Dreadful Blow, should be given them;
the mighty boast of their great Design and Confidence of Success, which were
expressed in Letters from some of the first Quality in that Kingdom, and the
Harangues of their Ministers at other Courts: This confirmed also at home by
the Confessions of those who have been Convicted and Executed here, who have
all owned the shares they were to have had in it upon their Deaths, and some
gloried in it: While a Papist at his Execution looks back with regret upon the
part he was to have acted in the bloody Tragedy, as a Crime he was led into by
his own Rashness and Passion, as a Wickedness which he repents of, and for the
punishment of which particularly he acknowledges he was brought to suffer
Death, by the just Hand of God, our Protestant Conspirators, to the reproach (I
hope not of our Holy Religion, which I am sure is far enough from countenancing
such things, but of) their wretched Guides, boast of the Villainy, take Pride
and Comforts at their Deaths in it, so far were they from repenting or
expressing the least Sorrow for it, and yet had Absolution publicly after a
very unusual manner, which plainly shows what Thoughts their Confessors had of
that Matter, for which they died. Blessed God! how amazing is it that any that
had ever heard of thee, or thy Nature, or Properties, especially that had ever
looked into those Revelations thou have made thereof in thy Written Word,
should call the Assassinating the best of Princes, and involving his Subjects
in Blood, Destruction of the best Church, and the over-turning the best
constituted Government in the World, the Murdering their King in cold Blood,
and which must have been a consequence the Butchering of many Thousands of
their innocent Fellow Subjects, the making all that survived Slaves to France
and Rome, subjecting both their Bodies and Minds to the worst of Tyrannies; How
amazing, I say, is it that any should call these the Causes of God, Religion,
and the Laws! as if the Blood of Kings shed by their own Subjects was an
acceptable Offering to God; as if Religion were promoted by forcing us into the
Communion of such a Church as will lock up the Scripture from us; teach us to
believe without Reason, to Pray without Understanding, and give the Worship of
God to his Creatures; as if our Laws would be safe in the hands of such a
Guardian, who Tyrannizes Arbitrarily over his own Subjects, and would have had
the pretense of Conquest to use us worse if possible: If these are the Cause of
God and Religion, I know no such thing as the Works of the Devil, and what we
renounced as such in our Baptism was a mere Chimera.

This shows how much the Interest of a Party, when a Man's thoroughly embarked,
can blind his Reason as well as harden his Conscience, how dangerous it is to
engage at all in a Faction, since a Man knows not where he shall stop when he
is once in, how by steps he is lead to call Evil Good, and Good Evil, and
practice accordingly, and to make the measures of both the serviceableness or
diserviceableness of any Action to the Party, and how careful every one that
has any regard for his Soul should be, when he choosest out for the directors
of his Conscience, and intrusts with the Conduct of it.

But to return, after all this, I say 'twould be but to abuse your Time and
Patience to offer at any other proof of the truth and reality of the wicked
Design; whoever can call for further Conviction does the least need it; it is no
breach of Charity to believe, that none can pretend to doubt of it but such as
know it too well.

Let us then briefly see, what the Design was, and as to that, examine the same
Particulars which we did in Israel's case, who were engaged in it, what they
intended against us, how near they were to effect it, and how strangely we
escaped it?

Our Enemies, like theirs, were such whose Wrath was kindled against us.
Nothing under God has or does so much obstruct the aspiring and wicked Designs
of our Neighbor on the other side of the Water, as this Nation and Church;
nothing can satisfy the Pride and Ambition of that Prince less than an
universal Monarchy, and no Methods does he stick at, how base and ungrateful,
how fraudulent and treacherous, how violent and cruel soever, that may promote
his great end, no ties of Honor and Conscience, no Obligations of Justice or
Mercy, no Treaties or Leagues, neither Word nor Oath can hold him, but he
breaks through them with as much ease as Sampson did the Withs that bound him,
which were as a Thread of Tow when it touches the Fire. But while he makes War
and disturbance every where, that he may have quiet within, that if at any time
the Wounds he gives his Neighbors should touch his own Conscience, his
Parasitical Priests may pour in their Oil, and speak Peace to him; he, at their
instigation and direction, must atone for these Barbarities by committing
others; (as it is no new thing for those Confessors to enjoin for a Penance the
repetition of those Crimes which have been acknowledged in Confession) the
Ambition of the universal Monarch may be served, if at the same time care be
taken to satisfy the Pride of the occumenical Bishop; and let him use the most
wicked and cruel Methods to enlarge his Dominions, and bring Countries under
his Tyranny, they shall be forgiven him, if he will do so meritorious an act as
to put the same Methods in practice to extend the Papal Yoke, and bring
Heretics into the Bosom of the Catholic Church.

And what he has done in order to both these ends, is too notorious to need my
insisting upon it, and does sufficiently demonstrate how violent and impetuous
those Designs are, which are suggested by Ambition and false Zeal; and how
eagerly such pursue them as are spurred on by their own Pride, encouraged by
the blandishments, or driven with the lash of a Confessor; and what Indignation
then may we imagine will such conceive against all those that are obstacles in
their way, break their Measures and defeat their Designs?

Time was when England was in the Interests of France, giving her helping hand
to the enslaving the Nations of Europe, and her self among the rest; and not
many Years since our Romish Adversaries had a prospect likewise (at least as
they flattered themselves) to have established their Antichristian Religion
here; and indeed, had that unhappy Alliance continued, had this Nation assisted
them, or but stood neuter till now, in all probability before this time the
Shackles, the wooden Shoes had been on, the Ears of Europe had been bored; and
had they succeeded in their Attempts upon this Church, and by Fraud or Violence
destroyed her, the great Bulwork of Protestancy would have been gone, and the
Northern Heresy, as they please to call it, laid open to be torn up by the
Roots.

But this Kingdom has broke with France, and joined with the other Princes of
Christendom, in defending their common Liberties and Rights, and opposing that
torrent that was overwhelming them all; and we may say, without Vanity in our
selves, or Injustice to others, that our Forces in conjunction with theirs,
have stem'd the Tide, and that the weight of them has turned the Balance; and
that just Zeal, that Strength and Courage wherewith the Fathers and Sons of
this Church encountered the daring Attempts of the Priests of the Romish
Communion in the last Reign, have given such a foil to that Church, have so
baffled their Cause, exposed the Weakness, as well as Wickedness of it, that it
must lie dead as long as the Trophies of their Victory remain, nor can revive
till their Enemies can have an opportunity of treating their Books as they
would their Persons, committing both to the Flames, which indeed is the
quickest and surest way of stopping the Mouths of Heretics, and confuting
their Writings: No wonder therefore if they look upon us as their worst
Adversaries, who have given such a check to the careers of that Monarch, and
the designs of that Church, and have all the Malice and Rage against us, that
disappointment in their greatest hopes can suggest.

But this is not all, we have a Prince who does not more oppose the Ambition of
that Monarch by his Arms, than he eclipses his Glory by his Personal Character,
while He bravely leads his own Troops, and exposes Himself in the hottest
Action, and gallantly faces Death in a thousand Shapes: How does He reproach
that undue tenderness and over care which the other has for his Person, who
never ventures it within the reach of Danger, or sight of an Enemy; and while
One maintains the glorious Character of a Father of his own Country, and a
Friend and Patron to the Neighboring ones, how little does it make the Other's
Figure, who is a Terror to his Subjects, an Oppressor of his Neighbors,
dreaded at Home, and hated Abroad?

It Is not strange then if the Wrath of Enemies, to whom we have given so great
and insupportable Provocations, be kindled against us, and ready to break forth
with the greatest Violence, even to the consuming of us, if their Power be
equal to it: And so indeed it had like to have done.

For the mischief they intended, and were ready to execute, was no less than
the Murdering our King, and the invading the Kingdom in the distraction that
that sad occasion would have put us in; It Is more than probable; that that
cautious Monarch who never had the Courage to meet his glorious Enemy in the
Field, laid, or was privy to the Design of taking him off after such a base and
barbarous manner: The dying Criminals that were so careful to clear many others
from being accessory to it, say nothing to acquit him, and indeed it is not to
be imagined that men would of their own heads have engaged in so black and
hazardous an Enterprise; for which if they had succeeded in it he must have
sacrificed them to his honor he would have been bound in Prudence and Policy
to have washed his hands of the blood of the Murdered King in theirs that shed
it, it is not, I say, to be believed, that any would have engaged in such an
undertaking upon such terms unless they had some previous assurance from him
that could give it them, not only of impunity but reward: And if he had not
designed the Assassination, as a Preliminary, not only expedient for the
facilitating his intended Invasion, but indeed as absolutely necessary in order
to the success of it, why upon the discovery and prevention of that has he
desisted from this? However that were, a competent number of hardened Villains
(much such a number as bound themselves with an Oath to kill St. Paul) were
ready for the design, Horses and Arms provided, and the place pitched upon,
each had their Post assigned them, and they waited for nothing but an account
of the King's going abroad to put it in Execution. If the blow had been given,
what a surprise, what a consternation would this Kingdom have been in; if our
Shepherd had been Smitten how should we have been Scattered like a flock of
silly helpless Sheep? our head would have been gone, and our hearts failed us,
we should have had neither Counsel nor Courage to have opposed those Forces
that were at that time to Land upon us, but must have fallen an easy pray to
them: Reflect a little my Brethren, (if you dare) what would have been the
dreadful consequences if this design had taken effect. One cannot without
horror think upon a French Army, wasting our country, burning our Towns and
Houses, butchering our Friends and Relations; what comfort could any one have
taken that should have escaped with his Life, to see a plentiful Country turned
into a barren Wilderness, a free People that had many valuable rights made
Slaves and dependants upon the Arbitrary Will of a Tyrannical Conqueror; a
pure Religion extirpated, and Idolatry and Superstition set up in the room of
it?

This must have been the miserable condition in which we should all have been
involved: If any think they should have fared better than their Neighbors upon
the account of their own great Merits on the fair promises they may have had
from abroad, they have very wrong notions of Popish Gratitude, and French
Trust, Alas Papists have engrossed all merit, there is no such thing in
Protestants, and Promises made to the prejudice of the great Monarch, or Holy
Church, are not to be kept. All they could have hoped for, is, that if they
would have gone some few steps further, and turned their Religion, they might
possibly have been treated as the new Converts are in France, but otherwise all
the mercy to have been expected would have been this, to have been eaten last,
though it has not always been so, instances are not wanting where those
Protestants that have been most zealous and forward in setting up a Popish
Prince have been the first that had cause to repent of it.

In short, whatever is dear to us as men, English Men, and Protestants, must
have been wrested from us, it is not to be supposed that being driven on by Rage
and Revenge, as well as Avarice and Ambition, they should have used softer
methods here than they do in their other Conquests, where they tinge the Rivers
with Blood, where Sword and Fire devour all before them, and if they would but
totally extirpate the rational Inhabitants of the Country and leave none but
the four footed ones of the Field and Forest, the Beasts of burden, the Beasts
of prey they would make very proper Subjects for such a Government.

But though God suffered them to go so far as they did in their Hellish
Enterprise, that the proof of it might be clear beyond denial, or doubt, yet
was he pleased so seasonably to discover and defeat it, that the mischief falls
only on their heads that devised it, and we may say with Israel, he has not
given us as a prey to their teeth, our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the
Snare of the Fowler, the Snare is broken, and we are escaped: with them let us
also join in making such grateful returns to the Divine Goodness as the great
Mercy calls for.

1. Let us look up to God as the Author of it: I do acknowledge it is not
always safe or easy to determine what events are to be ascribed to God's
special efficacious Providence, and as the Lords doing, and what are not; yet
in some there are such visible marks of Discrimination, that a Man must be
wilfully blind if he does not distinguish them. I may not at present enter
upon this Argument, and shall only say that in occurrances which are brought
about unexpectedly, but seasonably for the deliverance or good of a Church, or
Nation, professing God's true Religion, without their privity or assistance, by
invisible, or incompetent means, or by the Ministry or Instrumentality of such
things as are only, or immediately under the direction and government of God,
in such cases not to trace the outgoings of the Almighty where his footsteps
are so plain, is to be more stupid, or Atheistical than the very Heathens: Ps.
126.2. Exodus 14.25.

In our deliverance I will remark but two things which must lead us to God as
the Author of it: The design against the King's Life was prevented only by the
discovery voluntarily made by some of those who were to be concerned in the
execution of it; and the Invasion or Descent upon us was hindered by our Fleets
being in such a readiness to guard our own Coasts and block up our Enemies in
their Harbors.

But to what shall we ascribe all this, was it through our Policy or Conduct
that we had such a Fleet at home? Were they not to have been gone long before
to the Streights and stopped only by a contrary strange Wind which has hardly
been known at that Season of the Year to sit so long in that quarter? And to
whom shall we attribute this, but to him whom the Wind and Seas obey, who
brings the Winds out of his Treasures, and makes them blow under Heaven whither
he lists?

And what was it that made the discoverers confess the designed Assassination,
when 't was so near being Executed. were they not Papists, who are not
generally over tender of the Blood and lives of Heretics, when their
destruction may promote the good of Holy Church, were they not engaged and
encouraged in it by some of their Priests, and no doubt assured if they lost
their lives in the attempt, of Eternal Life in Exchange; and how came the
Christian, the Gentleman, the Man to be too hard for the Papists, Conscience,
Honor, or Pity to be too strong for their Religion, what, or who touched their
hearts, and melted them into remorse and Confession? Who but he who only knows,
and alone can change the heart, take away the heart of stone, and give one of
flesh? Him therefore let us acknowledge to be our Savior and Deliverer, and
say if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us
they had swallowed us up quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

2. To him let us in the second place pay the tribute of praise and thanks for
it, this is what he expects, call upon me in the day of trouble and I will hear
thee and thou shall praise me: And very reasonable certainly, for any benefit
bestowed brings the person that receives it into debt to his Benefactor, and
thanks is the least part of payment if God has rescued us from the very Jaws of
Death how ought we to glorify him both in Soul and Body which he has redeemed.
How should we excite all the powers of our Soul and Members of our Bodies to
join in his praise? Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless
his holy name who saves thy life from destruction and crowns thee with mercy
and loving kindness. Awake also my Glory, my tongue shall speak of thy
righteousness, O Lord, and my Lips shall praise thee.

Has he preserved to us our Churches where we may have liberty to worship him
in Purity and the beauty of Holiness; has he secured to us those swept and
garnisht Houses from the return of the evil spirit, and shall not the Tribes go
up thither to worship, to give thanks to his holy name? Has he continued to us
a service in our own Language, and shall we not join in it when we may sing
with the Spirit, and with the understanding also; and can say Amen at the
giving of thanks? Have we still access to him through the Mediation and
Intercession of our great High Priest only, and shall we not through him offer
to God the Sacrifice of praise continually? May we still partake of the Wine as
well as Bread in the Eucharist, and shall we not receive the Cup of Salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord? Is Jerusalem safe notwithstanding her
Enemies cried down with her, down with her, even to the ground, and may our
Feet stand in her Gates; may we yet frequent her solemn Assembly, and praise
the Lord of Heaven with Music Vocal and Instrumental? and shall we be silent?
If any thing strikes us dumb but wonder and astonishment at the greatness and
strangeness of our Salvation, we shall deserve to continue so, and that our
tongues should cleave to the roof of our mouths; it is fit the neglected Harps
should be hanged for ever upon the Willows, and the skilful hand that touched
them forget its cunning, if they make not a cheerful noise to the God of Jacob
upon so Joyful an occasion; and if we prefer not Jerusalem above our chief Joy,
and join not in one of the Songs of Zion for her deliverance in the Temple of
God, how deservedly may God give her up to the will of our Enemies, suffer them
to carry us away Captive, and tauntingly require of us in a strange Land, a
Song and Melody in our heaviness.

My Brethren, this is the business for which Authority has this Day called us
together, and who ever can wilfully disobey that call, and without very just
reason refuse to come up with the multitude to the House of God, with the Voice
of Joy and Praise, with the Multitude that keep Holy Day, they give but just
cause of suspicion that they were Wellwishers to the Villainous Design, and are
sorry it is defeated. I am very glad to see such a numerous appearance in this
place, and hope that better Principles than Formality or Curiosity, or fear of
Censure; that a true sense of the never to be forgotten Mercy, and hearty
desire to express your thankfulness to the gracious Author of it, has brought
you together. And oh! that I could say any thing to increase that sense in you,
and to enlarge your Hearts, and raise up your Souls to the highest pitch of
Gratitude and Devotion.

Assure your selves, if the greatness of the destruction which threatened, and
was within few days of over taking us, if the wonderfulness of our deliverance,
who are escaped as a Bird that was taken in the Snare, if the visible
appearance of the hand of God in our rescue, who saw the Snares and Designs our
Enemies were privily laying, while we were secure and unapprehensive of them,
and discovered and broke them before they could take effect; if these are any
motives of thankfulness, they have their full strength and force upon us in the
present case: All that is valuable to us, as appertaining either to this Life
or Godliness, our Lives, with all the Comforts of them, our Liberties, our
Estates, our Friends, and which, I hope, we esteem above all, our Reformed
Religion, were all upon the very brink of ruin: The Blow was near being given,
and we knew nothing of it, so far were we from being able to have warded it of,
which must either have Murdered us presently, or if any had survived it for
some time they must have lived Slaves, and then died with the miserable
prospect of leaving their wretched Posterity such; fettered both in Body and
Mind, under Temporal and Spiritual Chains, and nothing has prevented this Blow,
or saved us from this ruin, but a merciful and watchful Providence: Let us
then say in the words of our Royal Prophet, Blessed be the Lord God, the God of
Israel, who only, does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious name for
ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his glory, Amen. Amen.

3. But lastly, to conclude, let us repose our Trust and Confidence in this God
for the future, and say with Israel our help stands in the name of the Lord
who made Heaven and Earth: It Is certain this Church and Nation have been for
some time preserved in that peaceable and happy state we enjoy by little less
than Miracle; God has as plainly appeared for us as he did of old for his
People whom he brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand; but yet as they were
questioning his power even in the midst of Miracles, and distrusting his
goodness at the same time that they had present Experience of it ( He smote the
stony Rock indeed, but can he give bread, etc.) Those mouths which should have
been opened only in his praise, were filled with nothing but murmurings and
diffidence; so has it been with too many among us, complainings and repineings,
doubts and despair almost have been heard in our streets, and how justly might
God have verifyed our unreasonable and unthankful fears? When St. Peter at his
own request was commanded by Christ to come unto him upon the Water, he walked
safely upon the surface of it while his Faith boy'd him up, but when at the
raging of the Winds his Faith began to shake, and he was afraid, as if Christ
who he saw at that time Commanded the Seas and they obeyed, could not govern
the Winds too, and secure him against both; how reasonably did Christ chastise
his despondency and want of Faith by letting him begin to sink? And so might
God have dealt with us, withdrawn his Protection from us, and suffered the
Waters to have overwhelmed us, when we had so unworthily distrusted his Power
and Readiness to Rule the raging of them, after he had so often forced them
within their Banks, and for our sakes said to them, hitherto shall you come,
and no further? But he has rather chose to upbraid than correct us for our
repining and doubting, and to bring us to our duty of an humble affiance and
trust in him, by giving fresh instances of his Power and Goodness, than punish
our neglect of it by withdrawing them from us: How should this even shame us
out of our insidelty (I can call it no better) and give us a holy Confidence in
him, and Dependence upon him; that he who has so often and strangely appeared
for us, will be our God and Guide for ever; that he who has delivered us from
so great a death, and does deliver, will yet deliver us; and perfect in his
time that good work which he has begun, and carried on so far for us.

But then in order to this trust and relyance, that they may be reasonable and
well grounded, we cannot but think there is something to be done by us, and
what is that but to endeavor to walk worthy of that goodness which God has
showed to us, by improving the mercy, he continues to us to his Glory, and by
making him the returns of a filial fear, unfeigned Love, and an universal
Obedience? without this our Faith will be but a vain Considence, and mere
Presumption.

We have the best Government and Laws in the World, but if we are loose and
lawless in our Lives, the advantage of our Constitution will be so far from
availing us, that contrariwise it will make a considerable Article in the
charge against us; it will both hasten our account and make it the more heavy.

We have a Prince to go in and out before us, to Rule us at home, and Fight for
us abroad, who does at least come up to the Character of any that have sat
upon this, or any other Throne before him; but if we do not approve our selves
good Subjects of the King of Heaven, our Princes Virtues will not secure us,
though our wickedness may injure him: The Spirit of God has told us, that for
the Sins of a Nation many are the Princes thereof. God may as well take away a
good one as give a bad King in his wrath, and we know he once threatened a
People, that if they did wickedly they should be destroyed, both they and their
King.

We have a pure Religion a Church reformed from the corruptions of that of
Rome, but if our Conversations are impure and we are unreform'd in our manners,
will our Church, or our Faith save us? God will indeed have a Church to the end
of the World, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, but sure he
is not tied to this, or that particular Place, or Country, the Gospel may be
taken from one Kingdom and yet not out of the World, but transplanted to
another, and our Savior has plainly enough told us upon what terms he will
give, or take it away from a People in those words to the Jews, the Kingdom of
Heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that shall bring forth
the Fruits thereof.

Would we therefore that God should go on to preserve and secure these
blessings to us, and that we may raise to our selves a ground and considence in
him that he will, we see how we must qualify our selves for them, we must not
be barren and unfruitful under all the Cultivations and Husbandry, all the
gracious methods which he uses to improve us, but must bring forth Fruits meet
for repentance, the blessed Fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, peace,
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Being thus
disposed we may reasonably hope for God's Blessing upon our endeavors; it is
true our endeavors without the divine assistance will turn to little account,
and it is certain God can if he pleases, save us without our contributing any
thing toward it; but yet, though God may, and does sometimes for weighty
reasons act either immediately, at least without the ministry of them, for
whose sake he acts and after a very extraordinary manner, yet where there is no
special promise, it is not to be expected that God should go out of his ordinary
methods of his Providence, which is to act by the instrumentality of second
causes to cooperate with the honest endeavors of Men, when there is room for
them, and make that successful for their support, or preservation: And
therefore as no success is to be expected from our endeavors without the
divine assistance, so that assistance cannot reasonably be expected without the
use of our endeavors.

The Husbandman would be thought very wild and extravagant in his expectation
that should think to reap a plentiful Crop without manuring and tilling his
ground, preparing it for and committing the seed to it in due manner and
season, and yet it is certain it is God only that can give the increase. The
Watchman undoubtedly waketh but in vain unless the Lord keep the City, but yet
if a Town beleagur'd by an Enemy should neglect to Man their Forts, and guard
their Avenues, and instead of unanimously joining together to defend themselves
and oppose the Foe, should quarrel among themselves and fall a tearing and
devouring one another, it would not be hard to guess what would be the fate of
it. I say, our endeavors must not be wanting toward our own safety, though
it is only God's Blessing upon them that can make them successful for that end.
That therefore we may expect and receive that blessing, let us do our parts,
pursue those methods that tend most plainly to the securing them, and trust God
with the event.

Nothing under Heaven but Union and Resolution can secure us; if we are broken
into Factions, and pursuing the interest of Parties, or private Revenge, while
the Enemy is watching for the ruin of the whole. We may learn from our Savior
what is like to become of us, a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

If now the Adversary has showed himself so openly and daringly, we shall be
Cowardly, or to put it into other words, cautious and reserved; we invite and
encourage his attempts upon us: This is no time to dissemble, we must declare
plainly one way or other; either resolve upon a brave Defense, or to yield our
Necks to the Yoke.

My Brethren we want no Engagements or Encouragements to unite and to be bold.

The cause we are to unite in, is the Cause of our King and Country, and indeed
of all Europe; it is the Cause of our Church and the whole Protestant Religion.

We are not left alone to grapple with our Enemies, we have most of the Princes
and States of Christendom joined with us; and which is most encouraging of all,
hitherto God has appeared for us: Let us then join as one Man, both Heart and
Hand, in defense of our selves, our little ones, and all our Substance (as Ezra
expresses it) in defense of our Liberties, our Laws and Religion; and for the
sake of these in defense of our King and Government, upon whom, under God, all
these depend. We have all the strictest Obligations to him that can be laid
upon us, of Gratitude, of Duty, of Interest.

Shall we not unite in the defense of him that has once rescued us out of the
very Jaws of Destruction, and is still guarding us with the utmost hazards and
fatigue, in defense of that Precious Life which has been so often exposed for
the security of ours?

Have we not sworn many of us, to bear Faith and true Allegiance to him, and do
we not all every day beg of God, in our public Prayers, to strengthen him that
he may Vanquish and Overcome all his Enemies; and ought we not to convince the
World that we have not in our Oaths prevaricated with God as well as imposed
upon Man; that in our Prayers our Hearts do not give the Lie to our Tongues, by
our readiness to make good our Oaths upon such an occasion, and to second our
Prayers by our hearty endeavors? Are we not Embarkt in one Cause, have we not
the same common concern with him, both Civil and Religious? So that to join in
his Defense, is indeed to join in our own: why then should we not resolve to
stand by him and one another, with the same Courage with which he Fights for us
all?

To conclude, Let us first seek and engage the Divine Favor and Blessing, and
then add our joint Endeavors, as our Places and Capacities give us
opportunity, for our common Security; and being reconciled to God by Repentance
and newness of Life, and united to one another by all the Bonds which our
common Relation and Interests, as to Nature, Country, and Religion obliges us;
and resolve to act in good earnest for the benefit and safety of the whole, we
may confidently rely upon God, that he will prosper and give success to our
Endeavors, that he will guard us at home, and go forth with our Fleets and
Armies, and fight our Battles abroad, that he will preserve the breath of our
Nostrils; bless him in his going out and coming in, give his Angels charge over
him, and cover his head in the day of Battle: that he will be a Sun and a
Shield to enlighten and protect him, to keep him from the Arrow that flies by
day, and the evil that walks in darkness; that he will bring him back with
Honor and Victory, and Crown at last all his Labors and our Wishes with a
happy and durable Peace: and that our Enemies being scattered, who delighted in
blood, we being delivered from their hands, may serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness, before him, all the days of our Life.

FINIS.

