Dr. TILLOTSON's FAST-SERMON BEFORE THE House of COMMONS, APRIL 16. 1690.

Jovis 17 die April. 1690.
Ordered,

THAT the Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Tillotson, Dean of St. Paul's,
for the Sermon Preached before this House Yesterday; And that he be desired to
Print the same; And that Sir Edmund Jenings do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, ON Wednesday the
16th of April: A DAY Appointed by Their MAJESTY'S, FOR A Solemn Monthly Fast.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Clerk of the Closet to His
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill; William
Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet; And John
Tillotson, Bookseller in London. M DC XC.

Ecclesiastes IX. 11. I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not
to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happens to them all.
NEXT to the acknowledgment of God's Being, nothing is more essential to
Religion, than the Belief of his Providence, and a constant dependence upon
him, as the great Governor of the World, and the wise disposer of all the
affairs and concernments of the children of men: And nothing can be a greater
argument of Providence, than that there is such an order of Causes laid in
Nature, that in ordinary course every thing does usually attain its end; and
yet that there is such a mixture of Contingency, as that now and then we cannot
tell how nor why, the most likely causes do deceive us, and fail of producing
their usual effects.

For if there be a God and a Providence, it is reasonable that things should be
thus: Because a Providence does suppose all things to have been at first wisely
framed, and with a fi^ness to attain their end; but yet it does also suppose
that God has reserved to himself a power and liberty to interpose, and to
cross as he pleases, the usual course of things; to awaken men to the
consideration of him, and a continual dependence upon him; and to teach us to
ascribe those things to his wise disposal, which, if we never saw any change,
we should be apt to impute to blind necessity. And therefore the Wiseman, to
bring us to an acknowledgment of the Divine Providence, tells us that thus he
had observed things to be in this World; that though they generally happen
according to the probability of Second Causes, yet sometimes they fall out
quite otherwise, I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, etc.

The connection of which Words, with the foregoing Discourse, is briefly this.
Among many other Observations which the Wise Preacher makes in this Sermon of
the vanity and uncertainty of all things in this World, and of the mistakes of
men about them, he takes notice here in the Text, and in the Verse before it,
of two Extremes of human Life: Some, because of the uncertainty of all worldly
things, cast off all care and diligence, and neglect the use of proper and
probable means; having found by experience, that when men have done all they
can, they many times fail of their end, and are disappointed they know not how:
Others, on the contrary, rely so much upon their own skill and industry, as to
promise success to themselves in all their undertakings; and presume so much
upon second Causes, as if no consideration at all were to be had of the First.

The Wise Preacher reproves both these Extremes, and shows the folly and vanity
of them. On the one hand, of those who sit still, and will use no care and
endeavor, because it may all happen to be disappointed, and to fail of
Success: Not considering, that though prudent care and diligence will not
always do the business, yet there is nothing to be done without them, in the
ordinary course of things; and that, in the order of Second Causes, these are
the most likely and effectual means to any end: And therefore, rejecting this
lazy Principle, he counsels men, whatever they propose to themselves, to be
very diligent and vigorous in the use of proper means for the attainment of it;
in the Verse immediately before the Text, Whatever thy hand finds to do, do
it with thy might.

But then he observes also, as great a folly and vanity on the other hand; that
they who manage their affairs with great wisdom and industry, are apt to
presume and reckon upon the certain success of them, without taking into
consideration that which in all human affairs is most considerable, the favor
and blessing of that almighty and wise Providence which rules the World; I
returned, says he, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, etc.

I returned and saw, that is, having considered on the one hand the folly of
sloth and carelessness, I turned mine eyes the other way, and saw as great an
error on the other hand; in men's presuming too much upon their own diligence
and conduct, without taking notice of the Providence of God. For I have found,
says Solomon, by manifold observation, That the success of things does not
always answer the probability of second causes and means. So that the sum of
the Preacher's advice is this: When thou propoundest any end to thy self, be
diligent and vigorous in the use of means; and when thou have done all, look
above and beyond these to a Superior Cause which overrules, and steers, and
stops as he pleases, all the motions and activity of second Causes: And be not
confident that all things are ever so wisely and firmly laid, that they cannot
fail of success. For the Providence of God does many times step in, to divert
the most probable event of things, and to turn it quite another way: And
whenever he pleases to do so, the most strong and likely means do fall lame,
or stumble, or by some accident or other come short of their end.

I returned, and saw under the sun, that is, here below, in this inferior World.

That the race is not to the swift: This the Chaldee Paraphrast does understand
with relation to warlike affairs, I beheld, says he, and saw, that they who are
swift as eagles do not always escape in the day of battle. But I choose rather
to understand the Words in their more obvious sense, that in a Race many things
may happen to hinder him that is swiftest from winning it.

Nor the battle to the strong; That is, victory and success in war do not
always attend the greatest force and preparations, nor does that side which in
humane estimation is strongest, always prevail and get the better.

Nor yet bread to the wise; Neque doctorum panem esse, so some render the
Words, that learned men are not always secured against poverty and want.

Nor yet riches to men of understanding, for so some Interpreters translate the
Words, Neque industriis divitias esse, that those who take most pains do not
always get the greatest estates.

Nor yet favor to men of skill; that is, to those who understand men and
business, and how to apply themselves dexterously to the inclinations and
interests of Princes and Great men. Others interpret these Words more
generally, Neque peritorum artificum esse gratiam, that those who excel most
in their several Arts and Professions do not always meet with suitable
encouragement: But because the Word, which is here rendered favor, is so
frequently used by Solomon for the favor of Princes, the former sense seems to
be more easy and natural.

But time and chance happens to them all; that is, says Aben Ezra, there is
a secret Providence of God which sometimes presents men with unexpected
opportunities, and interposeth accidents which no human wisdom could foresee:
Which gives success to very unlikely means, and defeats the swift, and the
strong, and the learned, and the industrious, and them that are best versed in
men and business, of their several ends and designs.

It sometimes falls out, that he that is swiftest, by a fall, or by fainting,
or by some other unlucky accident may lose the Race.

It sometimes happens, that a much smaller and weaker number, by the advantage
of ground, or of a pass; by a stratagem, or by a sudden surprise, or by some
other accident and opportunity, may be victorious over a much greater force.

And that an unlearned man, in comparison, by favor, or friends, or by some
happy chance of setting out to the best advantage the little learning he has,
before one that has less, may arrive at great things; when perhaps at the same
time, the man that is a hundred times more learned than he, may be ready to
starve.

And that men of no great parts and industry may stumble into an estate, and by
some casual hit in Trade, may attain such a Fortune, as the man that has
toiled and drudg'd all his life shall never be able to reach.

And Lastly, that a man of no great ambition or design may fall into an
opportunity, and by happening upon the mollia tempora fandi, some soft and
lucky season of address, may slide into his Princes favor, and all on the
sudden be hoisted up to that degree of dignity of esteem, as the designing Man
who has been laying trains to blow up his Rivals, and waiting opportunities
all his days to worm others out and to skrew himself in, shall never be able to
attain.

The Words thus explained contain this general Proposition, which shall be the
subject of my following Discourse.

That in human affairs the most likely means do not always attain their end,
nor does the event constantly answer the probability of second causes; but
there is a secret Providence which governs and overrules all things, and does,
when it pleases, interpose to defeat the most hopeful and probable designs.

In the handling of this Proposition I shall do these three things.

First, I shall confirm and illustrate the truth of of it, by an Induction of
the particulars which are instanced in, here in the Text.

Secondly, I shall give some reason and account of this, why the Providence of
God does sometimes interpose to hinder and defeat the most probable designs.

Thirdly, I shall draw some inferences from the whole, suitable to the occasion
of this Day. In all which I shall endeavor to be as brief as conveniently I
can.

First, For the confirmation and illustration of this Proposition, That the
most likely means do not always attain their end; but there is a secret
Providence which overrules and governs all events, and does, when it pleases,
interpose to defeat the most probable and hopeful designs. This is the general
Conclusion which Solomon proves by this Induction of particulars in the Text.
And he instanceth in the most probable means for the compassing of the several
ends which most men in this World propose to themselves. And the great darlings
of mankind are Victory, Riches, and Honor: I do not mention Pleasure, because
that seems rather to result from the use and enjoyment of the other. Now if a
man design Victory, what more probable means to overcome in a Race than
swiftness? What more likely to prevail in War than strength? If a man aim at
Riches, what more proper to raise an Estate than understanding and industry? If
a man aspire to Honor, what more likely to prefer him to the Kings favor and
service than dexterity and skill in business? And yet experience shows that
these means, as probable as they seem to be, are not always successful for the
accomplishment of their several ends.

Or else we may suppose that Solomon by these Instances did intend to represent
the chief engines and instruments of humane designs and actions. Now there are
five things more especially, which do eminently qualify a man for any
undertaking; expedition and quickness of dispatch; strength and force;
providence and forecast; diligence and industry; knowledge, and insight into
men and business: And some think that Solomon did intend to represent these
several qualities by the several instances in the Text. The Race is not to the
swift, that is, men of the greatest expedition and dispatch do not always
succeed: For we see that men do sometimes outrun business, and make haste to
be undone. Nor the battle to the strong, that is, neither does force and
strength always carry it. Nor yet bread to the wise; which some understand of
the provident care and pains of the Husband man, whose harvest is not always
answerable to his labor and hopes. Nor yet riches to men of understanding, or
industry; that is, neither is diligence in business always crowned with
success. Nor yet favor to men of skill, that is, neither have they that have
the greatest dexterity in the management of affairs always the fortune to rise.
And if we take the words in this sense, the thing will come much to one: But I
rather approve the first interpretation, as being less forced and nearer to the
Letter.

So that the force of Solomon's reasoning is this. If the swiftest do not
always win the race; nor the strongest always overcome in War: If knowledge and
learning do not always secure men from want; nor industry always make men rich;
nor political skill always raise men to high place; nor any other means, that
can be instanced in as most probable, do constantly and infallibly succeed:
then it must be acknowledged that there is some other Cause which mingles it
self with humane affairs and governs all events; and which can, and does when
it pleases, defeat the most likely, and bring to pass the most improbable
designs: And what else can that be imagined to be, but the secret and
overruling Providence of Almighty God; when we can find no other, we are very
unreasonable if we will not admit this to be the Cause of such extraordinary
events, but will obstinately impute that to blind Necessity or Chance which
has such plain characters upon it of a Divine Power and Wisdom.

I might be large upon every one of these Instances in the Text, and illustrate
them by pat and lively Examples both out of Scripture and other Histories. But
I shall briefly pass over all of them, but the second; the battle is not to the
strong.

The race is not to the swift. If we understand this literally, it is obvious
to every man to imagine a great many accidents in a Race, which may snatch
Victory from the swiftest runner. If we understand it, as the Chaldee
Paraphrase does, with relation to War, that the swiftest does not always
overcome or escape in the day of Battle; of this Asahel is an eminent Instance,
who though he was, as the Scripture tells us, light of foot as a wild Roe, yet
did he not escape the spear of Abner. It seems that among the Ancients,
swiftness was looked upon as a great qualification in a Warrior, both because
it serves for a sudden assault and onset, and likewise for that which in
civility we call a nimble retreat. And therefore David; in his Poetical
Lamentation over those two great Captains, Saul and Jonathan, takes particular
notice of this warlike quality of theirs; They were, says he, swifter than
Eagles, stronger than Lions: And the constant Character which Homer gives of
Achilles, one of his principal Hero's, is, that he was swift of foot: The Poet
feigns of him, that by some charm or gift of the Gods he was invulnerable in
all parts of his body except his heel: And that was the part to which he
trusted; and in that he received his mortal wound: The wise Poet hereby
instructing us, that many times our greatest danger lies there, where we place
our chief confidence and safety.

Nor yet bread to the wise, or to the learned. The poverty of Poets is
Proverbial; and there are frequent instances in History of eminently learned
persons that have been reduced to great straits and necessities.

Nor yet riches to men of understanding: By which, whether we understand men of
great parts, or of great diligence and industry; it is obvious to every man's
observation, that an ordinary capacity and understanding does usually lie more
level to the business of a common Trade and Profession, than more refined and
elevated parts; which lie rather for speculation than practice, and are better
fitted for the pleasure and ornament of conversation, than for the toil and
drudgery of business: As a fine Razor is admirable for cutting hairs, but the
dull Hatchet much more proper for hewing a hard and knotty piece of timber. And
even when Parts and Industry meet together, they are many times less successful
in the raising of a great Estate, than men of much lower and slower
understandings: because these are apt to admire riches, which is a great spur
to industry; and because they are perpetually intent upon one thing, and mind
but one business, from which their thoughts never straggle into vain and
useless enquiries after knowledge, or news, or public affairs; all which being
foreign to their business they leave to those who are, as they are wont to say
of them in scorn, more curious and too wise to be rich.

Nor yet favor to men of skill. All History is full of Instances of the casual
advancement of men to great favor and honor, when others, who have made it
their serious study and business, have fallen short of it. I could give a
famous Example in this kind, of the manifold and manifest disappointment of a
whole Order of men: the slyest and most subtle, in their generation, of all
the children of this World; the most politically instituted, and the best
studied and skilled in the tempers and interests of men; the most pragmatical,
and cunning to insinuate themselves into the Intrigues of Courts and great
Families: and who, by long experience, and an universal intelligence, and
communicated observations, have reduced humane affairs, at least, as they
think, to a certain Art and Method, and to the most steady Rules that such
contingent things are capable of: I believe you all guess beforehand whom I
mean, even the honest Jesuits: And yet these men of so much art and skill have
met with as many checks and disappointments, as any sort of men ever did: They
have been discountenanced by almost all Princes and States, and, one time or
other, banished out of most of the Courts and Countries of Europe. And it is no
small argument of the Divine Providence, that so much cunning has met with so
little countenance and success; and has been so often, so grossly infatuated,
and their counsels turned into foolishness.

But I promised only to mention these, and to insist upon the second Instance
in the Text, I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the battle is not to the
strong, to the Gibborim, the Giants, for so the Hebrew word signifies; in which
Solomon might possibly have respect to the history of the Israelites subduing
the Canaanites, a People of great strength and stature, among whom were the
Giants, the sons of Anak: or more probably, to the famous encounter of his
Father David with the great Goliath. But however that be, the Scripture is full
of Examples to this purpose; that when the Providence of God is pleased to
interpose in favor of any side, it becomes victorious; according to the saying
of King ^ Chr. 14. 11.
Asa in his prayer to God, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many,
or with those that have no power.

Sometimes God has defeated great Armies by plain and apparent Miracles: Such
was the drowning of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea; and the Stars fighting
in their courses against Sisera; by which Poetical expression I suppose is
meant Sisera's being remarkably defeated by a visible hand from Heaven: And
such was the destruction of the proud King of Assyria's Army by an Angel, who
slew an hundred and fourscoure and five thousand of them in one night.

Sometimes God does this by more humane ways; by striking mighty Armies with a
Panick and unaccountable fear; and sometimes by putting extraordinary spirits
and courage into the weaker side, so that an hundred shall chase a thousand,
and a thousand shall put ten thousand to flight.

This made David so frequently to acknowledge the Providence of God, especially
in the affairs of War. There is no King saved by the Psalm. 33. 16.
multitude of an Host, neither is a mighty man delivered by much strength. And
again, I will not trust in Psalm. 44. 6.
my bow, neither shall my sword save me. And Solomon Prove. 21. 30, 31.
confirms the same observation, There is no wisdom, says he, nor understanding,
nor counsel against the Lord. The horse is prepared against the day of battle,
but safety, or, as some Translations render it Victory, is of the Lord. Gideon,
by a very odd stratagem of Lamps and Pitchers, defeated a very numerous Army,
only with three hundred men. Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, by climbing up a
Rock, and coming suddenly on the back of the Philistines Camp, struck them with
such a terror as put their whole Army to flight. King Asa, with a much smaller
number, defeated that huge Ethiopian Army which consisted of a Million. And how
was Xerxes his mighty Army overthrown, almost by a handful of Grecians? And, to
come nearer our selves, how was that formidable Fleet of the Spaniards, which
they presumptuously called invincible, shattered and broken in pieces, chiefly
by the Winds and the Sea? So many accidents are there, especially in War,
whereby the Divine Providence does sometimes interpose and give Victory to the
weaker side.

And this has been so apparent in all Ages, that even the Heathen did always
acknowledge, in the affairs of War, a special interposition of Fortune; by
which the wiser among them did understand the Divine Providence. Plutarch,
speaking of the Romans, says, that Time and Fortune, the very same with
Solomon's Time and Chance here in the Text, did lay the foundation of their
Greatness; by which he ascribes their success to a remarkable Providence of God
concurring with several happy Opportunities.

And Livy, their great Historian, has this remarkable Observation, That in all
human affairs, especially in matters of War, Fortune has a mighty stroke. And
again, No where, says he, is the event less answerable to expectation than in
War; and therefore nothing is so slight and inconsiderable, which may not turn
the Scales in a great matter. And Caesar himself, who was perhaps the most
skilful and prosperous Warrior that ever was, makes the same acknowledgment;
As in all other things, says he, so particularly in War, Fortune has a huge
sway. And Plutarch observes. That there was no Temple at Rome dedicated to
Wisdom or Valor, but a most magnificent and stately one to Fortune; signifying
hereby, that they did ascribe their success infinitely more to the Providence
of God, than to their own Courage and Conduct. I proceed now, in the

Second place, to give some reason and account II.
of this, Why the Providence of God does sometimes thus interpose to hinder and
defeat the most probable designs of men. To bring men to an acknowledgment of
his Providence, and of their dependence upon Him, and subordination to Him; and
that He is the great Governor of the World, and rules in the Kingdoms of men;
and that all the inhabitants of the Earth are as nothing to Him, and the power
of Second Causes inconsiderable: That He does according to his will, in the
Armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none may stay his
hand, or say unto him what do thou.

God has so ordered things, in the administration of the affairs of the World,
as to encourage the use of means; and yet so, as to keep men in a continual
dependence upon him for the efficacy and success of them: To encourage Industry
and Prudence, God generally permits things to their natural course, and to fall
out according to the power and probability of second Causes.

But then, lest men should cast off Religion, and deny the God that is above;
lest they should trust in their sword and their bow, and say, the Lord has
not done this; lest men should look upon themselves as the Creators and framers
of their own fortune, and when they do but a little outstrip others in wisdom
or power, in the skill and conduct of humane affairs, they should grow proud
and presumptuous, God is pleased sometimes more remarkably to interpose, to
hide pride from man, as the expression is in Job; to check the haughtiness and
insolence of men's spirits, and to keep them within the bounds of modesty and
humility; to make us to know that we are but men, and that the reins of the
World are not in our hands, but that there is One above who sways and governs
all things here below.

And indeed if we should suppose, in the first frame of things which we call
Nature, an immutable Order to be fixed, and all things to go on in a constant
course, according to the power and force of second Causes, without any
interposition of Providence to stop, or alter that course, upon any occasion:
In this case, the foundation of a great part of Religion, but especially of
Prayer to God would be quite taken away: Upon this Supposition, it would be the
vainest thing in the World to pray to God for the good success of our
undertakings, or to acknowledge Him as the Author of it: For if God do only
look on, and permit all things to proceed in a settled and established course;
then instead of praying to God we ought to ply the means, and to make the best
provision and preparation we can for the effecting of what we desire; and to
rely upon that, without taking God at all into our counsel and consideration.
For all application to God by Prayer does evidently suppose, that the
Providence of God does frequently interpose, to overruled events besides and
beyond the natural and ordinary course of things, and to steer them to a quite
different Point, from that to which in human probability they seemed to tend.

So that it is every whit as necessary to Religion to believe the Providence of
God, and that He governs the World, and does when He pleases, interpose in the
affairs of it, as that He made it at first. I come now in the

Third and last place, to make some Inferences, III.
suitable to the Occasion of this Day, from what has been said upon this
Argument: And they shall be these.

First, From hence we may learn, not to account Religion, and time spent in the
Service of God, and in Prayer to Him for his blessing upon our endeavors, to
be any hindrance to our affairs. For after we have done all we can, the event
is still in Gods hand, and rests upon the disposal of his Providence.

And did men firmly believe this, they would not neglect the duty of Prayer,
and behave themselves so carelessly, and unconcernedly, and irreverently in it,
as we see too many do; they would not look upon every hour that is spent in
Devotion as lost from their business.

If men would but take a view of what happened to them in the course of a long
Life, I believe most of us would see reason to acknowledge, that our prosperity
and success in any kind has depended more upon happy opportunities, upon
undesign'd and unexpected occurrences, than upon our own prudent forecast and
conduct.

And if this were well considered by us, we should not methinks be so apt to
leave God out of our counsels and undertakings, as if he were a mere Name and
Cipher in the World. It is, I am sure, the advice of one that was much wiser
and more experienced, than any of us will pretend to be, I mean, Solomon, Trust
in Prove. 3. 5, 6.
the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding: In
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths: Be not wise in
thine own eyes, fear the Lord and depart from evil. There is no Principle that
ought more firmly to be believed by us than this, That to live under a constant
sense and awe of Almighty God, to depend upon his Providence, and to seek his
favor and blessing upon all our designs, being fearful to offend Him and
careful to please Him, is a much nearer and surer way to success, than our own
best Prudence and Preparations.

And therefore at such a time, more especially, when we are going to War, or
engaged in it, we should break off our sins by repentance and the sincere
resolution of a better course: We should earnestly implore the blessing of God
upon our undertakings; and not only take great care that our Cause be just, but
likewise that there be no wicked thing amongst us, to drive God out of our
Camp; no accursed thing, that may provoke Him to deliver us into the hands of
our Enemies. It was a particular Law given by God to the Jews, When the Host
goes Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
forth against thine Enemy, then keep thy self from every wicked thing; then,
that is, more especially at such a time.

And this is a necessary Caution, not only to those who are personally engaged
in the War, that by the favor of God they may have their heads covered in the
day of Battle, or if God shall suffer them to fall by the hand of the Enemy,
that having made their peace before hand with Him, they may not only have the
comfort of a good Cause, but of a good Conscience, void of offense toward God
and men.

But this Caution likewise concerns those, who are interested in the success
and event of the War; as we all are, not only in regard of our Lives and
Estates, but of that which ought to be much dearer to us, our Religion and the
freedom of our Consciences; which are now every whit as much at stake, as our
Civil interests and Liberties. And therefore as we tender any, or all of these,
we should be very careful to keep our selves from every wicked thing; that they
who fight for us may not for our sins, and for our sakes, turn their backs in
the day of battle, and fall by the Sword of the Enemy.

Secondly, From hence we may likewise learn, so to use the means as still to
depend upon God; who can, as he pleases, bless the Counsels and endeavors of
Men, or blast them and make them of none effect. For as God has promised
nothing but to a wise and diligent use of means, so all our prudence, and
industry, and most careful preparations may miscarry, if He do not favor our
design: For without Him nothing is wise, nothing is strong, nothing is able to
reach and attain its end.

We should indeed use the means as vigorously, as if God did nothing; and when
we have done so, we should depend upon God for the success of those means, as
if we our selves had done nothing, but did expect all from his favor and
blessing: For when all is done, we are only safe under his Protection, and sure
of success from his Blessing.

For whatever vain and foolish men may say in their hearts, There is, There is
a God, that made the World, and administers the affairs of it with great Wisdom
and Goodness; else how came any of us into Being, or what do we here? Did we
not most assuredly believe that there is a God, that governs the World and
super-intends humane affairs; the first wish of a Wise man would be, to steal
out of Being, if he could; and that the same Chance or Necessity, that brought
him into the World, would take the first opportunity to carry him out. For to
be every moment liable to present, and great, and certain Evils; and to have no
security against the continuance of them, or the return of the same or worse
Evils; nor to have any assurance of a better and more durable state of rest and
happiness hereafter, is in truth so very melancholy a meditation, that I do not
know any consideration in the World that is of force and power enough to
support the mind of man under it: And were there not in the World a Being, that
is wiser, and better, and more powerful than our selves, and that keeps things
from running into endless confusion and disorder; a Being that loves us, and
takes care of us, and that will certainly consider and reward all the good that
we do, and all the evil that we suffer upon his account, I do not see what
reason any man could have to take any comfort and joy in Being, or to wish the
continuance of it for one moment.

Thirdly and lastly, The Consideration of what has been said upon this
Argument, should keep us from being too sanguine and confident of the most
likely designs and undertakings; because these do not always answer the
probability of second Causes and Means; and never less, than when we do with
the greatest confidence rely upon them; when we promise most to our selves from
them, then are they most likely to deceive us: They are, as the Prophet
compares them, like a broken reed, which a man may walk with in his hand,
whilst he lays no great stress upon it; but if he trust to it, and lean his
whole weight on it, it will not only fail him, but even pierce him through.

And we cannot do a greater prejudice to our affairs, when they are in the most
hopeful and likely condition to succeed and do well, than to shut God and his
Providence out of our counsels and consideration. When we pass God by, and take
no notice of Him, but will rely upon our own wisdom and strength, we provoke
him to leave us in the hands of our own counsel, and to let us see what weak
and foolish Creatures we are: And a man is never in greater danger of drowning,
than when he clasps his arms closest about himself: Besides, that God loves to
resist the self-confident and presumptuous, and to scatter the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

And as in all our concernments we ought to have a great regard to God, the
Supreme disposer of all things, and earnestly to seek his favor and blessing
upon all our undertakings, so more especially in the affairs of War; in which
the Providence of God is pleased many times in a very peculiar manner to
interpose and interest it self: And there is great reason to think he does so;
because all War is, as it were, an Appeal to God, and a reference of those
Causes to the decision of his Providence, which through the pride, and
injustice, and perverse passions of men, can receive no other determination.

And here God loves to show himself, and in an eminent manner to take part with
Right and Justice against those mighty Oppressors of the Earth, who like an
overflowing flood would bear down all before them: In this case, the Providence
of God is sometimes pleased to give a remarkable check to great Power and
Violence, and to One that vainly gives out himself not unequal to the whole
World, by very weak and conttemptible means; and, as the Apostle elegantly
expresses it, by the things which are not, to bring to naught the things that
are: And to say to Him, as God once did to the proud King of Assyria: Whom have
thou reproached and blasphemed, Isa. 37. 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32.
and against whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on
high? even against the Holy one of Israel. Have thou not heard long ago, that I
have done it; and of ancient times that I have formed it? Now have I brought it
to pass, that thou should be to lay wast defenced Cities into ruinous heaps:
Therefore their Inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and
confounded, etc. But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in,
and thy rage against me: Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up
into mine ears, therefore will I put my hook into thy nose, and my bridle into
thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came. -- The
zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall do this.

But more especially, in vindication of his oppressed Truth and Religion, and
in the great and signal Deliverances of his Church and People, God is wont to
take the conduct of affairs into his own hands, and not to proceed by humane
rules and measures: He then bids second Causes to stand by, that his own Arm
may be seen, and his Salvation may appear: He raises the spirits of men above
their natural pitch, and gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might he increases strength, as the Prophet expresses it.

Thus has the Providence of God very visibly appeared in our late Deliverance;
in such a manner, as I know not whether He ever did for any other Nation,
except the People of Israel, when He delivered them from the House of Bondage
by so mighty a hand and so outstretched an arm: And yet too many among us, I
speak it this day to our shame, do not seem to have the least sense of this
great Deliverance, or of the hand of God which was so visible in it; but like
the Children of Israel when they were brought out of Egypt, we are full of
murmurings and discontent against God the Author, and his Servant the happy
Instrument under God of this our Deliverance. What the Prophet says of that
People, may I fear be too justly applied to us, Let favor be shown to the
wicked, yet will he not learn Isa. 26. 10, 11.
righteousness; in the Land of uprightness he will deal unjustly, and will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord: Lord, When thy hand is lifted up, they will not
see; but they shall see, and be ashamed: And I hope I may add that which
follows in the next verse, Lord, thou will ordain peace for us; for thou also
have wrought all our works for us. What God has already done for our
deliverance is, I hope, an earnest that He will carry it on to a perfect peace
and settlement; and this, notwithstanding our high provocations and horrible
ingratitude to the God of our Life, and of our Salvation.

And when ever the Providence of God thinks fit thus to interpose in humane
affairs, the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong: For which
reason their Majesty's, in their great Piety and Wisdom, and from a just sense
of the Providence of Almighty God, which rules in the Kingdoms of men, have
thought fit to set apart this Day for solemn repentance and humiliation: That
the many and heinous Sins, which we in this Nation have been, and still are
guilty of, and which are of all other our greatest and most dangerous Enemies,
may not separate between God and us, and hinder good things from us, and cover
us with confusion in the day of our danger and distress: And likewise,
earnestly to implore the favor and blessing of Almighty God upon their
Majesty's Forces and Preparations by Sea an Land: And more particularly, for
the preservation of his Majesty's sacred Person, upon whom so much depends, and
who is contented again to hazard Himself to save us.

To conclude; There is no such way to engage the Providence of God for us, as
by real Repentance and Reformation; and by doing all we can, in our several
Places from the highest to the lowest, by the provision of wise and effectual
Laws for the discountenancing and suppressing of Profaneness and Vice, and by
the careful and due execution of them, and by the more kindly and powerful
influence of a good Example, to retrieve the ancient Piety and Virtue of the
Nation: For without this, what ever we may think of the firmness of our present
settlement, we cannot long be upon good terms with Almighty God, upon whose
favor depends the prosperity and stability of the present and future Times.

I have but one thing more to mind you of; and that is, to stir up your charity
toward the poor; which is likewise a great part of the Duty of this Day, and
which ought always to accompany our Prayers and Fastings: Thy Prayers and
thine Alms, says the Angel to Cornelius, are come up before God: And
therefore if we desire that our Prayers should reach Heaven, and receive a
gracious answer from God, we must send up our Alms along with them.

And instead of all other arguments to this purpose, I shall only recite to you
the plain and persuasive words of God Himself, in which He declares what kind
of Fast is acceptable to Him: Is it such a Fast as I have chosen. a Day for
Isai. 58. 5, 6, etc.
a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bullrush, to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable
Day to the Lord? Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? To loose the bands of
wickedness, and to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke: Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thine house; when thou see the
naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy salvation shall
spring forth speedily; thy righteousness, or thine Alms, shall go before thee,
and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rere-ward: Then shall thou call, and I
will answer thee; thou shall cry, and He shall say, here I am.

Now to Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb that was slain: To
God, even our Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, the first begotten from the
dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: Unto Him, who has loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God and his Father: To Him be glory and dominion, for ever and
ever, Amen.

And the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight; through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, for ever
and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of St. Paul's.
THirty Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, in three Volumes, in
Octavo. The Rule of Faith; or, an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sergeant, by
Dr. Tillotson. To which is adjoined, A Reply to Mr. J. S. his third Appendix,
etc. by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. late Dean of St. Paul's, now the Right
Reverend Bishop of Worcester. Octavo. A Discourse against Transubstantiation,
in 80. Price 3d. A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, in 80. Price 3d. A Sermon Preached at Lincolns-Inn-Chappel on
the 31st of January 1688. being appointed for a Public Thanksgiving to
Almighty God for having made His Highness the Prince of Orange the Glorious
Instrment of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power. 4to. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall. 4to. A Sermon
Preached before the King and Queen at Hampton Court. 4to. A Sermon Preached
before the Queen March 9th
Printed for B. Aylmer and W. Rogers.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death, by William Sherlock, D. D. Master of
the Temple. The Third Edition, 80. Printed for VV. Rogers.


