THE BAR to Free Admission TO THE LORDS-SVPPER REMOVED: OR, A Vindication of
Mr. Humfreys Free Admission to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Wherein the most material Exceptions and Objections of Doctor Drake against
it in his Book called A Bar to Free Admission, etc. are taken off and answered.

Whereunto is annexed an expostulatory Speech unto them of the Congregationall
way: And also an Examination of the Book called A Scripture Rail to the
Communion Table, by some Ministers in Gloucester shire.

By JOHN TIMSON a private Christian of Great Bowden in Leichestershire.

JOH. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

London, Printed by E. Cotes and are to be sold by Will. Tompson Bookseller in
Harborough, 1654.

To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
I Am necessitated not only to give thee some advertisement concerning the
following discourse, but also to make some Apology for my self in this my so
bold undertaking, as this will be thought to be; and that perhaps even by some
truly godly sober Christians and reverend Ministers of the Gospel; to whom it
may seem unfit that such a one as I should interpose in this Controversy
concerning Admission to the Lords Supper, and that I should undertake to make
answer to a Reverend Doctor about these things. And therefore let me entreat
thy patience, though I seem somewhat tedious in this Epistle by reason of the
length of it. I trust it will not be impertinent nor unprofitable, but helping
to the following discourse, to free my self from blame, and to help thee in the
right understanding of what thou shall read, and of my end and aim therein.

The truth is, these few sheets were not at first intended for public view,
but only to be sent privately to the reverend Doctor, that by the answer which
I hoped he would return, my self and some friends of mine might receive some
satisfaction: but through the importunity of some others, to whom I imparted my
thoughts herein, I am now overcome and persuaded to make them public; but
with great disadvantage, not having time to perfect and amplify things suitable
to so different an end from what I first intended. And I confess I have not so
heedfully kept to the Doctors expressions, nor written arguments with that
latitude or fullness, nor kept to his method orderly as he goes on in answering
Mr. Humfrey, as I should and would have done, if my intent at first had been to
appear in public. But yet I have been as careful as I could in taking his
sense, and have not omitted any thing of moment, which I had occasion to insert
and answer in my own method and way which I propounded to my self at first.

And for Mr. Humfreys arguments, I have made but little use of them, more out
of haste then out of any dissenting from him; and choosing rather to add to
what he has asserted and strongly evinced, then to repeat his own: because I
have an earnest desire that this controversy may be better sifted and more
thoroughly searched into; it being of greater concernment then most even of
those that are godly have or do judge it to be, for the ending of the present
distractions and divisions in this unsettled Church. Our being dissatisfied
about Sacramental communion, has been the great occasion and isntrumental
cause of our confusions and disorders tending to the Churches destruction. If
satisfaction can but be given in the warrant of free Admissions, I conceive the
only isntrumental cause of the Churches unsetlednesse will be removed; and
nothing will much hinder the falling in of Presbyterians and Independents into
one way of communion and discipline, especially the orthodox party of both. And
as for those that deny our Baptism, Church and Ministry, as Antichristian,
there is little hope of gaining their return. I desire it may be put to some
solemn and serious debate impartially; For although the principles committed to
consideration in the ensuing discourse, be somewhat against the common stream,
yet I have some hope they may be a means to discover some common mistakes, with
such glimmering of rational and Scripture light, as better heads may make to
shine more bright in the Christian world. I look to be censured for this my
presumption in dissenting from the common interpretations of several
Scriptures; and asserting some things against the judgment of many or most
Divines and godly Christians, who will be ready to object against me and charge
me with a fault herein; against which give me leave to make some defense.

First, by confessing that this very thing of dissenting from so many learned
and godly, has been a greater bar in my way, then any ground of Scripture or
strength of argument I ever heard or have seen from any godly man. And were the
Church in a well ordered settled state, I had rather chosen in some lesser
things to err with the Church, then dare to do any thing that might break the
peace and order of the same. But in an unsettled disorderly condition of the
Church as it is now with us; all things in the Church being now upon the brinck
of confusion and ruin; it concerns even every private member to show himself,
and to contribute his mite toward the conservation of the whole. In vain do we
look to have the effects and consequences, our divisions, breakings and
separations to cease, while the most sober and godly nourish them in their rise
and cause. The same principles maintained by the godly in the Bishops times,
would as necessarily have run us into the same separations and divisions, had
not the severity of discipline put a restraint to our excess from the same or
like mistakes.

Secondly, I deny that this free admission pleaded for, is altogether novell or
a new thing. For did not our first reformers maintain a free Admission, nay
command a general observance of the Supper of the Lord three times in the year
at least, under some punishment to be inflicted for unnecessary neglect;
grounded (I conceive) from the equity of the Law of the Passover, Numb. 9. and
the command of Jesus Christ: Do this in remembrance of me. And will any say
that our first reformers were not godly and learned men? It Is true they urged
it not till Church members were of years of discretion, and not under Church
censure; and required that all should learn the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and
the Ten Commandments, etc. which would be now easily yielded to, in order to
the Sacrament.

Thirdly, do not Protestant godly writers, in all reformed Churches, maintain
infant Baptism upon Covenant relation, in that the children of Christians by
birth privilege, are really members of the Church; and so esteemed to be as
truly as those that by nature are aliens, and admitted upon their profession of
faith? And is not there the same reason for the enjoyment of the other
Sacrament of the Supper, being of years, and already admitted members? should
not these have as much privilege as those that come in as proselytes or
Disciples by preaching of the Word? Where do we find that any were received to
Baptism, and yet denied the Supper? or what essential difference is there
between Baptism and the holy Supper, that the same profession that fits for
the one, will not serve for the other, being persons of years? The Blood of
Christ crucified is represented in both for remission of sins, Act. 2.37. And
by consent of all, both seal to the same Covenant, in which the unregenerate,
as well as the regenerate, are included and concerned; and that as well when
grown to years, as in their minority: they adhering to the ordinary means of
grace as well as others, that they may obtain the blessings of the Covenant
promised and sealed by the Sacrament. And I think the woeful consequences, and
runnings out into such exorbitances amongst the godly in these times, may make
intelligent and sober men sensible of their own inconsistences and interfeering
in things concerning the Sacraments. Suppose the unregenerate in the Church not
baptized till grown to years, could that discovenant or dismember them, it not
being their own fault, but the fault of their parents? might not such challenge
their privilege of that Church in which they were born members, by virtue of
that membership merely? their membership not being an effect or consequent of
Baptism, but Baptism a consequent privilege of membership: though I confess
it is true of aliens, they are formally installed into membership in the Church
by Baptism upon their profession of faith.

Fourthly, did not all godly Ministers in the Bishops time, that were for
conformity, administer the Sacrament to all, without excluding any? and shall
we judge that they practiced against their judgment and conscience?

Mistake me not, good Reader, whosoever thou art, as if I did indulge, or
labor to foster any in their gross ignorance, by the following discourse or
any thing therein; or the sloth and not profiting under the means; or that I
plead for a dispensation for the profane and scandalous in the Church: poor
creatures! they shall know it one day to their cost (if they repent not) what
it is to abuse the grace of holy administrations, and to neglect the means of
their salvation. God will be sanctified by or in all he admits to come near
him; and all his holy ordinances are a sweet savor to him, in them that perish
as well as in them that are saved in the use thereof.

Most terrible things are written of them that have the light and walk in
darkness; that have the means to know and do, and yet will not, but remain
both ignorant and disobedient to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Dreadful will be
the doom of all those that have had their residence at the feast of fat things
of the Gospel, and shall be found without the wedding garment at the last.
Therefore I shall desire and entreat all to take heed of this, and to submit
themselves to those that are over them in the Lord; as to them that are
appointed by Jesus Christ to watch over their souls, as they that must give
account thereof. I say, let me persuade you to be willing to be instructed,
catechized and tried: refuse no means that tends to your edification,
instruction and salvation, I beseech you: I know your ignorance and
unanswerable walking to the rules of the Gospel is such, that most are
unwilling to go to their Minister to be examined and admonished in private, in
order to the Sacrament. I, but remember you must be brought to a stricter
search and account before you can be saved: And if you be unwilling to give an
account of your faith and hope that is in you to your Minister, that would
encourage you in your Christian profession; and take such advantages to
instruct you and confirm you in the grounds and practice of Christianity; what
would you do, if a persecuting enemy to the Protestant Religion should put you
upon the renouncing of the true Religion, and turning Turk or Papist; or else
be put to death; as has been a common lot of the professors of the Christian
Religion in most ages since the coming of Christ? Oh be not such strangers to
your Pastors that labor among you; what shall they be appointed to bring your
souls to heaven, and will you not acquaint them with your ignorance and other
wants and doubts which are impediments in your way? Would you be more frequent,
friendly and familiar with your Pastors, you would not be afraid to have
conference with them in things concerning Gods Kingdom and the good of your
own souls. Let not (good Reader) shame of thy ignorance, hinder thee from
presenting thy self to be proved and taught in order to the Sacrament. For
ignorance continued in under the means of knowledge is damnable. Barren
branches of the true vine shall be cut off and burned. Remember the barren
fig tree. Though as yet thy profiting has not been answerable to the cost and
charge God has been at, or his grace, mercy, goodness and patience toward
thee do require; yet now let the patience and goodness of God, so long abused,
lead thee to repentance, and inquiring after him. Let not sense of thine own
ignorance make thee rather forbear the Sacrament, then go to thy Minister to be
better informed: but rather implead thy right, and come and do thy homage and
service as well as thou can, though not so well as thou should. Put case
thou be judged unfit to come to the Sacrament; yet follow on, doubling thy
desires and endeavors to receive as far as thou can. If thou be desired to
forbear until the next Sacrament, let it humble thee, but not discourage thee;
that being better prepared, thou may expect a greater blessing. But if thou
art beat off with delays, wait and be aspectator of thy bleeding Savior, set
forth crucified before thine eyes by instituted signs of Bread and Wine: and
if thou may not take and eat in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for
many for remission of sins, and to save sinners by giving them grace and glory;
yet let me persuade thee to give thy presence, to hear and see in that
remembrance: thou know not but that the sight of such an object, the effect
of love and bleeding bowels may melt thy heart, and draw thy soul after him thy
merciful Redeemer, it not being thy fault thou do not actually receive. Be
it so that thou art still repulsed, as like to eat and drink judgment to thy
self; yet let not that affright thee from the ordinance of Christ, so long as
thou art art a visible subject in his Kingdom. Plead thy duty and homage, how
thou art obliged to Christ in this observance: and say, thou art so well
persuaded of the goodness of Christ in all that he commands his subjects, that
thou will humbly venture upon his mercy, in doing thy duty as thou art able.
But I shall commend thee to the ensuing discourse for further knowledge of thy
duty, and pleading thy right, during thy privilege of positive Church
membership.

And in the last place I shall in all humility offer a few words to the
reverend Ministers of God, as a means to quench the present flames that are in
the Church of Christ in England.

First, let me beseech you not to urge upon your people any practice under
necessity of duties of worship, either public or private, that is not
evidently commanded, or at least deducted from the clear and genuine sense of
holy Scripture by necessary, consequence.

Secondly, labor so to agree among your selves in the main essentials of
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, that in every place there may be a preaching
and holding forth of the same things in all.

Thirdly, condescend to the meanest of your people, with an equal respect in
all your ministerial administrations, both public and private, that none may
be discouraged, nor any indulged in an evil way.

Fourthly, be as watchful of those that are inclined to an inordinate zeal in
the smaller matters of Religion, as of those that express but little zeal at
all in Gods worship.

Fifthly, allow the worst of your people the title of Christians, believers,
members, and allow them all other external privileges which of right are
theirs in regard of their relative state, as they are such: yet deal faithfully
with them, as touching their real state in order to their eternal weal or woe.

Sixthly, decline (as much as may be) novelty and variety in profession,
catechismes, and all essentials of public worship; that your people may more
willingly adhere to you, and give you the greater advantage to advance the
Christian Religion among them.

Lastly, What in you lies restore with the spirit of meekness, in your private
admonitions, weak brethren, that through infirmity fall; and do not exasperate
any with pulpit invections, unless it be in case of known obstinacy. But I
shall leave all to your charitable construction and sober apprehension of what
I do here offer to your consideration. I am a poor worm, and look to be
despised for meddling with things out of my sphere: but I see it is the common
lot of the most learned in these times to be reproached, and therefore I shall
the better bear it; though for this my vindicating of Mr. Humfrey from
reproach, I be the more reproached: I am sorry his principles be not vindicated
from the reverend Doctors exceptions and objections by a better pen then his,

Who is thy humble servant, breathing after the simplicity of truth, John
Timson.

The Bar to free Admission to the LORDS SVPPER removed.
MEEting with a Book called A Bar to free Admission to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, written by Doctor Drake, in answer to Mr. Humphrey, and having
diligently read both, I find that even good men are too apt to reprove one
another in things controverted betwixt them; which ought not so to be. As for
Mr. Humphreys vindication of free admission (as he states, bounds and handles
it) it seems to me more rational and clear, then to deserve so many harsh
expressions from the reverend Doctor, as he has let slip; whether in haste, or
more deliberately, I leave to himself to consider. Sure I am, some words might
better have been spared, then so published in print to the world, it being not
yet determined whether Mr. Humphreys discourse be untrue or no, though
disputable with the Doctor (it seems) whether it be more full of words or
untruthes, which is very uncharitable and unbrotherly dealing; but I forbear.
Both the reverend Doctor and Mr. Humprey are Gentlemen I am altogether
unacquainted with, whose gifts and learned abilities I yet much reverence, and
wish this poor distracted Church may never want such officers to rule and feed
her in the Lord, as the meanest of them be. It Is an unhappy controversy I
confess, and little cause there is to take content in these debates: yet as
times are, it has need of scanning and sifting; because much of the unity and
welbeing of the national Church depends upon the right stating and clearing of
this Question; our doubts and scruples concerning the holy Supper, having upon
the matter unsettled all. Some mistakes about admission thereto, have run
thousands into faction, schism, and separation, under a zeal of separating the
Precious from the Vile, of withholding the childrens bread from dogs, of
preserving the Ordinances pure, etc. The premises are good, conducing much to
reformation, were they not misapplyed in respect of persons, and in respect of
the right way, and means of putting them in execution, as things now stand, as
I believe it will appear they are, by this following discourse; wherein I shall
endeavor to vindicate that little Tract of Mr. Humphrey from the Doctors
unbrotherly dealing with him, according to my measure and meannesse. Not that I
intend an orderly and exact reply to every particular (which neither my
capacity nor occasions of my laborious calling will bear) but to undermine his
chiefest strength, passing by the rest.

And first of all, for the Text which Mr. Humphrey delivers his discourse upon,
though he may be thought not so happy in his choice of it in order to what he
insisteth on, (as having rather a sound then a true and full sense of the
question and point concluded) yet I doubt not but the discourse will (as to the
substance thereof) be warranted by other Scriptures.

And for Judas his receiving or not receiving, I look not upon it as clearly
argumentative one way or other. Neither do I think that first president,
without the supply of other Scriptures, would make much for or against us in
this matter, they being Apostles only that then received, whose office in the
Church is now ceased.

In short, I shall not go about to defend every quotation or assertion in Mr.
H. Book, nor to clear him from some inconsistences pointed out by the reverend
Doctor; it is sufficient that he has made good the main thing asserted: namely,
That all Church members of years, and under Church indulgence (not rightly
excommunicated) may come freely to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

His free Admission is limited with exceptions of infants, distracted, the
excommunicated, and he might say, the drunk.

Now the Doctor says, That by the same reason that he excepts these, we may
may except the grossly ignorant and scandalous in the Church.

Concerning which this twofold inquiry is made.

1. Whether Church members of years, having the exercise of reason, being
ignorant, be as incapable of the Sacrament as Infants or distraught?

2. Whether scandalous members under Church indulgence, may be equally debarred
this Church privilege with the regularly excommunicated?

To the former of these the Doctor says, That the grossly ignorant are as
incapable to examine themselves, and discern the Lords body as Infants, and
therefore as justly to be excepted against: nay more, because Infants and
distraught may have the grace of the covenant really, the other not.

To which I answer; what the secret working of the Spirit may be in such comes
not within the Churches cognizance to inquire, but what is agreeable to the
revealed will of God; and then if any of years, being baptized and professing
the true religion be in the same incapacity as Infants or distracted; it is true
there is the same exception against them, otherwise not. For mine own part, I
never knew any of years but could take and eat and drink of the consecrated
signs reverently and orderly according to the institution, as to the externals
of that service, which the state of Infants is incapable of.

And mad men would endanger the abuse of the holy signs, by their undecent and
unreverent demeanor in those necessary acts of communion and worship. And it
must be granted that persons at years are not under that natural incapacity
that infants are, in order to the outward form of worship, Neither are Infants
as such under the obligation of precepts of worship, as grown persons in the
Church are. Nor can it be reasonably imagined, that such a state of persons in
the Church should be admitted actually to receive, that in the discretion of
the Church are no proper objects of Church censures, in point of offending,
which grown persons in the Church are though never so ignorant. And what though
the Doctor say, he can teach a child of three or four years old, as much or
more then some of our people at years have learned all their life time? A
Parrat may be taught to speak words: but can he make such children rationally
understand what they are taught, and exercise devotion from a principle of
conscience, in reference to religious worship? as in charity we may hope of
grown ones according to that little they know; which may be conceived by their
desires after it, and their demeanor in the Sacramental actions. Moreover, I
doubt not but the Doctor or any other Minister of the Gospel, may in a short
time, inform the ignorant among their people, so as to make them capable of
discerning the Lords body; and to eat and drink lawfully, in the Apostles
sense, though not in the sense I shall give account of hereafter. All which
being laid together, I conceive that Church members of years most ignorant are
not so incapable of the Sacrament, as Infants or mad men are: and therefore the
same or like ground of excepting against the one, will not equally reach the
other. And then the Doctors often retorting Mr. H. exception, does rather
discover weakness, then add any strength to the cause. This to the first
inquiry.

As for the other, namely, whether the scandalous members under Church
indulgence, may be equally debarred this Church privilege with the regularly
excommunicated, I do not find the Doctors judgment so expressly delivered: but
he seems to debar such from the Sacrament. But sure to debar Church members
scandalous their external privilege during Church indulgence, and toleration,
they being under trial or otherwise, is contrary to the judgment and practice
of the independent Churches, and seems irrational and unjust to execute before
a judicial trial and sentence.

I confess I am unsatisfied with their proceedings (as Presbytered) toward
Church members of years admitted.

1. They set up an Eldership whose office is very doubtful, too doubtful to
assume and exercise the keys of Christ's Kingdom (especially where there is no
association of Churches) so that upon the matter the power of sentence is in
the Pastor alone, or in those whom Jesus Christ never empowered with the keys
at all to bind and loose authoratively.

2. They set up such a way of trial and Church examination of native Church
members in order to the Sacrament (the observance whereof is both their duty
and their privilege) as no word does warrant, discouraging the most from
indevouring after their duty and privilege; so that upon the matter they are
left out without any regular casting out.

3. They cause a careless forbearance of the Sacrament; and make their
suspension and excommunication upon the matter all one; and the Doctor allows
all presence at every ordinance, denying only the act of receiving to the worst.

4. They positively suspend Church members for ignorance and such like wants
and comings short of what they should be to God; for which there is not the
least warrant, either of rule or president, in divine writ.

5. They make excommunication less then it is indeed, in allowing the
excommunicate presence in the congregation at every ordinance: and make it more
then indeed it is, in dismembring Church members by it, it being appointed as
the last remedy to heal diseased members, not to destroy them. They are not
thereby dismembered, but to be looked upon (says Mr. Cawdry) as diseased members
under cure.

6. No more privilege is allowed to Church members not approved of by the
eldership (though not yet under any positive sentence) then is allowed to
Heathens: and to the excommunicate as much of privilege in the ordinances of
the Church is allowed as to Heathens. All which upon trial will be found to be
beside the rule, I think: and yet such are the consequences that flow from the
Doctors own principles and premises, in his Bar to free admission to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

In the next place, the Doctor declares his judgment concerning a scandalous
member of a congregation impresbytered presuming to receive: what is to be done
in such a case: As first, the Minister is to tell him of the sin, and desire
him to forbear; if that will not do, then to show him the present danger of
murdering Christ, and eating and drinking judgment to himself, and he has
done his duty.

But then it may be inquired, whether he mean only in case of common fame, the
scandal having been public: otherwise, I suppose it will not be a time to
nominate any members sin, or person in public first.

Then secondly, I question whether a scandalous member does necessarily murder
Christ, and eat and drink judgment to himself in the Scripture sense, whether
the person be regenerate or unregenerate: For he may be Scandalous, and yet
knowing, and able to put a difference between common bread and the instituted
signs, in order to their end. He might be drunk the week before, and yet sober,
scrious and reverent in the act of receiving, and not guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, nor eat and drink judgment to himself in the Doctors sense.

He often distinguishes of worthy Church members and unworthy, according to the
judgment of visibility; accounting the regenerate in the Church only worthy of
admittance, but not the other, they not having a personal worthiness, must
necessarily eat and drink unworthily, and so judgment to themselves in the
Apostles sense, etc.

Now because all his conclusions seem to be deducted from mere mistakes and
misapplyings of the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 11.20, to the 34. to the great
peril and danger of the visible Church of Christ, as causing rents and
divisions therein, I shall therefore make bold to present to consideration
these necessary queries in reference to a discovery of the most probable sense
of the place, humbly praying the Reader (when ever he think of me) to think
seriously and impartially of them.

1. Enquiry is to be made whether the Apostle intends any such thing as
personal worthiness, or unworthiness in order to the Sacrament.

2. Whether the unworthiness the Apostle speaks to, were not merely their
miscarriages and actual offending in or about the externals of Sacramental
actions and order.

3. What were those sins that provoked the Lord so immediately to punish them
for the present, and made them liable to be further punished for the future.

4. Whether they were chastised for unworthiness of person or other sins they
were guilty of, before they came together to celebrate the holy Supper.

5. What is the remedy the Apostle prescribes to that Church to prevent future
judgment, and to enjoy present benefit.

6. Whether the unregenerate and most ignorant person professing and owning the
true Religion among them, were not in a capacity so to use the remedy, as to
prevent the judgment and receive benefit by the ordinance where God gave a
blessing.

7. Whether the duty of self-examination in order to the Sacrament is not to be
restrained to the premises treated on in the context.

8. Whether a careless neglect or incapacity of this duty of self-examination
before, do excuse and give a writ of ease from that precept of public duty
and service, Do this in remembrance of me.

9. Whether there be any thing in the institution, nature, end, language,
action of the Sacrament in the context, or elsewhere, incongruous to the
receiving of the unregenerate in the Church.

I doubt not but an ingenuous answer to these Queries would much moderate the
unchristian rigor of these times about Sacramental communion, if not to make
the controversy to cease among sober godly men. And therefore pardon my
boldness in adventuring to present to public view my confused apprehensions
in answer to these queries, and that with as much brevity as I can. Something
must be done; and if I can discover the truth or give occasion unto some more
able to do it, I shall bless God, and think my labor well bestowed.

For the first, I conceive there is not the least hint or sound of
unworthiness of persons in the Church of Corinth spoken to by the Apostle, in
reference to the Sacrament, nor are they blamed or punished for their real
unworthiness as to God, visible to the Church, though it is probable they had
such amongst them in that communion. For in the beginning of this Epistle, the
Apostle gives them the titles of the Church of God, sanctified in Christ Jusus,
called to be Saints, etc. And of those that were punished for profaning the
ordinance, the Apostle speaks very hopefully, nay confidently, that their
persons were justified; they were chastened of the Lord that they might not be
condemned with the world.

But it may be said, Corinth were all of them, at least visibly, worthy in
respect of their persons; and therefore their free admission is no warrant for
us, seeing many of ours want that visible worthiness. And if those that were
visibly worthy, did through their miscarriage eat judgment to themselves, what
may we think of ours, that have not so much as that visible worthiness which
they had?

1. I answer,

2. If the Apostle upon so weighty occasion meddle not with their unworthiness
of person, in reference to their receiving, then neither need we to meddle with
it: it is sufficient that those we admit be baptized, and of the true Religion,
under Church indulgence, to entitle them to all the ordinances which they are
to use as means of their spiritual good; they being given to the visible
Church to that very end.

3. If our Baptism were rightly administered according to the Word, then ours
of years that are of the same with them of the Church of Corinth, have as much
external privilege in the Church, as they had, till either by Apostasy they
fall off, or by the right exercise of Discipline they be put out. And had we
the same charity the Apostle had, we would allow them the title of Saints,
believers, brethren by profession and calling, as they did all along.

For the second and third Quere, I am sure the Text is clear for the
affirmative, namely, that their unworthiness was merely their miscarriages and
actual offending about the externals of Sacramental actions and order.

And they did eat and drink unworthily, not discerning the Lords body, and they
profaned the holy Ordinance, in that they put no difference between their own
supper and the Lords Supper; their own bread and the instituted signs: And for
persons to make the consecrated signs, appointed by Jesus Christ to spiritual
ends (as in the institution) a common or civil thing, to please and satisfy
the outward man, must needs be a great evil; and was that high and provoking
sin for which they are there punished, as well they might. For indeed it was a
sin worse then carrying the Arc of the Covenant contrary to order; and yet for
that the Lord made a breach upon them. And Nadab and Abihu were destroyed for
offering strange fire which the Lord commanded not: so dangerous a thing it is
not to come up to, or to add to, or to profane divine institutions. Doubtless
the Corinthians were very rude, unreverent and disorderly in the present
observance; some were hungry, and some drunk; some had too much, and others
could get none, or but little, as is intimated in the remedy or direction given
to that particular case: To tarry one for another (as to order) and if any
hunger, let him eat at home, and not make the holy Supper a mere business of
eating and drinking; that they come not together to condemnation, for time to
come, as they had done before.

To the fourth Query, I answer, They were not chastened for unworthiness of
person, or for any other sins they were guilty of before, but for unworthy
actings in the act of receiving, or at that time. For this cause some are weak,
and some are sick, and some are fallen asleep, that is, for eating and drinking
unworthily, contrary to order and decency: the which word unworthily, respects
their manner of doing, not their persons. It Is no were said, Whosoever eats and
drinks being unworthy, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And I
think it is no where else the language of Scripture to require real
worthiness of person, before they be sit to come under precepts of duty and
service. Does not Baptism lay engagements upon all to observe all the commands
of Christ? Mat 28.19, 20.
And do this in remembrance of me, is a precept for the baptized of years to
observe (they being under Church indulgence) otherwise we shall be driven to
question our Baptism, and then our Church ministry; and run mad to the
separations, or begin again if we could tell how.

In the mean time, how injurious to Church members does our ungrounded rigor,
and private interpretations cause us to be!

To the fifth Querie, I say, The remedy is both by instruction and direction, by
these ways the Apostle applies himself to them for the cure of their malady.
He repeats the first institution, comments upon it, the better to give them to
understand the nature, end and use of the ordinance, which before they were
ignorant of, or did not well consider. And having taught them the mind of
Christ, in what was necessary to that service, then he gives direction what
they must do. First to examine themselves, whether they understand what these
things of God did mean, as they had been taught; and then to tarry one for
another, that the ordinance may be carried on with order, decency and
reverence, becoming worship, and then he assures them they shall not be judged
of the Lord.

To the sixth Querie, I answer, The Apostle intends the remedy to the good of
the whole Church, which comprehends every particular member of years that did
actually receive, and offend therein. And he taught them not any thing, but
what was easy to be understood by any reasonable man owning the true Religion
among them. He directed them not to do any thing, but what was easy for them
to do externally. And their offending was so obvious and apparent, that they
were easily convinced, and yielded to the reproof, Gods blessing concurring
with the means: and indeed we read no more of their offending in that manner
afterward; nor any other Christian Church.

But they were a Church consisting of members under better qualifications then
ours;

1. should not eat; intimates, that there were such among them that were as bad
as ours.

But secondly, if we be a true Church, and our members we admit true Church
members, even as theirs, then ours come under the same rules with them; unless
we can find different rules for the same Church in the same things and
respects: if not, then ours are under the same rule in reference to the
Sacrament (until they be legally ejected and cast out) and are bound to act
according to those rules, and that order prescribed, in hope of a blessing,
even the worst member among us.

To the seventh Querie, whether the duty of self-examination in order to the
sacrament be not properly to be restrained to the premises treated on in the
context; I answer, That whether it be to be extended in this place so far as
most do urge, in respect of their real state unto God, competent measure of
knowledge in the many fundamentals of Religion, the having and acting every
grace necessary to salvation, etc. or to be restrained to the particulars there
mentioned; I dare not peremptorily determine, though strongly inclined to
believe the latter. Not because I think self-examination touching the former
may carelessly be neglected by any; but I question whether the Apostle had any
respect thereto in this place, in reference to the Sacrament: because I
conceive the Apostle here suits the remedy to the malady; and that
unworthiness of person was not any part of malady nor ignorance in the
fundamentals of Religion; but their not discerning the Lords body, and that put
them upon other unworthy carriages, as is showed before. And therefore as
examination is part of the remedy prescribed, it seems to me, most probable,
that it properly refers to the rule of institution, and those other directions
given in the context.

The eighth Querie is, whether a careless neglect of this private duty of
self-examination before, do give a writ of ease, and excuse such negligent
persons from the precept of public duty and service, Do this in remembrance
of me?

To this I say, I cannot conceive how the neglect of a private duty, can excuse
any in the neglect of public worship, that are Church members of years, under
the obligation of all that Christ commands. The Apostles being sent to preach
and baptize those that received their Doctrine (the Doctrine of the Gospel)
and came under the baptism of Christ, were bound to teach them to observe all
things whatsoever Christ had commanded; and in so doing they had a promise of
his presence, and blessing upon their endeavors, And lo I am with you always
to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20. What can be more plain, except we
shall say the observance of the holy Supper, is none of his commands?

I think Christ commands nothing for the hurt of his visible subjects, they
observing it according to their present capacity. Can an instance be given in
the Old or New Testament, of any that came under Circumcision or Baptism,
whether proselyte or native of years, that as private members were admitted to
all other ordinances in the Church; and yet were forbidden the use of the other
Sacrament, the Passover or the Lords Supper? There is but one Law for the
stranger and home-borne. If our Baptism be the Baptism of Christ, I say, if
it be the baptism of Christ, by which we are consecrated to Christ, why should
any be exempted from any obedience and privilege, being of years, and under
Church indulgence at least, more then the circumcised under Moses, or the
Baptized under the Apostles? Our not acting according to Scripture presidents
in this particular, will (I fear) in time unchurch us. We blame the
Separations, when we our selves maintain the first principles of setting up
distinctions and separations in the Church: But it is dangerous to be partial
in the laws of Christ. Why may not the woeful neglect of Sacraments, visible
pledges of divine love; be one thing that makes ministers be so contemptible
and vile in the eyes of many as they are?

Well, but to return, I say this coming to the Sacrament is one of Christ's
commands, and he that breaks the least of his commands, and teaches men so,
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God. But I think Mr. H. has said
enough to this to satisfy any sober impartial Christian, to whom I must still
refer the reader for further satisfaction herein. The Doctor has many
quillets about this particular, which are more like to puzzle then to satisfy
the reader. He strives to put an enclosure to some duties, as not common to
all, and he instances in relations and sex that come under the obligations of
the second Table; the which duties are common and universal to all of the same
relations and sex. And what though it be not the duty of all Church members to
preach and administer Sacraments; yet it is the duty of all Ministers what ever
so to do. But Mr. H. argument is, If all other service lie in common, it is an
intrenchment upon the common liberty, to put an enclosure upon the Sacraments.
And if the Sacrament come under the obligation of the first Table, as a part of
Gods worship, it is equally binding to all, and so in common with the rest of
worship, notwithstanding any thing yet made out to the contrary.

It is true, affirmative precepts do not bind to every moment of time; but
that will not justify a careless and wilful neglect at any time. And whereas
it is said, that Church members are not bid absolutely to come, but so to come,
it seems strange to me: I had thought that all precepts of worship had been
absolute to persons of years, in the Church of Christ. And do this in
remembrance of me is absolute, and the principal duty, however the Doctor is
pleased to call it carnal Divinity, and a setting up the form above the power
of worship. For in every duty there is a form, which is heedfully to be
observed; and it is impossible there should be the power of godliness without
the form. To obey the voice of God in regard of the matter enjoined, seems to
be the main, as respecting reasonable man: and when there is an external
conformity to the commands of the Lord, such are said to walk in the ways of
the Lord, failings in the manner there will still be; both good and bad are
under a necessity of failings and miscarriages in every thing, which is to be
imputed to the common frailty of man fallen But not (...) what God commands at
all is voluntary rebellion, and that which the Scriptures most usually threaten
severe judgments unto. But I hope the Doctor does not mean that the
celebration of the Lords Supper is the form, and self-examination the power;
which yet he seems to do by his exceptions against making receiving to be the
principal, the other but an accessory.

To which exceptions, I say, First, that this duty of examination of our selves
is a private duty, and the private is subordinate to the public. Secondly,
This duty was prescribed occasionally, as a remedy to that particular case of
making a breach upon the materials of divine institution and order; and
therefore a means to further them in the right observance of the Supper: and we
may most safely say, the end is most principal, the means less. Besides,
where the duty cease in some respects, it is not to be urged in those
respects; but it is clear there is not the same reason, for point of offending
in the Church of England, as there was at Corinth, about the Administration of
the Sacrament; the work of our congregations demeaning themselves more
reverently and orderly in a way suitable to the carrying on of that service in
regard of the external part, according to the rule of institution.

And therefore that duty is not to be urged upon ours with the same necessity
of danger of eating and drinking unworthily, as to the Church of Corinth. It is
true, their ignorance, and not discerning of the Lords body represented by the
instituted signs, was the cause of all their other miscarriages.

But some may say,

I answer, to the externals of the institution. Had the Corinthians come up to
that conformity of Sacramental actions, and order that ours generally do, we
should not have read of their punishment for unworthy receiving (as I humbly
conceive) nor of their being urged so to come: for that principal duty is not
to be neglected, though through carelessness the other be.

But then (says the Doctor) It is a sen to dissuade men from doing their duty,

To which I say, H. but many other sober Christians, Ministers, and others,
judge that all the visible subjects of Christ's Kingdom, are under the
obligation of his commands? And do this in remembrance of me, is one not to be
restrained to sex, sunction or any particular relations; but to be observed in
common by all the baptized of years under Church indulgence. And if the Doctor
has any thing further to say, that may give satisfaction in that point, my
self and others will be very thankful.

9. And so I come to the last Querie propounded; namely, whether there be any
thing in the nature, language, actions or end of the Sacrament, in that place
of the Corinths, or elsewhere, incongruous to the actual receiving of the
unregenerate in the Church.

Before I come to answer directly to the Querie, I shall lay down these six
propositions.

1. I conceive that Sacraments in general, and this in particular were
instituted for the spiritual good of the visible Church of Christ
comprehensively taken, in which every particular member is included.

2. That the visible Church of Christ consists of persons regenerate and
unregenerate, professing the true religion, and their seed.

3. That the unregenerate in the Church are the only proper and immediate
objects of the most sundamentall promises in the Gospel Covenant, of the
giving the first grace.

4. That the whole administration of the Covenant belongs to those in the
Church, that are the immediate objects of the absolute promises in the
Covenant; they being of years of discretion to use the same, in order to the
Lords putting the promises into execution and performance.

5. That whom the promises of grace do respect, to them the use of the
Sacraments do belong; Sacraments being visible representations of the death and
blood of Christ, on which those promises of grace are founded, and by which
they are confirmed.

6. That those in the Church and of years, whom we cannot exclude from covenant
relation, we may not exclude from the Sacraments, they being visible seals and
pledges of Covenant love to that people that are in possession of Covenant
administrations, of divine Ordinances, of worship, as ours are.

These being truths (as I conceive they all are) I think it will follow, that
there is nothing in the Word against the receiving of the unregenerate in the
Church, being of years of discretion, and professing the true Religion

The Doctor has written very understandingly and informingly concerning the
Covenant, and the manner how it is sealed; and yet he falls off in his
conclusions and applications, excluding the unregenerate in the Church from the
Sacramental seals, whom yet he allows to be objects of Covenant grace, saying
that only the elect and persons effectually called are the objects; and yet he
intimates that the elect unregenerate are the object of initiall grace; and
that grace and faith be a part of the Covenant sealed by the Sacrament: and yet
he would not have those receive that have not this faith and grace, though
promised in the Covenant and sealed in the Sacrament.

But if the elect before conversion be in the writing, and in the Church, then
Sacraments seal to them: but doubtless God has his elect to call in the
Church, else we cannot tell where they are; if not under the ordinary means of
their calling. And therefore there can be no danger in sealing that part of the
Covenant to such. And does not the Doctor himself and others act accordingly in
administering the seal in Baptism? Are they within the Covenant then by virtue
of a visible profession in their parents, and upon that account sealed with the
Sacrament of Baptism; and yet grown to years denied the same seal of the
Supper? If they had right then; how comes it to pass they have none now? The
Doctor says, Because of their antifederall wickedness, they prejudice
themselves, and deprive themselves of covenant right: and that those that are
in the state of nature, are out of the Covenant, and the grossly ignorant are
such, etc. And therefore to be denied the sacramental Seal.

To which I answer, It Is hard to such, that any born in the Church of Christian
Parents, they continuing to uphold an external profession of the true
Religion, are out of the Covenant, how ignorant or wicked so ever they be. For
if there be a more immediate object of those promises of giving the first
grace, in the Church, where the ordinary means of working that grace are, then
persons in the state of nature, and unregenerate in the Church are the
immediate object of those promises before others out of the Church. But there
is a present and immediate object of those promises in the Church, that are
under covenant ordinances; except the day of Gods giving the first grace be
past in the Church. Therefore those in the State of nature and unregenerate in
the Church, are the present and most immediate object of those promises in the
Covenant of Gods giving the first grace. As for those in the Church that have
the first grace already, they cannot be the proper objects of it in the
promise: and those that are out of the Church, not having the ordinary means of
putting those promises into performance, cannot be the present and most
immediate, or most likely objects.

For as touching the state of Paganism, the Apostle intimates plainly, That
they are strangers from the Covenants of promise, without hope, and without God
in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. Therefore the unregenerate in the Church, are the
present and most proper objects of those promises, and consequently of
Sacraments that seal to the truth of those promises. And for those that will
not allow men in the state of nature and unregenerate, to be of the Church,
they will allow the Covenant a full object in the Church. And for particular
sins and personal miscarriages in the Church, we are to make no difference in
the regenerate and unregenerate, there being the same rule to guide us in
dealing with both. But let none mistake me, when I say the unregenerate in the
Church are the immediate and proper objects of the promises of the first grace,
I do not mean that all such in the Church must necessarily have that grace
given them; but such there are in the visible Church, which by nature are as
bad as any others, and in no consideration differ from the worst of men
considered in themselves; but are simple sinners wholly lost with the rest of
fallen mankind: That which makes the difference is out of themselves; it is the
mere good will and pleasure of him that works all things after the counsel
of his own will; giving grace to whom he will, of those that in all respects
are equal in sin and misery. So that when we shall come to judge of persons in
the Church, under the most evident characters of unregeneracy; yet we may not
exclude them from being objects of covenant grace and mercy; nor from the seals
and pledges of that grace and mercy, during their abode in the Church, and the
Churches indulgence toward them. In a word, nothing excludes from covenant
relation, but the sin against the Holy Ghost (which I fear many of our
blasphemous Sectaries are guilty of) and positive unbelief, such as was in the
hardened and obstinate Jews; who denied the holy One, and true Messiah sent
among them; obstinacy and Apostasy in the justly excommunicated, renouncing
the Christian Religion, hating to be reformed by the Churches censures; these
things exclude, and nothing else. And this might suffice for answer to the
Querie, but I shall add two or three arguments more.

1. The very nature of the Sacrament of the Supper is a visible Gospel,
representing Christ crucified to sight and all the other senses, by instituted
signs, which more ordinarily is carried to the ear by the word: but in this all
the senses are made the inlets to the soul, carrying the knowledge of Christ
crucified to the understanding heart and conscience. And I think the
unregenerate in the Church, have as much need of being taught Christ crucified,
by the visible signs, as any others: and they have as much need of the benefit
and advantage of their outward senses, as the regenerate, and more, they being
more dull and slow of spirit to understand or to be affected with the meaning
and end of this service then they are.

2. The main end of this service, is to keep a continual fresh remembrance of
the death of Christ, and that satisfaction made by him; by which all the same
blessings of the Covenant are procured to fallen man: Christ's blood was shed
for many, for remission of sins; that he might gather into one the children of
God, scattered abroad in all the world, and in all ages of the world, is the
end of his death, Joh. 11.52. And the Sacrament is to be observed in
remembrance of that by all those that profess hope of being saved through the
merits of his death; which the unregenerate in the Church do, and cannot be
excluded from the number of those many Christ shed his blood for: and therefore
it is proper for such to remember the death of Christ, in order to their
spiritual good, whom we cannot exclude from being the sheep he died for.

3. The actions of taking, eating and drinking are natural actions of the
body, in reference to those spiritual ends the institution directs us to, the
which actions the unregenerate are in a natural and rational capacity to
perform externally as the Word requires. Though the Doctor be pleased to judge
them altogether incapable, as not having a hand to take, he making faith the
hand, which he says they have not; which indeed is true of the unregenerate:
but is he able to prove, that by the act of taking and eating expressed in the
institution is meant the act of faith? I rather conceive it one thing among
many others he takes for granted, which would give better satisfaction, to hear
soundly proved by the Word, then to leave us merely to credit the dictates of
men.

4. The language of Sacraments runs in general and indefinit terms, This cup
is the New Testament in my blood, shed for many for the remission of sins,
drink ye all of it; so says Matthew and Mark; indeed Luke and Paul restrain
the word many, to you, as being a part of that many in the judgment of
charity; and so Paul judges of the Corinthians.

I doubt not but if the Doctor examine the institution well, he may find
enough to warrant a forbearance of that particular application in the delivery
of the Sacrament, which he so much urges in his Book. I cannot find in
Scripture language any such thing as he makes giving and receiving to be. Page
4^2.
What danger is there of confirming the unregenerate in presumption, if they
take and cat in remembrance of Christ's death? Who have more need of remembering
the death of Christ, then they that must perish for ever, dying without the
saving benefits thereof? Who have more need of those gracious tenders of life
and favor, then such in the Church? For is not regenerating grace a benefit
that comes by the death of Christ? And is not remission of sins a benefit that
comes by the death of Christ? And is not Christ and all his benefits exhibited
by those outward signs? And does not that include or suppose a proper subject
of those benefits present; which the unregenerate and unpardoned in the Church
are? What incongruity is there in all this? Besides, it sounds very harsh in
the Church, to exclude this ordinance of Christ from being a renewing and a
converting ordinance, or a means of renewing and converting grace to the
unregenerate, they being the most proper objects of that grace, as it is held
forth in the promises, for the putting of which into execution, all the
ordinances seem to be subservient.

Again, that one main end of the work of the Ministry is the conversion of
souls, none will deny; and I think none can exempt any essential part of that
work from being a means subservient to this end; and if no essential part can
be exempted, then not this of administering this Sacrament of the Supper, which
none can deny to be an essential or necessary part of the Ministers work in
reference to the good of souls. That ordinance in the Church that was
instituted to show forth the death of Christ till he come, is a means of
conversion. But the Sacrament is an ordinance in the Church instituted to show
forth the death of Christ till he come. Therefore the Sacrament is a means of
conversion. What may more strongly move a sinner to convert then the death of
Christ, which sets forth the heinousness of sin, the wretched condition of the
sinner in himself, without Christ, and yet a possibility of salvation by Christ?

Thirdly, The word and prayer (confessedly means of conversion) are so
necessary to the right administration of the instituted signs, that without
them there is no Sacrament; and therefore to deny the Sacrament to be a means
of conversion, is to deny the Word and Prayer to be a means of conversion;
unless we shall say that the adding of the instituted signs to the Word and
Prayer hinders the power and efficacy of them from their intended end; so that
though the Word and Prayer be means of conversion out of the administration of
the Sacrament, yet in it they are not.

And whereas the Doctor says, There is no promise made to that Ordinance, in
that respect: it is easily answered: for there is a promise of Christ's presence
in every ordinance, Mat. 28.20. Besides, Precepts and Promises are relatives;
in Precepts we are to understand Promises included, and in Promises Precepts
are understood. As sinners are to seek God while he may be found, and to call
upon him while he is near; so they must seek him where he will be found. As we
may not exclude the merciful presence of Christ from the Sacrament; so neither
may we exclude sinners in the Church from seeking Christ there. We know not but
that a wilful or careless neglect of this one duty of worship and homage, may
hinder a blessing from all the rest: as he that turns his ear from the Law, his
prayer shall be abominable.

But when the Doctor cannot with any clearness answer the argument to
satisfaction, he would evade it, by allowing all presence at the administration
which he says is profitable, and answers the end pleaded for, etc.

1. And indeed in that his device Church members of years are beholding to him
for his charity in allowing them as much privilege in order to the Sacrament,
as he allows to infidels, and the excommunicated.

2. If that bare presence answer that end, then much more actual receiving,
having the advantage of more of their bodily senses, then merely to be
spectators: and I think that in yielding this he has granted the argument; and
his putting the question to actual receiving, is not to any purpose; because
the act of receiving abstracted from word and prayer, necessary essentials to
the very being of the ordinance, is but a civil thing only: And therefore the
whole must go together to make up that service; and his question is beside the
question. It is sufficient to prove the argument, that the whole administration
be blessed to that end; as Mr. H. states the question. But what devices do men
find out in pretense of advancing Sacraments? Some exclude all Infants, others
some Infants in the Church. The papists will give the Sacrament but in one
kind; many among us in neither kind. The Doctor will allow all presence at
the Sacrament: they may hear and see, but they may not taste; they may not take
and eat according to the Commandment.

But why will he allow all to be present? Why, because presence may convert,
but actual receiving not, because natural men being present, may get good
without that sin which they are in danger of by unworthy receiving; but by
their receiving they can receive no benefit; but do prejudice themselves by
their unworthy receiving, besides their being guilty of murdering Christ. And
shall we think, that that act, wherein they eat and drink judgment to
themselves, shall be so blessed of God, as to become a means of conversion to
them, etc. And besides, because the committing of some gross and scandalous
sin, is made by God an occasion of conversion; shall any take warrant
therefrom to commit scandalous sins, etc.

To all which I answer, That all which he has to that purpose is argued from
mere mistakes, he taking for granted all along, that the unregenerate in the
Church, do necessarily eat and drink unworthily in the Apostles sense; whereas
I conceive the contrary has been already fully declared. And therefore it
would be well, if he would see his mistake, and alter his judgment, that
others might not be in danger of being misled by him. In the mean time what he
has charged Mr. H. with in point of excommunication untruly, may be retorted
upon himself justly, It is a cruel assertion, a bloody tenent, etc. And that
not only in his depriving many souls of the benefit and spiritual good of so
blessed an ordinance; but in his detracting also from the goodness, grace and
power of God in that ordinance; as if Christ had appointed it in the Church,
rather for the hurt, then for the spiritual good of his visible subjects, they
partaking thereof conformly according to their present capacity.

If it be a convering ordinance, we may administer the Sacrament to the Heathen
to convert them to Christianity; for if it will convert those in the Church
that have but the form, to the power of Religion, then it will sure convert the
Heathen (at least) to the form: if it will do the greater, much more the lesser.

To this I answer, must be of things of the same kind, and so of men under an
equal capacity, else it will not hold. I can throw a stone over a house, can I
therefore throw a feather: this is less then the other, and yet though the
same arm and strength be put forth, it will not do it. The fallacy of the
argument lies in this, That there is not the same capacity of receiving good by
the Sacrament in both: the formal professing Christian is not in such an
incapacity of receiving good by that ordinance as the Heathen are? We know that
to Heathens, that never heard of Christ, or at least do not acknowledge him
their redeeming Lord, so as to come under his Laws, no not so much as
Baptism, the outward elements are but mere civil things. And they might be
easily persuaded to take and eat of those elements of Bread and Wine, in order
to the good of their bodies, but not for the good of their souls, before they
own Christ to be their Lord, Redeemer and Savior; till then they know not what
these things mean. But those among us, educated in the true Religion, do
acknowledge Christ their redeeming Lord; and they do know in some measure what
these things of God mean: so that the Sacrament in an ordinary way, may work
some proper effect upon the one, but can have none upon the other without a
miracle. Besides, it is clear enough, that as no uncircumcised persons were to
enter into the Sanctuary, or to eat of the Passover; so no unbaptized person
is to partake of the holy Supper in that Communion. Were there the like ground
of denying the Sacrament to the ignorant and scandalous persons under Church
indulgence, that there is of denying it to infidels; this controversy had been
at an end before this time. It cannot be denied, but excommunication is
appointed in the Church, to convert and reduce the obstinate and wilful sinners
therein: does it therefore follow, that we may exercise this means of
conversion to Heathens out of the Church? What can be more absurd? Nay, what
have we to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5.12. The Doctor knows
well enough, that different premises will not bear the same conclusions: and
the truth is, for want of making premises equal, according to Scripture
presidents, we have run upon false conclusions: to instance in some.

1. Because we find in Scripture the distinction of believer and unbeleever,
used to distinguish the Church from the World, how commonly is the same used to
make a distinction in the Church amongst us who in Scripture sense are all
believers: for it is evident, that an unbeleever? in the Scripture sense, is
either a Pagan infidel, or an unbeleeving Jew that absolutely renounces
Christ, under the notion of a false Christ, a deceiver, a devil, etc. refusing
to obey his Laws, or to expect salvation by him.

2. Because we find that these unbeleevers are under wrath, Aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the Covenants of promise, without hope,
and without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12. Which was true of the Ephesians
before they received the Gospel; that therefore the unregenerate in the
Church, are under the same condition, though they believe in a true sense
(though not sincerely) and are under the Covenant; and persons to whom the
adoption, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God pertains, as once
to the Jews, Romans 9.4, 34. finding warrant in the word to separate from the
Infidel and idolatrous world (especially in matter of worship) therefore they
conclude, we must separate our selves from the unregenerate in the Church.

4. Because we find, that some believers have by their unworthy and undecent
behavior, in time of administration, profaned the Sacrament to their own
peril and judgment; therefore we conclude, First, That those whose persons
are unworthy (as not being regenerate) eat and drink unworthily. Secondly, That
some other unworthy actions of Christians committed before their coming to the
Sacrament, renders them incapable of worthy receiving; and consequently renders
them liable to judgment therein.

5. Because we find in the Scripture, some excommunicated for foul and
scandalous sins, and blasphemous opinions; therefore we conclude we may
exercise Church censures for any sin, even for omission of such duties as are
dubious whether enjoined in the word or no; but I have done with these false
conclusions.

There is one objection more which the Doctor makes against Mr. H. Free
Admission; to which I desire to speak something.

The objection is this. That Mr. H. Free Admission strengthens the hands of the
wicked, by promising them lies in the Name of the Lord: and makes sad the
hearts of the righteous, whom God would not have made sad, by their profaning
the ordinance, etc. And this he endeavors to back with the language of the
Sacrament, or words which the Minister uses in the delivering of the Sacrament
to particular persons: by his words and action, giving and tendering Christ and
all his benefits of grace and glory to the wicked, as well as to the godly; the
which grace and glory the Sacraments are appointed to assure and confirm, etc.
When as in the preaching of the word it is far otherwise; the Minister
therein not dispensing the same to all alike; but preaching comfort to whom
comfort belongs, and terror to whom terror belongs, etc.

I shall in answer to this objection,

1. That Sacraments are of no other signification then what they are appointed
to signify by the Word.

2. That what Sacraments signify, that only they do necessarily teach, and
nothing else.

3. That the subject of Sacramental teaching, or that which they chiefly
teach, is Christ crucified, together with all the benefits that come thereby to
the visible Church, included in that particular blessing of remission of sins.

4. That the main end of the whole service, is to bear in our minds a
continual remembrance of the death of Christ; the meriting and procuring cause
of all grace and glory bestowed upon baptized man.

5. That the Administration of the Sacrament, is appointed in the Church as
well to be a means of grace, as a pledge to assure thereof.

To all this add what has been said before concerning the unregenerate, in
order to the Sacrament; and then make it out he that can, that the language or
administration of the Sacrament, to the wicked or unregenerate, remaining in
the Church, does strengthen the hands of the wicked more then the Word may do;
or promise them lies in the name of the Lord. I grant that false conclusions
and applications may be drawn from the truest premises in the Word: and so
likewise from the use of the Sacrament, through mistake of our selves: but it
does not therefore follow, that the Word or Sacrament promises lies to the
hearer or receiver; when through an ignorant deceitful heart, they misapply
the Word or Sacrament. For there are general truths held forth indefinitely to
all in both, though all do not rightly apply the same. And the very same that
is said of the Sacrament, may be truly said of the Word, as to the particular
in hand, when rightly dispensed to men in the Church.

Is not this the great, and most true assertion of the Gospel, worthy to be
received of all men, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And also to seek and to save that which is lost, to call to
repentance, to justify the ungodly, and to die for enemies, who yet in other
places are called sheep, his Church and friends, according to Gods electing
love and gracious purpose? And is not this Gospel to be preached to every
creature, in order to the working and effecting these ends of grace and
salvation in such as are sinners absolutely, and lost in themselves, and simply
ungodly? And dare any say, this is to promise lies to the ungodly and sinners
in the Church, and so to strengthen the hands of the wicked, that they may not
return from their wickedness? And what is the Sacrament given and received,
but a visible representation of the death of Christ, and satisfaction made by
him for sinners, to put us in remembrance of all this; and which opens a door
of hope to all in general, and a peculiar comfort to them that can from their
experience of grace received (with Paul) apply this to themselves: Christ came
into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief. I know what is usually put
in against this general assertion of the Gospel, limiting the same to
penitent sinners, sensible of their being lost, and of being enemies, etc. But
doubtless out of some mistake; and such as does reflect somewhat upon the
public Ministry (to which I would not be any way in the least degree
injurious) but because such like quotations in Mr. H. are excepted against by
the reverend Doctor; I shall crave leave to express some of my thoughts in
vindication of him.

The Doctor says, Christ came not to call the righteous, that is, such as
think themselves so, but sinners to repentance, that is, says he, such sinners
that are sensible of their sinfulness, sick and lost, etc. But will not this
then follow, that all natural men, dead in trespasses and sins, thinking
themselves righteous, whole, and in the right way, and that they have need of
nothing (with the Laodiceans) not knowing that they are wretched and miserable,
poor, and blind, and naked, are out of the number Christ came to call; and so
by consequence he came to call none at all; because all by nature are sinners
under the forementioned Characters and black qualification of insensiblenesse
of sin and misery, and high thoughts of themselves. And therefore the Doctors
sense is not like to be the true sense and meaning. For we know what counsel
Christ gives to the Laodiceans, who were such conceited senseless sinners, Rev.
3.18. And how that he gives life to quicken them that are dead in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. And is sent to give repentance to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and remission of sins, Act. 5.31. For to say he gives
repentance to the penitent, and life to the living, (as he does if the Doctors
sense be right) is not the sense of the Gospel, nor indeed a truth in its
proper sense, without the advancing of the power of nature too high. And
therefore such supernatural conditions or qualifications are not required to
put persons into a capacity of receiving the benefits of the Gospel Covenant:
it being the supernatural benefits and blessings of the Covenant that make any
to be such. It Is true, supernatural grace precedes glory; and the first grace
precedes the growth and increase therein: but it is natural depravity,
sinfulness and miscry that necessarily precedes the first saving grace; so
that that cannot be a condition of the first grace, that is either the first
grace it self, or growth therein. The Covenant in this case is absolute and
inconditionall: but then I conceive the Covenant to be conditional in other
respects, in an easy and favorable sense thus. The tenor of the Gospel, to
people that never yet embraced nor owned the Doctrine and ordinances of the
Gospel, runs thus, He that believes shall be saved; but the wrath of God
abides upon those nations, people and persons, that either have not the Gospel
in the tender of it, or being tendered receive it not. But those that upon the
tender receive the Gospel, so as to credit the truth thereof, and willingly
come under the laws and worship enjoined, forsaking all false religions, and
join with the professors of the true, such are reckoned for believers, and come
under the promises of grace and glory upon that account. And therefore the
Apostle sends salutations to all that in every place call upon the name of the
Lord, both theirs and ours; and he applies that of the Prophet in this case,
Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved, 1 Cor. 1.2. Romans
10.13. That is, such people are under the promises of salvation, in opposition
to those that call not upon the Name of Christ Jesus the Lord at all; as Jer.
10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not on thy Name. I look upon belief of the truth as the only
means of ingraffing the unbeleeving Jew or Gentile into the true Olive or
visible Church of Christ, out of which is no salvation; because they have not
the ordinary means of attaining the same. And where the means is, the Word
profits not, when it is not mixed with faith in them that hear it. The Jew
believed not the truth of the Gospel at all: And he that comes to God must
believe in the first place, Heb. 11.6.
that God is, and then, that he is a bountiful rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

And that leads me to the next thing, namely, to conceive of all those that are
in external convenant with God, in regard of their being in possession of the
Divine oracles and ordinances, precepts and promises, that all such are under
all the commands of Jesus Christ: and the observance of those commands seems to
me to be the condition of the Gospel, and the grace thereof to be attained
unto in the use of instituted means, and ways appointed by Jesus Christ in
order to that end. And I do also conceive that not only half promises, and it
may bees, but whole promises seem to respect persons in the Church, doing but
the moral, reasonable and external duties. Ask and ye shall receive, knock
and it shall be opened unto you, seek and ye shall find. If you that are evil
know how to give good things to your children, much more will your heavenly
Father give the Spirit to them that ask it, even to them that have it not?
Hear ye deaf, and see ye blind, that ye may see. Isa. 42.18. And again, hear
and thy soul shall live. Isa. 55.3. Cease to do evil, learn to do well; and
then come and let us reason together; though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. And after the Lord was pleased to express the greatest
freeness of his grace to the house of Israel, in promising to give to them a
new heart, and to put his spirit in them, and to make them his people, he
adds, yet will I be required of for this by the house of Israel to do it for
them, Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27, 28, 37.

And as the Lord has made many promises to the use of means, so the use of
means is ordinarily successful and blessed to attainment of grace. I do not
say, that any by the use of means deserve grace, or that God is bound to give
grace to all use of means, or that he gives grace to any for the use of means
and reasonable serving of God. The blessing of grace is promised and also given
freely according to the good pleasure of Gods own will. And both the means and
the blessing upon the means is a fruit of Christ's purchase by his blood.

The like may be said of those in whom the promises of the first grace are
performed: they ought diligently to apply themselves to the use of all good
means, and walk in all holy ways of Christian obedience, for further growth
and increase therein. All men stand bound to employ all their abilities, and to
put forth themselves in all real endeavors to improve their talents, either of
common or general endowments, or more peculiar blessings of supernatural
grace, according to the advantages and opportunities given them, and shall be
accountable to their Lord for them: this is the tenor of Scripture, and thus
man is bound to do, whether God give the blessing or no: duties belong to man,
the issue is the Lords: man is bound to him, but he is free to do whatsoever he
pleases in heaven and in earth. And yet it is true also that the promises of
eternal glory and blessedness, belong only to those that are actually
justified and sanctified; and do patiently continue in weldoing, Romans 2.7. And
this I think is neither Antinomianism nor Pelagianism; but the tenor and scope
of the Covenant of grace to man. So then if we consider men under sin and
misery, being in the Church, they are under the commands of the Gospel, which
justifies their observance of those commands, in hope of a blessing. And
according to promises in that particular case, the unworthy guess in the
parable, was not sentenced for his being unworthy, and without the wedding
garment when he was commanded to come to the feast (for so were all that were
bidden as well as he) but his partaking of the Gospel, and having liberty to
sit down, and eat of every dish of that feast of fat things, and yet at the end
of the feast, being found to be one not having a wedding garment; this was
damning; and for this he was sentenced to be bound hand and foot, and to be
cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat.
22.11, 12, 13. This is a place usually misapplyed: for it proves no more then
this, That of those that have the advantage of Gospel administrations, some
may and do perish, for not having the grace of the Gospel. Many are called,
but few are chosen. But this by the way; I will return to the other part of the
objection made by the Doctor against Mr. H. free admission, which is this,
namely, That it makes sad the hearts of the godly, to see the ordinance
profaned, etc.

To which I answer, Why should the hearts of the godly be made sad, because
unregenerate persons join with them in duties of homage and worship, and are
willing to join with them in the use of the Word and Prayer as well as the
Sacrament, as means of a blessing? Why should any be grieved that wicked men
and sinners are objects of Redemption, Covenant blessings and mercy? shall the
eye of any be evil, because God is good, in sending Christ into the world to
save sinners? Should not all remember that they themselves were such, though
now through free grace they be washed, and sanctified and justified. Christians
that are partakers of this grace, are all this by virtue of Electing love,
Redemption and Covenant grace. None of us by nature, were any better then our
fellow sinners. It was the mere good pleasure of God in Christ, that has made
us to differ. And what have any that they have not received, and that in the
use of the same ordinary means, you stomach at in others your fellow sinners?
Where would you have sinners to seek Christ Jesus but in the Temple? Where
shall they find him, but where he is? Christ bids all that will come and take
of the true bread and water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. He does no where
discourage any from coming to him. O that Ministers would rather woo sinners,
and seek by all fairness and love to draw them to wait upon Christ in the way
of all his ordinances, in order to blessing; then causlesly, upon mistake, to
discourage them, and take them off from endeavoring after their duty of
remembering the love of Christ, in his laying down his life for sinners! but I
must contract.

But then says the Doctor, If this be so,

To this I answer, H. has said. For he has very well stated the question, and
excepted infants, distracted and justly excommunicated persons; and these being
excepted, if he or I say, let all come that will, I think it neither to be
absurd nor dangerous; seeing that Christ, when he offers himself, and the thing
signified in the Sacrament, says, Let him that is athirst come; and whosoever
will, let him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. Why may not we say of
all of years, under Church indulgence (whether Presbytered or not Presbytered)
they offering themselves to receive, are not to be denied the Sacrament for
supposed incapacity or unworthiness? Besides, Mr. H. has given a rational
account of his own practice, to acquit himself from such reproachful
expressions, as are used against him, namely, That he has done his utmost (de
jure) that all come prepared: And that none may charge him with arrogance, he
modestly and humbly breaks out into this patheticall expression.

But woe is me, if I justify my self, who am a man of unclean lips, and dwell
among people of unclean lips, eminent only in failings! By which words he does
not detract what he had said before, but only shows, that though such were his
frailty, that he (as all other) failed and came short in every duty, yet he had
not willingly neglected or wholly omitted any duty in that respect, which
Christ requires of him. And so whether Mr. H. or the Doctor favors most of
pride and vanity, let the intelligent and sober judge.

Now to the other part of the objection, namely, Where is the reformation so
long indevoured after, if we allow of such a free admission.

I answer,

1. I would learned men did more study by the right means, and in the right way
to reform a true Church laboring under some corruptions in Doctrine, worship
and discipline; which is our case.

2. I would fain know whether the debarring of Church members of years, and not
excommunicated from the Sacrament be a means of reforming approved in the Word.

3. Whether the want of discipline do justify a total neglect or suspension
of Sacraments, in order to reformation.

4. Whether separation in the Church be a good expedient to further the
reformation of the whole.

5. Whether to abolish the essentials of Church discipline, in the use thereof,
for some exorbitant abuses, be a good expedient to reform the thing.

6. Whether denying the Sacrament to those whom the Church cannot justly
proceed against, the positive excommunication be any furtherance to reformation.

7. Whether there can be any reformation of the Church in that respect, until
discipline be restored, and uniformly exercised in the same; and if so, whether
the Sacrament must be suspended till then, and whether it be any thing toward
reformation so to do.

8. Whether the very nature and being of reformation in the visible Church,
stands not only in the external conformity to the indisputable Laws of Christ
their head; constraining all to an uniformity thereunto. When these few queries
are answered either by the reverend Doctor, or any other that holds the Church
of England a true constituted Church, as to its essentials and being; if I
live, and God enable me thereto, I may take occasion to make a further and more
direct answer to that latter part of the objection concerning reformation.

In the mean time I shall go on to vindicate Mr. H. in what he asserts touching
excommunication, and censures of the Church. For what he has asserted
concerning these, is by the Doctor charged to be false, bloody tenants, etc.

And here I shall first assert what I conceive is truth, and then answer to what
the Doctor has said.

1. I conceive that none are proper objects of excommunication, but such as are
in the true Church of God, and in fellowship with the Saints in all acts of
communication and worship public. For what have I to do to judge them that are
without? them God judges, 1 Cor. 5.12.

2. That no one is to be excommunicated, but in case of violating some manifest
and known Law of Christ: and that violation peristed in to obstinacy; after a
judicial trial, conviction, and patient waiting of the Church, for his
reformation.

3. That none may exercise the key of Ecclesiastical Discipline, but such
persons in office to whom all the keys of Christ's Kingdom are committed, being
appointed by him to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments as well as
exercise discipline.

4. That no single pastor alone, but such as are so in an association, as to
derive authority from the whole, can exercise Church censures authoritatively;
and that every Presbyter in general is not to have a part in this power, but
some in special chosen by the whole Church, which are more eminently qualified
and fitted for the exercise of Ecclesiastical rule and government.

5. That excommunication, when it is just, is a solemn ejecting or putting out
of obstinate sinners in the Church, from all acts of communion and worship of
God in the public congregation; until by repentance they manifest both their
shame and sorrow for their sin; and upon the manifestation of this, and public
promise of amendment, the Church ought to be satisfied therewith; and the
penitent offender to be restored and regularly admitted to all external Church
privileges again.

6. That those have much to answer for, that were the occasion of laying Gods
vineyard waste, by throwing down the wall, and plucking up the hedge of
discipline established, before they were agreed of another warranted by the
Word, to be set up in stead thereof. By this time they may both see their folly
and feel the smart of it in the evil effects and consequences.

Well, having laid down these propositions, let me a little apply them, and
show you what will follow upon the truth of them. And first, if the first be
true (as I conceive it is) then those that never were admitted to the Lords
Supper, are not in a capacity of these censures of the Church; nor to be
amended by them, what ever their enormities be. If the second be true, then
none in the Church may be censured for ignorance, or for the omitting of
doubtful duties; especially that of submitting to Church examination, in order
to the Sacrament. If the third be true, then not only the common members, but
the ruling Elders will be called in question for usurping the key of
Discipline; they not having power to exercise the key of Doctrine and
Sacraments. If the fourth be true, then we may take notice how little of true
discipline is practiced in the Church of England; and in what an incapacity we
are (for the present) of any true reformation; whatever some pretend. But the
sixth and last I intend more especially to clear up in vindication of Mr. H.

And take it thus.

Excommunication is a delivering to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. It Is a great thunderbolt
and punishment inflicted by the Church, as the last remedy to reduce the
obstinate from the way of perishing Calvin says, As Christ is in the Church,
so Satan is out of the Church; to which condition the excommunicated are
sentenced: but with a merciful end; to reduce them to Christian obedience,
where God gives the blessing. Otherwise it is the very beginning of hell, and
eternal wrath; when the sentence is just; it being confirmed in heaven. Put
out from among you that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.13. He must be put out from
among themselves, and so out of all communion. The same word seems to be Joh.
9.22. and 12.42. where it is said of some, that they durst not confess Christ
for fear of the Jews, for they had a greed, that if any did confess him, they
should be put out of the Synagogue. So that if the Apostle Paul in the censure
of the incestuous person, have any reference to the practice of the Jews, (as
the Doctor seems to hint) why then doubtless he was put out of the Churches
assemblies. For it is most certain, the Synagogues were places of case, where
the Jews publicly assembled for divine worship, of prayer, reading,
preaching, etc. Act. 13, 14, 15, 16. So that I say, if Paul followed the
practice of the Jews, or meant that the Corinthians should proceed according
to their practice in this; then his meaning was, that they should put out that
wicked person from their assemblies for communion and worship I profess I
cannot but wonder the Doctor should be so tart with Mr. Humphrey in this thing;
he having the very letter of the Text, and the practice of the Jews Church to
warrant what he has asserted in this point. For let me ask the reverend
Doctor how he or any other of his opinion will reconcile that delivering to
Satan out of the Church, and allowing their presence in the congregation, in
all acts of worship and spiritual communion, except actual receiving of the
Sacrament of the Supper? To put out that wicked person from among themselves:
and at the same time to allow him presence among themselves; and to have
communion with them in all acts of worship except the Supper, are altogether
inconsistent. Neither does that any thing at all help, which the Doctor so
often urges in his book; Let him be as a Heathen or publican: But Heathens and
publicans may be present at all the ordinances, 1 Cor. 14.24. And therefore the
excommunicate may; because they are not to be unto the Church worse then a
Heathen, etc.

For to this I have many words to say, which I think will answer the argument.

1. It will appear that scandalous brethren are in some respect worse then
infidels. If any provide not for his own, specially for those of his own house;
he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. And it had
been better for revolting Christians, never to have known the way of
righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21. And there was not such a thing so much as named
among the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife, 1 Cor. 5.1. And when
scandalous brethren are worse then Heathens, in sinning under such means of
better obedience, that Heathens have not; there is reason they should be denied
something of privilege that Heathens may have.

2. It Is clear that scandalous brethren are to be denied that privilege in
civil commerce and familiarity that Heathens are allowed to have with
Christians, and Christians with them, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 1 Cor.
10.27. compared. Liberty is given to Christians to have civil and friendly
familiarity with infidels, and fornicators of the world; which yet is
absolutely to be denied to scandalous and disorderly brethren; as a means to
bring them to shame. And if scandalous brethren under trial or actual
censure, are to be debarred of some privilege that heathens are allowed: it
will somewhat weaken the strength of the Doctors argument.

3. The Apostles had direct and express commission (after Christ's ascension)
to preach unto the Heathen; and therefore had warrant to admit of their
voluntary presence to hear in any place where opportunity might give the
advantage of converting them. But yet upon their rejecting the Gospel when it
was faithfully tendered to them; the Apostles might shake off the dust of their
feet against them; and leave them deeper under wrath. The unbeleeving Jews
were within the commission too; but when they rejected the words of eternal
life, and abused the messengers of Christ, that preached this to them, it is
said, they judged themselves unworthy of eternal life; and upon that account
the Apostles forsake them. Most terrible things are written against the
disobedient to the Gospel. And I am sure, Christians that reject the Laws of
Christ (as the excommunicated are supposed to do) are worse then Infidels, that
never had the means of knowing and doing what Christ commands. As in respect of
sin and eternal punishment, those that live under the Gospel, but refuse to
submit to it, may be said to be worse then Heathens; so why not in point of
external Church privilege likewise; they having forfeited all those
privileges of word, prayer, Sacraments, engaging all powerful means of their
reformation, which heathens never had the advantage of. And it is supposed that
Christ is rejected in all the ordinary means appointed to reclaim the
scandalous and obstinate in the Church, before this sentence of excommunication
is pronounced and put in execution against them. And just it is, that they that
obstinately reject all, should be banished from all; that they may either
return to their duty by repentance, and thereby give satisfaction to the
Church, and be again received into communion: or else add to obstinacy
apostasy; also be rejected for ever, that the Name of God be not evil spoken
of, because of such scandalous members.

4. Let him be to thee as a Heathen or Publican: that is, let the
excommunicated be as odious, and as abominable to thee as a Publican, or Roman
officer sitting at the receipt of custom, was to the Jews: or as a Heathen was
to the Jews, during the present state of the Jewish Church (with respect to
which Christ speaks) when the uncircumcised were an abomination to the Jews;
they being forbidden to let any stranger or uncircu^cised in the flesh, come
into Gods Sanctuary, or partake of any privilege of worship, but upon being a
Proselyte. And let the excommunicated be as such a one, and then what has the
Doctor and his party gotten?

Touching the practice of the Greek Churches urged: I say what is that to us,
when it is not agreeable to the practice of the first Apostolical Church of
Christ? For upon the like ground on which they made four degrees of
excommunication, they might have brought in ten. And therefore not so much
their practice, as the ground thereof is to be regarded in this point.

But then the Doctor adds, That if this admitting of the excommunicated to be
present at all ordinances be an error, it is out of indulgence, and an error
on the right hand: for whereas he excludes from one ordinance, he might exclude
from all, according to Mr. H. tenent, etc.

1. To this I answer; right hand errors are evil as well as left, and to be
taken heed of; and therefore not to be pleaded for, but to be reformed.

2. Suspension from the Sacrament only is no legal censure. 1. Because it has
no ground nor footing in the Word. 2. Because it is the same with
excommunication, according to the Doctors own principles and practice. For he
allows presence at all the ordinances in the Church in both; and his
proceedings in order to both are the same. And he and the rest of his opinion
and way, not coming up to the true nature of Church censures, do as much as in
them lies, hinder the end of censures; which is, that the persons censured may
either be ashamed and penitent, and so return to Christian obedience; or else
renounce their profession, and turn Apostates. Thus I humbly conceive, Mr. H.
tenent is no bloody tenent; but a most merciful way and means set up in the
Church, and left to be used as the last remedy, for the cure of the most
desperate souls: And not to use this remedy according to its nature and true
intent of Christ therein, is to deprive, the obstinate offender of the only
means left of his amendment and salvation; and so is indeed far from being an
error on the right hand. And yet by the way, to express my thoughts a little
further: I hold that all unnecessarily friendly familiarity with scandalous
disorderly brethren, that sin out of wilfulness, whether they be under Church
induigence, trial, or censure, is to be declined according to that 1 Cor.
5.10, 11. which sense I humbly conceive comes nearer the meaning of the place,
then to understand it of, or to infer therefrom a suspension from the
Sacrament.

The last thing that I shall speak to, is the Doctors exceptions against some
of Mr. H. quotations of Scripture, concerning which I say; let him but allow
Mr. H. the same liberty he takes himself in some of his own quotations, and
then he will have little cause to find fault for his impertinent allegations
of Scripture. I have given account of some of the Doctors already: I shall here
take notice of two or three more.

1. He urges many texts of Scripture to prove that some in the Old Testament
were debarred the privileges of worship for moral uncleanness: but his
proofs in that fall short of what they are brought to prove; being in cases that
will not serve his turn. For such persons in the Jewish Church, came under the
censure of the Judicial Laws, which were very severe against such offenders:
and there is nothing expressed in Moses or the Prophets (that I know of) in
reference to excommunication. And in that Church, the porters charge concerning
uncleanness is to be understood of ceremonial and Gentile uncleanness.

Again, for that Tit. 1.15. brought by the Doctor to prove that some in the
Church not excommunicated were unclean. I deny that those the Apostle there
speaks of, were of the Christian Church. Let him consult with the tenth verse,
and he may easily see the Apostle means those vain talkers and deceivers that
were especially of the circumcision: they profess they know God, (as other
unbeleeving Jews did) but in their works they deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, verse. 16. They were either such
as never were of the Christian Church, or if they were once of it, yet now were
revolted and become Apostates by their horrid opinions, and abominable
impieties. And then what is this to members of a Christian Church, professing
Christianity?

Again, for Church examination in order to the Sacrament, the Doctor alleges,
1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear; having a good
conscience, etc. The scope of the place is to show what a Christians duty is
when they are apprehended, and under the terror of persecuting adversaries:
which duty is to be so far from being affrighted from their Christian
profession; that in such case, they should be always ready to give a reason of
the hope that is in them with meekness and fear, etc. And the Apostle urges
them to this duty of constancy from a great encouragement, If you suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye, verse. 14. Now how impertinent is this place
for Church examination, or examination by the Pastor or Elders before
admittance to the Sacrament. If such kind of proofs be sufficient to warrant
that practice of examination, and suspension from the ordinance for neglect of
it, men may prove any thing they have a mind to; and make every fancy of their
own a necessary duty; and so make void the necessary Laws of God by their
traditions.

I shall instance in one quotation more, and then I have done: and it is 2 Pet.
3.5. For this they are willingly ignorant of, that by the Word of God the
heavens were of old, etc. This the Doctor quotes to prove that gross ignorance
in Church members is a scandalous sin, for which the Church may proceed to
censure them, and to suspend them from the Sacrament: but sure this is not very
pertinent to his purpose, as will easily appear, if he consult with the
Context. This second Epistle was written to stir up their pure minds by way of
remembrance, that they might be mindful of the words spoken before by the holy
Prophets, etc. and to arm them against those Scoffers that should come in the
last days: 2 Pet. 3.1, 2, 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts; and saying, Where is the
promise of his coming, etc. Scoffers at the Promise; which notes the highest
degree of defection from and renouncing of piety, so Psalm. 1.1. of the three
degrees of ungodly men the scoffers or scorners is the last, as being the
worst. And by these are meant such as fell off and joined their selves with the
persecuting Jews, complying with them; and falling into all the villainy in the
world, expressed here by walking after their own lusts, that is, going on
habitually as in a constant course, doing whatsoever seemed right in their own
eyes, without any restraint of law, of nature, of Christ, etc. In the second
chapter of this second Epistle, they are set forth in their colors; to be such
as had escaped the pollutions that are in the world, through the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by apostasy were entangled again
therein, and overcome, and so their latter end was worse then the beginning.
They that have been converted from their heathen sins, by receiving the
knowledge and faith of Christ, and then again relapse and turn to them again,
this latter estate of theirs, this Christian Heathenisme is worse then their
bare Heathenisme at first. They had knowledge enough to bring in damnable
heresies, and wicked loose opinions; to wrest the Scriptures, to trouble the
Church, and unsettle many: but they were willingly ignorant of the Word of God;
they had the knowledge of Scripture, but against their knowledge did pervert
the same, and wrest all the Scriptures to their own destruction; as the learned
Papists and our Apostate Sects do. But what is this to the simple ignorant
among us, that out of carelessness merely, or incapacity and weakness are so;
and yet adhere to the true religion by profession amongst us? These are strange
mistakes and applications of Scriptures: but I hope the Doctor is not willingly
ignorant. By this he may see how severe he is against that in Mr. H. which he
is more guilty of himself. But I have done with this, entreating him and all
others into whose hands this shall come, to make a charitable sense and
construction of what I have here written, and not to be offended, or prejudiced
at the plainness of the matter or rudeness of the expressions and method,
because I want those advantages that should help all this.

The Lord knows that I herein intend plainness, and so far as I know my own
heart, I have thus declared my judgment in these things in uprightness and
sincerity, hoping they may be a means of the Churches good, tending to her
peace and unity; and I am persuaded will be so if prejudice or some other thing
do not hinder the serious consideration, right understanding and use of what I
have here written. And so I have done with the reverend Doctor.

And I shall now from the grounds and principles laid down in the foregoing
discourse, crave leave to hint a few things to the dissenting brethren of the
Congregationall way: and the rather, because if the Presbyterian way (as some
do practice) will not hold and stand good, much less will the Independent
novelty in point of separation, and gathering Churches out of Presbyterian
congregations or others, and therefore give me leave (you that are for that
way) to speak freely unto you in a few words.

If you judge the Ministry and the ordinances and particular congregations
lawful as to the main, why do you separate from them, and gather out their
best members from them? would you be content to be so served by other separated
Churches? Does not this sensibly insinuate to the world, that those gathered
Churches are the only Churches of Christ, and so all other congregations (not
after your moulding) thereby called into question whether they be Churches of
Christ or no? Are you for order and edification, and for the peace of the
whole, or are you not? Do you intend the reformation of the whole, or of a part
only? If you be only for the reformation of a part, and your desire be to draw
up some to purity of ordinances and spiritual communion with Christ their
head, and one with another, what must become of all the rest that are not of
your mind, nor indeed in a capacity of admittance unto you, upon your terms
and qualifications of members? what will you make of them that are not so
qualified? will you account them members of the true visible Catholic Church,
and yet not fit to be of particular congregations, and enjoy communion with
Christ in all his holy ordinances?

Are they by virtue of the holy Covenant of grace, Church natives and members
borne; and declared to be such by public testimony on the Churches part in
administering of Baptism unto them, a great Church privilege, of right
belonging to none but such as are in external Covenant with God at least,
either by profession of faith in themselves, or by their parents, and yet not
fit to be owned, or received into communion by any particular congregation?
Why, what a case are we in then? Your selves were equal with the rest in your
Baptism, and under the same administration of worship and service that others
were: and if you have found a blessing in your regeneration and effectual
calling, keeping in that station, why do you forsake it now? Has the Covenant
of grace, in the use of ordinary means, brought quickening grace and life to
your souls (which is the main in order to eternal blessedness) whither will
you go to mend your selves? Why should you be so offended at the presence of
such as you your selves once were? Did such kind of persons hinder the power
and blessing of ordinances from doing you good before, that you are so zealous
in separating from them now? Will not the effects of free grace which you have
already received convince you, that it is good for you to keep your former
station, and wait upon the same God in covenant for increase and completing of
what he has begun? What fault can you find with Word, Sacraments and Prayer
(the main essentials of holy worship) they being the same both with us and you?
only you are grieved that sinners should enjoy the benefit of all these, though
you as bad as they have found good in the use of all these. Would you have
Jesus Christ save no more then those that are already saved, or in a saving
state? Would you have the effects of Covenant love, flowing from a bleeding
Savior unto sinners now to cease? Had not mere grace and mercy prevented when
you were sinners, you had been impenitent sinners still like to the worst. Will
not the remembrance of what you once were beget some bowels of tenderness
toward such sinners? Is this your separation the way to draw on others that are
weak ones, and to recover offending brethren? Is this the way to do their souls
good, to rail and revile them with reproachful speeches and slanders, calling
them the World in opposition to the Church, and unbeleevers, aliens, profane
ones, dogs, and swine, and the like? Nay, is not this the way rather to cast
stumbling blocks before the blind, and to destroy many weak brethren whom
Christ has died for, by hardening them in an evil way? Is it not a means to
make them apostatize from the true Religion, and turn Papists or any thing, to
keep the name of Christians, rather then to be under that reproach of Infidels,
Heathens, the profane world, etc. You would have them left to wander in their
own ways, and so you make them objects of the threatenings, but not of the
grace of the Gospel and promises; under the commands, but not under the
promises made to Gospel administrations. I wonder at it, that such Ministers
would be accounted the only men that patronize free grace, and the only Gospel
Preachers; and yet forget that Christ came into the world to save sinners; and
to give repentance and remission of sins; to seek and to save that which is
lost, as all were and are until he find them and gather them to himself by a
blessing of spirit and power in the use of his own ordinances. The Scriptures
distinguish indeed between the Church and the World; but these men will be
making a world in the Church, and a world out of the Church: and make Infidels
of the baptized, and such as were born in the Church, and make a profession of
faith, and that truly too an to the object at least, and yield external
conformity in the materials of worship and Christian obedience. But you that
are so bold to unchurch Christians, and to make spoil in Christ's Kingdom; did
you ever read any such thing approved in the Scriptures? I confess these are
bold times; but let not men make too bold with Jesus Christ's interest; suffer
him to have his full possessions and dominion over all his subjects that
profess loyalty and homage unto him in the world. Let us wish grace and peace
to all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus both theirs and ours; and let us
have union with them and communion too in all the Laws and ordinances of Jesus
Christ. He has spirit and grace sufficient to answer all the wants, to prevent
all the evils of all that seek after him according to his own institutes. Oh
brethren hinder none in seeking after Jesus: discourage none because they are
sinners from coming under the most engaging ordinances to preserve Christian
obedience; do not act so contrary to the Apostolical days. The Apostles did
what they could to convert the world unto Christiani^^ and rejoiced in bringing
sinners to the obedience of faith: and were all for the enlarging of Christ's
kingdom, for which end they put themselves upon the greatest hazards. And will
many of you pervert Christianity into the world,' Christ into Belial, unchurch
and unchristian such as the Apostles did generally embrace, and receive to
communion upon as slender grounds as ours are desired to be received? Did you
over read that they refused any one that embraced the Doctrine of faith, and
was willing to be baptized? Did you ever read that they required more to
breaking of bread, then they did to Baptism? Did you ever read, that they
called any in the Church Unbeleevers, Heathens, Belial, Dogs, etc. Did you ever
read of this distinction of Church and World in any of those Churches the
Scriptures speak of? I would you would prove a twofold world, one in the
Church, another out of the Church: and a twofold Kingdom in the visible Church
of Christ, where men and women generally submit to the Laws and Ordinances of
Jesus Christ. Will you confound things that so much concern the Lord Christ's
interest? can you put no difference between the unregenerate under Covenant
lations and administrations, and the infidel world that are left to wander from
all these, and to sacrifice to the Devil, and not unto the true God at all?
Will you allow them no better titles and privileges then you will allow to
Heathens? I wonder what rule you walk by, and judge by, and what spirit it is
that you act so vigorously from. Suppose the Indians in America should
generally embrace the Christian faith, and disavow their worshipping of Devils,
and desire to imbody themselves with those that profess the Christian
religion, would you not offer them Baptism, and upon their coming under it,
would you not admit them to all the ordinances of Christian profession and
communion? Whether you would or no, the Apostles have done it in the like case.
Or suppose the infidel Jews should be convinced of their mistake, and should
now confess that Jesus whom their fathers crucified, is the true Messiah and
Savior of the world; and upon that account renounce their error, and desire
the Baptism of Christ, professing their resolution to submit unto his
administrations, and come under Christian obedience, would you refuse them and
not baptize them until they were so qualified as to come up to your terms of
communion? I think you would not. And I pray then, why will you separate from
the most of ours that are lawfully baptized, and come up to the same
profession, and are of no other religion but the Christian religion, and expect
salvation by Christ alone? Is it because they have this by education and the
helps of tradition, which in the other case is not so? I pray you do not
undervalue any benefits and helps that are the consequences of the Covenant of
grace. Remember how sadly the Apostle laid it to heart, when the Jews by their
infidelity in denying Christ to be the Son of God, did unchurch themselves and
apostatize, Romans 10.1. and the 11. compared. It was not their being carnal and
otherwise ignorant and wicked, but their not believing that Christ was the
Messiah promised unto their fathers, that did unchurch them and their posterity
to this day: for that unbelief was the thing that barred them from his
administrations, and so are said to be cut off, although by birth privilege
they were the only natural branches or Church members. Were they refused by
the Apostles, or cast off, or did they eject and cast out themselves from being
branches of the true Olive? Christ's coming in the flesh not discerned by them,
was the occasion of their fall from being the Israel of God: he was the
stumbling stone and the rock of offense, that made them fall from their Church
state and relation. They would not own any other administration but that of
Moses; and upon that account undid themselves and perished. What think you
would have been the issue, had they owned Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah,
and so had come under the Gospel administrations, as ours are; and would not
be under any other, that they should have been refused and separated from, as
being none of the Church of Christ? I beseech you consider of it: did not
thousands of the Jews come in and offer themselves to Baptism at the
preaching of one short word or sermon, Act. 2. And can we imagine that they
were all true Converts in your sense? was any refused that desired to be one in
the Christian profession? Suppose that all the common people in England were
unbaptized (as some reproachfully and slanderously report they are) and were
sensible of that condition: and should come and desire Baptism upon no other
account then their present capacity would admit of; confessing themselves
sinners, and promising obedience to the word of God; professing hope of mercy
and happiness through the merits of Jesus Christ (which all that have learned
their Creed are capable to do) I would fain know whether you could lawfully
refuse to baptize them at the present, without any long deferring of it,
although they had been Heathens born. I would I did but understand your answer
to this supposition. I conceive that all those that being of years, are in a
capacity for Baptism, are in a capacity also of all other Christian communion.
I presume the Apostles baptized upon as easy terms, and so might you; except
you have a different commission, or understand the Apostles commission in some
other sense then they themselves did. But I must contract my self, and ask you
once again, whether you ever found any president in the Word for what you
practice in this point? what Church under the administration of the Gospel
will afford a president for your practice? Do you separate according to
Apostolical order and rule, or by virtue of some new commission or light the
Scriptures never taught you? I pray you again consider: you had need be sure of
good warrant to bear you out: for you have been the cause and means of our
being without discipline, Sacraments, union and communion with other reformed
Churches: indulgence to you has been the occasion of an unlimited Toleration,
the misery of all those factions, Schisms, Heresies, Blasphemies now abounding
in every corner of the Land. Well, if your foundation be only the wisdom of
the flesh, and a worldly interest, time will discover more of the Babel you are
building: when the consequences of your principles, practice and design are
come to full maturity. It may come to that pass (and it is much to be feared
it will) that you would retreat if you could tell how. In the mean time the
wild beasts of the wilderness come into Gods vineyard, and by heresies
destroy the tender grapes: and many follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth is evil spoken of. Men arise from among our selves
speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them, 2 Pet. 2.2. Act.
20.30. But mark them thut cause divisions and avoid them, Romans 16.17.

But let me speak one word more in order to discipline, which as you were never
yet willing to come under as to the reforming of the whole, so have your
indevours been all along most fierce to obstruct and retard the discipline
debated on in order to that end.

Again, when the fittest way in Christian prudence, according to rule was
agreed upon as a means to reform the whole; and confirmed by the supreme
Authority of this Nation: designs were driven on to obstruct it, and such
things attempted, as are the greatest scandals to the Protestant Religion that
ever it suffered under.

And thirdly, notwithstanding many symptoms and sad omens of a carnal design
tending to the confusion and ruin of the whole (and those the proper products
of your own miscarriages) do already appear; yet you persist in your own
contrivances, and will not retract, until not only the Church, but also the
flourishing state of the Common wealth be involved in the same confusion and
ruin. The very sinews of the Commonwealth are the fear of God, and divine
order in carrying on the same in all its parts uniformly: different parties and
factions too much indulged do ever beget jealousies and fears, the common
nursery of sedition and rebellion: And that which cannot be held without
gratifying of all factions and parties, cannot in reason and policy hold long.
Why may not men truly fear God, and carry on the power of godliness in their
several functions and places, under an establishment of Doctrine, worship and
order; the only way to honor God? And the best expedient to preserve the whole
uniformity in the Church is a good foundation of peace and tranquillity in the
Commonwealth. And that is ever the best policy amongst Christians that is
subordinate to true piety: and our greatest freedom desired, will be soonest
attained in the way of religiousnesse, when sin will be a snare to any people.
I confess it is merely occasionally that some things have dropped from my pen
of this nature. I would not offend any, nor have I undertaken to meddle with
the Independent way strictly taken; they have been sufficiently answered by
diverse learned and reverend Gentlemen: and the inconsistences, contradictions,
absurdities and mistakes of their way discovered, and not yet vindicated by any
that ever I heard of. I only have hinted some things tending (as I conceive) to
the Churches peace and unity in vindicating Church members from reproach and
slander, and inference to the preceding discourse. And therefore I shall end
with Mr. Humphreys wishes, adding some of mine own.

1. I wish we had a government established in the Church, the nearest in
Christian prudence that may be to the word of God.

2. I wish the duty of fraternall correption, a watching over, and admonishing
one another in love were better known and practiced amongst us.

3. I wish that men would look more to their own consciences, and leave the
judging of others spirits, heart and reins alone to the judgment seat of
Christ.

4. I wish, though there may be some judging by the fruits, that wise religious
men would be more cautious of countenancing the separations in the visible
Church, seeing upon the same ground that you go to gather a Church out of any
mixed congregation, another will gather a separation out of your Church; and so
continue (as I have intimated from our sad experience) an endless separating,
until this first separation shall in a few years be able to take up the saying
of that greatest Grandmother, unto those many Schisms she shall see issuing
as her natural offspring, out of her own bowels, Rise up daughter, go to thy
daughter, for thy daughters daughter has a daughter; for this separations
separation has a separation; so far Mr. Humfrey: I add.

1. I wish that the distinction of believers and unbeleevers, Church and world,
Christ and Belial, holy and profane, worthy Church members, and unworthy, were
used in the Church of God according to Scripture meaning, and with due caution,
and no otherwise.

2. I wish that Sacraments were more clearly understood in respect of their
nature and end, attributing unto them their due according to the Scripture,
avoiding all humane boldness, either in adding to advance them, or in
diminishing them so as in the least degree to debase them.

3. I wish that the Lord Jesus may have the liberty and full scope of his own
instituted ordinances given for the spiritual good of his Church; that he may
use them as instruments of his Spirit in order to that end, upon the spirits of
all his subjects, according to their necessities and spiritual wants.

4. I wish that a godly care may be taken in the education of all borne in the
Church, that being instructed in the plainest way of faith and obedience in the
Christian religion, they may be prepared to profit by every ordinance in the
Church when they come to years.

5. I wish that all of years may be made to understand their duties and Church
privileges and be encouraged unto Church communion in all the ways of Christ;
that so they may come under Church discipline, the best remedy to reclaim the
obstinate and wilful offenders.

6. I wish the gifted brethren were better employed, then in unchurching our
Churches, and gathering Churches out of them: it were a work more proper and
acceptable, either to be content to exercise their gifts to the edifying and
building up of that Church in which they received them; or else to go into the
infidel world (as the Apostles did) and preach the Gospel and plant Churches
there.

The Scripture Rail Examined.
REader, since I parted with what I had written in answer to Doctor Drake in
the foregoing discourse; there came to my hand Mr. Humfreys Rejoyner in
vindication of himself; a work very well performed by him: wherein the truth
formerly by him asserted is better cleared, and confirmed, to the satisfaction
of many souls fearing God, and breathing forth their earnest desires after the
settlement, reformation and uniformity of the Church of God in England
according to the Word of God. Be not prejudiced against his book by other
learned men, who have and still do appear with much bitterness and passion
against him; more to affright with words and humane dictates merely, then with
matter of grounded truth, according to the sense of the holy Scripture:
witness that book put forth by some Ministers of Gloucestershire, entitled, A
Scripture Rail to the Communion Table. I confess the title is good; for we do
acknowledge there ought to be such a thing; but not in their sense, as I hope
shall appear by the discovery made in this short discourse following, in which
I shall wave what has been already written in answer to D. Drake, by Mr.
Humfrey and my self, and take notice only of some things in the Scripture Rail
which have not yet been spoken to, that I know of. And this I shall do as
briefly as I can, because I would not anticipate him whom it does more nearly
concern.

And first of all, because I would not leave the weak and incautelous Reader
deceived with vain and groundless words in reading this Scripture Rail, let
this be noted, that I take Scripture discipline to be the only Rail for the
Communion Table; which (I hope) both the Author reproached, and my self
earnestly desire may be set up; and all our indevours tend as conducible means
to that end; as being assured that the first stone in the building of the
reformation, (as to our case) is holy discipline: And whether their principles
or ours tend most to that, I hope to make appear to sober and unprejudiced
Christians. And the way I shall take, shall be to discover some of these
Gentlemen's unbrotherly dealings with Mr. Humfrey: first in perverting his
sense. Secondly, in setting up a Rail to the Lords Table, by perverting
Scripture, and so making that Rail to be a pretended discipline merely.

1. They have damned and censured his Book to be an ungodly pamphlet, in which
is a mass of perverting Scriptures, tending to destroy all Church reformation;
little better then carnal and profane reasoning, sophistry, a heterodox piece,
abomination, a vile piece, with diverse other such hard censures; language
enough to affright any from ever looking into it, that have any care of their
souls, to avoid their own destruction, in complying with that soul damning
practice of maintaining mixed communion, as they call it.

I must confess these men seem very confident in reproaching and censuring
both the Book and the man: but in this their endeavor to make it thus vile and
odious to the world, they have not the least evidence of truth or strength of
reason to evince it, that I can find in their Book: And it will so appear, if
you mind what is Mr. H. scope and end in his discourse, and what are the
principles upon which it is founded. As,

1. That the visible Church of Christ consists of men making a profession of
faith in Jesus Christ, and so are Saints by calling, what ever they are in
truth, while they so profess, and adhere to the true worship, the means and
matter of which are hearing the word, receiving the Sacrament, and prayer: and
of these many are called and few are chosen.

2. That all of these of years come under the obligation of Christ's commands,
and are bound to do their duty and homage to Christ their Lord, as well as they
can, according to Mat. 28.19, 20.

3. That all such ought to submit to Church discipline, and not to be excluded
from any observance, nor denied any Church privilege, until they be
judicially proceeded against, and debarred by virtue of positive
excommunication.

4. That Ministers by virtue of their function and office may lawfully
administer the Sacraments to Church members, though they be ignorant and
scandalous, he doing his duty as well as he may in preparing them, in the want
of Church discipline. These (I dare boldly affirm) are the main things
asserted in that little despised piece; which with a sober spirit, the Author
has soberly discussed and cleared from the common exceptions made against it
by men of different minds: for which his pains first and last, I verily
believe the Church of God in England have great cause to be thankful to the
Lord of the harvest, for sending such a faithful plain-hearted labourer
amongst us: the sweet temperature of his spirit, so adorned with wisdom,
charity, and such a peaceable frame, bespeaks him taught of God the true sense
of his will in his holy Scriptures, rather then his reproachers.

1. Touching the visible Church, what evil has he done in asserting it, to
consist of men making a profession of faith in Christ? Wherein does he dissent
from the most orthodox writers in all ages, in judging the Church of England a
true Church? It is confessed by the adversaries; and also that a parochial
congregation where the Word is truly preached, and the Sacraments administered
according to order, being a part of the whole, is a true Church likewise. And
this is also confessed by these Gentlemen; for they grant that our parochial
Churches are true Churches in a large sense, and that is enough as to this; and
so I hope there is no evil in this first position.

2. For the next thing by him asserted, namely, that all of years in a parish,
being baptized, come under the obligation of all Christ's commands; it is proved
by the text before cited, Mat. 28.19, 20. And that in order to the Lords
Supper, Do this in remembrance of me, is a known duty belonging to every
particular member of the Church in common with all other parts of the worship
and service of God. And is it then profane reasoning to urge Church members to
do their duty and homage, in this particular more then in all others? To this
these Gentlemen have said but little (that I can find) to take off what is
urged by Mr. H.

As for that of the Passover, Mr. H. has the better end of the staff; it
being the duty of all to observe it in the season under penalty of their lives
upon wilful neglect. Numb. 9.13. And If any, by reason of legal uncleanness,
or being in a journey a far off, could not keep the Passover the fourteenth
day of the first month, they were to keep it the fourteenth day of the second
month, and so nothing would excuse any in the not observing that ordinance,
see verse. 10.11. And besides, that legal uncleanness did not debar them
from the Passover more then from any other observance of communion sacred or
civil.

It is pity these Gentlemen should be in such haste, that they could not
enforce the many places of Scripture which have been brought by others (as they
say page 28.) to prove that the Jews were kept from the passover for moral
uncleanness or scandalous sins; which they are confident neither M. H. nor all
the world can ever answer. For my part I wonder what Scriptures those are, that
I should never see nor read them in the Bible. These Gentlemen quote four texts
(as I take it) to prove the same; to which I shall speak something particularly.

The first text is Numb. 15.30, 31. Where by Gods appointment, the soul sinning
presumptuously was to be cut off from among his people; namely by death; and so
from all other observances as well as the Passover. And for the unclean person
that would not submit to the law of purification, he was to be cut off from the
congregation of Israel; and therefore from all communion in worship, Numb. 19,
20.

And putting out of the Synagogue, Joh. 9.22. was to be put out of the Jews
and Gentiles, and so from all ordinances of worship; besides the Synagogues
were not the place of keeping the feast of the passover. And what then is
there yet in all this to prove that for moral uncleanness some were to be
kept from the Passover only?

But let us come to the next place, which is Ezra 10.8. Where (they say)
whosoever would not come to build the Temple within three days, should be
separated from the congregation, and consequently excluded from the passover.
This place, that it might seem to be for their purpose, is corrupted by them,
and falsely alleged. The words are part of that proclamation agreed upon by the
heads of the people after their return from captivity to Jerusalem; concerning
that great sin of taking strange wives, whosoever would not come within the
three days according to the counsel of the Princes and the Elders of the
people, all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation, etc. Now was this to come to build the Temple? no, it was to
confess their sins, and to put away their strange wives, that the wrath of the
Lord might be turned away. This Scripture will serve my turn her easter better
then theirs now.

But the next Scripture they allege is Ezekiel. 22.26. Her Priests have violated
my law, and have profaned my holy things: they have put no difference between
the holy and profane, the clean and the unclean. Now by holy and profane (we
know) is usually meant the circumcised and the uncircumcised; and so clean and
unclean is to be taken in a legal sense: and then what is this to debarring
from the Passover for moral uncleanness and scandalous sins, more then from
other observances?

But they say further, that the uncircumcised in heart were not to enter into
the Sanctuary to pollute it; and for this they quote Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. where again
they grossly abuse the Text, and that wilfully too, as one may think. And truly
I cannot but wonder that men pretending to such purity of worship and
discipline, dare make so bold with Scriptures, as purposely to pervert them to
blind the eyes of the reader that he may not understand the sense; telling him
that such as did manifestly appear to be uncircumcised in heart, though they
had received the circumcision of the flesh, might not enter into the Sanctuary;
and that the admitting of such into the Sanctuary, was the fault for which the
Priests were punished, verse. 13. A most notorious falsehood, and (if they did
look upon the text) wilfully asserted to deceive their reader. The thing the
Lord complained of in this place, was that they had brought into Gods
Sanctuary, not Jews, but strangers or aliens, uncircumcised in heart: and that
we might be sure it is meant of Gentiles and not Jews, there is added
uncircumcised in the flesh to pollute the Sanctuary, contrary to the Law; but
this these men leave out, and conceal from the reader; which if they could also
have dashed out of the Bible, I believe it would be the strongest place in the
Bible for their purpose; but being as it is, it makes nothing at all for them
or against Mr. H. And we may take notice of the just judgment of God upon
these men's spirits, leaving them to miscarry themselves, and that wittingly, in
perverting the Scriptures; the thing they unjustly charge that reverent man Mr.
H. with.

But to leave their salfe glosses on these places and go on; they tell us
further page 30. That this spoken of the Sanctuary is typical in reference to
the spiritual Sanctuary, the Church of Christ in Gospel times: but how they
will prove that the Sanctuary was a type of the Church of God in our times, I
confess I know not; because the Jews were a Gospel Church and under the
Gospel Covenant then, as well as we now. To them was the Gospel preached as
well as to us, Heb. 4.2.

But from those Scriptures they conclude, that the Jews were kept from the
Passover for presumptuous and scandalous sins; for say they, If they were cut
off from the congregation, then they came not to the Passover; And one end of
their cutting off was, that they might not defile the Passover; and thence
conclude that Mr. H. has deluded the reader.

Answ. Let them for shame be more single hearted hereafter in their
conclusions. This is their argument, some Jews were to be cut off from the
congregation by death for presumptuous and scandalous sins; therefore some were
to be debarred the Passcover for moral uncleanness: is this a good
consequence? That by cutting off from the congregation we are (for the most
part at least) to understand a cutting off by death, appears, Numb. 15.30, 31.
Exodus 31.14. Again, they were cut off, stoned to death for their presumptuous
sins; therefore they were cut off that they might not defile the Passover:
This in plain terms is all that they say; and is this good and sound
reasoning? Is not this a great discovery of Mr. Humsreys deluding the reader?
And let me note surther, that if it could be proved that any were excluded the
Sanctuary for scandalous sins; the consequence will be no more but this, That
for scandalous sins some may be excluded from all the parts of Gods worship,
which is not denied but granted by Mr. H. provided it be done by the just
censures of the Church: so that these Gentlemen may see, what a noise they make
about nothing.

But they go on and tell us what Gelaspy says on 1 Cor. 10. (in his Book
called Aarons Rod budded) concerning those Israelites that did eat of the
Manna, and drank of the Rock that followed them, that they falling into
idolatry, whoredoms, murmurings, and the like, the wrath of God came upon
them; hence they infer, They did not eat of the Manna and drink of the Rock
after the committing of those sins, and so were excluded for moral
uncleanness; as good a consequence as the former.

For first, I deny that all that were guilty of those sins were cut off from
the congregation: for the whole congregation murmured, etc. yet were they not
all destroyed; their carcasses fell in the wilderness not all at once in one
day, but by degrees for many years: and yet those that were spared did eat
Manna, otherwise they must needs have perished with hunger.

Secondly, For those that were destroyed and cut off, was it that they might
not eat Manna any more? What a strange, and absurd consequence is this; They
were destroyed for their idolatry, whoredoms and murmurings, therefore they
were cut off that they might not eat of that Sacramental Manna. What a strange
fancy is this? as if a malefactor were put to death, that he might not live to
come to the Sacrament any more; me thinks it were more rational to say, they
were cut off by death, that they might not dishonor God by the committing of
those sins of idolatry, whoredoms and murmurings any more.

In the same page, from the false and absurd premises (as they are already
discovered to be) those Gentlemen urge Mr. H. with an argument; but it is so
long, flat and false, that I shall pass it by, having already cut the legs it
stands upon. And the truth is, the Author whom they reproach, has said enough
concerning this Scripture to stop the mouth of very malice and envy it self,
if any thing would do it.

But let us remember what we are upon. These Gentlemen have denied that all the
Israelites were admitted to their Sacraments, especially the Passover: and to
prove this, they have brought some Scriptures: I have examined them (you see)
and their interences and conclusions drawn from them: and all they have said
and make a show of amounts to no more but this; 1. That some were denied the
Passover for a months space by reason of their legal uncle^nnesse. 2. That
some have been cut off by death for moral uncleanness, or that some have
otherwise been separated from the congregation, and so from all ordinances of
divine worship, for scandalous sins. And all that can possibly be gathered
hence, is no more then what Mr. H. has all along granted: for he excepts the
excommunicate in his Free Admission to the Lords Supper: and this is by them
yielded unto, if he mean right according to the word, the matter is ended. So
that one would think they granted this, and in another place, that our
parochial congregations are true Churches in a large sense, that the whole
difference between Mr. H. and them were only in point of discipline: And if so,
then the fault Mr. H. is chargeable with in this point, is his not setting up
discipline, but exercising the ordinances of worship without it. But M. Joanes
has said enough to take off this, in urging and proving a necessity of
administering the Sacrament of the Supper, in congregations not Presbytered.
Thus we have considered the admission to the Passover among the Jews.

Now seeing there is such analogy between the Passover and the Lords Supper;
the admission to the one seems to be a good rule for admission to the other;
and seems to be granted on both sides, in that it is urged by both. And
therefore I shall assert some things from the law of the Passover, for further
confirmation and strengthening of the duty of free admission to the Lords Supper.

1. The Passover was the same for substance with the holy Supper, signifying
the same things.

2. It was a service commanded the whole Church, that whosoever should neglect
it in his season should be cut off from his people.

3. The people of Israel were a mixed people, and many of them as incapable of
making a spiritual use of the Passover, as ours of the Supper.

4. The Church under the Gospel administration is under the same Covenant, and
is but added to or graffed into the Church of the Jews, and their
constitution, Romans 11.18.

5. The Church of Christ, since the coming of Christ in the flesh, is under
the same principles, and in some respects greater then under Moses and the
Prophets. And therefore why should not admission to the Lords Supper be as free
as the Passover.

First I say the Jews Passover was the same for substance with our Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, both signify the same things?

1. The Paschal Lamb appointed for that holy service, was a lively type of the
Lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, to take away the sins
thereof.

2. The offering of this Lamb whole without dismembring or breaking a bone of
him, did show that whole Christ must suffer, that his suffering might be
sufficient to satisfy divine justice.

3. The blood of the lamb was to be stricken on the lintels and side posts of
every ones door, as a token upon those houses where the Israelites were; that
when the Lord passed through the land of Egypt to destroy the first born both
of man and beast, the plague might not smite those houses: which was to
instruct them, that this Lamb of God Christ Jesus, whose blood was shed upon
the cross, was the only Savior of his Church and people from the wrath which
the Egyptian world lies under: and not having any knowledge of him, nor means
of coming unto him, must needs perish. And all this concerning the Passover
was to be observed yearly at the time appointed, through their generations for
ever, for a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt: which though it were
but bodily and temporal, yet it was to lead them to the understanding of their
spiritual and eternal deliverance by the blood of Christ. And hence it is
that the Apostle says, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.
We in the Supper have the signs of Christ's own death, held out as already
accomplished; they in the type had him held forth as decreed and promised to be
accomplished; and both to be observed in that remembrance. And as it is well
observed, that Christ having kept the last Passover, did immediately institute
the Sacrament of the Supper, that it might succeed in the room and stead of the
Passover. A change in the thing typified (Christ then to come and suffer
death, now already come and suffered) was the cause of the change in the
externals of this service.

Secondly, That the Law of the Passover, was of absolute force in respect of
all the congregation of Israel, is so obvious and manifest, that I need not say
any thing for proof thereof: Exodus 12. and Numb. 9. is without all gainsaying.
And though the end of that observance were spiritual and the service it self
mysterious; yet those that were most ignorant and carnal, were as much under
the obligation of that holy service, as those that were regenerate and really
holy: it concerned them all to conform to the externals of that service upon
their lives; no excuse would serve for the omission of it, but that of legal
uncleanness and being in a journey, and that but for the present only.

Thirdly, That the Church of the Jews was a mixed people, in respect of real
goodness and badnesse, even as ours are, I know none will deny; and yet in
respect of their relative state, in reference to the Covenant made with their
fathers, they were all equals in the enjoyment of the external privileges and
observances of the Covenant, and the Church of God, in order to that
blessedness promised to all that diligently observed the duties of the
Covenant. And no people so happy and prosperous as they, while they adhered to
Gods worship prescribed unto them: but when they forsook the ways of God, and
followed their own ways, and went after other gods, etc. then it ever went ill
with them. I know the Lord required truth and power, as well as external form
in worship, yet they are not usually blamed for want of power, but for want of
form in not doing what God commanded.

4. That the several Churches of the Gentiles now, are under the same Covenant
of grace, and added to, or graffed into the Church of the Jews and their
Church constitution; I think cannot be denied. For though the administration of
the Covenant now be different from what it was before Christ was exhibited; yet
there is no more change of the Church properly and formally considered, then
there is change of the Covenant; or change of the head Christ, the same
yesterday, to day and for ever, on whom (as the chief corner stone) the Church
in all ages has been and still is built and founded. The same persons that by
birth privilege were born members of the Jews Church, and believing in Christ
kept their station, were always members, they and their seed never ceasing so
to be, even thousands of the Jews. Jesus Christ had many Disciples, while he
himself was a member and a Prophet of that Church, and conformed unto the
ceremonial Administration. The twelve whom he chose were before (most of them)
members of the Jewish Church: and though not after the order of Aaron, yet
after the order of Melchisedech (as being King and Lord of all) he gave them
authority to preach and baptize and work miracles in the Jewish Church only,
while he was conversant among them. And those that believed in him, and those
that believed not, were all one Church, adhering to the same worship and order
of that Church until Christ was raised from the dead; and had completed the
work of man's redemption: then all those carnal ordinances were abolished; he
put an end to them all: and those that never did believe that he was the true
Messiah, did then unchurch themselves and their seed. For they still adhering
unto Moses, and looking upon Christ as a false Christ, refused to submit to the
administration of the Lord Jesus; and so lost their station in the Church: but
so many as were convinced that he was the true Messiah, adhered unto the
Apostles Doctrine, and came under all Church administrations: so that for a
good space of time the Apostles preached the Lord Jesus in Jury only, before
they preached to the Gentiles; so that there was I believe many thousands of
souls of the newly reformed Church of the Jews, before there were any
particular Churches of the Gentiles. And where it is said, they were added to
the Church, it is not to be understood, that here was now a new Church
constituted where was none before; but still the same Church under a different
administration: And the Jews that were of the Church before, believing in
Christ, as in him that was promised should come, are now by the preaching of
the Apostles convinced, that Jesus whom their Rulers crucified, is the Christ
already come. And this believing of theirs was no new faith, but the same which
they had before in respect of the object, though under another consideration.
And for those Jews which believed and adhered to the Apostles Doctrine, many
of them for a great while would not be taken off from their former customs and
observations. It is said, that salvation is of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. Out of
Sion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3.
After Christ's ascension, the Apostles were to preach the God to all nations,
but beginning first at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. And they that were scattered
abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen, traveled as far as
Venice and Cyprus and Antioch, preaching the Word to none but the Jews only,
Act. 11.19.

Certainly the Jews were the first that came under the Gospel Ministry; and
although some of them did not believe, yet that did not make the faith of God
of none effect; that did not deprive the believers of their Church state, nor
make void the promises of God made to them, Romans 3.3. The faithfulness of God
appeared in the effects of great Covenant love to that people, in opening the
eyes and hearts of so many thousands to receive the Gospel. There were but
some of the branches that were broken off, and not all, Romans 11.17.

Besides, the Gentiles received all from the Jews; they were the only
instruments of their conversion: there being few or none in authority to preach
but such as were Jews by nation at first. All this being so, it must needs
follow, that the believing Gentiles were but added to, or graffed into the
Church of the Jews; and baptized into the same body, and so made partakers of
the same hope and calling, being made the children of the same God; fellow
heirs, and of the same body, and partakers with them of his promise in Christ
by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. Fellow citizens with the Saints (the believing
Jews) and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19.

And true it is, that the Churches of the Gentiles had a very reverent esteem
of the Church of the Jews; and did readily conform to the directions of the
Church at Jerusalem: and were careful in their charity, to gather and
distribute to their necessity; confessing themselves their debtors, having
received from them their spiritual things, and that alone by their means, Romans
15.26, 27. So that all make up but one Church; and all walk by the same rule;
having one faith, one Lord, one Baptism: All submitted themselves to the rule
and order of the Apostles, they undertaking the care and order of all Churcher.
All the Churches of the Gentiles were not only converted to the faith by the
Apostles, but also put into an holy order and way by ordaining them officers to
rule and feed them in the Lord. And as it was in the Jews Church under Moses
and the Prophets, there was a receiving of Proselytes, aliens converted, and
they became Jews by religion; so it was in the times of the Ap^stles; they
made nations and cities and countries proselytes, and they became Christians
with the Jews, and there was but one law, rule and way for all that w^^e
imbodied into the Church. And there was gra^^ing into (...) off from the same
Church still all along to this day. I have been too long in this, but I will be
shorter in the next.

Fifthly, that the Church of Christ since the coming of Christ in the flesh is
under the same, and in some respects, greater ^riviledges, then under M^ses and
the Prophets. This will appear to be a truth., if we con^^der th^^ Jesus Christ
is and ever was the m^^^ting ^^ule of all blessings and privil^dges unto the
Church in all times and ages of the world, that the Church has ever been in
possession or expectation of. On the account of his transaction with the
Father, all the promises of covenant blessings of grace and glory, made to
Abraham and his seed, are founded and thereby confirmed; and so consequently to
all that are of his faith; for so says the Apostle, They that are of the faith
are blessed with faithful Abraham; even all the Gentiles that receive the
Doctrine of faith, so as to initiate them into that Church of which Abraham was
the father; it being first formed up in his family, and the Govenant freely
made with him, and sealed to him by the Sacrament of Circumcision: I say all
that are of Abraham's faith are blessed with him. Hence it is that the Apostle
to the Ephesians has many expressions to the same purpose. Chap. 1.3. Blessed
be God who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. And in the
second chapter it is clearly intimated, that there was a time, while they were
in their state of Paganism. that they were Aliens from the Common wealth of
Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise, without hope, and without God
in the world: But now, says he, you that were afar off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. But now in Christ Jesus you are of the
Commonwealth of Israel, children of the Covenants and Promises; and have as
much interest and hope of good from God through Christ, as the Jews who by
descent were the natural seed of Abraham. And therefore were now no more
strangers and foreiners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the
household of God, verse. 19. The reason of all is, Christ is the same yesterday
and to day and for ever in spiritual things, as to the Church and their seed.
And therefore he is said to be the Minister of circumcision, for the truth of
God, to confirm the promises made to the fathers, and that the Gentiles might
glorify God for his mercies, Romans 15.8, 9. as being made sharers in all those
promises of free grace made to the fathers and their natural seed. Nay, we may
observe, how the Apostles do usually apply the several promises in the
Prophets to particular cases in the Churches of Christ in their times.

But it may be asked, Moses and the Prophets?

(...) The Law of the Passover did oblige all the congregation of Israel upon
their lives to observe it in the season. Our Supper of the Lord is the same to
us that the Passover was to them, for the substance (as has been proved)
having the same meaning and end. The people of the Jews as mixed as ours are,
if not worse in respect of good and bad, regenerate and unregenerate: and so as
incapable to make a spiritual use thereof. The Church under the Law and the
Prophets before the coming of Christ in the flesh and since the same; which
Jesus Christ and his Apostles only reformed in point of external
administration, first owned by the Jews: unto which Church so reformed, all
believing Gentiles are added, and graffed into it as the stock; and so partake
of the same spiritual and external privileges with them, they and their
seed, so long as they continue to adhere and cleave to the outward means of
salvation, in order to that end: and from these premises will follow these
conclusions.

First, that the same obligation lies now upon all Christians to observe the
Ordinance of the holy Supper, that did lie upon the whole congregation of
Israel to observe the Ordinance of the Passover; and the Law of the Passover
may teach us so much; and in some respect is still in force. For so long as the
equity and reason of a command or law remains, the command and law it self
remains for the substance of it: but the equity and reason of that command
concerning the Passover still remains in respect of the Lords Supper
succeeding in the room of the Passover; and therefore should guide and direct
us in the administration thereof, as touching the subjects or persons that
ought to receive.

And then secondly, if all that were in the Church of the Jews, came under the
obligation of all the commands of God to that Church, respecting the members in
common; and that both good and bad; then all that are grassed into the same
Church, come under the obligation of all the Laws given to the same Church,
and respecting the members in common, now as well as then, even all good and
bad.

Thirdly, the same exceptions that (...) which all (as he has stated the
thing) are bound to observe.

I need not stand upon this, Corinthians. And there need be no question but the
Corinthians were enjoined by the Apostle to observe this ordinance of the holy
Supper in remembrance of Christ: for verse. 2. he commends them for remembering
him in all things, and keeping the ordinances as he delivered them to them. So
that their keeping and observing of this ordinance, as well as the other (as to
the thing it self) was well done by them: but then when he speaks to their
miscarriages about the manner of performance, he praises them not, but reproves
them, for their woeful abuse of the ordinance in their excess, disorderly and
unreverent behavior in the very act of receiving, or while they were together
for that end: They made a breach upon the very externals of that service; using
the elements as common things to please the outward man, and not to that end
for which the Lord Jesus appointed them. And these men (in a manner) confess
as much, that they being newly come out of idolatry, in imitation of their
idolatrous feasts had their love feasts, when they came to the Lords Supper,
and that there was excess among them, though not precisely at the Lords
Supper. These men are not willing to yield they were drunk at the
administration precisely, but immediately before; or if at the time of
receiving, yet not with the wine consecrated for that holy and spiritual end,
the remembrance of the death of Christ. And therefore (as most Divines
conjecture) their excess was at their love-feast spoken of in Jude. But I
conceive it is very uncertain whether they had any such feast or no; that place
in Jude does not determine it; much less the keeping of it immediately before
the Lords Supper, or in the place where they met together for the celebration
of that holy service. But whether they came drunk, or eat and drank unto
excess of the elements liberally provided, it was such a profaneness that
neither (...) nor Mr. H. I hope shall never (...): what ever these men charge
(...) with in this respect, telling the (...), he (...) the admission of
idolaters, drunkards and impenitents to the Sacrament, page 32.33, 34. compared.
But is this brotherly dealing (think you) to m^ke such a wild in(...) a
Minister show what (...) was, ^or which God so severely punished the
C^^int^^an^, but he must be reproached as ^ne pleading for the admittance of
idolaters, drunkards and impenitent^ to the Sacrament? Has not Mr. H. said
enough in his Book to free himself from this crime? He said indeed there was
nothing against their coming; for that was their duty, which these men deny,
unless they be so qualisied: but he does not only say they ought to come, but
to come prepared: yet men's impenitency and unpreparednesse does not make void
the commandment of God; neither is the principal to be neglected for an (...)
subservient thereto.

And I pray you, whom does the Apostle set up to be judge of the^^
^^^^^fications in the Church? What (...) has he appointed for this? Is it not
clear that every man is to examine himself, and judge himself, that he may not
be judged of the Lord? Can men devise better ways to carry on Gods Ordinances
with purity, th^n himself has prescribed? The C^rinthians sinning, was in
unworthy actions at the time of the administration: and I pray you who could
foresee that to prevent it better then themselves? And as for their persons and
real worthiness, the Apostle meddles not with it at all. Neither may we
denomin^te men such in person really, as some unworthy acts done by them do
import: for if we do so, we shall condemn the generation of the just; righteous
men may be overtaken with some unrighteous actions; for in many things we
offend all, Jam. 3.2. And I grant this unworthy receiving was out of weakness
and ignorance (as these Gentlemen plead) the Corinthians coming newly out of
their heathenism: but what is this to them that are not guilty of their
unworthy receiving at all? as for matter of order and reverent decorum in the
observances, not one among a thousand offending therein. And for unworthiness
of person, there is not one word in the Text, in reference to coming to the
Sacrament, and yet that makes all the trouble, and causes many to run into a
world of mischief in the Church. Hence they infer that the unregenerate in
the Church, receiving, eat and drink judgment to themselves, and therefore
teach them to omit the duty; contrary to all rule both in the Old and New
Testament and all Scripture Churches. And hence they make schisms and
separations in the Church. And hence they make this the highest ordinance, as
being a communion for Saints only; and upon the matter the least of all in
other respects; detracting from the wisdom, power and goodness of God, in
denying it to be a means of regenerating grace unto Church members. And hence
they have invented suspension from the Lords Supper, with the loss or neglect
of true discipline. And hence these tlemen have commended unto us, as the only
expedient for reformation, to begin with the minor part, leaving out the rest
(as judged to be excommunicable) without any trial. Hence it is that many are
afraid of being guilty in partaking with others in their sins, in unworthy
receiving; especially in the sin of murdering Christ. And many other like
errors they run into, by reason of this one error in taking that eating and
drinking unworthily to be meant of unworthiness of person. The holy Ghost
intends the manner of eating, but they will have it to be intended of the
worthiness of the man that eats. And upon this error is grounded all that
these men have to say against M. H. book. I could wish they would better
consider of it. For still I say the Corinthians were commended for keeping this
ordinance as well as any other in the Church; and reproved only for some great
abuse in their manner of carrying on that service: the which abuse did not lie
in coming unworthily, nor in their other miscarriages which were many upon
other occasions; but in this, their abusing of the holy signs unto c^^nall and
common ends: For this (...) and sickly amongst them, an (...). So that this
place cannot be urged against any that are Christians, and ex^^nally (at least)
comm^^ to the holy actions required in this service: but against open abuses of
the institution.

But these men will say of me, M. H. page 88 That I know well enough, but that
I would blind poor souls that [Do this in remembrance of me] was spoken to the
Disciples, such as were of Christ's family, and not to all, etc.

I know sure enough, that Christ commands, Mat. 28.19, 20. And let the reader
then judge, who are most guilty of blinding poor souls; they that teach them to
observe and do all that Christ commands, or they that teach men to omit and
neglect some necessary duties of homage and service which Christ commands for
the good of their souls; as these Gentlemen make very bold to do: but how they
will answer it before their Master, I leave to themselves to consider. And when
I say all ought to come, I do not mean the justly excommunicated, who while
they are so, are out of Christ's family; nor the unbaptized, as being against
divine order; nor any that renounce the Christian Religion, casting off the
yoke of Christ in defiance of him, or the like.

In the next place, I shall take notice how the Gentlemen do most notoriously
abuse Mr. Humfreys sense in a passage of his Book, telling their reader, That
Mr. Humfrey says, those dreadful expressions of the Apostle of being guilty
of the body and blood of Christ; and eating and drinking judgment to
themselves, were not to affright any from coming to the Sacrament: page 39.

But whosoever shall but look into Mr. Humfreys Book, page 71. may easily see
what design these men have upon Mr. H. The truth is, be it right or wrong, they
are resolved (if possible) to render him odious to the inconsiderate, who are
apt to believe every thing they hear from men that can but speak smooth words,
without further search. And who would think that men of such language,
pretending so much to holiness and power of religion, should dare to pervert
and tear in pieces sentences, that they might have something to say against the
Author, to render him odious to the worst of men. Mr. H. words are these: It is
certain those dreadful expressions, of being guilty of the blood of Christ,
and eating and drinking damnation; are to make men take heed that they prepare
themselves and come worthily: but (says he) I cannot think they are to
affright any from the Sacrament. This is the result of what went before, where
he urges both the principal duty and the accessory: we are bound to come; and
to come worthily: If a man fail in the one, and be not sufficiently prepared, I
dare not say (says he) that must keep him from the Sacrament: I am sure it
will not excuse him from the other that is the principal duty. Besides, they
should have remembered what Mr. H. laid down in stating his Free Admission,
before they had made such an outcry against him. What not one, say they, what
not an idolater, an incestuous person, a hater of the godly, a witch? etc. Why
does not Mr. H. after his urging the necessity of coming (and that with such
strength of argument, as I believe will never be taken off by any) distinguish
between a profane and presumptuous coming to an ordinance, and a Christian
coming in conformity to Gods worship? and he says, Though it be better not to
come, then to come in a profane way (that being rebellion and sin in the fact)
yet it is better to come in a Christian way, though but in an outward
conformity to Gods service, then altogether to neglect it: the which being
granted, and practiced of all, in all other duties; he thinks it but a begging
of the question to deny it in the Sacrament, page 73, 74.

I profess the Gentlemen in their answer to what Mr. H. has written, in three
or four pages together, have done nothing but trifle; as if they were glad they
could but shift their hands of what is urged against them, miserably begging
the question in every thing they assert. But page 147. they ask if those do
not come in a profane way, that come but in an outward conformity; and whether
the most profane wretches do not so come, and think they have done enough: and
they urge many places of Scripture against this, as Isa. 1.11. and 66.5. Jer.
6. and 7. chap. from whence they infer that the distinction is abhorred of
the Lord; and that whosoever comes in an outward conformity only, comes in a
presumptuous and profane way.

I answer, that notwithstanding these Scriptures, Mr. Humsreys position is
still a truth; namely, that it is better to come in a Christian way (though but
in outward conformity to Gods service) then altogether to neglect it: For (as
he says) it is confessed by all in all other duties, and therefore it is but a
begging of the question to deny it in this.

And besides, these Scriptures do no more respect the Passover then all other
parts of Gods worship and service. And I believe these Gentlemen will not deny
but in other duties of Gods service, as prayer, hearing the Word, and singing
of Psalms, etc. external conformity is better and not so abhorred of the Lord
who commands these duties, as wholly to neglect them.

But they say,

Gods commands free such comers from presumption and profaneness in that
particular;

For that first of Isaiah; the scope of the chapter is to demonstrate and show
what a most horrible apostasy there was of the whole people of Judah at that
time, but especially of the rulers and judges over them, verse. 21, 22, 23. in
so much that verse. 10. they are called rulers of Sodom, and princes of
Gomorrah, because they were so degenerate from what they should be according to
divine appointment: and therefore no wonder if the Lord do upbraid them with
their sacrifices, new moons, sabbaths, and solemn meetings; and that the Lord
regarded them not; why? their hands were full of oppression and blood; there
was no answerablenesse in other things to the duties of worship they did
perform: and yet they thought because they had the worship of God amongst them,
they might do all manner of abominations; and that was the use they made of
former deliverances. And yet it is hard to say that they had been less sinful
if they had altogether omitted the duties of worship, or that they were
condemned because they did perform them. The Lord tells them, that if they would
put away the evil of their doings, and cease to do evil and learn to do well;
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead the cause
of the widow (the which things they might do) then the Lord promises grace and
favor, pardon of sin, and acceptance in his worship: but the want of obedience
in those particulars, made them not accepted in the things of Gods commanded
worship: yet they might not leave off the worship of God; neither is here any
thing to affright them from it, but motives and argument used to make them more
obedient in all other observances answerable to that worship of God, as they
expected good from him.

Now what is all this to them that yield an outward conformity (at least) in
all or most things which God requires, to prove that it is no better for them
to perform duties of worship then to omit them altogether; or that it is better
for all unregenerate persons not to come to the Sacrament, then to come in a
Christian way, though but in outward conformity only, which is the main thing
now in question.

And the like may be said of that Isa. 66.3. He that kills an ox, is as if
he slew a man, and he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck,
etc. What is the reason of all this? Because they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delights in their own abominations; therefore the Lord will
also choose their delusions, and bring their fears upon them, etc. verse. 3.4.
The truth is, the fault lay not in doing those things, but in not doing all
that the Lord required as well as they could; but they would do some things he
commanded, and other things of their own choosing, even their own abominations,
like those spoken of Jer. 7. that cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord; and yet will steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely,
and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other gods; and come and stand before
God in his house; and say, We are delivered to commit all these abominations.
This is a profane presumptuous coming to an ordinance of God; but to come in a
Christian conformity unto duties of worship, in hope of a blessing; being
restrained from such enormities as are spoken of in these Scriptures, is a
different thing; especially these places respecting national sins rather then
of particular private persons.

But these Gentlemen judge, that this outward consormity in the duties of
Christianity, according to the present capacity of persons in the Church, as
they are able to perform, is a sweet bit for the Devil, and a means to keep
up rotten formality still.

But I pray you, what is reformation in the Church, but to bring people to
yield an outward conformity to the clear and undisputable Laws which Jesus
Christ has set up in the Church? I wish with all my heart, the generality of
Christ's subjects in the Church of England, were reduced to that obedience,
though but merely external. I should then think we were very happy; and should
much rejoice to see such days and times in England: and I must confess my
desires and prayers unto the Lord are, that all our exorbitances may be reduced
unto uniformity of Christian obedience (though it were but in respect of the
outward man) in doctrine, worship and discipline: that all might come under the
ordinary means and ways of their salvation: and that we might teach our
posterity in the way of holy profession and establishment of the true and
lively oracles of God, in respect of which for the present, we are the most
unhappy of all the reformed Churches in Christendom. For some men cannot
endure to hear of such words as uniformity in Religion, under the establishment
of Christian Laws of the nation; nor of a form of godliness, and holy order
in the Church of Christ: but in the Kingdom of Christ would (upon the matter)
have every one left to his liberty, to do what seems good in his own eyes. But
our God is the God of order, and not of confusion. And I doubt not but the
Christian Magistrate has as much power to reform Religion in times of
defection and apostasy, according to the manifest Laws of Jesus Christ by
whom they rule, as the Kings and rulers of the house of Judah had; and ought to
follow those glorious presidents, Josiah, Hezekiah, and Nehemiah who were
careful to reform Religion in all things according to the known Laws of God:
These examples are recorded for our learning, and for the encouragement of
those whose hearts are warmed with the love of God, and zeal for his glory, to
improve the advantages of power and opportunity, to bring both Ministers and
people to a conformity in the externals of holy worship and order. And the
memory of Queen Elizabeth in this Nation is blessed, because of her care to
reftrain the Papists from their superstition and cruelty, and to draw on the
whole people of the Nation to the Protestant Religion: And the success of this
her care in reforming and restoring the true Religion, has been very glorious
in all reformed Churches abroad; and indeed was isntrumental of the greatest
blessing that ever this nation was possessed of: for being put into a peaceable
enjoyment of covenant ordinances and godly order; we are still (by that means)
a people in Covenant, and have the Lord for our God, yet not without our fears,
lest the lukewarmnesse of all in the things of our God, especially in the
matters of his worship, will in a short time darken all our glory, and render
us a people most despicable and odious to God and men, if not utterly unchurch
and discovenant us, as some do slanderously report that we are already.

But I shall now come to the third thing propounded, namely, that all in the
Church, and of years, ought to submit themselves to the discipline of the
Church, not to be denied any external Church privilege until they be
judicially proceeded against, and justly excommunicated. To omit what has been
already said in answer to the Doctor touching excommunication; I shall propose
some few things further to be considered for the stating and clearing of the
true discipline: and then I shall examine whether that which these Gentlemen
commend to their reader, be any thing like the discipline of Christ held forth
in Scripture, and practiced by the primitive Churches of Christ.

1. That all that are baptized and of years, must of necessity come under the
obligation of all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ, of which Discipline is
one, and therefore none may plead exemption from it: whosoever he be that is a
brother and within, comes under the Church judgment and censure, Mat. 18.1
Cor. 5.

2. That although all ought to come under the discipline of that Church of
which they are members, yet may not any be denied Church privileges for the
state of unregeneracy merely, nor for barrenness and unfruitfulnesse under the
ordinary means of grace; or not coming up to the practice of such duties as are
private, and more doubtful then the duties of public worship are. For it is
certain that Jesus Christ has his elect ones, lost sheep, and children of God
among the natural seed of Christians, or to come of them, as he had among the
Jews: and these elect ones he is pleased more savingly to call, some at the
third hour, others not until the eleventh hour of the day of grace vouchsafed
to them. And these being the special objects of redemption, included in the
Gospel Covenant, to whom the promises of the first grace do properly belong;
we must suffer Jesus Christ to have the liberty of his own appointments in the
Church; as the only means of gathering in such unto himself; that they may have
life in him, and live unto him according to the grace they have received from
him.

3. That the scandalous in the Church are to be dealt with under the notion of
offending brethren, whom they that are spiritual ought by private admonitions,
and Christian counsel, and wise and seasonable reproofs, to restore in the
spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. And the person or sin of any member not to be
nominated in public, while there is any reasonable hope (in charity) of
amendment by the private means: provided the offense be not already public and
infamous to all; in that case, I think, though the offender be penitent and
ashamed, yet he ought to be rebuked before all that the rest may fear, and the
congregation be satisfied. And that it is only in case of obstinacy, and hating
to be reformed, notwithstanding all possible means used by the Church for their
reformation, that the authoritative act of excommunication is to be issued out
against any member. The Apostle did more often threaten and shake the rod then
make use of it. The administration of public censures should be carried on
with that solemnness and mourning over the offender, that might show a real
unwillingnesse to put the same in execution; if any other means would humble
and break the heart of an obstinate transgressor. And though there may be in
the Church a readiness to revenge all wilful disobedience, yet a readiness
to forgive also, as they shall see cause.

4. That none ought to usurp the power of the keys of Christ's visible
Kingdom, or take upon them the power of stewards, and to be Judges of Christ's
subjects, that have not a clear warrant in the Word for the same, lest they be
judged. For my part, I must confess, I utterly reject as impious and against
all rule and order for the common members to claim an interest in the exercise
of the keys, either of Doctrine, Sacraments or Discipline, save only to be
obedient in declining familiarity with those that are justly excommunicated,
and all communion with them in worship: and to be witnesses to attest what they
know against an offending brother, when it is necessary to prove the fact and
conviction of his obstinacy. I profess I wonder that any acquainted with the
holy Scriptures should plead for any other power to be allowed to any of the
common members: I cannot see how this should be, but that some men drive on
designs of their own factious framing, rather to hinder the setting up of
discipline, then any way to advance it. What dismal divisions, separations and
confusions, what prejudices, heart-burnings and bitterness do such practices
every where necessarily occasion between Pastors and their people? while the
better part must withdraw from the rest, and set up Discipline among
themselves; choose their own officers, and use a language beyond the ordinary,
and think they are in a fine posture: when (alas) they are out of their
station, and all they do is but erecting ways of their own choosing, and
setting up altars to sin; some of Jeroboams craft to keep the people from
worshipping at Jerusalem. And the truth is, members that separate from the body
are not like to live long. What strange exorbitances very often are the
consequences of such uncharitable zealous ways? And how can it be avoided, if
the power of the keys reside in the common brotherhood, but the major part of a
parochial congregation may choose their own officers, set up Discipline, and
judge in the Church? and what reformation is then like to follow, may easily be
imagined. Doubtless all Church members, as such, stand upon a level in point
of external privileges: for we do not find different privileges of those
that are members of the same Church, planted together into the same visible
body by baptism: and so by consequence women and children, ignorant and
scandalous persons shall have power to judge the rest; nay they may create and
ordain their own officers, and consequently take upon them all Gospel
administrations: for if the keys reside in them originally, so that they may
make Ministers etc. then they themselves are much more such, and may do the
works they are to do. The effect cannot be greater then the cause.

But they will say, and complete Church Members, or believers that have the
spirit of sanctification, etc.

I know no such distinction in the Word of God. Peter use the same words and
apply them to the scattered strangers embracing Christianity? 1 Pet. 2.9. And
does not the Apostle give equal titles to all those to whom he writes, and to
all in every place that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus? 1 Cor. 1.1, 2, 3.
If we never read of any such distinction in Moses and the Prophets; nor find
any such used by Christ or his Apostles, why should any plead for it in our
congregations, but that they would see more then all that ever were before them?

But the keys were given to the twelve as believers,

That the twelve were empowered with the keys of Christ's Kingdom, is beyond
all dispute, and that they were believers when they received that power, is as
certain: but that the Lord Jesus gave the keys to them as such, is denied. And
they might as well say, they were given to them as men; for they were men when
they received them. But the truth is, that though there were many Disciples and
believers beside the twelve; yet of his mere good pleasure, he gave the keys
of his Kingdom to the twelve only, not to the rest that believed as well as
they. He has set some in the Church, Apostles, Pastors and Teachers, not all.
And we know the twelve, by virtue of that authority received, preached and
baptized, and ordered all the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, during their age:
they planted several Churches, and ordained them Elders and Deacons; they were
the instruments for the propagation of the Gospel in almost all places.
Doubtless after Jesus Christ had received all power in heaven and earth, he
put the twelve only in commission to build his Church; and they ordained Elders
and Deacons, and gave order to some others, as Timothy and Titus to ordain; and
directed them also to commit the same power to able and sit men, in after ages
to teach others, etc. And in the seven Churches of Asia, the Angel of every
Church is writ unto, and blamed or commended according as they demeaned
themselves in their places, in opposing error or cleaving to the truth. But we
never find that the common brotherhood or membership were empowered with the
keys, either by Christ or by his Apostles, or any that drived authority
immediately from them: and therefore they have it not at all: and to intrude
themselves, and assume unto themselves things of such an high nature, is a most
insolent boldness; and they may fear to perish in the gainsaying of Corah and
his company.

5. I cannot conceive how there should be any true discipline practiced in our
Churches without the special assistance, countenance and power of the civil
Magistrate, as the state of things are in England: For almost all of all sorts,
are either careless, or impatient, or erroneous, and not willing to come under
discipline. And although these Gentlemen say it is our own fault; and why do we
not set upon it, beginning with the minor part? yet this is very ill, nay
absurdly advised. For as I said before, I believe I shall never see true
discipline exercised in the Church of England, until the Lord so move upon the
hearts of our Rulers, as to make them isntrumental to put the Church into that
capacity: which ordinarily cannot be without a national assembly of learned,
grave, moderate and godly Divines; chosen (if possible) by the whole; and
carried on without tumult. And that a profession of faith (if not already done)
may be so clearly drawn up in respect of fundamentals in doctrine and worship,
according to evident rules of holy Scripture, as may be established to be the
public profession of the Nation; which all whatsoever should with peaceable
spirits submit unto. And also that the subjects of the keys in a national
Church may be more clearly determined, and liberty of conscience better stated
and bounded; that the reformation of the whole may grow up together, at least
in all the externals of Christian obedience. Otherwise how shall discipline be
practiced, if carnal and loose Christians shall be left at liberty, whether
they will come under it or no? Now I say, while they are within the visible
Church and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and profess his Name in hope of
eternal life, why should they not submit to all his Laws, as the way and
means appointed of that blessed end? And the same grounds that do warrant the
restraining offenders from evil, and the forcing of them to do their duty in
reference to some of the Laws of Christ, do warrant the doing of the like in
reference to all the rest of his royal Laws. What is more suitable, then that
they that reign and rule only by Jesus Christ, should put forth their power,
and improve all their interest for the advancing of Christ's Scepter over all?

I confess these Gentlemen have some unhappy expressions, questioning our
Church members; because (as they say) the main instruments of bringing them to
the true Religion in England, were such as carried it on by a civil power;
when the outward calling ought to be by the word only, which the most of our
common people never had, they say.

Answ. 1. I wish our Governors had that holy and grounded zeal for the
reformation of what is amiss now in the Church, that our first reformers
expressed in point of reformation in their generation.

2. We must distinguish of a twofold state of Church membership, or the way of
bringing people to be Church members, 1. Aliens of years are to be discipled
and called by the Word before they may be baptized and received into the
Church: and so it was in the Apostles first planting of Churches. But 2. The
seed of persons so called are by virtue of the Gospel Covenant members borne;
and upon that account are baptized: and when they come to years are as much
under the obligation of all holy observances, as those that are called by the
word: So it was in the Church of the Jews in respect of all that were
circumcised: so that Church membership is and may be pleaded from birth
privilege, Gal. 2.15. We who are Jews by nature, etc.

3. Our first reformers did not force Heathens to receive and profess the
Protestant Religion; but reduced baptized erring Christians unto that obedience
and reformation which their Baptism and profession did oblige and engage them
unto: according to the examples of godly Kings and Prophets amongst the Jews,
in case of defection and irregularity. I might produce diverse instances of this
holy and religious care and zeal in reforming; but those that are acquainted
with the Scripture can remember the histories of them. And orthodox Divines do
generally hold, that the Baptism of a Papist is valid,, and need not be
repeated: And it need not be doubted, but upon that ground, the King of Spain
or the French King, if the Lord should give them a heart thoroughly convinced
of, and affected with the truth, might reduce their subjects (if they were
able) to that conformity to the Laws of Jesus Christ which their Baptism does
oblige them to. Rome it self upon such a reformation, might become a true
visible Church, without any repeating either of the ordination of their
Ministers, or their Baptism. Were all that superfluity of naughtiness, from
time to time contracted, in Doctrine, worship and discipline purged out; and
all administrations made conformable to the Laws of Jesus Christ (as it was
with them for some hundreds of years from the Apostles times) we could not tell
what to object against them, but might have communion with them. Say that we
heretofore were a member of Rome, and received all sacred ordinances from them;
having now repented of the evils and abominations which the holy things of
Christ were polluted with, and reformed them according to the institution; what
can be objected against us, though we were put in possession of the ordinances
of Christ by means of the civil power?

4. If an argument drawn from success be of any force in any case, surely in
supernatural and spiritual events above any other: and we are not left
without innumerable evidences of the divine operations upon the souls of many
in our Nation, through the blessing of the Lord upon the use of those holy
administrations of the Covenant, which our first reformers with zeal, care and
power brought our fathers under; blessed be God for this unspeakable gift.

This for the fifth thing proposed concerning discipline.

6. The sixth and last is this, That holy discipline is so to be ordered, that
the edification of all may be best furthered and preserved, and the objects of
Church censures may be healed rather then hurt by them. Sometimes the Church
must rebuke some, that the rest may fear; and sentence some few, most notorious
offenders, when many deserve the same punishment, rather then endanger the
peace, union and edification of the Church; punish and chastise what they can,
with the health and safety of the whole: and with patience bear and forbear,
when the remedy is like to prove worse then the disease. Lawful things are not
always expedient, nor consist with charity.

It is a good saying of Cyprian mentioned by Calvin, Let the Church mercifully
correct what they can, and what they cannot, let them patiently suffer, and
with love groan and lament it: And to the same purpose he brings in the advice
of Augustine, touching the abounding of drunkenness in Africa; this and the
like evils (according to his judgment) are to be taken away, not roughly, nor
after an imperious manner; but more by teaching then commanding; more by
admonishing then by threatening; and that is the way to deal with a multitude of
sinners; severity must be exercised on the sin of a few, etc. And he concludes
thus; The command of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7. to cast out the wicked, is in no
case to be neglected, when it may be done without peril of breaking the peace
of the Church, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 12. Sect. 11.13.

And we may take notice, that where there is mention made of the Apostles
exercising of Discipline, it is only upon particular persons, and not upon a
multitude: when he finds many guilty of evil practices, he reproves,
admonishes, and threatens to come with the rod, 2 Cor. 12.20. and 13.21. 1 Cor.
4.21.

And truly, as the state of things now stands, I think it will be found a very
difficult thing to get into possession of the true way of discipline, and to
make that use of it, that the Churches peace and edification may be promoted
and not prejudiced by it. For either the supposed unregenerate in the Church
shall (on the one hand) be cast off and separated from, as in the Independent
way and some others; or else (on the other hand) the dissenting brethren will
be judged schismatical, for causing divisions and separations in the Church,
contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. And therefore our condition is the
more sad, in that Discipline which tends so much to the welbeing of the Church
can so hardly be attained amongst us. Thus I have given you my judgment and
apprehensions in this point.

Now in the next place, Because these Gentlemen have commended a way of
Discipline to the godly, I shall crave leave a little to examine it; whether it
be such a one as godly men may safely receive and use as the discipline of
Jesus Christ; and not rather reject it, as having nothing of Christ in the rise
and root of it, according to holy Scripture: and this I shall do very briefly,
because I have said so much to the point already.

1. It Is well they acknowledge our parochial congregations to be true
Churches, though it be but in a large sense: for being such, they come under
the same laws and privileges externally, which belong to true Churches in the
strictest sense; that is, unless they can find a different rule in Scripture
for true Churches, though not in the same degree of purity; which I believe
they cannot, because I do not find but Laodicea and Philadelphia, as they were
both true Churches, so they were both under the same rule, etc.

2. They confess that none but such as are already excommunicated, and such as
ought to be excommunicated, are to be kept from the Sacrament: and in this Mr.
H. and they seem to be agreed, page 27. provided (say they) that Mr. H. mean
such as of right ought to be excommunicated by the Church. For his meaning,
they may be sure he does not mean that Church members should be censured
without regular trial, and that by a Church that is in a fit capacity to hear
and judge, and sentence according to divine rule. But how will these gentlemen
prove that the greater part in a parish are such as of right ought to be
excommunicated, and never put it to the trial, whether their sinfulness be of
that nature, for which excommunication may and ought to be inflicted? It is
obstinacy and wilful persisting in gross sins, after private and public
admonition, that is to be punished with excommunication; and how can they know
that the greater part of a parish do so sin, when they never admonish them,
either privately or publicly? Sure there must be a clear conviction of their
sins, and all fair and amicable Christian means used to reclaim them, before
they can judge any in their parish excommunicable; were they in a capacity thus
authoritatively to deal with them, which I think they are not.

3. But they say, This is a most generally received truth, that every
particular congregation has power in it self to reform it self, according to
what shall be practicable to them, page 158. To which I shall oppose their own
words, page 7.10. Where first they say, That the ignorant and profane must be
withdrawn from, because it is clear, they cannot be regularly cast out by
discipline, neither is there any way how they should be rightly excommunicated;
for that the major part of the Church is corrupt; and the same may be well
supposed of most of the mixed parochial congregations in England: and will not
excommunicate, nor are fit to do so, nor to choose officers to do it, page 9, 10.

Now is not this a strange thing? they condemn Mr. Humfrey for not setting up
Discipline in his Church: and strongly assert, That every Congregation has
power to reform it self, and yet they say it is clear, that the ignorant and
profane cannot be regularly cast out by Discipline, nor is there any way how
they should be rightly excommunicated. Reader, Can thou desire a better
justification of Mr. Humfreys present practice in the matter of the Sacrament,
then these men's own words? If he cannot reform in a right way, must he and
others undergo reproach, because they dare not exercise discipline in a wrong
way, as these gentlemen do? There are many sober and godly Ministers that judge
it better not to pretend to discipline at all; then to take up that way to
which some give the name, when there is nothing of the nature of true
discipline. If we cannot exercise it aright, why should any be censured for not
exercising it wrong? To do evil that good may come, the Apostle judges
damnable: so rarely it is that good ends and evil means stand together.

But they say, If they cannot regularly excommunicate the ignorant and
scandalous that are excommunicable, then the Minister and those that are
convinced of their duty to come up to a more close communion and fellowship in
the Gospel, must withdraw from the corrupt majority; and wait for their coming
in upon the same terms agreed upon by the minor part; and for this they
commend to us Mat. 18.

1. ways: And as it is a means of conversion (as these Gentlemen do confess)
the Magistrate may constrain all in the Church to come under it, and submit to
it.

They say, Jesus Christ should rule by the Word of his mouth, and not by the
Magistrates compelling edicts: and yet they say, That in bringing all to
converting ordinances (they humbly conceive) the Magistrate is to put forth his
power, page 176. And then will it not hence follow, that as discipline is a
means of conversion, the Magistrate is to put forth his power for the bringing
of all under it. Yea, doubtless, and to assist the Church in the settling,
exercise and execution of it. And to withdraw without a judicial proceeding,
neither does nor can attain the true end; but does harden and prejudice sinners
a great deal more, and so makes them worse in stead of making them better. The
end of withdrawing (according to the Scripture) is to bring the persons
withdrawn from, to shame and repentance; and is this a likely way to attain
that end, for a Minister and some ten or twenty of his people, to withdraw from
three or four hundred (as in some places would be the case) they all professing
the true Religion? Do these men think the Apostle meant such a withdrawing, to
bring sinners in the Church to shame? The rule is in reference to a disorderly
brother to bring him to shame; but in our times applied to hundreds at once, by
the minor part in a Church; and that very unfitly too; there being many in some
such places, that as truly fear God, and live in Christian obedience beyond
some of them that withdraw from them; who yet had rather be reckoned among
sinners, then to join with them, that by schism break the peace of the Church.

Besides, grant that many of them should be excommunicable, does that warrant a
separation, when it is not in our power to do it regularly? It is ten to one
that those that are so zealous for separating, did never deal with their
offending brethren, so far as they lawfully may and ought, to amend them. If we
should deal thus in the Kingdom of this world, as they do in the Kingdom of
Christ, there would be but a sad account given of many subjects therein. If it
were enough to say such are fellons and hangable by the Law, and thereupon
never bring them to trial, but knock them on the head, and there is an end of
them; How long think you would this Commonwealth stand, were such a confusion
and barbarism tolerated?

Suppose these Gentlemen in Glocestershire are run into a dangerous way of
schism in the Church, through error and mistake; would they be content
(without any ordinary means used to convince them of their error, or warning
and admonishing them to retract) to be forthwith sentenced by a Bench of
Elders, as schismatic persons, and upon that account suspended from their
Ministry? I think they would not. And yet by what they appear by their Book to
be, I think they are scarce qualified as Bishops ought to be, that undertake
the rule of Christ's Flock; and my prayer is, that their uncharitable practices
may not be an occasion of destroying many weak brethren for whom Christ died.

As for Mat. 18. it comes now to be examined; that we may see how it is
appliable to these new found models of Discipline hinted at by these men in the
preamble of their Book. And it is most clear and certain that the main scope of
our Savior is to teach us these two things in general.

First, That the meanest person coming to Christ and professing faith in him,
is not to be despised.

Secondly, That not to deal with offending brethren in the way and order by him
there prescribed is to despise them. And then for the way prescribed by our
Savior, it ought to begin with private admonition in case of a brother
offending, and if that prevail for his amendment, he is not to be put to
public shame: but if that will not work upon him, then upon sufficient proof
of the fact, he may and ought to be complained of to the Church, and the Church
may convent him before them, admonish to confess and reform his sin. But if
out of obstinacy he stubbornly refuse to hear the Church, after first and
second admonition, then to be cast out, not otherwise.

Now what is there in all this to favor or warrant these Gentlemen's practice?
do they proceed after this manner with every offending brother in their
several parishes, before they deny them Christian communion in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper? If not, why will they urge a rule from Jesus Christ to
others, which they themselves will not practice? Would they have others do that
themselves neither will nor can do, as themselves confess, where the greater
part is corrupt? And this being the case of most Parishes in England, how shall
we take up an establishment of discipline from this place? Why, they tell us,
by withdrawing from the major part of the Church: But then it will be demanded,
whether this Scripture do warrant any such practice; and it must needs be
granted it does not. Thus you may see how suitable these new models are to those
Scriptures alleged by themselves for proof thereof.

But to proceed a little further concerning this Scripture, Mat. 18. The
greatest difficulty (as I conceive) lies in the word Church, when our Savior
bids tell the Church: I shall give my thoughts concerning that also, and leave
them to the intelligent reader to consider.

1. I conceive our Saviors rules here given in this case, respected the
present state of the Jews Church, as well as the Christian Churches in after
times; and was practicable in that present state of the Jews Church.

2. According to the same rules and order his Disciples and their followers
should act in after ages, as verse. 18. does plainly show.

Concerning the former of these, as the rule given by our Savior respected the
present state of the Jews, and was practicable in that Church, we are to
inquire whether the complaint were to be made to the whole Church consisting of
rulers and ruled, assembled together in holy worship; or to the Rulers and
Officers of the Church only, assembled in a Court of Judicature, for the
hearing of complaints, and trying of offenders, and punishing evil manners.

To this I answer, That to one it seems very probable, that Church here is to
be taken in the latter sense: because the common people among the Jews, never
had any such authority in that Church, as to judge of manners, and censure
according to the rule given by our Savior in this Scripture. But it is clear
that they had a Council of Elders called the Sanhedrin, Mat. 5.22. that judged
of manners, and punished such as reviled their brother, intimated in these
words, He that shall say to his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the
Council or Sanhedrin. The Pharisees and chief Priests were chief in that
Council, or it consisted wholly of them; for they undertook to cast out of the
Synagogue, Joh. 9. and 12. And when Saul breathed out threatenings against the
Saints, in zeal of reducing them to the Church from which they were departed
and seduced, as he thought, he went to the chief Priests and all the estate of
the Elders for his commission, and he received anthority from them, to bring
both men and women unto Jerusalem to be punished, Act. 22.15. And that estate
of Elders in the original is called a Presbytery, which also shows that it
was made up of chief Officers of the Church called Presbyters; some of which
were chief Priests, the other Pharisees, and some subordinate Presbyters were
joined with them to make up that assembly, having authority to judge of manners
according to the Laws of God: however upon mistake they punished the true
professors of the Christian Religion, yet not under the notion of professors of
the true Religion, but out of zeal to reduce the believing Jews to conformity
to the old administration, as judging it still in force, as it was delivered by
Moses.

If any make question whether this Presbytery (according to the Text) were the
Church to whom complaint was to be made concerning stubborn offenders, I
answer, that Council or Presbytery was made up of the chief Officers of the
whole Church, and so the Church representative, on whom alone all the authority
of the Church was involved, for the punishing of sin, and preserving the peace
of the whole. And for the word Church, they that are acquainted with the
Original language, know it is used for any assembly, or congregation called
together, whether to civil or sacred ends; and so these Elders and Rulers of
the Jews assembled together for the ends aforesaid are not unproperly called a
Church.

And for the latter thing propounded before, namely that the Christian Churches
in after ages are to proceed by the same rule, and in the same order the Church
of the Jews then did, that is to say, by a Presbytery, seems to me very
probable. For first of all there were in use in the Christian Church, in
reference to the rule and government thereof, the same names that were in the
Church of the Jews, which is a sign that there was the same thing. Saint Paul
who was well acquainted with the nature of the Presbytery at Jerusalem, from
whom he received authority to trouble the believing Jews, calls an assembly of
Elders or Church officers a Presbytery, of which what better reason may be
conceived then this, the resemblance that was between this Eldership and the
great Council in the Church of the Jews? It is clear the Apostles themselves
did order all things in the Church; ordained Elders, and authorized them in the
Name of Christ to ordain others, etc. And they were as much Rulers and Officers
over the Catholic Church, as the chief Priests and Elders were to the Jews.
And hence in the Apostolical Churches, Ordination of Ministers was derived from
them that were Officers to the whole Church; and in a most immediate manner, by
Jesus Christ were constituted so to be: which makes me inclinable to believe,
that those still that are ordained Officers for the good and benefit of the
whole, should be ordained by such a Presbytery that are entrusted with that
power, by the Officers of the whole as much as may be. So far am I from
consenting to these men that take it for granted, that the common members of a
particular society, may choose and install their own officers. Now what is there
in all this for that pretended way of discipline which these Gentlemen commend
to their reader? here is not the least warrant for any to separate from the
Church, or withdraw (for all is one) nor for the people to rule, and choose
their own Officers, nor for imposing a Church Covenant, explicitly to be
professed in the congregation; and those that will not come up to this and such
like terms, must not be admitted unto Sacramental communion. Nor is here any
warrant for sentencing Church members before a regular trial; nay here is no
warrant for any single Minister to set up discipline over his people, without
the consent and conjunction of the reverent brethren of the Ministry with them.
The key of discipline is not at all in one alone, but rather in the whole
together.

A word more on that Scripture, as it is directed to the Apostles, verse. 18,
19, 20. and so in them to the officers of the Church in succeeding ages to the
end of the world. Verily (says our Savior there) if two of you shall agree on
earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my Father which is in heaven: for where two or three are gathered together in
my Name, there am I in the midst of them. These words seem to have reference
unto what was spoken before concerning the authority of the Jews Church
Officers; and our Savior would have his Apostles to know, that though their
authority may seem to the world, yea, and to themselves to be weak and
contemptible in respect of that great bench of Elders, generally submitted unto
by the Jews, yet they should have as great authority to bind and loose as the
other; nay two of them by the authority given them by the Lord of the Church,
should be equivalent to their great authority: And we know it came so to pass.
They had power to work miracles, and were inspired with an extraordinary
spirit; and had some special promises peculiar to them alone, as well as
gifts. They had power to give the holy Ghost by imposition of hands; and an
extraordinary power in prayer, and power to punish and kill the bodies of men
for sacrilege and hypocrisy. And we know the very Church it self is said to
be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief cornerstone. Now what is this to these Ministers in
Gloucestershire? Dare two or three of them assume this power (for I suppose all
the Ministers of the County are not of their mind and way) to do as the
Apostles did? Suppose they be Ministers of the Gospel, is the Church built
upon them, or their Doctrine? Where have they any such promise that they shall
not err; and whatsoever they shall agree to ask, shall be done for them of
the Father of Jesus Christ? They plead their serious and solemn seeking of God;
and commend unto us their model of Discipline, as the result of their serious
debates, and returns of their prayers: but that authority will not satisfy
judicious Christians, when the thing it self is so inconsistent with the
general rules of the Word, as has been showed. Besides it is well known, that
in many places the Ministers of the Gospel have used the like means in behalf
of themselves and their people, yet but few have run into their ways, but
either fall into some association of Churches and Presbyteries, framing such
expedients, as (in a manner) bring in all under a capacity of Sacramental
communion and discipline, as in Worcestershire and other places; or else carry
on the Ordinances of Jesus Christ by virtue of their office as well as they can
without Discipline; as being convinced of their incapacity for the present so
attain unto the true end and exercise thereof, notwithstanding all their
search, disquisition, and indevours to satisfy one another therein. And the
serious debates and seeking of God concerning this, should move to own and
assent to what is concluded thereupon; I conceive it more safe to adhere to the
greater part of sober Divines that have been serious in the use of these and
all other means, to satisfy themselves and others, as well as those men, and
yet dare not in the least degree countenance their way and practice. I would
ask them this question, whether they did ever read of any such practice, that
a few particular Ministers, by their own authority, have had the boldness to
withdraw from the greatest part of their flocks, and set up a way of Discipline
of their own framing? and upon the matter unchurch the greatest part of their
congregations, allowing them no other privilege in the Church, then they would
to Pagans. Did the Apostles ever make so bold with any Christian congregation
that adhered to the Gospel administrations? or did they ever authorize
ordinary Presbyters to do so? Nay, did any ordinary Presbyter in the Apostles
time, exercise Discipline but upon the command of the Apostles? or do we find
them any where blamed because they did not do it? I verily believe these
Gentlemen may not assume such an interest in the exercise of the Key of
Discipline as the Apostles had, and yet they are more busy with the rod then
ever any of the Apostles were. Alas! it is pity some care is not taken to
restrain their imperious usurpation over their several flocks. I think, since
the ceasing of the Apostles office, it is more suitable to the Scripture
alleged, and other Scriptures, to elect such Presbyteries to judge of manners
in the Church, as were constituted in the Church of the Jews, which our
Savior approved of; which yet would come short of being equal with the
Apostles, in respect of the authority which they had in the Church of Christ;
though they were in all places men of the best qualifications for Rule, that
any attain to in our times; and so I have done with that Scripture, Mat. 18.

I will trouble the reader but with two or three passages more about their new
model: for I have a good mind to draw to an end; and my other occasions will
not permit me to do much in these ways. Page 4. they tell us of the drawing up
a profession of faith, wherein they acknowledge their former Abominations in
worship, professing their repentance before the Lord for them. Concerning which
I say, It is a strange expression of Christians, except they were such as came
newly out of Paganism, or Popery at least. What abominations of worship have
been established or practiced in our Church since the reformation of it? Is it
not strange that the Ministers of the Church, who should be ready to defend the
Church from the wicked slanders and reproaches of Anabaptists and other
Separatists, should thus publicly join with them, and that in such a public
way before the world too? How many powerful and successful Ministers of the
Gospel, now with Jesus Christ in glory, have justified all the ordinary parts
of Gods worship, as it was practiced in our public assemblies all along, and
conformed thereunto cheerfully in respect of the substance of our worship?
Indeed there were some needless ceremonies used about worship, which were
declared by the Church to be no part of the worship: now these were born as
burdens which many of the godly desired to be eased of by their removal; but
it never came into their thoughts, that they were guilty of abominations in
worship because of them. How does Mr. Hildersham in his Lectures upon Joh. 4.
justify the Church of England as a true Church, and the several parts of
worship practiced therein, as being according to the institution of the Lord?
And how does he from thence blame those that separated, or neglected the
public prayers of the Church; and yet himself was one of the old
non-conformists? And Mr. Cotton that went into new England, writing an Epistle
to that Book, does therein highly commend the Author for many things; but in a
special manner for confuting the separations of the Brownists: and he repeats
what another reported of him, styling him the hammer of Schismatics, commonly
called Brownists.

Those Gentlemen talk of the Covenant established in Christ, into which they
require a profession to enter, of those they admit to partake of the Seal of
that Covenant, page 10.

Concerning this, I say it were well if they would act according to their own
words: for it is certain all Church communion is sounded upon covenant relation;
And those (whose admittance to the Sacrament we plead for) are supposed to have
entered Covenant relation, either in their parents, or in their own personal
profession of the true Religion that holy Scriptures teach, or both, and their
voluntary adhering to the administrations of the Covenant, does attest their
entering the Covenant, and their continuing and abiding in that relation; let
them say what they can to the contrary.

But they say, Persons that have entered Covenant, may back-slide and so that
relation cease, (and they instance in Simon Magus) but those that brake bread
were such as continued in the Apostles doctrine, Act. 2.42 And back-sliders are
not to be admitted to surther communion.

1. Simon Magus fell off rom the Christian profession, when the last we read
concerning him, is his retracting his erroneous the uphts, desiring the Apostle
to pray for him, that none of those evils might come upon him?

2. Suppose he did backslide and renounce his Baptism and profession, would he
then have desired Christian communion in the Ordinances of Christ? what more
absurd?

3. We only plead for such to break bread, that continue in the Apostles
Doctrine; which we say all do, that adhere to the administrations of Jesus
Christ, set up in his Church, as the ordinary means of obtaining Covenant grace.

And for what they say concerning renewing of our Covenant with God after
defection from him, we heartily allow of it; provided it be done according to
the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, etc. N^hem. 10.29. Where in the persons of
the chief, the whole engaged to walk in all the ways of the Lord; and to
observe and do all his commandments, and his judgment, and his statutes. This
is contrary to these men, that would set up a Rail to hinder Christians from
observing all Gods Commands; nay rather to uncovenant a people in Covenant,
then engage them to renew Covenant, and walk worthy their Covenant relation, in
their observance of all covenant Ordinances, in hope of blessing. And I wish,
that if the Church cannot, the Magistrate would take down the high places, that
hinder the Lords people from worshipping at the only place of worship. If some
have liberty to worship at Dan and Bethel, why should any be restrained from
worshipping at Jerusalem, and doing their homage and service in remembrance of
Christ who died for sinners?

I had thought to have added a word concerning the fourth and last thing
proposed in the beginning of this Examination; as it was urged by Mr. Humfrey;
namely, that Ministers ought to do their duties as they are Ministers, though
Discipline be wanting; and cannot well be attained as things stand: of which
duties, the administration of the Sacrament is one, which by their office they
are bound to perform; as they will answer the neglect thereof to Jesus Christ
himself, who commands the observance of all his holy Ordinances in the Church,
for the feeding of his flock: And those that love him will make conscience in
their places, to be faithful to him that has appointed them. But I fear I
have been too tedious already. And Mr. Humfrey in his Rejoinder to Doctor Drake
has abundantly given satisfaction in the vindication of this and other truths
asserted in his former Book: And if he shall think these Gentlemen worthy of
any further answer; I shall rather leave it to himself, then do any thing that
may hinder the Church of God of the faithful and profitable labors of him or
any others.

FINIS.
ERRATA
Page 1. line 7. for reprove read reproach, p. 4. l. 24. put out may, p. 12. l.
8. f. when r. what, p. 21. l. 25. f. many r. main, p. 32. l. 12. put out be, p.
33 l. 14 f. such r. say, p. 34. l. 28. r. not allow, p. 35. l. 16. r. simply,
p. 39. l. 16. in the margin for 42 2. r. 42. p 49 l. 5. l. 34. r. 3. which
should begin the line and sen^ence, p. 51. l. 3. r. premise, l. 22. f. baptized
r. lapsed, p 60. l. 26. r. guest, p. 65. l. 27. f. the r. by, p. 67 l. 8. f.
communication r. communion, p. 71. l. 13 put a period after worship. p. 74. l.
25. f. all r. and, p 75. l. 12. f. also r. and so, p. 91. l. 18. r. relation,
p. 99. l. 9. r. reference, p. 110. l. 29. f. and Gentiles r. assembilies, p.
116 l. 1, 2. r. Gillespy, p. 117. l. 22. put in the margin 1 Cor. 10.7, 8, 9,
10. p. 120 l. 10. f principles r. privileges, p. 127. l. 5. f. God r. Gospel,
p. 151. l. 1. s. no r not, p. 164. l. 14. s drived r. derived, p. 173. l. 7.
put out the stop after sense.


