The most R^verend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.
R. White sculp.


Several Discourses,

Viz.

Proving Jesus to be the Messiah.

The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion considered.

Jesus the Son of God, proved by his Resurrection.

The Danger of Apostasy from Christianity.

Christ the Author: Obedience the Condition of Salvation.

The Possibility and Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its consistence with
free Grace.

The Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Commission and Promise which he gave
to his Apostles.

The Difficulties of a Christian Life considered.

The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.

Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light.

By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The FIFTH VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

THE CONTENTS Of the Fifth Volume.
SERMON. I. Proving Jesus to be the Messiah. MATTHEW. XI. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. NOW when
John had heard in Prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his Disciples, and
said unto him, Art thou he that should come: or do we look for another? Jesus
answered and said unto them, go and show John again these things which ye do
hear, and see. The Blind receive their sight, and the Lame walk, the Lepers are
cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the
Gospel preached unto them. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in
me. Page I. SERMON. II, III. The Prejudices against Christianity considered.
MATTHEW. XI. 6. And blessed is he whosover shall not be offended in me. p. 47,
91. SERMON. IV. Jesus, the Son of God, proved by his Resurrection. ROMANS I. 4. And
declared to be the Son of God, with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead. p. 127. SERMON. V. The danger of Apostasy from
Christianity. HEB. VI. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come; If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance:
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God af^^sh, and put him to an open
shame. p. 155. SERMON. VI. Christ the Author: and Obedience the Condition of
Salvation. HEB. V. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Auth^^ of eternal
salvation unto all them tha^ obey him. p. 197. SERMON. VII. The Possibility and
Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its consistence with free Grace. HEB. V. 9.
And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them
that obey him. p. 231. SERMON. VIII. The Authority of Jesus Christ, with the
Commission and Promise which he gave to his Apostles. MAT. XXVIII. 18, 19, 20.
And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World. p. 265. SERMON. IX. The Difficulties of a
Christian Life considered. LUKE XIII. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait
Gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
p. 301. SERMON. X, XI. The Parable of the Rich Man, and Lazarus. LUKE XVI. 19,
20. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in Purple and fine Linen,
and fared sumptuously every day: And there was a certain Beggar, named Lazarus,
which was laid at his Gate full of Sores. p. 343, 379. SERMON. XII. The Parable
of the Rich Man and Lazarus. LUKE XVI. 31. If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead. p. 417.
SERMON. XIII. The Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light. LUKE
XVI. 8. For the Children of this World are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light. p. 447.
SERMON I. Vol. V.
Proving Jesus to be the Messiah.
MATTHEW. XI. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Now when John had heard in Prison the works of
Christ, he sent two of his Disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that
should come: or do we look for another? Jesus answered and said unto them, go
and show John again these things which ye do hear, and see. The Blind receive
their sight, and the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the
Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel preached unto them. And
blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
ABOUT the time of our Savior's appearing in the World, there was a general
expectation of a Great Prince, that should come out of Judea, and govern all
Nations: This the Gentiles had from the Prophecies of the Sybils, which spoke
of a great King that was to appear in the World about that time. So Virgil
tells us, that the time of Augustus was the utmost date of that Prophecy,
Vltima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas: And Suetonius tells us, that all over
the Eastern Countries, there was an ancient and constant Tradition, that such a
Prince should spring out of Judea: And for this Reason it is, that our Savior
is called by the Prophet, the Expectation of the Nations.

But more especially among the Jews, there was at that time a more lively and
particular expectation, grounded upon the Predictions of their Prophets, of a
Prince whom they called the Messiah, or the Anointed; and those who were more
devout among them, did at that time wait for his appearance; as it is said of
Simeon, that he waited for the consolation of Israel. Hence it was, that when
John the Baptist appeared in the quality of an extraordinary Prophet, they sent
from Jerusalem to enquire whether he were the Messiah? John 1. 19. The Jews
sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, who art thou? And he
confessed, and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ. The Sanhedrim,
to whom it belonged to judge who were true Prophets, sent to know whether he
was the Messiah or not? He would not take this honor to himself, but told them
the Messiah was just at hand; and the next day, when Jesus came to be baptized
of him, he bare record, that he was the Son of God, and that he saw the Spirit
descending, and abiding upon him.

So that it is plain that he knew him, and bare witness of him, which makes it
the more strange, that here in the Text, he should send two of his Disciples to
enquire, whether he were the Messiah or not? Art thou he that should come, or
do we look for another? That is, art thou the Messiah, or not? for so he is
called in the ancient Prophecies of him, (...), he that should come, Genesis 49.
10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come.

For the resolution of this difficulty, it is very probably said by
Interpreters, and I think there is no Reason to doubt of it, that John the
Baptist did not send this Message for his own satisfaction, but to satisfy his
Disciples, who were never very willing to acknowledge Jesus for the Messiah,
because they thought he did shadow and cloud their Master. From whence we may
take notice, how Men's Judgments are apt to be perverted by Faction and
Interest, and that good Men are too prone to be swayed thereby; for such we
suppose the Disciples of John to have been; they will not believe their own
Master, when they apprehend him to speak against their Interest; for they knew
that they must rise and fall in their Reputation and Esteem, as their Master
did. They believed that their Master was a Prophet, and came from God; yet for
all that, they could not digest his Testimony of Christ, because that set him
above their Master; which they were sagacious enough to perceive, that it
tended to the diminution and lessening of themselves. And that this was the
thing which troubled them, appears plainly from the Complaint which they make
to their Master, John 3. 26. The Disciples of John came to him and said, he
that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold the same
baptizeth, and all men come to him. This troubled them, to see him invade their
Master's Office, and that he began to have more Followers than John had; he
baptizeth, and all men come to him.

This prejudice John had endeavored to root out of their minds, by telling
them, that he had always declared that he was not the Messiah, v. 28. You your
selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent
before him. But when he perceived it still to stick with them, and that they
observed all his Actions, and the Miracles that he wrought, as if they had a
mind to pick a quarrel with him (for St. Luke, who relates the same Story,
tells us, that when our Savior had healed the Centurion's Servant, and raised
from the dead the Wodows Son at Naim, the Disciples of John showed him all
these things) I say John Baptist perceiving that they watched him so narrowly,
sent two of his Disciples to him, that they might receive full satisfaction
from him. And St. Luke tells us, that upon their coming to him, he wrought many
of his Miracles before them, to convince them that he was the true Messiah,
Luke 7. 21, 22. And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities, and
plagues, and of evil spirits; and to many that were blind he gave sight; and
then said to the Disciples of John, Go your way, and tell John what things ye
have seen and heard; how that the blind see, and the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and to the poor the gospel is
preached; and blessed is he that is not offended in me.

So that you see that the Reason why John Baptist sent to our Savior to know
whether he was the Messiah, was not to satisfy himself, for he had no doubt of
it; but perceiving his Disciples to be ill-affected toward our Savior, and
hearing them speak with some envy of his Miracles, he sent them to him, that by
seeing what he did, and hearing what account he gave of himself, they might
receive full satisfaction concerning him.

I have been the longer in the clearing of this, that Men upon every appearance
of contradiction in the Evangelical History, may not be too forward to suspect
the truth of it; but may be convinced, that if they would but have patience to
examine things carefully, they would find that the Story does sufficiently
vindicate it self; and though it be penned with great simplicity, yet there is
sufficient care taken, to free it from being guilty of any contradiction to it
self.

The Occasion of the words being thus cleared, there are in them these two
things considerable.

First, What it was that John the Baptist sent his Disciples to be satisfied
about; and that was, whether he was the Messiah or not? Now when John had heard
in Prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his Disciples. The Circumstance
of his being in Prison, seems to be mentioned, to intimate to us the Reason why
he did not come himself along with them; he sent two of his Disciples to him,
who said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? And
then,

Secondly, The Answer which our Savior returns to this Message; Jesus answered
and said unto them, go and show John again the things which ye do see and hear;
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached unto
them; and blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

So that these words contain, First, the Evidence which our Savior gives of
his being the true Messiah. Secondly, an Intimation that notwithstanding all
this Evidence which he gave of himself, yet many would be offended at him, and
reject him; blessed is he whosoever is not offended in me.

First, The Evidence which our Savior gives of his being the true Messiah: And
to prove this, there were but two things necessary.

1. To show that he was sent by God, and had a particular Commission from him.

2. That he was the very Person of whom the Prophets foretold that he should be
the Messiah.

The first of these he proves by the Miracles which he wrought; and the second,
by the correspondency of the things he did, with what was foretold by the
Prophets concerning the Messiah; the Prophecies concerning the Massias were
accomplished in him.

First, By the Miracles which he wrought; the blind receive their sight, and
the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are
raised up. Here is a brief enumeration of the several sorts of Miracles which
our Savior wrought, and these were a testimony to him that he came from God,
and was sent and Commissioned by him to declare his Will to the World. So he
himself tells us, Joh. 5. 36. I have a greater witness than that of John, for
the works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. Upon the Evidence of these
Miracles, Nicodemus a Ruler among the Jews, was convinced that he was sent by
God, John 3. 2. We know that thou art a teacher come from God, for no man can
do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him. Nay his greatest
Enemies were afraid of his Miracles, knowing how proper an argument they are to
convince men, John 11. 47. when the Chief Priests and Pharisees were met
together in Council against him, they concluded, that if he were permitted to
go on and work Miracles, he would draw all men after him. What do we? (say
they) for this man does many Miracles; if we let him thus alone, all men will
believe on him. This they said, upon occasion of the great Miracle of raising
Lazarus from the Dead.

And in Reason Miracles are the highest Attestation that can be given to the
Truth and Divinity of any Doctrine; and supposing a Doctrine not to be plainly
unworthy of God, and contrary to those natural Notions which Men have of God
and Religion, we can have no greater Evidence of the truth of it, than
Miracles; they are such an argument, as in its own nature is apt to persuade
and induce belief.

All Truths do not need Miracles; some are of easy belief, and are so clear by
their own light, that they need neither Miracle nor Demonstration to prove
them. Such are those self-evident Principles which Mankind do generally agree
in; others which are not so evident by their own light, we are content to
receive upon clear demonstration of them, or very probable Arguments for them,
without a Miracle. And there are some Truths, which however they may be
sufficiently obscure and uncertain to most Men, yet are they so inconsiderable,
and of so small consequence, as not to deserve the attestation of Miracles; so
that there is no reason to expect that God should interpose by a Miracle, to
convince Men of them.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit. But for such Truths as
are necessary to be known by us, but are not sufficiently evident of
themselves, nor capable of cogent Evidence, especially to prejudiced and
interested Persons, God is pleased in this Case many times to work Miracles for
our Conviction; and they are a proper Argument to convince us of a thing that
is either in it self obscure and hard to be believed, or which we are
prejudiced against, and hardly brought to believe; for they are an Argument a
Majori ad Minus, they prove a thing which is obscure and hard to be believed,
by something that is more incredible, which yet they cannot deny, because they
see it done. Thus our Savior proves himself to be an extraordinary Person, by
doing such things as never man did; he convinces them, that they ought to
believe what he said, because they saw him do those things, which were harder
to be believed (if one had not seen them) than what he said.

Miracles are indeed the greatest external confirmation and evidence that can
be given to the truth of any Doctrine, and where they are wrought with all the
advantages they are capable of, they are an unquestionable demonstration of the
truth of it; and such were our Savior's Miracles here in the Text, to prove
that he was the true Messiah; here are Miracles of all kinds, the blind receive
their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and
the dead are raised up. For the nature of them, they are such as are most
likely to be Divine, and to come from God, for they were healing and beneficial
to Mankind. Our Savior here instanceth in those things which are of greatest
benefit and advantage, and which free Men from the greatest miseries and
inconveniences; the restoring of sight to the Blind, and hearing to the Deaf;
soundness and health to the Lame and the Leprous, and life to the Dead. And
then for the number of them, they were many; not one instance of a kind, but
several of every kind, and great multitudes of most of them; and for the manner
of their operation, they were public, in the sight and view of great
multitudes of People; to free them from all suspicion of fraud and imposture,
they were not wrought privately and in corners, and given out and noised
abroad, but before all the People, so that every one might see them, and judge
of them; not only among his own Disciples and Followers, as the Church of Rome
pretends to work theirs, but among his Enemies, to convince those that did not
believe; and this not done once, and in one place, but at several times, and in
all places where he came, and for a long time, for three years and a half; and
after his death, he endowed his Disciples and Followers with the same power,
which lasted for some Ages. And then for the quality of them; they were
Miracles of the greatest magnitude; those of them, which in themselves might
have been performed by natural means, as healing the Lame, and the Leprous, and
the Deaf, he did in a miraculous manner, by a word or a touch, yea and many
times at a great distance. But others were not only in the manner of their
operation, but in the nature of the thing unquestionably miraculous, as giving
of sight to those that had been born blind, and raising up the dead to life, as
Lazarus, after he had lain in the grave four days; and himself afterterwards,
the third day after he had been buried; which, if there ever was or can be any
unquestionable Miracles in the World, ought certainly to be reputed such. So
that our blessed Savior had all the Attestation that Miracles can give, that
he came from God. And this is the first Evidence of his being the Messiah.

The Jews acknowledge that the Messiah, when he comes, shall work great
Miracles; and their own Talmud confesses, that Jesus the Son of Joseph and
Mary did work great Miracles; and the History of the Gospel does particularly
relate more and greater Miracles wrought by him, than by Moses and all the
Prophets that had been since the World began; so that we may still put the same
question to the Jews, which they did in our Savior's time to one another; when
Christ comes, when the Messiah whom ye expect comes, will he do more Miracles
than these which this Man has done?

But, Secondly, this will yet more clearly appear by the correspondency of the
things here mentioned, with what was foretold by the Prophets concerning the
Messiah.

Not to mention innumerable Circumstances of his Birth, and Life, and Death,
and Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, together with the success and
prevalency of his Doctrine in the World, all which are punctually foretold by
some or other of the Prophets: I shall confine my self to the particulars here
in the Text.

First, It was foretold of the Messiah, that he should work miraculous Cures.
Isa. 35. 4, 5, 6. speaking of the Messiah, he will come and save you; then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstop'd;
then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing; this
you see was fulfilled here in the Text. It Is true indeed, the Text mentions
another Miracle which is not in the Prophet, that he raised the dead; but if
God did more than he promised and foretold, this is no prejudice to the
argument, if all that he foretold was accomplished in him. Besides, the Jews
have a Proverb, that God is not content to perform barely what he promises,
but he usually does something over and above his promise. That the Messiah
should heal the blind, and the deaf, and the lame, Isaiah Prophesied; and God
makes good this Promise and Prediction to the full; the Messiah did not only do
these, but which is more and greater than any of these, he raised the dead to
life.

Secondly, It was likewise foretold of the Messiah, that he should preach the
Gospel to the poor, Isa. 61. 1. the spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; (...), to preach the
Gospel or good tidings to the Poor; so the LXX render the words; and they are
the very words used by our Savior here in the Text. It Is true indeed, this was
no Miracle, but it was the punctual accomplishment of a Prophecy concerning the
Messiah, and consequently an evidence that he was the Messiah. But besides, it
had something in it which was very strange to the Jews, and very different from
the way of their Doctors and Teachers: For the Rabbis among the Jews would
scarce instruct any but for great Reward; they would meddle with none but those
that were able to requite their pains: The ordinary and poorer sort of People
they had in great contempt, as appears by that slighting expression of them,
Joh. 7. 48, 49. Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? but
this People who knows not the Law are cursed. And Grotius upon this Text
tells us, that the Jewish Masters had this foolish and insolent Proverb among
them, that the spirit of God does not rest but upon a rich man; to which this
Prediction concerning the Messiah was a direct contradiction: The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
Poor. In old time the Prophets were especially sent to the Kings and Princes of
the People: but this great Prophet comes to preach the Gospel to the Poor. None
have so little reason to be proud as the Sons of Men: but never was any so
humble as the Son of God. our Savior's whole Life and Doctrine was a
contradiction to the false Opinions of the world; they thought the rich and
great men of the World the only happy persons, but he came to preach glad
tidings to the Poor, to bring good news to them whom the great Doctors of the
Law despised, and set at naught; and therefore to confound their pride and
folly, and to confute their false Opinions of things, he begins that excellent
Sermon of his with this Saying, Blessed are the Poor, for theirs is the Kingdom
of God.

Thirdly, It was foretold of the Messiah that the World should be offended at
him, Isa. 8. 14. He shall be for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of
offense to both the houses of Israel. And Isa. 53. 1, 2, 3. Who has believed
our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? he has no form nor
comeliness, and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him;
he is despised and rejected of men, and we hid as it were our faces from him;
he was despised, and we esteemed him not; and this likewise is intimated in the
last words of the Text, and blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in
me. Intimating, that notwithstanding the great works that he did among them,
which testified of him that he came from God, notwithstanding the Predictions
of their Prophets concerning the Messiah, were so clearly and punctually
accomplished in him; yet notwithstanding all this, they would take offense at
him upon one account or other, and reject him and his Doctrine; but even this,
that they rejected him, and would not own him for their Messiah, was another
Sign and Evidence that he was the true Messiah foretold by the Prophets; for
among other things this was expressly Predicted concerning him, that he should
be despised and rejected of men.

And thus I have done with the First thing I propounded to speak to; namely,
the Evidence which our Savior here gives of his being the true Messiah.

First, The many and great Miracles which he wrought, prove that he came from
God. And,

Secondly, The correspondence of the things he did, with what was foretold by
the Prophets concerning the Messiah, declare him to be the true Messiah.

I now proceed to the next thing I propounded to speak to, namely,

Secondly, An Intimation in the Text, that notwithstanding all the Evidence
Christ gave of himself, yet many would be offended at him, and reject him and
his Doctrine. In speaking to which, it will be very proper to consider,

First, How the Poor came to be more disposed to receive the Gospel, than
others.

Secondly, What those Prejudices are which the World had against our Savior
and his Religion at its first appearance, as also those which men have at this
day against the Christian Religion, and to endeavor to show the
unreasonableness of them.

Thirdly, How happy a thing it is to escape and overcome the common Prejudices
which Men have against Religion.

First, How the Poor came to be more disposed to receive the Gospel, than
others; the Poor have the Gospel preached unto them. Which does not only
signify that our Savior did more especially apply himself to them, but
likewise that they were in a nearer disposition to receive it, and did of all
others give the most ready entertainment to his Doctrine: And this our Savior
declares to us in the beginning of his Sermon upon the Mount, when he
pronounces the Poor blessed upon this account, because they were nearer to the
Kingdom of God than others; Blessed are the Poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of
God. So likewise St. James, Chap. 2. v. 5. Has not God chosen the poor of this
world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them
that love him? So that it seems the Poor were upon some account or other in a
nearer disposition to receive the Gospel, than the Great and Rich Men of this
World. And of this there are three Accounts to be given.

First, The Poor had no Earthly interest to engage them to reject our Savior
and his Doctrine. The Highpriests, and Scribes, and Pharisees among the Jews,
they had a plain worldly Interest which did engage them to oppose our Savior
and his Doctrine; for if he were received for the Messiah, and his Doctrine
embraced, they must of necessity lose their Sway and Authority among the
People; and all that which rendered them so considerable, their pretended skill
in the Law, and in the Traditions and Observances of their Fathers, together
with their external shows of Piety and Devotion, would signify nothing, if our
Savior and his Doctrine should take place. And there are very few so honest
and sincere, as to be content for truth's sake, to part with their Reputation
and Authority, and to become less in the esteem of men than they were before.
Few are so impartial as to quit those things which they have once laid great
weight upon, and kept a great stir about, because this is to acknowledge that
they were in an Error, and mistaken in their Zeal; which few have the ingenuity
to own, though it be never so plain to others; and therefore it is no wonder that
our Savior's Doctrine met with so much resistance from those, who were so much
concerned in point of Honor and reputation, to make head against it. And this
account our Savior himself gives us of their Infidelity, John 5. 44. How can
ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor which
comes of God only? And Chap. 12. 43. For they loved the praise of Men more
than the praise of God.

And besides the point of Reputation, those that were Rich, were concerned in
point of Interest, to oppose our Savior and his Doctrine; because he called
upon Men to deny themselves, and to part with Houses and Lands, yea and life it
self, for his sake, and for the Gospel's, which must needs be a very hard and
unpleasant Doctrine to Rich Men, who had great Estates, and had set their
Hearts upon them. Upon this Account it is that our Savior pronounces it so
hard for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God; and compares it with
those Things that are most difficult, and Humanly impossible; I say unto you,
it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than for a Rich Man
to enter into the Kingdom of God.

But now the Poor were free from these Encumbrances and Temptations; they had
nothing to lose, and therefore our Savior's Doctrine went down more easily
with them; because it did not contradict their Interest, as it did the Interest
of those who had great Estates and Possessions.

Secondly, Another Reason of this is, that those that are Poor, and enjoy
little of the good things of this Life, are willing to entertain good News of
Happiness in another. Those who are in a state of present Misery and Suffering,
are glad to hear that it shall be well with them hereafter, and are willing to
listen to the good News of a future Happiness; and therefore our Savior, when
he had pronounced the Poor, Blessed, Luke 6. 20. He adds by way of Opposition,
v. 24. But woe unto you that are rich; for ye have received your Consolation.
They were in so comfortable a Condition at present, that they were not much
concerned what should become of them hereafter; whereas all the Comfort that
Poor Men have, is the hopes of a better Condition, non si male nunc, and olim
sic erit, that if it be bad now, it will not be so always, and therefore no
wonder if the Promises and Assurance of a future Happiness be very welcome to
them.

Thirdly, If by the Poor we do not only understand those who were in a low and
mean Condition as to the Things of this World, but such likewise as had a
Temper, and Disposition of Mind suitable to the Poverty of their outward
Condition, which our Savior calls Poverty of Spirit, by which he means
Meekness and Humility, there is no doubt but that such a Frame and Temper of
Spirit is a great Disposition to the receiving of Truth. And that this is
included in the Notion of Poverty, is very plain, both from the Words of the
Prophecy I cited before, Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good Tidings to the meek, and to bind up
the the brokenhearted, and likewise from our Savior's Description of these
Persons, in one of the Evangelists, Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the Poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. So that by the Poor, who are so
nearly disposed to receive the Gospel, our Savior intended those, who, being
in a poor and low Condition in Respect of outward Things, were likewise meek
and humble in their Spirits. Now Meekness and Humility are great Dispositions
to the entertaining of Truth. These Graces and Virtues do prepare the Minds of
Men for Learning and Instruction; Meekness, and Modesty, and Humility are the
proper Dispositions of a Scholar. He that has a mean Opinion of himself is
ready to learn of others; he who is not blinded by Pride or Passion, is more
apt to consider things impartially, and to pass a truer Judgment upon them,
than the Proud and the Passionate. Passion and Pride are great Obstacles to the
receiving of Truth, and to our Improvement in Knowledge. Passion does not only
darken the Minds of Men, but puts a false Biass upon our Judgments, which draws
them off many times from Truth, and sways them that way, which our Passion
enclines them. A Man of a calm and meek Temper, stands always indifferent for
the receiving of Truth, and holds the Balance of his Judgment even; but
Passion sways and enclines it one way, and that commonly against Truth and
Reason. So likewise Pride is a great Impediment to Knowledge, and the very
worst Quality that a Learner can have; it obstructs all the Passages whereby
Knowledge should enter into us, it makes Men refuse Instruction, out of a
Conceit they need it not. Many Men might have known more, had it not been for
the vain Opinion which they have entertained of the sufficiency of their
Knowledge. This is true in all kinds of Learning, but more especially as to the
Knowledge of Divine things. For God loves to communicate himself, and bestow
his Grace and Wisdom upon meek and humble Minds. So the Scripture tells us,
Psa. 25. 9. The Meek will he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach his
Ways. And 1 Pet. 5. 5. Be clothed with Humility; for God resists the proud,
and gives Grace to the humble.

And thus I have shown in what Respects the Poor were more disposed for the
receiving the Gospel, than others. I proceed now to the

Second Thing, namely, What those Prejudices and Objections are, which the
World had against our Savior and his Religion at their first Appearance; as
also to enquire into those which Men have at this Day against the Christian
Religion, and to show the Weakness and Unreasonableness of them. I begin,

First, With those Prejudices which the World had against our Savior and his
Religion at their first Appearance.

Both Jews and Gentiles were offended at him and his Doctrine; but not both
upon the same account. They both took Exceptions at him, especially at his low
and suffering Condition; but not both upon the same Reason. I shall begin with
the Exceptions which the Jews took against our blessed Savior and his
Religion; and I shall reduce them all, or at least the most considerable of
them (as I find them dispersed in the History of the Gospel, and in the Acts of
the Apostles) to these Six Heads.

First, The Exceptions which they took against him upon account of his
Extraction and Original.

Secondly, At the Meanness of his Condition, contrary to their Universal
Expectation.

Thirdly, As to his Miracles.

Fourthly, His Conversation.

Fifthly, The Prejudice that lay against him from the Opposition that was made
by Persons of greatest Knowledge and Authority among them. And*

Lastly, That the Religion, which he endeavored to introduce, did abolish and
supersede their ancient Religion, as of no longer Use and Continuance, though
it was plain it was at first instituted by God.

First, The Exceptions which they took at his Extraction and Original. In
relation to this they were offended at three Things.

1. That his Original was known among them. This you find urged against him,
John 7. 27. We know this Man whence he is, but when the Messiah comes, no Man
knows whence he is.

This to be sure was no just Exception in reason against him. For what if his
Extraction were known, might he not be from God for all that? They owned Moses
for the greatest Prophet that ever was, and yet it was very well known from
whence he was.

But they seem to refer to some Prophecy of the Old Testament, which did seem
to assert so much. If they meant that his Extraction should be altogether
unknown; they knew very well, and believed the contrary, that he was to be of
the Line of David, and to come out of Bethlehem. If they referred to that
Prophecy, that a Virgin should conceive and bear a Son, and so understood that
he should be without Father; this was really true, though they thought that he
was the Son of Joseph. And if he affirmed that he had no Father, he did
sufficiently justify it by his Miracles; that being as easy to be believed
possible by a Divine Power, as the Miracles which he wrought; which yet they
could not deny, because they saw them.

2. Another Prejudice against his Extraction, was the Meanness of his Parents
and Breeding. This you find mentioned, Matthew. 13. 54, 55. Whence has this Man
this Wisdom, and these mighty Works? Is not this the Carpenter's Son, is not
his Mother called Mary, and his Brethren James and Joses and Simon and Judas?
And his Sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this Man these
things? And they were offended in him. And so likewise, John 7. 15. How knows
this Man Letters, having never learned?

A strange Prejudice and most unreasonable. They could not believe him to be an
extraordinary Person, because his Parents and Relations, his Birth and Breeding
were so mean. He had been brought up to a Trade, and not brought up to
Learning: whereas in Reason, this ought to have been an Argument just the other
way; that he was an extraordinary Person, and Divinely assisted, who all on the
sudden, without the help and assistance of Education, gave such Evidence of his
great Wisdom and Knowledge, and did such mighty Works. This could not be
imputed to his Breeding, for that was mean; therefore there must be something
Extraordinary and Divine in it. Thus another Man, who had been free from
Prejudice, would have reasoned.

3. The most unreasonable Prejudice of all, in respect of his Extraction, was
grounded upon a spiteful and malicious Proverb, concerning the Country where
our Savior was brought up, and they supposed him to be born; and that was
Galilee. John 1. 46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? And John 7. 41.
Shall the Messiah come out of Galilee? And v. 52. Search and look, for out of
Galilee arises no Prophet.

But it seems Nathanael, who was a good Man, was easily taken off from this
common Prejudice, when Philip said to him, come and see. He bids him come and
see the Works he did, and then refers it to him, whether he would believe his
own Eyes, or an old Proverb. However it seems the Jews laid great weight upon
it, as if this alone were enough to confute all his Miracles, and after they
had shot this Bolt at him, the Business were concluded clearly against him. But
prudent and considerate Men do not use to give much Credit to ill-natured
Proverbs; the good or bad Characters which are given of Countries, are not
understood to be universally true, and without Exception. There is no place but
has brought forth some brave Spirits, and excellent Persons; whatever the
general Temper and Disposition of the Inhabitants may be. Among the Grecians,
the Beotians were esteemed a dull People, even to a Proverb; and yet Pindar,
one of their chief Poets, was one of them. The Scythians were a barbarous
Nation, and one would have thought no good could have come from thence; and yet
that Country yielded Anacharsis an eminent Philosopher. The Idumeans were
Aliens, and Strangers to the Covenant; and yet Job, one of the best Men that
ever was, came from thence. God can raise up eminent Persons from any place;
Abraham from Vr of the Chaldees, and an Idolatrous People. Nay as our Savior
tells us, he can out of Stones raise up Children unto Abraham. The wise God, in
the Government of the World, does not tie himself to our foolish Proverbs. It
is not necessary to make a Man a Prophet, that he should be bred in a good Air.
If God sends a Man, it matters not from what Place he comes.

Secondly, Another Head of Exception against our Savior, was the meanness of
his outward Condition, so contrary to the Universal Expectation of the Jews.
The Jews, from the Tradition of their Fathers, to which they, (as the Church of
Rome does at this Day,) paid a greater Reverence, than to the written word of
God, were possessed with a strong Persuasion, that the Messiah, whom they
expected, was to be a great Prince and Conqueror, and to subdue all Nations to
them; so that nothing could be a greater defeat to their Expectations, than the
mean and low Condition, in which our Savior appeared; so that upon this
Account they were almost universally offended at him.

But this Prejudice was very unreasonable. For neither did their Prophets
foretell any such thing, as the Temporal Greatness of the Messiah: But on the
contrary most expressly, that he should be despised and rejected of Men, that he
should be a Man of Sorrows and Sufferings, and at last be put to death; which
was directly contrary to what they expected from their ill grounded Tradition.

Thirdly, Against his Miracles they made these two Exceptions.

1. That he wrought them by Magical Skill, and by the Power of the Devil.

Which was so exorbitantly unreasonable and malicious, that our Savior
pronounces it to be an unpardonable Sin, and for Answer to it, appeals to
every Man's Reason, whether it was likely that the Devil should conspire
against himself, and assist any Man to overthrow his own Kingdom? For it was
plain, our Savior's Doctrine was directly contrary to the Devil's Design; and
therefore to assist him to work Miracles for the Confirmation of it, must have
been apparently against his own Interest, and to the Ruin of his own Kingdom.

2. They pretended that though he did many great Works, yet he gave them no
Sign from Heaven. Matt. 16. 1. it is said, They desired him to show them a Sign
from Heaven. It seems they expected that God should give some immediate
Testimony to him from Heaven; as he did to Elias, when Fire came down from
Heaven, and consumed his Enemies; And particularly they expected, that when he
was upon the Cross, if he were the true Messiah, he should have come down and
saved himself: And because he did not answer their Expectation in this, they
concluded him an Impostor.

Now what could be more unreasonable; when he had wrought so many other, and
great Miracles, perversely to insist upon some particular kind of Miracle which
they fancied? As if God were bound to gratify the Curiosity of Men; and as if
our Savior were not as much declared to be the Son of God, by rising again
from the Dead, as if he had come down from the Cross.

Fourthly, As to his Conversation, they had these three Exceptions.

1. That he used no severity in his Habit or Diet, took too much Freedom, as
they thought; came Eating and Drinking, that is, he freely used the Creatures
of God, for the end for which they were given, with Temperance and
Thanksgiving; and did not lay those rigorous Restraints upon himself in these
matters, which many, that were esteemed the most Religious among them, used to
do.

But he plainly shows them, that this Exception was merely out of their
Prejudice against him. For if he had come in the way of Austerity, they would
have rejected him as well. They were resolved to find Fault with him, whatever
he did. Matthew. 11. 16. Whereunto shall I liken this Generation? John the
Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a Devil. He
lived in a more austere and melancholy way, he came in the way of
Righteousness, used great Strictness and Severity in his Habit and Diet, and
this they took Exception at. Our Savior was of a quite contrary Temper, and
that did not please them neither. The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and
they say, behold, a Wine-bibber, and a Glutton. So that let our Savior have
done what he would, he could not have carried himself so, as to have escaped
the Censures of Men, so peevishly and perversely disposed.

2. That he kept Company with Publicans and Sinners.

To which Exception nothing can be more reasonable than our Savior's own
Answer; that he was sent to be a Physician to the World, to call Sinners to
Repentance; and therefore they had no Reason to be angry, or think it strange,
if he conversed with his Patients, among whom his proper Employment lay.

3. They objected to him Profaneness in breaking the Sabbath, and that surely
was plain, that he could not be of God, if he kept not the Sabbath Day. The
Truth was he had healed one on the Sabbath Day.

To this our Savior gives a most reasonable and satisfactory Answer, that
surely it was lawful to do good on the Sabbath Day; that that was but a
Positive Institution, but works of Mercy are Natural and Moral Duties; and God
himself had declared, that he would have even his own Institutions to give way
to those greater Duties, that are of natural and eternal Obligation. I will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. And then from the End of the Sabbath; The Sabbath
was made for the Rest and Refreshment of Man; and therefore could not be
presumed to be intended to his Prejudice. The Sabbath was made for Man: and not
Man for the Sabbath.

Fifthly, Another great Prejudice against him, was, that Persons of the
greatest Knowledge and Authority among them, did not embrace his Doctrine. John
7. 48. Have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believed on him? So that here was
the infallible Rule and Authority of their Church against him.

There is no doubt, but the Example and Authority of our Guides ought to sway
very much with us, and overruled us in doubtful Cases: but not against plain
and convincing Evidence; there we ought to follow, and obey God rather than
Men. There is sometimes a visible and palpable Corruption in those who are to
lead us; they may have an Interest to oppose the Truth: And thus it was with
the Pharisees and Rulers at that Time: And so it has been among Christians in
the great Degeneracy of the Roman Church. The Christian Religion was never more
endangered, nor never more corrupted, than by those who have been in greatest
Authority in that Church, who ought to have understood Religion best, and have
been the principal Support of it. Men may err: but God cannot. So that when God
sends a Prophet, or by his Word does plainly declare his Will to us, Human
Example and Authority cease, and is of no force.

The last Prejudice I shall mention, which the Jews had against our Savior and
his Doctrine, was, that it did abolish and supersede their Religion, as of no
longer Use and Continuance; though it was plain it was instituted by God.

This had been a very specious Pretense indeed, had not this been part of their
Religion, and had not their own Prophets foretold, that the Messiah should come
and perfect what was wanting and defective in their Institution. It was
expressly said in their Law, That God would raise unto them another Prophet,
like to Moses, and that they should hear him, when he came. So that in Truth,
it was the Accomplishment of all those Revelations which were made to the Jews,
and did not reprove the Jewish Religion, as false; but as imperfect: And did
not contradict and overthrow; but perfect and fulfill the Law and the Prophets.

And thus I have gone over the chief Exceptions and Offenses which the Jews
took at our Savior and his Doctrine; and I hope sufficiently shown the
Unreasonableness of them. I have not now time to proceed to what remains: But
by what has been said, you may easily see, upon what slight and unreasonable
Grounds Men may be prejudiced against the best Person and Things, and yet be
very confident all the while that they are in the Right. For so no doubt many
of the Jews, who opposed our Savior and his Doctrine, thought themselves to
be. Therefore it concerns us to put on Meekness and Humility and Modesty, that
we way be able to judge impartially of things, and our Minds may be preserved
free and indifferent to receive the Truths of God, when they are offered to us:
Otherwise Self-Conceit and Passion will so blind our Minds, and biass our
Judgments, that we shall be unable to discern, and unwilling to entertain the
plainest and most evident Truths. We see here by the sad Example of the Jews,
that by giving way to Passion, and cherishing Pride and Self-Conceit, Men may
be so deeply prejudiced against the Truth, as to resist the clearest Light, and
reject even Salvation it self, when it is offered to them. So that it is not in
vain, that the Scripture says, let every Man be swift to hear, and slow to
Wrath; for the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God; and exhorts
us so earnestly, to receive with Meekness the Word of God, which is able to
save our Souls.

SERMON II. The Prejudices against Christianity considered.
MATTHEW. XI. 6. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
I Have from these Words propounded to consider two things.

I. Those Prejudices and Objections which the World had against our Savior and
his Religion at their first Appearance; as also to enquire into those which Men
at this day do more especially insist upon, against the Christian Religion; and
to show the Unreasonableness of them.

II. How happy a thing it is to escape and overcome the common Prejudices which
Men have against Religion.

I have entered upon the first of these, the Prejudices which the World had
against our Savior and his Religion. When this great Teacher of Mankind came
from God, though he gave all imaginable Testimony and Evidence, that he was
sent from Heaven; yet the greatest part of the World, both Jews and Gentiles,
were mightily offended at him, and deeply prejudiced against him and his
Doctrine; but not both upon the same Account.

I have already given you an Account of the chief Exceptions which the Jews
made against our Savior and his Doctrine, and have shown (...)
Unreasonableness of them.

(...) now to consider the (...) those Exceptions, which (...) and Heathen
Philosophers took at our Savior and his Doctrine. I shall mention these four.

First, That Christianity was a great Innovation, and contrary to the received
Institutions of the World.

Secondly, They objected against the Plainness and Simplicity of the Doctrine.

Thirdly, That it wanted Demonstration.

Fourthly, That the low and suffering Condition of our Savior was unsuitable
to one that pretended to be the Son of God, and to be appointed by him for a
Teacher and Reformer of the World. These are the chief Exceptions which the
Heathen, and especially their Philosophers, took at our Savior and his
Doctrine.

First, That the Christian Religion was a great Innovation, and contrary to the
received Institutions of the World; and consequently that it did condemn the
Religion, which had been so universally received and established in the World by
so long a continuance of Time. And no wonder if this made a great Impression
upon them, and raised a mighty Prejudice in the Minds of Men, against the
Christian Religion; no Prejudices being so strong as those that are fixed in
the Minds of Men by Education; And of all the Prejudices of Education, none so
violent and hard to be removed, as those about Religion, yea though they be
never so groundless and unreasonable. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which
yet are no Gods? Intimating to us, that Men are very hardly brought off from
that Religion, which they have been brought up in, how absurd soever it be.
When Christianity was first propounded to the Heathen World, had Men been free
and indifferent, and not prepossest with other Apprehensions of God and
Religion; it might then have been expected from them, that they should have
entertained it with a readiness of Mind, proportionable to the Reasonableness
of it. But the Case was quite otherwise, the World had for many Ages been
brought up to another way of Worship, and inured to Rites and Superstitions of
a quite different Nature. And this sways very much with Men; Sequimur majores
nostros, qui feliciter sequuti sunt suos, as one of the Heathens said in those
Days, We follow our Ancestors, who happily followed theirs. Men are hardly
brought to condemn those Opinions and Customs in Religion, which themselves,
and their Forefathers have always embraced and followed. And Wise Men
especially are loath to admit so great a change in a matter of so great
Concernment as Religion is. So that this must be acknowledged to have been a
considerable Prejudice against the Christian Religion at its first Appearance.
But yet upon a through Examination, this will not be found sufficient in Reason
to withhold Men from embracing Christianity, if we consider these four Things.

1. No prudent Person thinks that the Example and Custom of his Forefathers
obliges him to that which is evil in it self, and pernicious to him that does
it; and there is no Evil, no Danger equal to that of a false Religion; for that
tends to the ruin of Men's Souls, and their undoing for ever. A Man might
better allege the Example of his Forefathers to justify his Errors and
Follies in any other kind, than in this, which is so infinitely pernicious in
the Consequences of it.

2. In a great Corruption and Degeneracy, it is no sufficient Reason against a
Reformation, that it makes a Change. When Things are amiss, it is always fit to
amend and reform them; and this cannot be done without a Change. The wisest
among the Heathen did acknowledge, that their Religion was mixed with very great
Follies and Superstitions, and that the Lives and Manners of Men were extremely
corrupt and degenerate; and they endeavored, as much as they could, and durst,
to reform these things. And therefore there was no Reason to oppose an
effectual Reformation, for fear of a Change; a Change of Things for the better,
though it be usually hard to be effected, being always a thing to be desired
and wished for.

3. The Change which Christianity designed, was the least liable to Exception
that could be, being nothing else in the main of it, but the reducing of
Natural Religion, the bringing of Men back to such Apprehensions of God, and
such a way of worshipping him, as was most suitable to the Divine Nature, and
to the Natural Notions of Men's Minds; nothing else but a Design to persuade
Men of the one true God Maker of the World, that he is a Spirit, and to be
worshipped in such a manner, as is suitable to his Spiritual Nature. And then for
matters of Practice, to bring Men to the Obedience of those Precepts of
Temperance, and Justice, and Charity, which had been universally acknowledged
even by the Heathens themselves to be the great Duties which Men owe to
themselves and others. And that this is the main Design of the Christian
Religion, the Apostle has told us in most plain and express Words, Tit. 2. 11,
12. The Grace of God (that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel) which has appeared
to all Men, and brings Salvation, teaches us, that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present World.

And all that the Christian Religion adds beyond this, is means and helps for
our Direction, and Assistance, and Encouragement in the Discharge and
Performance of these Duties. For our Direction, God has sent his Son in our
Nature, to declare his Will to us, and to be a Pattern and Example of Holiness
and Virtue. For our Assistance, he has promised the Aids of his Holy Spirit;
and for our Encouragement, he offers to us Pardon of Sin in the Blood of his
Son, and Eternal Life and Happiness in another World. This is a short Sum and
Abridgment of the Christian Religion, and there is nothing of all this that can
reasonably be excepted against.

4. God, considering the Prejudice of the Heathen against Christianity, by
reason of their Education in a contrary Religion, was strong and violent, was
pleased to give such Evidence of the Truth of Christianity, as was of
proportionable Strength and Force to remove and conquer this Prejudice. He was
pleased to give Testimony to the first Founder of this Religion by mighty
Miracles, and particularly by his Resurrection from the Dead: But because the
Report of these things was only brought to the Heathen World, and they had not
seen these things themselves; therefore he enabled those who were the Witnesses
of these Things to the World, to work as great Miracles as he had done. And
when they saw those who gave Testimony to our Savior's Miracles, do as great
and strange things themselves, as they testified of him, there was no Reason
any longer to doubt of the Truth of their Testimony. So that though the
Prejudice of the Heathen against Christianity was very great, yet the Evidence
which God gave to it, was strong enough to remove it. The Doctrine of
Christianity was such as might have recommended it self to impartial Men, by
its own Reasonableness: But meeting with violent Prejudices in those, to whom
it was offered, God was pleased to give such a Confirmation to it, as was
sufficient to bear down those Prejudices.

Secondly, Another Objection against Christianity, was the Plainness and
Simplicity of the Doctrine. They expected some deep Speculations in Natural or
Moral Philosophy; they made full Account, a Teacher sent from Heaven would have
instructed them in the profoundest Points, and discoursed to them about the
first Principles of things, and the Nature of the Soul, and the chief end of
Man, with a Subtilty and Eloquence infinitely beyond that of their greatest
Sophisters, and able to bear down all Opposition and Contradiction: But instead
of this, they are told a plain Story of the Life and Miracles of Jesus Christ,
and of his dying upon the Cross, and rising from the Dead, and ascending into
Heaven; and a few plain Precepts of Life; and all this delivered without any
Ornaments of Art, or Insinuation of Eloquence, to gain the Favor and Applause
of those to whom they related these Things.

But now, this truly considered, is so far from being any real Objection
against the Christian Doctrine, that it is one of the greatest Commendations
that can be given of it: For matter of Fact ought to be related in the most
plain, and simple, and unaffected manner; and the less Art and Eloquence is
used in the telling of a Story, the more likely it is to gain Belief. And as
for our Savior's Precepts, how plain soever they might be, I am sure they are
a Collection of the most excellent and reasonable Rules of a good Life, and the
freest from all Vanity and Folly, that are to be met with in any Book in the
World. And can any thing be more worthy of God, and more likely to proceed from
him, than so plain and useful a Doctrine as this? The Language of Law is not
wont to be fine and persuasive, but short, and plain, and full of Authority.
Thus it is among Men: And surely it is much fitter for God to speak thus to
Men, than for Men to one another.

Thirdly, It is objected, that the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles
wanted Demonstration; they seemed to impose too much upon the Understandings of
Men, and to deliver things too Magisterially, not demonstrating Things from
Intrinsical Arguments, but requiring Belief and Assent without Proof.

This the Apostle St. Paul readily acknowledges, that in preaching the Gospel
to the World, they did not proceed in the way of the Heathen Orators and
Philosophers, 1 Cor. 4. 4. My Speech and my Preaching was not in the enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom: but in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; that
is, they did not go in the way of Human Eloquence and Demonstration: but yet
their Doctrine did not want its Evidence and Demonstration, though of another
kind. They did not go about to bewitch Men by Eloquence, nor to entangle their
Minds by subtle Reasonings, the Force of which very few are capable of: But
they offered to Men a sensible Proof and Demonstration of the Truth of what
they delivered, in those strange and miraculous Operations, to which they were
enabled by the Holy Ghost. And this was a sensible Evidence, even to the
meanest Capacity, of a Divine Assistance going along with them, and giving
Testimony to them. I appeal to any Man, whether the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the Dead, and his Ascending into Heaven, be not a clearer
Demonstration of another Life after this, and more level to the Capacities of
all Mankind, than the finest and subtilest Arguments that can be drawn from the
immaterial Nature of the Soul, its power of Reflection upon it self, and
Independency upon the Body as to some of its Operations; which yet are some of
the chiefest Arguments that Philosophy affords, to prove the Immortality of our
Souls.

Fourthly, The Heathens objected, that the low and mean Condition of our
Savior, was unsuitable to one who pretended to be the Son of God, and to be
appointed by God to be a Teacher and Reformer of the World. This to the Heathen
Philosophers did not only appear unreasonable, but even ridiculous. So St. Paul
tells us, 1 Cor. 1. 23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. To think that a Man, who appeared in such
mean Circumstances, should be fit to reform the World; and one, who himself was
put to Death, should be relied upon for Life and Immortality.

This Objection I have heretofore considered at large, and therefore shall now
speak but very briefly to it.

Besides those excellent Reasons and Ends which the Scripture assigns of our
Savior's Humiliation; as that he might be a Teacher and Example to us; that he
might make Expiation for our Sins; that by suffering himself, he might learn to
commiserate us; that by Death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death,
that is the Devil; and might deliver those, who through fear of Death were all
their lives subject to Bondage; I say, besides these, it was of great use that
he should live in so mean and afflicted Condition, to confront the Pride, and
Vanity, and Fantastry of the World; and to convince Men of these two great
Truths, that God may love those whom he afflicts, and that Men may be innocent,
and virtuous, and contented in the midst of Poverty, and Reproach, and
Suffering. Had our Blessed Savior been a great Temporal Prince, his Influence
and Example might possibly have made more Hypocrites and servile Converts, but
would not have persuaded Men one jot more to be inwardly good and virtuous: The
great Arguments that must do that, must be fetched, not from the Pomp and
Prosperity of this World, but from the Eternal Happiness and Misery of the
other. Besides had he appeared in any great Power and Splendour, the Christian
Religion could not have been so clearly acquitted from the Suspicion of a
worldly Interest and Design, which would have been a far greater Objection
against it, than this which I am now speaking to.

Add to all this, that the wisest of the Heathen Philosophers did teach, that
Worldly Greatness and Power are not to be admired, but despised by a truly wise
Man; that Men may be virtuous, and good, and dearly beloved of God, and yet be
liable to great Miseries and Sufferings; and whoever suffers unjustly, and
bears it patiently, gives the greatest Testimony to Goodness, and does most
effectually recommend Virtue to the World. That a good Man under the hardest
Circumstances of Misery, and Reproach, and Suffering, is the fittest Person of
all other to be the Minister, and Apostle, and Preacher of God to Mankind. And
surely they who say such things (which the Heathen have done) had no reason to
object to our blessed Savior his low and suffering Condition.

As to that part of the Objection, that he who promised Immortality to others
could not save himself from Death and Suffering; considering, that he who was
put to Death, rescued himself from the Power of the Grave, it is so far from
being ridiculous, that nothing can be more reasonable, than to rely upon him
for our hopes of Immortality, who by rising from the Grave, and conquering
Death, gave a plain demonstration that he was able to make good what he
promised.

I have done with the Exceptions which were made against our Savior and his
Doctrine at their first Appearance in the World. I proceed in the

II. Place to consider the Prejudices and Objections which Men at this day do
more especially insist upon, against our Savior and his Religion: And they are
many.

First, Some that relate to the Incarnation of our Savior.

Secondly, To the Time of his Appearance.

Thirdly, That we have not now sufficient Evidence of the Truth of
Christianity; the main Arguments for it relying upon Matters of Fact, of which,
at this distance, we have not, nor can expect to have sufficient Assurance.

Fourthly, That the Terms of it seem very hard, and to lay too great Restraints
upon Human Nature.

Fifthly, That it is apt to dispirit Men, and to break the Vigor and Courage
of their Minds.

Sixthly, The Divisions and Factions that are among Christians.

Seventhly, The wicked Lives of the greatest part of the Professors of
Christianty. In answer to all which, I do not propose to say all that may be
said; but as briefly as I can to offer so much, as may, if not give full
Satisfaction, yet be sufficient to break the Force of them, and to free the
Minds of Men from any great Perplexity about them.

As to the First, which relates to the Incarnation of our Savior; and the
Second to the Time of his Appearance; I know that these and most of the rest I
have mentioned, were urged by the Heathen against Christianity: But they are
now more especially insisted upon both by the secret and open Enemies of our
Religion.

The Objections against his Incarnation I have elsewhere considered. And
therefore shall proceed to the John 1. 14. Sermon. III.
next, viz.

Secondly, As to the Time of our Savior's Appearance, it is objected, if he be
the only Way and Means of Salvation, why did he come no sooner into the World;
but suffered Mankind so long without any Hopes or Means of being saved? This
was objected by Porphyry of old, and still sticks in the Minds of Men. To this
I answer,

I. It is not fit for Creatures to call their Creator to too strict an Account
of his Actions. Goodness is free, and may act when and how it pleases; and as
God will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, so he may have Mercy at what
Time he pleases, and is not bound to give us an Account of his Matters. This
is much like the Objection of the Atheist against the Being of God; That if
there were such an Infinite and Eternal Being, he would surely have made the
World sooner, and not have been without all Employment for so long a duration:
Such another Objection is this against our Savior, That if he had been the Son
of God, he would have begun this great and merciful Work of the Redemption of
Mankind sooner, and not have delayed it so long, and suffered Mankind to perish
for four Thousand Years together.

But it seems in the one as well as the other, God took his own time, and he
best knew what time was fittest. The Scripture tells us, That in the fullness of
Time, God sent his Son; when things were ripe for it, and all Things
accomplished that God thought requisite in order to it. In judging of the
Actions of our Earthly Governors, those who are at a distance from their
Councils, what Conjectures soever they may make of the Reasons of them, will
neverthe less, if they have that Respect for their Wisdom which they ought,
believe, that how strange soever some of their Actions may seem, yet they were
done upon good Reason, and that they themselves, if they knew the Secrets of
their Counsels, should think so. Much more do we owe that Reverence to the
infinite Wisdom of God, to believe that the Counsels of his Will are grounded
upon very good Reason, though we do not see many Times what it is.

2. It is not true that the World was wholly destitute of a Way and Means of
Salvation before our Savior's coming. Before the Law of Moses was given, Men
were capable of being received to the Mercy and Favor of God, upon their
Obedience to the Law of Nature, and their sincere Repentance for the Violation
of it, by virtue of the Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World.
Men were saved by Christ both before and under the Law, without any particular
and express Knowledge of him. There were Good Men in other Nations, as well as
among the Jews; as Job, and his Friends also, seem to have been. In all Ages of
the World, and in every Nation, they that feared God, and wrought Righteousness
were accepted of him. The Sacrifice of Christ, which is the Meritorious Cause
of the Salvation of Mankind, looks back as well as forward; and God was
reconcilable to Men, and their Sins were pardoned, by Virtue of this great
Propitiation that was to be made. In which Sense perhaps it is, that Christ is
said to be the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. Heb. 9. 25, 26, the
Apostle intimates to us, that if this Sacrifice which was offered in the last
Ages of the World, had not been available in former Ages, Christ must have
often suffered since the Foundation of the World: but now has he appeared once
in the Conclusion of the Ages, to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself.

3. He did appear at that Time, in which the World stood most in need of him;
when the whole World, both Jews and Gentiles, were sunk into the greatest
Degeneracy both in Opinion and Practice, and the Condition of Mankind seemed to
be even desperate and past Remedy. This was the needful time, when it was most
seasonable for this great Physician to come, and show his Pity and Skill in our
Recovery. God could have sent his Son many Ages before: but he thought fit to
try other ways first, and to reserve this powerful Remedy to the last; last of
all he sent his Son.

4. The Time of our Savior's Appearing was of all Ages of the World the
fittest Season for his Coming; Whether we consider,

1. That the World was at that Time best prepared and disposed for receiving
the Christian Religion: Or,

2. That this was the fittest Season that ever had been, for the easy
diffusing and propagating of this Religion. I assign these Reasons as tending
to give Men some Satisfaction, why this great Blessing was delayed so long; it
being rather an Argument of Wisdom and Goodness, than of the want of either, to
defer Things to that time, in which they are most likely to have their effect.
Not but that perhaps other and better Reasons may be given. To be sure God had
very good Reasons for this Dispensation, whether we can hit upon them or not.
In the mean Time these seem not to be altogether inconsiderable.

1. That the World was at that time best prepared and disposed for receiving
the Christian Religion. All the while our Savior's Coming was delayed, God's
Providence was disposing things for it, and training up Mankind for the
entertaining of this great Blessing. The Jewish Religion was always very
burdensome, but much more so, toward the Expiration of the Jewish State, partly
by the Intolerable Multitude of external Observances, which were daily
multiplied upon them, under Pretense of Traditions from their Fathers; and
partly by reason of their Subjection to the Romans, which made the Exercise of
their Religion in many Respects more difficult.

And the Heathen World was in a very good Measure prepared for Christianity, by
being civilized. About the time of our Savior's coming into the World,
Philosophy and Learning had been so diffused by the Roman Conquests, as had
brought a great part of the World from Barbarism to Civility. Besides that
their Philosophy had this Effect upon Men, to refine their Reason, and in a
good Degree to detect the Follies of the Heathen Idolatry and Superstition.

It Is true indeed Learning and Philosophy flourisht a great while before in the
Time of the Grecian Empire, and perhaps before that in some other Nations; and
the Conquests of the Grecians were very speedy and of vast Extent: But yet they
were neither so Universal, nor so well settled; nor did they propagate their
Philosophy and Civility together with their Conquests, as the Romans did. So
that there was no Age of the World, wherein Mankind were so generally prepared
and disposed for the receiving of the Gospel, as that wherein our Savior
appeared.

2. This was likewise the fittest Season for the easy diffusing and
propagating of the Christian Religion. The Romans, together with their
Conquests, did very much propagate their Language, which made the ways of
Communication far more easy; And by the long and frequent Correspondence of
the several Parts of that Empire one with another, the ways of Travel and
Passage from one Country to another were more ready and open. So that no Age
can be instanced, in all Respects so convenient for the speedy propagating of a
new Religion, as that wherein our Savior appeared, viz. when the Roman Empire
was at its height. And it was very agreeable to the Goodness and Wisdom of the
Divine Providence, that the bravest and most virtuous People in the World
(infinitely beyond either the Persians or Grecians) should be chosen by God, as
one of the chiefest Means for the spreading of the best and most perfect
Revelation that ever God made to the World.

Thirdly, It is objected, that we have not now sufficient Evidence of the Truth
of Christianity, the main Arguments for it relying upon matters of Fact, of
which, at this Distance, we have not, nor can be supposed to have, sufficient
Assurance. To this I answer,

1. That Men not only may have, but have an undoubted Assurance of matters of
Fact, ancienter than these we are speaking of; and the distance of them from
our Times creates no manner of Scruple in the Minds of Men concerning them.
That there was such a Man as Alexander the Great, and that he conquered Darius
and the Persians; That Julius Caesar invaded our Nation, and in some measure
subdued it; and that he overcame Pompey in the Battle of Pharsalia; and
innumerable other Things, which I might instance in, that were done before our
Savior's Time, are firmly believed without any manner of Doubt and Scruple by
Mankind, notwithstanding they were done so long ago. So that ancient matters of
Fact are capable of clear Evidence, and we may have sufficient Assurance of
them. And where there is equal Evidence, if we do not give equal Belief, the
fault is not in the Argument; but in the Passion or Prejudice of those, to whom
it is proposed.

2. We have every whit as great Assurance, (nay greater, if it can, or needed
to be) of the matters upon which the proof of Christianity relies, as of those
which I have mentioned. The matters of Fact, upon which the Truth of
Christianity relies, are, that there was such a Person as Jesus Christ; that he
wrought such Miracles; that he was put to death at Jerusalem under Pontius
Pilate; that he rose again from the dead, and was visibly taken up into Heaven;
that he bestowed miraculous Gifts and Powers upon the Apostles, to make them
competent Witnesses of his Resurrection, and of the Truth of that Doctrine
which they published in his Name; that accordingly they preached the Gospel to
the World, and in a short space, without any Human Advantages, did propagate
it, and gain Entertainment for it, in most parts of the then known World.

Now these matters of Fact have the same Testimony of Histories, wrote in those
Times, and conveyed down to us, by as general and uncontroled a Tradition, as
the Conquests of Alexander, and Julius Caesar. So that if we do not afford
equal Belief to them, it is a sign that we have some Prejudice or Interest
against the one, more than against the other, though the Evidence for both be
equal. Nay I go further, that the Evidence for these things which are the
Foundation of Christianity, is so much the greater, because that which depended
upon it, was of far greater Concernment to the World, and consequently Mankind
were more obliged to search more narrowly into it.

For our Savior's Life, and Death, and Resurrection, we have the Testimony of
a great number of Eyewitnesses, who have wrote the History of these things. And
though they were truly extraordinary Persons, and gave Testimony to themselves
by Miracles; yet at present I desire no more, but that they be looked upon, as
knowing and honest Relators of what they heard and saw; and that the same
Credit be given to them, which we give to Livy, and Arian, and Q. Curtius, for
plain Events, and matters of Fact.

But yet I must add withal, that besides the Miracles which they wrought, they
gave greater Testimony of their Integrity, than any Historian in the World ever
did. For they willingly suffered the greatest Persecution and Torment, yea and
Death it self, in Confirmation of the Truth of what they delivered. And for the
propagating of the Christian Religion through so great a part of the World, it
is evident by the Effect beyond all Denial.

So that for the matters of Fact, upon which the Truth of Christianity does
depend, here is greater, and more advantageous Evidence of History, than for
any other Matter of equal Antiquity whatsoever.

3. As to the substance of these matters of Fact, we have the concurring
Testimony of the greatest Enemies of the Christian Religion. That there were
such Persons as our Savior and his Apostles, that they preached such a
Doctrine, that they wrought such Miracles; for this we have the Acknowledgment
of the Jews, and the Testimony of the Heathen Historians, and particularly of
Celsus, and Porphyry, and Julian, who were the particular and most learned
Adversaries of the Christian Religion. So that as to the Matters of Fact, there
is no Objection against them, whatever use we may make of them, or whatever
Consequences we may draw from them. And I presume it agreed by all Objectors,
that if these matters of Fact be true, they are a sufficient Foundation of the
Truth of our Religion, and we are very unequal to our Religion, if we make a
doubt of these things, which the greatest Enemies of Christianity never had the
Face to deny.

4. And besides all this, to recompense the Disadvantage which we have of those
who saw the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles, we have the Testimonium
rei, the Evidence of the Effects of these things to confirm our Belief of them;
and this is an Advantage, which the first Ages of Christianity could not have.
We see our Savior's Predictions of the Success of his Religion in the World,
in the propagating and establishing of it, fully accomplished, notwithstanding
the fierce Opposition and Resistance that was made against it by the greatest
Powers of the World. We see the Dispersion of the Jews in all Nations, and the
Misery and Contempt which they every where suffer; and that now for above
Sixteen Hundred Years, they have continued a distinct People, and a Spectacle
of the Divine Justice and Severity, for rejecting and crucifying the Son of
God, and for a lasting and standing Testimony of the Truth of our Savior's
Prediction, and of the Christian Religion.

So that though we live at this distance from the first rise and beginning of
Christianity; yet we have the Relation of those Things, which give Confirmation
to it, conveyed down to us in as credible a manner, as any ancient matter of
Fact ever was; and the Effects of things remaining to this day, do give
Testimony to the Truth of it.

Fourthly, It is objected, that the terms of Christianity seem very hard, and
to lay too great Restraints upon Human Nature. It commands us to mortify our
Lusts, and subdue our Passions, and deny Ungodliness, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present World; to be holy in all manner of
Conversation; to have respect to whatever things are honest, and true, and
just, and virtuous, and of good report; and to deny our selves; and to part
with the dearest Enjoyments of this Life, yea and with Life it self, for the
sake of Christ, and his Gospel. Now these seem to be very hard Terms, to forego
all the present Pleasures and Enjoyments of this Life, in hopes of a future
Happiness which we are less assured of.

To this I answer,

1. That this is a greater Objection against Religion in general, than the
Christian Religion. For Natural Religion requires of us all the main Duties
that Christianity does, and gives us far less Assurance of the Reward of our
Obedience. Natural Religion requires Piety, and Justice, and Charity, the due
Government of our Appetites and Passions, as well as Christianity does; but
does not discover to us the Rewards of another World, by many Degrees so
clearly, as our Lord and Savior, who has brought Life and Immortality to
Light by the Gospel, and by his Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into
Heaven, has given us full Assurance of another Life after this, and of a
glorious Immortality. So that though we have not, nor can have the Evidence of
Sense, for a Future State, yet we have all the Rational Evidence for it, that
can be wished or expected; and much more than Men have for those Adventures of
their Lives and Fortunes, which they frequently make in this World, and think
themselves reasonable in so doing.

2. The Restraints which Christianity lays upon Men, are in the judgment of
Mankind so far from being an Objection against it, that they are highly to the
Commendation of it. Nay it were the greatest Objection that could be against
our Religion, if it did set us at Liberty from those Restraints. What can be
more to the credit of any Religion, than to command Men to be just, and
charitable, and peaceable? And what more to the Advantage of the Professors of
it? And on the contrary, what can reflect more upon any Religion, than to
indulge and allow Men in any Vice contrary to these? It shows Men are glad to
make any thing an Objection against Christianity, when they lay hold of that,
which, if it had been otherwise, they would have made ten times more Clamor
against it for the contrary.

3. As for most of those Restraints which Christianity lays upon us, they are
of that Nature, so much both for our Private and Public Advantage, that
setting aside all Considerations of Religion, and of the Rewards and
Punishments of another* Life, they are really good for us, and if God had not
laid them upon us, we ought in Reason, in order to our Temporal Benefit and
Advantage to have laid them upon our selves. If there were no Religion, I know
Men would not have such strong and forcible Obligations to these Duties; but
yet I say, though there were no Religion, it were good for Men, in order to
Temporal Ends, to their Health, and Quiet, and Reputation, and Safety, and, in
a word, to the private and public Prosperity of Mankind, that Men should be
temperate, and chaste, and just, and peaceable, and charitable, and kind, and
obliging to one another, rather than the contrary. So that Religion does not
create those Restraints arbitrarily, but requires those things of us, which our
Reason and a Regard to our own Advantage, which the Necessity and Convenience
of the Things themselves, without any Consideration of Religion, would in most
Cases urge us to.

4. As to the case of Persecution for Religion; besides that it does not now
happen so frequently, as it did in the beginning of Christianity, nay very
seldom in comparison, if all things be considered it cannot be thought
unreasonable; both because Religion offers to us, in Consideration of our
present Sufferings, a Happiness unspeakably greater than that which we forego
for the sake of Religion; and because when it happens, God does extraordinarily
enable Men to go through it with Courage and Comfort, as we see in the Examples
of the primitive Christians; who in great Numbers of all Tempers and Ages, did
voluntarily choose to give up themselves to these Sufferings, when there was no
necessity laid upon them, but fair terms of Retreat were offered to them by
their Enemies. It is one thing, when a Man suffers by the Law, and cannot help
it; and another thing when Men may avoid Suffering. In the former Case Men
submit to necessity, and bear it as well as they can; in the latter Case, if
Men suffer, it is a Sign they firmly believe the Reward of it; and if they
suffer cheerfully, and with Joy, as most of the Martyrs did, it is a plain
Evidence that God affords them extraordinary Support in their Sufferings; and
then the Case is not very hard, when Religion puts them upon nothing, but what
it gives them cause, and enables them, to rejoice in the doing of it.

Fifthly, It is objected, that the Christian Religion is apt to dispirit Men,
and to break the Courage and Vigor of their Minds, by the Precepts of
Patience, and Humility, and Meekness, and of forgiving Injuries, and the like.
This Objection has made a great Noise in the World, and has been urged by Men
of great Reputation, and a deep insight into the Tempers of Men, and the
Affairs of the World. It is said to be particularly insisted upon by Machiavel,
and very likely it may; though I think that elsewhere he is pleased to speak with
Terms of Respect, not only of Religion in general, but likewise of the
Christian Religion; and (which seems very much to contradict the other,) he
says in the first Book of his Discourses upon Livy (Chapter 11.) That the greatness
and Success of Rome is chiefly to be ascribed to their Piety and Religion, and
that Rome was more indebted to Numa Pompilius, for settling Religion among
them, than to Romulus the Founder of their State; and the Reason he gives is
much to our present Purpose; For says he, without Religion there can be no
Military Discipline, Religion being the Foundation of good Laws and good
Discipline. And particularly he commends the Samnites, who betook themselves to
Religion, as their last and best Remedy to make Men courageous, nothing being
more apt to raise Men's Spirits than Religion.

But howsoever this Objection be, I dare appeal both to Reason and Experience
for the Confutation of it.

1. To Reason, and that as to these two things.

(1.) That the Christian Religion is apt to plant in the Minds of Men
Principles of the greatest Resolution and truest Courage. It teaches Men upon
the best and most rational Grounds to despise Dangers, yea and Death it self,
the greatest and most formidable Evil in this World; and this Principle is
likely to inspire Men with the greatest Courage; for what need he fear any
thing in this World, who fears not Death, after which there is nothing in this
World to be feared? And this the Christian Religion does, by giving Men the
assurance of another Life, and a Happiness infinitely greater than any is to be
enjoyed in this World. And in order to the securing of this Happiness, it
teaches Men to be holy, and just, and to exercise a good Conscience both
toward God and Man, which is the only way to free a Man from all inward and
tormenting Fears of what may happen to him after Death. This makes the
righteous Man to be (as Solomon says) bold as a Lion. Nothing renders a Man
more undaunted as to Death, and the Consequences of it, than the Peace of his
own Mind; for a Man not to be conscious to himself of having wilfully
displeased him, who alone can make us happy or miserable in the other World. So
that a good Man, being secure of the Favor of God, may upon that Account
reasonably hope for a greater Happiness after Death than other Men: Whereas a
bad Man, if he be sober, and have his Senses awakned to a serious Consideration
of things, cannot but be afraid to die, and be extremely anxious and solicitous
what will become of him in another World. And surely it would make the stoutest
Man breathing afraid to venture upon Death, when he sees Hell beyond it.
Possibly there may be some Monsters of Men, who may have so far suppressed the
Sense of Religion, and stupefied their Consciences, as in a good Measure to
have conquered the fears of Death, and of the Consequences of it. But this
happens but to a very few, as the Poet tells us in the Person of an Epicurean.

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, Atque metus omnes and inexorabile
fatum Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari. There are very few that
attain to this Temper, and but at some times. So that if Vice and Wickedness do
generally break the Firmness of Men's Spirits; it remains, that nothing but
Religion can generally give Men Courage against Death. And this the Christian
Religion does eminently to those who live according to it; our blessed Savior
having delivered us from the fear of Death, by conquering Death for us, and
giving us Assurance of the glorious Rewards of another Life.

(2.) Meekness, and Patience, and Humility, and Modesty, and such Virtues of
Christianity, do not in Reason tend to dispirit Men, and break their true
Courage, but only to regulate it, and take away the Fierceness and Brutishness
of it. This we see in Experience, that Men of the truest Courage, have many
times least of Pride and Insolence, of Passion and Fierceness. Those who are
better bred, are commonly of more gentle and civil Dispositions: But yet they
do not therefore want true Courage, though they have not the Roughness and
Foolhardiness of Men of ruder Breeding. So in a true Christian, Courage and
Greatness of Mind is very consistent with Meekness, and Patience, and Humility.
Not that all good Men are very courageous; there is much of this in the Natural
Tempers of Men, which Religion does not quite alter. But that which I am
concerned to maintain is, that Christianity is no hindrance to Men's Courage;
and that caeteris paribus, supposing Men of equal Tempers, no Man has so much
Reason to be valiant, as he that has a good Conscience; I do not mean a
blustering, and boisterous, and rash Courage; but a sober, and calm, and fixed
Valor.

2. I appeal to Experience for the Truth of this. Did ever greater Courage and
Contempt of Death appear in all Ages, and Sexes, and Conditions of Men, than in
the primitive Martyrs? Were any of the Heathen Soldiers comparable to the
Christian Legion, for Resolution and Courage, even the Heathens themselves
being Judges? The Religion of Mahomet seems to be contrived to inspire Men with
Fierceness and Desperateness of Resolution, and yet I do not find, but that
generally where there has been any equality for Number, the Christians have
been superior to them in Valor, and have given greater Instances of
Resolution and Courage, than the Turks have done. So that I wonder upon what
Grounds this Objection has been taken up against Christianity, when there is
nothing either in the Nature of this Religion, or from the Experience of the
World, to give any tolerable Countenance to it. And surely the best way to know
what Effect any Religion is likely to have upon the Minds of Men, is to
consider what Effects it has had in the constant Experience of Mankind. There
remains the other two Objections, which I mentioned, but I must reserve them to
another Opportunity.

SERMON III. The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion considered.
MATTHEW. XI. 6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.
FROM these Words I proposed to consider these Two Things.

I. The Prejudices and Objections which the World at first had, and many still
have against our Blessed Savior and his Religion.

II. That it is a great Happiness to escape the common Prejudices which Men are
apt to entertain against Religion.

I have considered those Objections which the Jews and Heathen Philosophers
made against our Savior and his Religion: And,

II. Those which at this Day are insisted upon by the secret and open Enemies
of our Religion. And I mentioned seven, the two last of which I shall now speak
to.

Sixthly, It is objected, That there are many Divisions and Factions among
Christians. This I confess is a great Reproach and Scandal to our Religion: but
no sufficient Argument against it. And,

1. To lessen and abate the Force of this Objection, it is to be considered,
that a very great part of the Divisions that are among those that are called
Christians, are about things that do not concern the Essentials of
Christianity, and therefore they are no Argument that Christianity is not true,
because they bring no Suspicion of Doubt and Uncertainty upon the Fundamentals
of Christianity which all agree in, though they differ in other things. It Is
true indeed they are very undecent, and contrary to the Nature and Precepts of
the Christian Religion, which above any Religion in the World, does strictly
require Love and Unity. They take off much from the Strength and Beauty of our
Religion: but do by no means destroy the Truth of it.

2. How many and great soever they may be, yet they can with no Color of
Reason be imputed to the Christian Religion, as giving any Cause and
Encouragement to them, however by Accident it may be the Occasion of them. For
no Man doubts but that the best thing in the World may be perverted by bad Men,
and made an Occasion of a great deal of Mischief in the World, and yet be very
innocent of all that Mischief. No Man can deny but that Christianity does
strictly enjoin Love, and Peace, and Unity among all the Members of that
Profession; and so far as Christians are factious and unpeaceable, so far they
are no Christians. So that a Man may as well except against Philosophy, because
of the Differences that were among the Philosophers, and say there was no Truth
among them, because they were not all agreed in all Things; as call the Truth
of Christianity in question, for the differences that are among Christians. Nay
a Man might every whit as well except against Laws and Government; because,
notwithstanding them, there are frequent Seditions and Rebellions, infinite
Suits and Controversies occasioned even by the very Laws: But no Man was ever
so unreasonable as to think this a good Reason against Laws and Government.

3. The Divisions of Christians are so far from being an Argument against
Christianity, that on the contrary, they are an Argument that Men should
embrace Christianity more heartily, and make more Conscience of obeying the
Precepts of it. And if they did this, the greatest part of those Contentions
and uncharitable Animosities which are among them would presently cease. If the
Christian Religion were truly entertained, and Men did seriously mind the
Precepts of it, and give up themselves to the Obedience of its Laws,
Differences would not be easily commenced, nor so vehemently prosecuted, nor so
pertinaciously continued in, as they are. Men would not, upon every slight
Reason, and little doubt and Scruple, rend and tear the Body of Christ in
pieces, and separate themselves from the Communion of the Church they live in,
and in which they were baptized and received their Christianity.

If Men seriously considered, and truly understood what they do, when they
divide the Church of Christ upon little Scruples and Pretenses, they would
hardly be able to think themselves Christians, whilst they continued in these
unchristian and uncharitable Practices.

If Men would but be, or do what Christianity requires, there would be no
occasion for this Objection; and if Men will not, Christian Religion is not to
be blamed for it, but those that act so contrary to the plain Precepts and
Directions of it. I proceed to the,

Seventh and last Objection, The vicious and wicked Lives of a great part of
the Professors of Christianity. This is a heavy Objection indeed, and such an
one, that though we may justly be ashamed to own the Truth of it, yet can we not
have the face to deny it. It Is so sad a Truth, that it is enough to confound
us, and to fill all our Faces with Shame and Blushing: But yet it is an
Objection not so strong against Christianity, as it is shameful to Christians.
And notwithstanding the utmost Force of it, we have no cause to be ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ; but the Gospel of Christ may justly be ashamed of us. For
whatever we be, The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto Salvation. The
Natural Tendency of it is to reform and save Men, and the wrath of God is
therein revealed against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, however
they may detain the Truths of God in Unrighteousness, and not suffer them to
have their due and proper Influence upon their Hearts and Lives.

But that I may give a more clear and particular Answer to it, I desire you to
attend to these following Considerations.

1. It cannot be denied, but that Christianity has had once very great and
mavelous Effects upon the Hearts and Lives of Men. And for this, I appeal to
the Lives and Manners of the Primitive Christians, for which we have not only
the Testimony of our own Books and Writers, but even of the Adversaries of our
Religion. What Reformation Christianity at first wrought in the Manners of Men,
we have clear and full Testimony, from what the Apostles wrote concerning the
several Churches which they planted in several Parts of the World. What hearty
Unity and Affection there was among Christians, even to that Degree, as to make
Men bring in their private Estates and Possessions for the common Support of
their Brethren, we may read in the History of the Acts of the Apostles. The
City of Corinth, by the Account which Strabo gives of it, was a very vicious
and luxurious place, as most in the World; and yet we see by St. Paul, what a
strange Reformation the Christian Religion made in the Lives and Manners of
many of them: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
And such were some of you: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And
surely it is no small matter to reclaim Men from such a profligate course of
Life. The Apostle instanceth in Crimes and Vices of the first Rate, from which
yet he tells us many were cleansed and purified by the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and the Spirit of God; that is, by the Power and Efficacy of the Christian
Doctrine, together with the Cooperation of Gods Holy Spirit.

After the Apostles, the Ancient Fathers, in their Apologies for Christianity,
give us a large Account of the great Power and Efficacy of the Christian
Doctrine upon the Lives and Manners of Men. Tertullian tells the Roman
Governors, that their Prisons were full of Malefactors, committed for several
Crimes; but they were all Heathens. De vestris semper aestuat carcer, Their
Prisons were thronged with Criminals of their own Religion: But there were no
Christians to be found committed there for such Crimes; Nemo illic Christianus,
nisi hoc tantum, etc. There were no Christians in their Prisons, but only upon
account of their Religion. Or if there were any Malefactors that had been
Christians, they left their Religion when they fell into those Enormities. And
afterward he adds, that if Christians were irregular in their Lives, they were
no longer accounted Christians, but were banished from their Communion as
unworthy of it. And they appealed to the Heathens, what a sudden and strange
change Christianity had made in several of the most lewd, and vicious, and
debauched Persons, and what a visible Reformation there presently appeared in
the Lives of the worst Men, after they had once entertained the Christian
Doctrine.

And these Testimonies are so much the stronger, because they are Public
Appeals to our Adversaries, which it is not likely, they who were so persecuted
and hated as the Christians were, would have had the Confidence to have made,
if they had not been notoriously true, even their Enemies themselves being
Judges.

And that they were so, we have the Confession of the Heathen themselves. I
shall produce two remarkable Testimonies to this Purpose, and one of them from
the Pen of one of the bitterest Enemies that the Christian Religion ever had.

Pliny, in his Epistle to Trajan the Emperor, gives him an Account, That
having examined the Christians, setting aside the Superstition of their way, he
could find no Fault; and that this was the Sum of their Error, that they were
wont to meet before Day, and sing a Hymn to Christ, and to bind themselves by a
Solemn Oath or Sacrament, not to any wicked Purpose; but not to steal, nor rob,
nor commit Adultery, nor break their Faith, nor detain the Pledge. So that it
seems the Sum of their Error was, to oblige themselves in the strictest manner
against the greatest Vices and Crimes. Which methinks is a great Testimony from
an Enemy and a Judge, one who would have been ready to discover their Faults,
and had Opportunity of enquiring into them.

My other Witness is Julian the Emperor and Apostate, who in one of his
Epistles tells us, The Christians did severely punish Sedition and Impiety. And
afterward exhorting the Heathen Priests to all Offices of Humanity, and
especially Alms toward the Poor; he tells them, they ought to be more careful
in this particular, and to mend this Fault; Because (says he) the Galileans
taking advantage of our Neglect in this kind, have very much strengthened their
Impiety (for so he calls their Religion) by being very intent upon these
Offices, and exemplary in their Charity to the Poor, whereby they gained many
over to them.

And in his 49th Epist. to Arsacius the High Priest of Galatia, he recommends
to him, among other Means for the Advancement of Paganism, the building of
Hospitals, and great Liberality to the Poor, not only of their own Religion,
but others. For, says he, it is a Shame that the impious Galileans should not
only maintain their own poor, but ours also; wherefore let us not suffer them
to outdo us in this Virtue. Nothing but the force of Truth could have extorted
so full an Acknowledgment of the great Humanity and Charity of the Christians,
from so bitter an Enemy of our Religion as Julian was. If he owned it, we may
be sure it was very great and exemplary.

So that you see that the Christian Religion had a very great Power and
Efficacy upon the Lives and Manners of Men, when it first appeared in the
World. And the true Spirit and Genius of any Religion, the Force of any
Institution is best seen in the primitive Effects of it; before it be weakened
and dispirited by those Corruptions, which in time are apt to insinuate
themselves into the best things. For all Laws and Institutions are commonly
more vigorous, and have greater Effects at first, than afterward; and the best
things are apt in time to degenerate and to contract Soil and Rust. And it
cannot in Reason be expected otherwise. So that though it be a thing to be
bewailed, and by the greatest Care and Diligence to be resisted, yet it is not
so extremely to be wondered at, if Christianity, in the space of Sixteen
Hundred Years, has abated much of its first Strength and Vigor.

Especially considering, that there were several Circumstances, that gave
Christianity mighty Advantages at first, especially the miraculous Powers which
did accompany the first Publication of the Gospel; which must needs be full of
Conviction to those who saw the wonderful Effects of it: The extraordinary
Operation of the Spirit of God upon the Minds of Men, to dispose them to the
receiving of it: The persecuted and suffering State that Christians were
generally in, which made those who embraced the Profession, to be generally
serious and in good earnest in it, and kept up a continual Heat and Zeal in the
Minds of Men for that Religion which cost them so dear, and for which they
suffered so much: And the fury of their Enemies against it, did naturally
inflame their Love and Kindness to one another; nothing being a greater
Endearment among Men, than common Sufferings in a common Cause. So long as
Christians were not corrupted by Secular Interests; and by denying all for
Christ, were free from Covetousness and Ambition, the great roots of all Evil,
The Church of Christ, though she was black, yet she was comely, and terrible,
as an Army with Banners; She was all this while in an excellent Posture to
resist the Temptations, and fight against the Vices and Corruptions of the
World: But after the World broke in upon the Church, and Christianity was
countenanced by the Powers of the World, and watered with Secular Preferments
and Encouragements, no wonder if the Tares began to grow up with the Wheat;
Then Iniquity began to abound, and the Love of many to grow cold. When the Sun
of Prosperity began to shine upon the Christian Profession, then no wonder if
the Vermin bred and swarmed every where. When it grew creditable and
advantageous for Men to be Christians, this must in all Reason make a World of
Hypocrites, and counterfeit Professors.

These things, I reckon, must in Reason make a mighty Difference between the
first Ages of Christianity, and those which have followed since; and no wonder,
if the real Fruits and Effects of Religion in these several States of
Christianity be very unequal. For Prosperity and Adversity made a wide
difference in this Matter. The Persecution of any Religion naturally makes the
Professors of it real; and the Prosperity of it does as naturally allure and
draw in Hypocrites. Besides that even the best of Men are more corrupted by
Prosperity, than Affliction.

But though Christians were best under Persecution, yet God did not think fit
always to continue them in that State, because he would not tempt them, and
tire them out with perpetual Sufferings; and after he had given the World a
sufficient Experiment of the Power and Efficacy of the Christian Religion, in
maintaining and propagating it self in despite of all the Violence and
Opposition of the World, sufficient for ever to give Reputation to it; he then
thought good to leave it to be kept up by more Human Ways, and such as offer
less violence to the Nature of a Man. Being once established and settled in the
World, and upon equal Terms of Advantage with other Religions, God left it to
be supported by more ordinary Means; by pious Education, and diligent
Instruction, and good Laws and Government, without Miracles, and without
Persecution, and without those extraordinary and overpowring Communications of
his Grace and Spirit which he afforded to the first Ages of Christianity.

I have insisted the longer upon this, that Men may see what Effects
Christianity has had upon the Lives of Men, by which we may see the proper
Nature and Efficacy of it; and withal may not wonder so much that it has not
the same Effects now. Though it be matter of great Shame to us, that they are
so vastly disproportionable to what they were at first.

2. Though the Disproportion be very great between the Effects of Christianity at
first, and what it has now upon the Lives of Men; yet we ought not to deny,
but it has still some good Effects upon Mankind; and it is our great Shame and
Fault that it has no better. If we will speak justly of things, as to the
general civility of Life and Manners, Freedom from Tyranny, and Barbarousness,
and Cruelty, and some other enormous Vices, yea and as to the exemplary Piety
and Virtue of great Numbers of particular Persons of several Nations, there is
no Comparison between the general State of Christendom, and the Pagan and
Mohammedan parts of the World. Next to Christianity, and the Law of Moses,
(which was confined to one Nation) Philosophy was the most likely Instrument to
reform Mankind that has been in the World; and it had very considerable
Effects upon some particular Persons, both as to the rectifying of their
Opinions, and the reforming of their Lives: But upon the generality of Mankind
it did very little in either of these Respects, especially as to the rectifying
of the absurd and impious Opinions of the People concerning God, and their
superstitious Worship of the Deity. Whereas the Christian Religion did
universally, wherever it came, set Men free from those gross Impieties and
Superstitions, and taught Men to worship the only true God in a right Manner.

Though we must confess, to the Eternal Reproach of the Christian Religion, that
the Western Church has degenerated so far, that it seems to be in a great
Measure relapst into the Ignorance and Superstition of Paganism; out of which
Degeneracy, that God has rescued us, as we have infinite Cause to adore his
Goodness, so we have all the reason in the World to dread and detest a Return
into this spiritual Egypt, this House of Darkness and Bondage, and the bringing
of our Necks again under that Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able
to bear.

So that you see that there are still very considerable Effects of the
Christian Religion in the World, yea and I doubt not but in those places where
it is most corrupted and degenerated; because they still retain the essential
Doctrines of Christianity, which have not quite lost their Force,
notwithstanding the many Errors and Corruptions that are mixed with them. And
as God knows, and every Man sees it, that the generality of Christians are very
bad, notwithstanding all the Influence of that excellent Religion which they
profess; yet I think it is very evident, Men would be much worse without it.
For though very many who have entertained the Principles of Christianity are
very wicked in their Lives; yet many are otherwise: And those that are bad have
this Advantage by their Religion, that it is in its Nature apt to reduce and
recover Men from a wicked Course, and sometimes does: whereas the case of those
Persons would have been desperate, were it not for those Principles of Religion
which were implanted in them by Christian Education, and though they were long
suppressed, yet did at last awaken them to a Consideration of their Condition,
and proved the happy Means of their Recovery.

3. I will not deny but there are some Persons as bad, nay perhaps worse, that
have been bred up in the Christian Religion, than are commonly to be found in
the Darkness of Paganism; for the Corruption of the best Things is the worst,
and those who have resisted so great a Light as that of the Gospel is, are like
to prove the most desperately wicked of all other. There is nothing that Men
make worse use of, than of Light and Liberty, two of the best and most pleasant
Things in the World. Knowledge is many times abused to the worst Purpose, and
Liberty into Licentiousness and Sedition: and yet no Man for all that thinks
Ignorance desirable, or would wish a perpetual Night and Darkness to the World;
and conclude from the Inconveniences of abused Liberty, that the best State of
things would be, that the generality of Mankind should be all Slaves to a few,
and be perpetually chained to the Oar, or condemned to the Mines.

There are many times as bad Consequences of good things, as of bad: but yet
there is a great difference between good and bad for all that. As Knowledge and
Liberty, so likewise the Christian Religion is a great Happiness to the World
in general, though some are so unhappy as to be the worse for it; not because
Religion is bad, but because they are so.

4. If Religion be a matter of Men's free Choice, it is not to be expected that
it should necessarily and constantly have its Effect upon Men; for it works
upon us, not by way of Force or natural Necessity, but of Moral Persuasion. If
Religion, and the Grace of God which goes along with it, did force Men to be
good and virtuous, and no Man could be so unless he were thus violently forced,
then it would be no Virtue in any Man to be good, nor any Crime and Fault to be
otherwise. For then the Reason why some Men were good, would be because they
could not help it; and others bad, because the Grace of God did not make them
so whether they would or not.

But Religion does not thus work upon Men. It directs Men to their Duty by the
shortest and plainest Precepts of a good Life; it persuades Men to the
Obedience of these Precepts, by the Promises of Eternal Happiness, and the
Threatenings of Eternal Misery in case of obstinate Disobedience; it offers us
the Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, to help our Weakness, and enable us to
that, for which we are not sufficient of our selves: But there is nothing of
Violence or Necessity in all this. After all, Men may disobey these Precepts,
and not be persuaded by these Arguments, may not make use of this Grace which
God offers, may quench and resist the Holy Ghost, and reject the Counsel of God
against themselves. And the Case being thus, it is no wonder, if the
Temptations of this present World prevail upon the vicious Inclinations of Men
against their Duty, and their true Interest; and consequently if the Motiyes
and Arguments of the Christian Religion have not a constant and certain Effect
upon a great part of Mankind. Not but that Christianity is apt to bring Men to
Goodness; but some are so obstinately bad, as not to be wrought upon by the
most powerful Considerations it can offer to them.

5. It cannot be denied, but that Christianity is as well framed to make Men
good, as any Religion can be imagined to be; and therefore wherever the Fault
be, it cannot be in the Christian Religion, that we are not good. So that the
bad Lives of Christians are no sufficient Objection either against the Truth or
Goodness of the Christian Doctrine. Besides the Confirmation that was given to
it by Miracles, the Excellency of the Doctrine, and its proper Tendency to make
Men holy and virtuous, are a plain Evidence of its Divine and Heavenly
Original. And surely the Goodness of any Religion consists in the sufficiency
of its Precepts, to direct Men to their Duty; in the force of its Arguments to
persuade Men to it; and the suitableness of its Aids and Helps to enable us to
the Discharge and Performance of it. And all these Advantages the Christian
Religion has above any Religion or Institution that ever was in the World. The
reasonable and plain Rules of a good Life are no where so perfectly collected,
as in the Discourses of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles. No Religion ever
gave Men so full Assurance of the mighty Rewards and Punishments of another
World; nor such gracious Promises of Divine Assistance, and such Evidence of
it, especially in the Piety, and Virtue, and Patience, and Self-denial of the
Primitive Christians, as the Doctrine of God our Savior has done, which
teaches Men to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present World, in contemplation of the blessed
hope and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify to hiwself a peculiar People zealous of good Works.

6. and lastly, After all that has or can be said, it must be acknowledged,
and ought sadly to be lamented by us, that the wicked Lives of Christians are a
mavelous Scandal and Reproach to our Holy Religion, and a great Obstacle to
the spreading of it in the World, and a real Objection against it to prejudiced
Persons, with whom it does justly bring into doubt the Goodness and Efficacy of
the Institution it self, to see how little Effect it has upon the Hearts and
Lives of Men. It is hard for a Man to maintain the Reputation of an excellent
Master in any kind, when all the World sees, that most of his Scholars prove
Dunces. Whatever Commendation may be given to any Art or Science, Men will
question the Truth and Reality of it, when they see the greatest part of those
who profess it, not able to do any thing answerable to it. The Christian
Religion pretends to be an Art of serving God more decently and devoutly, and
of living better than other Men: but if it be so, why do not the Professors of
this excellent Religion show the Force and Virtue of it in their Lives? And
though I have sufficiently shown, that this is not enough to overthrow the
Truth, and disparage the Excellency of the Christian Doctrine; yet it will
certainly go a great way with prejudiced Persons, and it cannot be expected
otherwise.

So that we have infinite Reason to be ashamed, that there is so plain a
contrariety between the Laws of Christianity, and the Lives of the greatest
part of Christians; so notorious and palpable a difference between the Religion
that is in the Bible, and that which is to be seen and read in the
Conversations of Men.

Who that looks upon the Manners of the present Age, could believe, if he did
not know it, that the holy and pure Doctrine of the Christian Religion, had
ever been so much as heard, much less pretended to be entertained and believed
among us? Nay among those who seem to make a more serious Profession of
Religion, when we consider how strangely they allow themselves in Malice and
Envy, in Passion, and Anger, and Uncharitable Censures, and evil Speaking, in
fierce Contentions and Animosities; who would believe that the great Instrument
of these Men's Religion, I mean the Holy Bible, by which they profess to
regulate and govern their Lives, were full of plain and strict Precepts of Love
and Kindness, of Charity and Peace, and did a hundred times with all imaginable
Severity, and under pain of forfeiting the Kingdom of God, forbid Malice and
Envy, and Revenge, and evil speaking, and rash and uncharitable Censures, and
tell us so plainly that the Christian Religion obliges Men to put off all
these; and that if any Man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
that Man's Religion is vain? Do Men read and hear these Things every day, and
profess to believe them to be the Truths of God, and yet live as if they were
verily persuaded they were false? What can we conclude from hence, but either
that this is not Christianity, or the greatest part of us are no Christians?

So that if one of the Apostles or Primitive Christians should rise from the
Dead, and converse among us, how would he wonder to see the Face and Complexion
of Christianity altered from what it was in their Days; and were it not for the
Name and Title which we bear, would sooner guess us to be any thing than
Christians.

So that upon the whole Matter, there is no Way to quit our selves of this
Objection, and to wash away the Reproach of it, but to mend and reform our
Lives. 'Till this be done, it is unavoidable, but the vicious Manners of Men
will affect our Religion with Obloquy and Reproach, and derive an ill Conceit
and Opinion of it into the Minds of Men. And I cannot see how Christianity can
ever gain much ground in the World, 'till it be better adorned and recommended
by the Professors of it. Nay we have just cause to fear, that if God do not
raise up some great and eminent Instruments to awaken the World out of this
stupid Lethargy, that Christianity will every Day decline, and the World will
in a short Space be overrun with Atheism and Infidelity. For Vice, and
Superstition, and Enthusiasm, which are the reigning Diseases of Christendom,
when they have run their Course, and sinisht their Circle, do all naturally
end, and meet in Atheism. And then it will be time for the great Judge of the
World to appear, and effectually to convince Men of that, which they would not
be persuaded to believe by any other Means. And of this our Savior has given
us a terrible and fearful Intimation, in that Question of his; When the Son of
Man comes, shall he find Faith upon Earth? Our Savior has not positively
affirmed it, and God grant that we may not make it, and find it true.

And thus I have, by God's Assistance, given the best Satisfaction I could, to
the most material Exceptions I have met with against our blessed Savior and
his Religion. The

II. Thing remains briefly to be spoken to, viz. How happy a Thing it is to
escape the common Prejudices which Men are apt to entertain against Religion,
Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. And this will appear if
we consider these Three or Four Things.

First, That Prejudice does many times sway and biass Men against the plainest
and clearest Truths. We see in daily Experience, what a false Bias Prejudice
puts upon Men's Understandings. Men that are educated in the grossest Errors and
Superstitions, how hard it is to convince them that they are in a wrong Way!
and with what Difficulty are they persuaded of their Mistake! Nay they have
hardly the Patience to be told they are in an Error, much less to consider what
may be offered against it. How do the Passions and Lusts of Men blind them and
lead them aside from the Truth, and incline them to that side of the Question,
which is most favorable to their Lusts and Interests? How partially do Men
lean to that part which makes most for their Advantage, though all the Reason
in the World lie on the other side?

Now Ignorance and Mistake are a great Slavery of the Understanding, if there
were no worse Consequences of our Errors: and therefore our Savior says
excellently, that the Truth makes Men free; Ye shall know the Truth, and the
Truth shall make you free.

Secondly, Prejudice does not only by ass Men against the plainest Truths, but
in Matters of greatest Concernment, in things that concern the Honor of God,
and the Good of others, and our own Welfare and Happiness. Prejudices against
Religion occasion Mistakes of the highest Nature, and may lead Men to
Superstition and Idolatry, and to all manner of Impiety, nay many times to
Atheism and Infidelity. The Prejudices against the Doctrine of our Savior are
of another Concernment, than the Prejudices which Men have against the Writers
of Natural Philosophy or Eloquence, or any other Human Art or Science. If a
Man's Prejudice make him err in these Matters, the Thing is of no great Moment:
but the business of Religion is a matter of the greatest and weightiest
Concernment to Mankind.

Thirdly, The Consequence of Men's Prejudices in these things prove many times
fatal and destructive to them. Men may upon unreasonable Prejudices reject the
Counsel of God against themselves; as it is said of the Chief Priests and
Pharisees among the Jews. Men may oppose the Truth so obstinately and
perversely, as to be Fighters against God, and to bring certain Ruin and swift
Destruction upon themselves, both in this World, and the other; as the Jews
did, who by opposing the Doctrine of the Gospel, and persecuting our Savior
and his Disciples, filled up the measure of their Sins, 'till Wrath came upon
them to the uttermost. It is easy to entertain Prejudices against Religion,
and by considering only the wrong side of things, to fortify our Prejudices to
such a Degree, and entrench our selves so strongly in our Errors, that the
plainest and most convincing Truths shall not be able to have any Access to us,
or make any Impression upon us: but all this while we do in truth undermine our
own Happiness, and are secretly working our own Ruin; and while we think we are
opposing an Enemy, we are destroying our selves; for who has hardened himself
against God and his Truth, and prospered? The Principles of Religion are a firm
and immovable Rock, against which the more violently we dash our selves, the
more miserably we shall be split and shattered. Our Blessed Savior and his
Religion, have been to many, and are to this day a Stone of stumbling, and a
Rock of Offense; but he himself has told us what shall be the Fate of those
who are offended at him; Whosoever shall fall on this Stone, shall be broken;
but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to Powder. And therefore
well might he say here in the Text, blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me.

Fourthly, There are but few in comparison, who have the Happiness to escape
and overcome the common Prejudices which Men are apt to entertain against
Religion. Thus to be sure it was when Christianity first appeared in the World:
And though among us the great Prejudice of Education be removed; yet there are
still many, who upon one Account or other, are prejudiced against Religion, at
least so far, as not to yield to the Power of it in their Lives. Few Men are so
impartial in considering things, as not to be swayed by the Interest of their
Lusts and Passions, as to keep the Balance of their Judgments even, and to
suffer nothing but Truth and Reason to weigh with them. We generally pretend to
be Pilgrims and Strangers in the World, and to be all traveling toward
Heaven: but few of us have the Indifferency of Travelers; who are not
concerned to find out the fairest and the easiest Way, but to know which is the
right Way, and to go in it. Thus it should be with us, our End should always be
in our Eye, and we should choose our way only with Respect to that; not
considering our Inclination so much as our Design; nor choosing those Principles
for the Government of our Lives, which are most agreeable to our present
Desires, but those which will most certainly bring us to Happiness at the last;
and that I am sure the Principles of the Christian Religion, firmly believed
and practiced by us, will do.

Let us then be persuaded by all that has been said upon this Argument, to a
firm Belief of the Christian Doctrine. I hope you are in some Measure
satisfied, that the Objections against it are not such, as ought much to move a
wise and considerate Man. If we believe that God has taken so much care of
Mankind, as to make any certain Revelation of his Will to them, and of the way
to Eternal Happiness; let us next consider, whether any Religion in the World
can come in Competition with the Christian, and with half that Reason pretend
to be from God, that Christianity is able to produce for it self, whether we
consider the Things to be believed, or the Duties to be practiced, or the
Motives and Arguments to the Practice of those Duties, or the Divine
Confirmation that is given to the whole. And if we be thus persuaded concerning
it, let us resolve to live up to the Laws and Rules of this Holy Religion. Our
belief of it signifies nothing, without the Fruits and Effects of a Good Life.
And if this were once resolved upon, the Difficulty of believing would cease;
for the true Reason why Men are unwilling to believe the Truths of the Gospel,
is because they are loath to put them in Practice. Every one that does Evil,
hates the Light. The true Ground of most Men's Prejudice against the Christian
Doctrine, is because they have no mind to obey it; and when all is done, the
great Objection that lies at the bottom of Men's Minds against it, is, that it
is an Enemy to their Lusts, and they cannot profess to believe it without
condemning themselves, for not complying with it in their Lives and Practice.

SERMON IV. Jesus, the Son of God, proved by his Resurrection.
ROMANS I. 4. And declared to be the Son of God, with Power, according to the
Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead.
ST. Paul in the beginning of this Epistle (according to his Custom in the
rest) styles himself an Apostle, particularly called, and set apart by God, for
the preaching of the Gospel; the main Subject whereof was, Jesus Christ our
Lord; Who as he was, according to his Divine Nature, the eternal Son of God; so
according to his Humane Nature, he was not only the Son of Man, but also the
Son of God. According to the Flesh (that is the Weakness, and Frailty, and
Mortality of his Humane Nature) he was the Son of David, that is, of his
Posterity by his Mother, who was of that House and Line. Made of the seed of
David, according to the Flesh, v. 3. But according to the Spirit, of Holiness;
(that is, in regard of that Divine Power of the Holy Ghost, which was
manifested in him, especially in his Resurrection from the Dead,) he was
demonstrated to be the Son of God; even according to his Humane Nature;
Declared to be the Son of God, with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead.

All the Difficulty in the Words, is concerning the meaning of this Phrase; of
Christ's being declared to be the Son of God: The word is (...), which most
frequently in Scripture does signify predestined, decreed, determined; but
it likewise signifies, that which is defined, declared, demonstrated, put out
of all Doubt and Controversy. And in this Sense our Translation renders it. As
if the Apostle had said, that our Lord Jesus Christ, though according to the
Frailty and Weakness of his Humane Nature, he was of the Seed of David; yet in
respect of that Divine Power of the Holy Ghost, which manifested it self in
him, especially in his Resurrection from the Dead, he was declared to be the
Son of God, with Power, that is, mightily, powerfully demonstrated to be so; so
as to put the matter out of all Dispute and Controversy.

And therefore following our own Translation, I shall handle the Words in this
Sense, as containing this Proposition in them: That the Resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ from the Dead, by the Holy Ghost, is a powerful demonstration
that he was the Son of God.

And it will conduce very much to the clearing of this Proposition to consider
these Two things.

First, upon what Account Christ, as Man, is said to be the Son of God.

Secondly, In what Sense he is said to be declared to be the Son of God, by his
Resurrection from the Dead. The Consideration of these Two Particulars will
fully clear this Proposition, and the Apostles Meaning in it.

First, Upon what Account Christ, as Man, is said to be the Son of God. And for
our right Apprehension of this Matter, it is very well worthy our Observation,
that Christ as Man, is no where in Scripture said to be the Son of God, but
with relation to the Divine Power of the Holy Ghost, some way or other
eminently manifested in him; I say the Divine Power of the Holy Ghost, as the
Lord and Giver of Life, as he is called in the Ancient Creeds of the Christian
Church. For as Men are naturally said to be the Children of those from whom
they receive their Life and Being; so Christ, as Man, is said to be the Son of
God, because he had Life communicated to him, from the Father, by an immediate
Power of the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost. First at his Conception, which
was by the Holy Ghost. The Conception of our Blessed Savior was an immediate
Act of the Power of the Holy Ghost, overshadowing, as the Scripture expresses
it, the blessed Mother of our Lord: And then at his Resurrection, when after
his Death, he was, by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, raised to Life again.

Now upon these two Accounts only, Christ as Man, is said in Scripture to be
the Son of God. He was really so upon Account of his Conception; but this was
secret and invisible: but most eminently and remarkably so, upon account of his
Resurrection, which was open and visible to all.

1. Upon Account of his Conception by the Power of the Holy Ghost. That upon
this Account he was called the Son of God, St. Luke most expressly tells us,
Luke 1. 35. where the Angel tells the Virgin Mary, that the Holy Ghost should
come upon her, and the Power of the Highest should overshadow her, and
therefore that Holy Thing, which should be born of her, should be called the
Son of God. And this our Savior means by the Father's sanctifying him, and
sending him into the World; For which Reason he says he might justly call
himself the Son of God, John 10. 35, 36. If he call them Gods, unto whom the
word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of him, whom the
Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I
said I am the Son of God? If there had been no other Reason, this had been
sufficient to have given him the Title of the Son of God, that he was brought
into the World by the Sanctification, or Divine Power of the Holy Ghost.

2. Christ is also said in Scripture to be the Son of God, and to be declared
to be so upon Account of his Resurrection from the Dead, by the Power of the
Holy Ghost. His Resurrection from the Dead, is here in the Text ascribed to the
Spirit of Holiness, or the Holy Ghost. And so in other places of Scripture,
Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in
you: And, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Being put to Death in the Flesh: but quickened by the
Spirit; that is, he suffered in that frail mortal Nature which he assumed; but
was raised again by the Power of the Holy Ghost, of the Spirit of God which
resided in him. And upon this Account he is expressly said in Scripture to be
the Son of God. Psa. 2. 7. I will declare the decree; The Lord has said unto
me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; to which perhaps the
Apostle alludes here in the Text, when he says that Christ was decreed to be
the Son of God, by his Resurrection from the Dead. To be sure these Words, this
day have I begotten thee, St. Paul expressly tells us were accomplished in the
Resurrection of Christ; as if God by raising him from the Dead, had begotten
him, and decreed him to be his Son. Acts 13. 32, 33. And we declare unto you
glad Tidings, how that the Promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has
fulfilled the same unto their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again,
as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee.

He was the Son of God before, as he was conceived by the Holy Ghost; but this
was secret and invisible, and known only to the Mother of our Lord: And
therefore God thought fit to give a public and visible demonstration of it, so
as to put the matter out of all question, he declared him in a powerful manner
to be his Son, by giving him a new Life after Death, by raising him from the
Dead; and by this new and eminent Testimony given to him, declared him again to
be his Son, and confirmed the Title which was given him before upon a true, but
more secret Account, of his being conceived by the Holy Ghost.

And as our Savior is said to be the Son of God upon this twofold Account, of
his Conception by the Holy Ghost, and his Resurrection to Life by the Spirit of
God: So the Scripture (which does solicitously pursue a Resemblance and
Conformity between Christ and Christians) does likewise upon a twofold Account
(answerable to our Savior's Birth and Resurrection) call true Believers and
Christians, the Children of God; viz. Upon Account of their Regeneration or new
Birth, by the Operation of the Spirit of God; and upon Account of their
Resurrection to Eternal Life, by the Power of the same Spirit.

Upon account of our Regeneration and becoming Christians by the Power and
Operation of the Holy Spirit of God upon our Minds, we are said to be the
Children of God, as being regenerated and born again by the Holy Spirit of God.
And this is our first Adoption. And for this Reason, the Spirit of God
conferred upon Christians at their Baptism, and dwelling and residing in them
afterward, is called the Spirit of Adoption; Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby you cry, Abba Father. And Gal. 4. 5, 6. Believers
are said to receive the Adoption of Sons; God having sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into their Hearts, crying Abba Father; That is, all Christians, for as
much as they are regenerated by the Holy Spirit of God, and have the Spirit of
God dwelling in them, may with Confidence call God Father, and look upon
themselves as his Children. So the Apostle tells us, Romans 8. 14. That as many
as are led (or acted) by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

But though we are said to be Children of God upon account of our Regeneration,
and the Holy Spirit of God dwelling and residing in Christians; yet we are
eminently so, upon account of our Resurrection to Eternal Life, by the mighty
Power of God's Spirit. This is our final Adoption, and the Consummation of it;
and therefore Romans 8. 21. this is called the glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God, because by this we are for ever delivered from the Bondage of Corruption;
and by way of Eminency, the Adoption, viz. the Redemption of our Bodies.

We are indeed the Sons of God before, upon account of the regenerating and
sanctifying Virtue of the Holy Ghost; but finally and chiefly upon account of
our Resurrection by the Power of the Divine Spirit. So St. John tells us, that
then we shall be declared to be the Sons of God, after another manner than we
are now: 1 Jo. 3. 1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the Sons of God. Now we are the Sons of God, (that
is, our Adoption is begun in our Regeneration and Sanctification) but it does
not yet appear what we shall be; we shall be much more eminently so at the
Resurrection. We know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him.

But the most express and remarkable Text to this Purpose, is, Luke 20. 36.
where good Men, after the Resurrection, are for this Reason said to be the
Children of God, because they are the Children of the Resurrection. But they
who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from
the Dead, neither marry, nor are given in Marriage, neither can they die any
more; for they are equal to the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the
Children of the Resurrection. For this Reason they are said to be the Children
of God, because they are raised by him to a new Life; and to be made Partakers
of that which is promised to them, and reserved for them. For all that are
raised by the Power of God, out of the Dust of the Earth, are not therefore the
Children of God; but only they that have part in the blessed Resurrection to
Eternal Life, and do inherit the Kingdom prepared for them. Not those who are
raised to a perpetual Death, and the Resurrection of Condemnation. These are
not the Children of God; but the Children of Wrath, and the Children of
Perdition.

But the Resurrection of the Just, is the full and final Declaration, that we
are the Children of God; not only because we are restored to a new Life, but
because at the Resurrection, we are admitted to the full Possession of that
blessed Inheritance which is purchased for us, and promised to us.

And the Spirit of God which is conferred upon Believers in their Regeneration,
and afterward dwells and resides in them, is the Pledge and earnest of our
final Adoption, by our Resurrection to Eternal Life; and upon this account, and
no other, is said to be the Earnest of our future Inheritance, and the Seal and
Confirmation of it. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were
sealed by that Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance,
until the redemption of the purchased Possession; that is, the Holy Spirit of
God which Christians were made Partakers of, upon their sincere Belief of the
Christian Religion, is the Seal and Earnest of our Resurrection to Eternal
Life; as the Apostle plainly tells us, in that remakable Text; Romans 8. 11. If
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you.

I have been the longer upon this, because it serves fully to explain to us
those obscure Phrases, of the Seal, and Earnest, and first Fruits of the
Spirit, which many have mistaken to import some particular and spiritual
Revelation or Impression upon the Minds of good Men, assuring them of their
Salvation. Whereas the Apostle intended no more by them, but that the Spirit of
God which dwells in Believers, enabling them to mortify the deeds of the
Flesh, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, is a Pledge and Earnest to
us, of a blessed Resurrection to eternal Life by the Power of the Spirit of
God, which now dwells in us, and is the same Spirit which raised up Jesus from
the dead. And in this Chapter, the Spirit of God is said, v. 16. To bear
witness to our Spirits, that is, to assure our Minds, that we are the Children
of God; that is, that we are his Children now, and consequently Heirs of a
glorious Resurrection to Eternal Life: For so it follows in the next Words, and
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ; if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified together. And this being
glorified together with Christ at the Resurrection, he calls, v. 19. the
manifestation of the Sons of God. Thus you see how in Conformity to the Son of
God, our elder Brother, we are said to be the Sons of God, because we are now
regenerated, and shall at the last day be raised up to Eternal Life, by the
Power of the Spirit of God. I proceed to the

Second Thing I propounded to speak to, for the clearing of these words,
namely, in what Sense Christ is said to be declared, or demonstrated to be the
Son of God by his Resurrection from the dead. By which the Apostle means these
two things.

1. That by his Resurrection from the dead, he was approved by God to be the
true Messiah, and vindicated to the World from all Suspicion of being a
Deceiver and Impostor. And consequently in the

2. Place, That hereby God gave Testimony to the Truth and Divinity of his
Doctrine.

1. By his Resurrection from the dead, he was approved by God to be the True
Messiah, foretold by the Prophets, and expected at that time by the Jews, and
sufficiently vindicated to the World to be no Deceiver and Impostor.

And for our fuller Understanding of this, we are to consider these two Things.

(1.) What the Apprehensions and Expectations of the Jews were concerning the
Messiah. And,

(2.) What the many Crimes were which they laid to our Savior's charge, and
for which they condemned him.

(1.) What the Apprehensions and Expectations of the Jews were concerning the
Messiah. And it is very plain from the Evangelical History, that they generally
apprehended these two things of him: That the Messiah was to be the Son of God,
and the King of Israel; and therefore that our Savior, by affirming himself to
be the Messiah, did call himself the Son of God, and the King of Israel; John
1. 41. Andrew tells his Brother Simon, We have found the Messiah, v. 45. Philip
tells Nathanael, We have found him, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets
did write; that is, the Messiah. v. 49. Nathanael upon Discourse with our
Savior, being convinced that he was the Messiah, owns him in these Terms;
Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. John 6. 69. Peter
declares his Belief that he was the Christ, or the Messiah, in these Words, We
believe and are sure that thou art the Son of the living God. This appears
likewise from the High-Priest's Question to him, Matthew. 26. 63. Art thou the
Christ, (that is, the Messiah) the Son of the living God; or as it is in St.
Mark, the Son of the Blessed; compared with Pilat's Question, Art thou the King
of the Jews? And when he was upon the Cross, some reviled him under the Notion
of the Son of God, Matthew. 27. 40. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
Cross: Others under the Notion of the King of Israel, v. 42. If he be the King
of Israel, let him come down from the Crossed. From all which it is plain that
the Jews expected and believed, that the true Messiah was to be the Son of God,
and the King of Israel; and whoever was not so, was a Deceiver and Impostor.
But our Savior affirmed himself to be the true Messiah, and the Son of God.
Now God by raising him from the dead did abundantly vindicate him to the World,
from all suspicion of Imposture; and gave Testimony to him, that he was all
that he said of himself, viz. the true Messiah, and the Son of God.

Which will further appear, if we consider, ( 2dly,) What were the Crimes which
the Jews laid to our Savior's Charge, and for which they condemned him; and
they were mainly these two, That by giving himself out to be the Messiah, he
made himself King of Israel, and the Son of God. Of the first of these, they
accused him to Pilate; hoping by this Accusation to make him guilty of Sedition
against the Roman Government; for saying, that he was the King of Israel. Of
the other they accused him to the Chief Priests, as being guilty of Blasphemy,
in that not being the Messiah, he called himself the Son of God. And upon this
they laid the main stress, as being a thing that would condemn him by their
Law. They charged him with this in his lifetime, as appears by those Words of
our Savior, John 10. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and
sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? And
when he was arraigned before the Chief Priests, they accused him of this, and
he owning this Charge, that he called himself the Son of God, upon this they
judge him guilty of Death. Matthew. 26. 65, 66. Then the High Priest rent his
Clothes, and said, He has spoken Blasphemy; what further need have we of
witness? Behold, now ye have heard his Blasphemy. What think ye? They answered,
He is guilty of Death. And when Pilate told them, that he found no Fault in
him, they still instance in this as his Crime, John 19. 7. We have a Law, and
by our Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

Now this being the Crime which was charged upon him, and for which he was
crucified, and put to Death; God, by raising him up from the dead, and taking
him up into Heaven, gave Testimony to him, that he was no Impostor, and that he
did not vainly arrogate to himself to be the Messiah and the Son of God. God by
raising him from the dead, by the Power of the Holy Ghost, gave a mighty
Demonstration to him, that he was the Son of God. For which Reason he is said
by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16. to be justified by the Spirit. The Spirit gave
Testimony to him at his Baptism, and by the mighty Works that appeared in him
in his Life time; but he was most eminently and remarkably justified by the
Holy Ghost, by his Resurrection from the Dead; God hereby bearing him Witness,
that he was unjustly condemned, and that he assumed nothing to himself, but
what of right did belong to him, when he said he was the Messiah, and the Son
of God. For how could a Man that was condemned to die, for calling himself the
Son of God, be more remarkably vindicated, and more clearly proved to be so;
than by being raised from the dead, by the Power of God?

And, 2dly, God did consequently hereby give Testimony to the Truth and
Divinity of our Savior's Doctrine. Being proved by his Resurrection to be the
Son of God, this proved him to be a Teacher sent by him, and that what he
declared to the World was the Mind and Will of God. For this none was more
likely to know, and to report truly to Mankind, than the Son of God, who came
from the Bosom of his Father. And because the Resurrection of Christ is so
great a Testimony to the Truth of his Doctrine, hence it is that St. Paul tells
us, that the belief of this one Article of Christ's Resurrection, is sufficient
to a Man's Salvation, Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thy Heart, that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. The Reason is plain, because the Resurrection of Christ
confirmed the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine; so that the belief of our
Savior's Resurrection does by necessary Consequence infer the belief of his
whole Doctrine. That God raised him from the dead, after he was condemned and
put to Death for calling himself the Son of God, is a demonstration that he
really was the Son of God; and if he was the Son of God, the Doctrine which he
taught was true, and from God.

And thus I have shown you, how the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, is a
powerful Demonstration that he was the Son of God.

All that remains, is briefly to draw some practical Inferences from the
Consideration of our Savior's Resurrection.

1st. To confirm and establish our Minds in the belief of the Christian
Religion, of which the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead is so great a
Confirmation. And therefore I told you that this one Article is mentioned by
St. Paul as the Sum and Abridgment of the Christian Faith; If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and believe in thy heart that God
has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. The belief of our Savior's
Resurrection does by necessary consequence infer the belief of his whole
Doctrine; for he who believes that God raised him from the Dead, after he was
put to death for calling himself the Son of God, cannot but believe him to be
the Son of God; and consequently that the Doctrine which he delivered was from
God.

2dly. The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead assures us of a future
Judgment, and of the Recompenses and Rewards of another World. That Christ was
raised from the Dead, is a demonstration of another Life after this; and no man
that believes the immortality of our Souls, and another Life after this, ever
doubted of a future Judgment; so that by the Resurrection of Christ from the
Dead, God has given assurance unto all men of a future Judgment, and
consequently of the Recompenses and Rewards of another World.

The consideration whereof ought to have a mighty influence upon us, more
especially to these three purposes.

1st. To raise our minds above the present Enjoyments of this Life. Were but
men convinced of this great and obvious Truth, that there is an infinite
difference between Time and Eternity, between a few days and everlasting Ages;
would we but sometimes represent to our selves, what thoughts and apprehensions
dying Men have of this World, how vain and empty a thing it appears to them,
how like a Pageant and Shadow it looks, as it passes away from them; methinks
none of these things could be a sufficient temptation to any Man to forget God
and his Soul; but notwithstanding all the present delights and allurements of
Sense, we should be strongly intent upon the concernments of another World, and
almost wholly taken up with the thoughts of the vast Eternity which we are
ready to enter into. For what is there in this World, this vast and howling
Wilderness, this rude and barbarous Country which we are but to pass through,
which should detain and entangle our Affections, and take off our Thoughts from
our Everlasting Habitation, from that better, and that heavenly Country, where
we hope to live and to be happy for ever?

2dly. The Consideration of the Rewards of another World should comfort and
support us under the troubles and afflictions of this World. The hopes of a
blessed Resurrection are a very proper Consideration to bear us up under the
evils and pressures of this Life. If we hope for so great a Happiness
hereafter, we may be contented to bear some Afflictions in this World; because
the Blessedness which we expect will so abundantly recompense and outweigh our
present Sufferings. So the Apostle assures us, Romans 8. 18. We know that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
that shall be revealed in us. The consideration whereof was that which made the
Primitive Christians to triumph in their Sufferings, and in the midst of all
their Tribulations to rejoice in the hopes of the Glory of God; because their
Sufferings did really prepare and make way for their Glory. So the same Apostle
tells us, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18. Our light Afflictions which are but for a moment,
work for us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory; whilst we look
not at the things which are seen; for the things which are seen are Temporal,
but the things which are not seen are Eternal.

3dly, and lastly, The assurance of our future Reward is a mighty Encouragement
to Obedience and a Holy Life. What greater Encouragement can we have than this,
that all the good which we do in this World will accompany us into the other?
That when we rest from our labors, our works will follow us? That when we
shall be stripped of other things, and parted from them, these will still remain
with us, and bear us company? Our Riches and Honors, our sensual Pleasures and
Enjoyments will all take their leave of us, when we leave this World; nay many
times they do not accompany us so far as the Grave, but take occasion to
forsake us, when we have the greatest need and use of them: but Piety and
Virtue are that better part which cannot be taken from us. All the good actions
which we do in this World will go along with us into the other, and through the
Merits of our Redeemer procure for us, at the hands of a Gracious and Merciful
God, a Glorious and Eternal Reward; not according to the meanness of our
Services, but according to the Bounty of his Mind, and the vastness of his
Treasures and Estate.

Now what an encouragement is this to Holiness and Obedience, to consider that
it will all be our own another day; to be assured that whoever serves God
faithfully, and does suffer for him patiently, does lay up so much Treasure for
himself in another World, and provides lasting Comforts for himself, and
faithful and constant Companions, that will never leave him nor forsake him?

Let us then do all the good we can, while we have opportunity, and serve God
with all our might, knowing that no good action that we do shall be lost and
fall to the ground, that every Grace and Virtue that we exercise in this life,
and every degree of them, shall receive their full recompense at the
Resurrection of the Just.

How should this inspire us with Resolution and Zeal and Industry in the
Service of God, to have such a Reward continually in our Eye? how should it
tempt us to our Duty, to have a Crown and a Kingdom offered to us, Joys
unspeakable and full of Glory, such things as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
nor have entered into the heart of man? And such are the things which God has
laid up for them who love him heartily, and serve him faithfully in this World.

SERMON V. The danger of Apostasy from Christianity.
HEB. VI. 4, 5, 6.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; If they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

THESE words are full of difficulties, and the misunderstanding of them has
not only been an occasion of a great deal of trouble, and even despair to
particular persons, but one of the chief Reasons why the Church of Rome did for
a long time reject the Authority of this Book; which by the way I cannot but
take notice of as a demonstrative Instance both of the fallible Judgment of
that Church, and of the fallibility of Oral Tradition; for St. Jerome more than
once expressly tells us, that in his time (which was about 400 years after
Christ) the Church of Rome did not receive this Epistle for Canonical: But it
is plain, that since that time, whether moved by the Evidence of the thing, or
(which is more probable) by the Consent and Authority of other Churches, they
have received it, and do at this day acknowledge it for Canonical; from whence
one of these two things will necessarily follow; either that they were in an
error for 400 years together while they rejected it; or that they have since
erred for a longer time in receiving it. One of these is unavoidable; for if
the Book be Canonical now, it was so from the beginning; for Bellarmine himself
confesses (and if he had not confessed it, it is nevertheless true and
certain) that the Church cannot make a Book Canonical, which was not so before;
if it was not Canonical at first, it cannot be made so afterward; so that let
them choose which part they will, it is evident, beyond all denial, that the
Church of Rome has actually erred in her Judgment concerning the Authority of
this Book; and one error of this kind is enough to destroy her Infallibility,
there being no greater Evidence that a Church is not Infallible, than if it
plainly appear that she has been deceived.

And this also is a convincing instance of the Fallibility of Oral Tradition.
For if that be Infallible in delivering down to us the Canonical Books of
Scripture, it necessarily follows, that whatever Books were delivered down to
us for Canonical in one Age, must have been so in all Ages; and whatever was
rejected in any Age, must always have been rejected: but we plainly see the
contrary, from the instance of this Epistle, concerning which the Church of
Rome (which pretends to be the great and faithful Preserver of Tradition) has
in several Ages delivered several things. This is a peremptory instance both of
the Fallibility of the Roman Church, and of her Oral Tradition.

Having observed this by the way, which I could not well pass by upon so fair
an occasion, I shall betake my self to the explication of these words; toward
which it will be no small advantage to consider the particular Phrases and
Expressions in the Text. It is impossible for those who were once enlightened;
that is, were solemnly admitted into the Church by Baptism, and embraced the
profession of Christianity. Nothing was more frequent among the Ancients, than
to call Baptism, (...) Illumination, and those who were baptized were called,
(...) enlightened Persons, because of that Divine Illumination which was
conveyed to the minds of Men by the knowledge of Christianity, the Doctrine
whereof they made Profession of at their Baptism. And therefore Justin Martyr
tells us, that by calling upon God the Father, and the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the name of the Holy Ghost, (...), the enlightened Person is washed;
and again more expressly, (...), this Laver (speaking of Baptism) is called
Illumination. And St. Cyprian gives us the Reason; because by virtue of Baptism
in expiatum pectus ac purum desuper se lumen infundit, Light is infused from
above into the purified Soul. And that this Expression is so to be understood
here in the Text, as also Chap. 10. 32. the Syriac and Ethiopic give us good
ground to believe; for they render the Text thus, It is impossible for those
who have been once baptized, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift. And at the
10th. Chap. v. 32. which we translate, But call to remembrance the former days,
in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;
that is, call to mind the former days, in which after by Baptism ye had
publicly embraced the Profession of Christianity, ye were upon that account
exposed to many grievous Sufferings and Persecutions. So that I think there can
be no great doubt, but, by those that were once enlightened, the Apostle means
those that were baptized.

To proceed then, For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost;
these two Expressions seem to denote the Spiritual Benefits and Graces of the
Holy Ghost conferred upon Christians by Baptism; particularly Regeneration,
which is the proper work of the Holy Ghost, and Justification and Remission of
Sins. So we find Faith, whereby we are justified, called the Gift of God, Ephesians.
2. 8. Faith is the gift of God; and our Justification is called a Gift, and a
free Gift five several times in one Chapter, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17, 18. But not as
the offense, so also is the free gift; for if through the offense of one many
be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man
Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many; and what this free Gift is, he tells us
in the next words, viz. Justification, or Remission of Sins, v. 16. And not as
it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by one to
Condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For if
by one man's offense, death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one; Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men unto justification of life. So that by the Heavenly Gift, I
understand remission of Sins; and by being made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
the sanctifying Power and Efficacy of God's Spirit.

And have tasted the good word of God; that is, entertained the Gospel, which
is here called the good word of God; by reason of the gracious promises
contained in it, particularly the Promises of Eternal Life and Happiness.

And the powers of the World to come, (...), the Powers of the Gospel Age; that
is, the miraculous Powers of the Holy Ghost which were bestowed upon Men, in
order to the propagation of the Gospel. And that this is the true meaning of
this Phrase, will I think be very plain to any one who shall but consider, that
the word (...) is generally in Scripture used for miraculous Powers and
Operations; and particularly to express the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which were bestowed upon the Apostles and first Christians; (I need not cite
the particular Texts for the proof of this, they are so many and so well
known;) And then if we consider farther, that the times of the Gospel, the days
of the Messiah, are frequently called by the Jews Seculum futurum, The Age to
come. And indeed this is the very Phrase used by the LXX concerning our
Savior, Isa. 9. 6. where he is called, according to our Translation, The
Everlasting Father, but according to that of the LXX (...), The Father of the
future Age. And this very Phrase is used once more in this Epistle to the Heb.
chapter 2. 5. For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the World to come,
whereof we now speak. He had said before, that the Law was given by Angels. v.
2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast; but the dispensation of the
Gospel, which he calls The World to come, or the future Age, was not committed
to them, this was administered by the Son of God; Unto the Angels has he not
put into subjection the World to come. And it is observable, that this Phrase is
only used in this Epistle to the Hebrews, because the Jews very well understood
the meaning of it, being that whereby they commonly expressed the times of the
Gospel, according to that ancient Tradition of the House of Elias, which
distributed the duration of the World into three (...), or Ages; the Age before
the Law, the Age under the Law, and the Age of the Messiah, which they called
the Seculum futurum, or the Age to come; and which is likewise in Scripture
called, The last days, or times, and the conclusion of the Ages; Concerning
which, it was particularly prophesied, that the Holy Ghost should be poured
forth upon Men in miraculous Gifts and Powers. And to this very purpose the
Prophet Joel is cited by St. Peter, Acts 2. 16, 17. This is that which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days, (says
God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your Sons and your
Daughters shall prophecy, etc. From all which it is very evident, that by
tasting the powers of the World to come, is meant, being partakers of the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were poured forth in the Gospel Age,
by the Jews commonly called, The World to come.

If they shall fall away; that is, if after all this they shall apostatize from
this Profession, out of love to this present World, or from the fear of
Persecutions and Sufferings.

It is impossible to renew them again to Repentance; that is, it is a thing
very difficult, hardly to be hoped for, that such wilful and notorious
Apostates should be restored again by Repentance. For the word (...), which we
translate Impossible, is not always to be taken in the strictest sense, for
that which absolutely cannot be; but many times for that which is so very
difficult, that it seems next to an impossibility. So our Savior, that which
in one place he calls exceeding hard, viz. for a rich Man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, he afterward calls impossible with Men; and so here I
understand the Apostle, that those who apostatize from Christianity, after
Baptism and the benefits of it, It Is exceeding hard to recover them again to
Repentance: This Phrase (...), to renew them again to Repentance, some
understand of restoring them again to the Peace and Communion of the Church, by
a course of Penance, such as was prescribed in the ancient Church to great
Offenders; and then they understand by (...), not a Natural, but a Moral
Impossibility; that which cannot be done according to the Orders and
Constitutions of the Church; that is, the Church did refuse to admit Apostates,
and some other great Offenders, as Murderers and Adulterers, to a course of
Penance, in order to their Reconciliation with the Church; This Tertullian
tells us was the strictness of the Church in his time, Neque Idololatriae,
neque Sanguini pax ab Ecclesia redditur; they admitted neither Idolaters, nor
Murderers to the reconciliation of the Church. Though they were never so
penitent, and shed never so many tears, yet he says they were jejunae pacis
lacrimae, their tears were in vain, to reconcile them to the Peace and
Communion of the Church. He says indeed, they did not absolutely pronounce
their case desperate in respect of God's Pardon and Forgiveness; sed de venia
Deo reservamus, for that they referred them to God: but they were never to be
admitted again into the Church; so strict were many Churches, and that upon the
Authority of this Text; though the Church of Rome was more moderate in this
matter, and for that Reason called the Authority of this Book into question.

But I see no reason why these Words should primarily be understood of
restoring Men to the Communion of the Church by Penance: but they seem to be
meant of restoring Men to the Favor of God by Repentance; of which indeed
their being restored to the Communion of the Church was a good sign. This the
Apostle says was very difficult, for those who after Baptism, and the several
benefits of it, did apostatize from Christianity, to be recovered again to
Repentance.

Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame. This is spoken by way of Aggravation of the crime of Apostasy, that
they who fall off from Christianity, in effect and by interpretation do
crucify the Son of God over again, and expose him to shame and reproach, as
the Jews did; for by denying and renouncing of him, they declare him to be an
Impostor, and consequently worthy of that death which he suffered, and that
Ignominy which he was exposed to; and therefore, in account of God, they are
said to do that, which by their actions they do approve; so that it is made a
Crime of the highest Nature, as if they should crucify the Son of God, and use
him in the most ignominious manner, even tread under foot the Son of God, as
the expression is to the same purpose, Chapter 10, 29.

Thus I have endeavored, as briefly and clearly I could, to explain to you the
true meaning and importance of the several Phrases and Expressions in the Text;
the sense whereof amounts to this, that if those who are baptized, and by
Baptism have received Remission of Sins, and do believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the Promises of it, and are endowed with the miraculous Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, if such persons as these shall after all this apostatize from
Christianity, it is very hard, and next to an impossibility, to imagine how
such Persons should recover again by Repentance, seeing they are guilty of as
great a Crime, as if in their own Persons they had put to Death and
ignominiously used the Son of God; because by rejecting of him, they declare to
the World that he suffered deservedly.

Having thus explained the words, in order to the further vindication of them,
from the mistakes and misapprehensions which have been about them, I shall
endeavor to make out these five things.

1st, That the Sin here mentioned is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

2dly, That the Apostle does not declare it to be absolutely impossible, but
only that those who are guilty of it are recovered to Repentance with great
difficulty.

3dly, That it is not a partial Apostasy from the Christian Religion by any
particular vicious Practice.

4thly, That it is a total Apostasy from the Christian Religion, and more
especially to the Heathen Idolatry, which the Apostle here speaks of.

5thly, The Reason of the difficulty of the recovery of those who fall into
this Sin.

1st, That the Sin here mentioned is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which
I have heretofore discoursed of, and shown wherein the particular Nature of it
does consist. There are three things which do remarkably distinguish the Sin
here spoken of in the Text, from the Sin against the Holy Ghost described by
our Savior.

1st, The Persons that are guilty of this Sin here in the Text, are evidently
such as had embraced Christianity, and had taken upon them the Profession of
it: whereas those whom our Savior charge with the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, are such as constantly opposed his Doctrine, and resisted the Evidence
he offered for it.

2dly, The particular nature of the Sin against the Holy Ghost consisted in
blaspheming the Spirit whereby our Savior wrought his Miracles, and saying he
did not do those things by the Spirit of God, but by the assistance of the
Devil; in that malicious and unreasonable imputing of the plain Effects of the
Holy Ghost to the Power of the Devil, and consequently in an obstinate refusal
to be convinced by the Miracles that he wrought: but here is nothing of all
this so much as intimated by the Apostle in this place.

3dly, The Sin against the Holy Ghost is declared to be absolutely
unpardonable, both in this World, and in that which is to come: but this is not
declared to be absolutely unpardonable; which brings me to the

2d, Thing, namely, That this Sin here spoken of by the Apostle, is not said to
be absolutely unpardonable. It is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost; and
whatever else it be, it is not out of the compass of God's Pardon and
Forgiveness. So our Savior has told us, that all manner of Sin whatsoever
that men have committed is capable of pardon, excepting only the Sin against
the Holy Ghost. And though the Apostle here uses a very severe Expression, that
if such persons fall away, it is impossible to renew them again to Repentance;
yet I have shown that there is no necessity of understanding this Phrase in the
strictest sense of the word impossible; but as it is elsewhere used, for that
which is extremely difficult. Nor indeed will our Savior's Declaration, which
I mentioned before, that all Sins whatsoever are pardonable, except the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, suffer us to understand these words in the most
rigorous Sense.

3dly, The Sin here spoken of, is not a partial Apostasy from the Christian
Religion by any particular vicious Practice. Whosoever lives in the habitual
practice of any Sin plainly forbidden by the Christian Law, may be said so far
to have apostatized from Christianity: but this is not the falling away which
the Apostle here speaks of. This may be bad enough, and the greater Sins any
Man who professes himself a Christian lives in, the more notoriously he
contradicts his Profession, and falls off from Christianity, and the nearer he
approaches to the Sin in the Text, and the danger there threatened: but yet for
all that, this is not that which the Apostle speaks of.

4thly, But it is a total Apostasy from the Christian Religion, more especially
to the Heathen Idolatry, the renouncing of the true God, and our Savior, and
the Worship of false Gods, which the Apostle here speaks of. And this will be
evident, if we consider the occasion and main scope of this Epistle. And that
was to confirm the Jews, who had newly embraced Christianity, in the profession
of that Religion; and to keep them from apostatizing from it, because of the
Persecutions and Sufferings which attended that Profession. It pleased God,
when Christianity first appeared in the World, to permit the Powers of the
World to raise a vehement Persecution against the Professors of it, by reason
whereof many out of base fear did apostatize from it, and in testimony of their
renouncing it, were forced to Sacrifice to the Heathen Idols. This is that
which the Apostle endeavors to caution and arm Men against throughout this
Epistle. Chapter 2. 1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, lest at any time we should fall away: And, Chap. 3.
12. it is called an evil heart of Unbelief to apostatize from the living God.
Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of Unbelief, to
depart from the living God; that is, to fall from the Worship of the true God
to Idolatry. And, Chap. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith
without wavering, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together; that is,
not declining the Assemblies of Christians, for fear of Persecution; and, v.
26. it is called a sinning wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of
the Truth; and, v. 39. a drawing back to Perdition. And, Chapter 12. it is called
by way of Eminency, the Sin which so easily besets; the Sin, which in those
times of Persecution, they were so liable to.

And I doubt not, but this is the Sin which St. John speaks of, and calls the
Sin unto Death, and does not require Christians to pray for those who fall into
it, with any assurance that it shall be forgiven; 1 John 5. 16. There is a Sin
unto Death; I do not say that he shall pray for it. All Unrighteousness is Sin,
and there is a Sin not unto Death. We know that whosoever is born of God,
sins not; that is, does not fall into the Sin of Apostasy from Christianity
to that of the Heathen Idolatry: But he that is begotten of God, keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not. And then, v. 21. he adds this
Caution, Little Chrildren keep your selves from Idols. Which sufficiently
shows, what that Sin was which he was speaking of before.

So that this being the Sin which the Apostle designed to caution Men against
throughout this Epistle, it is very evident what falling away it is he here
speaks of, namely, a total Apostasy from Christianity, and more especially to
the Heathen Idolatry.

5thly, We will consider the Reason of the difficulty of Recovering such
Persons by Repentance. If they fall away, it is extremely difficult to renew
them again to Repentance; and that for these three Reasons.

1. Because of the greatness and heinousness of the Sin.

2. Because it renounceth, and casts off the means of Recovery.

3. Because it is so high a Provocation of God to withdraw his Grace from such
Persons.

1. Because of the greatness and heinousness of the Sin, both in the Nature and
Circumstances of it. It is a downright Apostasy from God, a direct renouncing
of him, and rejecting of his Truth, after Men have owned it, and been inwardly
persuaded and convinced of it; and so the Apostle expresses it in this
Epistle, calling it an Apostasy from the living God, a sinning wilfully after
we have received the knowledge of the Truth. It has all the Aggravations that
a Crime is capable of, being against the clearest Light and Knowledge, and the
fullest Conviction of a Man's Mind, concerning the Truth and Goodness of that
Religion which he renounceth; against the greatest Obligations laid upon him by
the Grace and Mercy of the Gospel; after the free Pardon of Sins, and the Grace
and Assistance of God's Spirit received, and a miraculous Power conferred, for
a Witness and Testimony to themselves, of the undoubted Truth of that Religion
which they have embraced. It is the highest Affront to the Son of God, who
revealed this Religion to the World, and sealed it with his Blood; and, in
effect, an expression of as high Malice to the Author of this Religion, as the
Jews were guilty of, when they put him to so cruel and shameful a Death.

Now a Sin of this heinous Nature is apt naturally either to plunge Men into
hardness and impenitency, or to drive them to despair; and either of these
Conditions are effectual Bars to their Recovery. And both these Dangers the
Apostle warns Men of in this Epistle. Chapter 3. 12, 13. Take heed, Brethren, lest
there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, to apostatize from the living
God: but exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Or else the Reflection upon so
horrid a Crime is apt to drive a Man to Despair; as it did Judas, who, after he
had betrayed the Son of God, could find no ease but by making away himself; the
guilt of so great a Sin filled him with such Terrors, that he was glad to fly
to Death for Refuge, and to lay violent hands upon himself. And this likewise
was the Case of Spira, whose Apostasy, though it was not total from the
Christian Religion, but only from the Purity and Reformation of it, brought him
to that desperation of Mind which was a kind of Hell upon Earth. And of this
danger likewise the Apostle admonishes, Chapter 12. 15. Looking diligently, lest
any man fail of the Grace of God (or as it is in the Margin, lest any Man fall
from the Grace of God) lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you;
and then he compares the Case of such Persons to Esau, who, when he had
renounced his Birthright, to which the Blessing was annexed, was afterward,
when he would have inherited the Blessing, rejected, and found no place of
Repentance, though he sought it carefully with Tears.

2dly, Those who are guilty of this Sin, do renounce and cast off the means of
their Recovery; and therefore it becomes extremely difficult to renew them
again to Repentance. They reject the Gospel, which affords the best Arguments
and Means to Repentance, and renounce the only way of Pardon and Forgiveness.
And certainly that Man is in a very sad and desperate Condition, the very
nature of whose Disease is to reject the Remedy that should cure him. And this,
the Apostle tells us, was the Condition of those who apostatized from the
Gospel, Chap. 10. 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin; but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall
devour the Adversary. The great Sacrifice and Propitiation for Sin was the Son
of God; and they who renounce him, what way of Expiation can they hope for
afterward? what can they expect, but to fall into his Hands as a Judge, whom
they have rejected as a Sacrifice and a Savior? And then,

3dly. Those who are guilty of this Sin, provoke God in the highest manner to
withdraw his Grace and Holy Spirit from them, by the Power and Efficacy whereof
they should be brought to Repentance; so that it can hardly otherwise be
expected, but that God should leave those to themselves, who have so unworthily
forsaken him; and wholly withdraw his Grace and Spirit from such Persons, as
have so notoriously offered despite to the Spirit of Grace.

I do not say that God always does this, he is sometimes better to such Persons
than they have deserved from him, and saves those who have done what they can
to undo themselves, and mercifully puts forth his Hand to recover them who were
drawing back to Perdition; especially if they were suddenly surprised by the
violence of Temptation, and yielded to it, not deliberately and out of choice,
but merely through weakness and infirmity, and so soon as they reflected upon
themselves, did return and repent: This was the case of St. Peter, who being
surprised with a sudden fear denied Christ; but being admonished of his Sin by
the signal which our Savior had given him, he was recovered by a speedy and
hearty Repentance. And so likewise several of the Primitive Christians, who
were at first overcome by fear to renounce their Religion, did afterward
recover themselves, and died resolute Martyrs: but it is a very dangerous
State, out of which but few recover, and with great difficulty.

And thus I have done with the five things I propounded to make out, for the
clearing of this Text from the mistakes and misapprehensions which have been
about it. I shall now draw some useful Inferences from hence by way of
Application, that we may see how far this does concern our selves; and they
shall be these.

1st. From the Supposition here in the Text, that such Persons as are there
described (namely, those who have been baptized, and by Baptism have received
remission of Sins, and did firmly believe the Gospel, and the Promises of it,
and were endowed with miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost,) that these may fall
away; this should caution us all against Confidence and Security; when those
that have gone thus far may fall, let him that stands take heed.

Some are of opinion, that those whom the Apostle here describes are true and
sincere Christians, and that when he says, it is impossible if they fall away,
to renew them again to Repentance, he means that they cannot fall away totally,
so as to stand in need of being renewed again to Repentance: But this is
directly contrary to the Apostle's design, which was to caution Christians
against Apostasy; because if they did fall away, their recovery would be so
exceeding difficult; which Argument does plainly suppose that they might fall
away.

On the other hand, there are others who think the Persons, here described by
the Apostle, to be Hypocritical Christians, who for some base ends had
entertained Christianity, and put on the Profession of it, but not being
sincere and in good earnest, would forsake it when Persecution came. But
besides that this is contrary to the description which the Apostle makes of
these Persons, who are said to have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and to have
been made partakers of the Holy Ghost; by which if we understand Justification
and Remission of Sins, and the Sanctifying Virtue of the Holy Ghost, which in
all probability is the meaning of these Phrases, these are Blessings which did
not belong to Hypocrites, and which God does not bestow upon them; I say,
besides this, there is no reason to imagine that the Apostle intended such
Persons, when it is likely that there were very few Hypocrites in those times
of Persecution; for what should tempt Men to dissemble Christianity, when it
was so dangerous a Profession? or what Worldly Ends could Men have in taking
that Profession upon them, which was so directly contrary to their Worldly
Interests?

So that upon the whole matter, I doubt not but the Apostle here means those
who are real in the Profession of Christianity, and that such might fall away.
For we may easily imagine, that Men might be convinced of the Truth and
Goodness of the Christian Doctrine, and in good earnest embrace the Profession
of it, and yet not be so perfectly weaned from the World, and so firmly rooted
and established in that Persuasion, as when it came to the Trial to be able to
quit all for it, and to bear up against all the Terrors and Assaults of
Persecution; so that they might be real Christians, and no Hypocrites, though
they were not so perfectly established and confirmed, and so sincerely resolved
as many others. They were not like St. Paul, and those tried Persons whom he
speaks of, Romans 8. 35, 37. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerours. (They had been
tried by all these, and yet had held out) upon which he breaks out into those
triumphant Expressions; I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. They might not (I say)
be like those: and yet for all that be real in their Profession of
Christianity, and no Hypocrites.

In short, I take them to be such as our Savior describes him to be, who
received the seed into stony places, namely, he that hears the word, and anon
with joy receceiveth it: yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a
while; for when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and
by he is offended. This is no description of a Hypocrite; but of one that was
real, as far as he went, (for he is said to receive the word with joy) but was
not well rooted, and come to such a confirmed State, as resolutely to withstand
the assaults of Persecution.

So that though we have truly embraced Christianity, and are in a good degree
sincere in the Profession of it, yet there is great Reason why we should
neither be secure nor confident in our selves. Not secure, because there is
great danger that our Resolution may be born down one time or other by the
Assaults of Temptation, if we be not continually vigilant, and upon our Guard.
Not confident in our selves; because we stand by Faith, and Faith is the gift
of God; therefore as the Apostle infers, we should not be high minded, but
fear. Men may have gone a great way in Christianity, and have been sincere in
the Profession of it; and yet afterward may apostatize in the foulest manner,
not only fall off to a vicious Life, but even desert the Profession of their
Religion. I would to God the Experience of the World did not give us too much
Reason to believe the Possibility of this. When we see so many revolt from the
Profession of the reformed Religion, to the Corruptions and Superstitions of
Rome; And others from a religious and sober Life, to plunge themselves into all
kind of Lewdness and Debauchery, and it is to be feared, into Atheism and
Infidelity; Can we doubt any longer whether it be possible for Christians to
fall away? I wish we were as certain of the possibility of their Recovery, as
we are of their Falling, and that we had as many Examples of the one as of the
other.

Let us then be very vigilant over our selves, and according to the Apostle's
Exhortation, 2 Pet. 3. 17. Seeing we know these things before, beware, lest we
also being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from our own
stedfastness.

2dly, This shows us how great an Aggravation it is, for Men to Sin against the
Means of Knowledge which the Gospel affords, and the Mercies which it offers
unto them. That which aggravated the Sin of these Persons was, that after they
were once enlightened, that is, at their Baptism were instructed in the
Christian Doctrine, the clearest and most perfect Revelation that ever was made
of God's Will to Mankind, that after they were justified freely by God's Grace,
and had received Remission of Sins, and had many other Benefits conferred upon
them; that after all this, they should fall off from this Holy Religion. This
was that which did so heighten and inflame their Guilt, and made their Case so
near desperate. The two great aggravations of Crimes are Wilfulness and
Ingratitude; if a Crime be wilfully committed, and committed against one that
has obliged us by the greatest Favors and Benefits. Now he commits a fault
wilfully, who does it against the clear knowledge of his Duty. Ignorance
excuses; for so far as a Man is ignorant of the Evil he does, so far the
Action is involuntary: but knowledge makes it to be a wilful Fault. And this is
a more peculiar Aggravation of the Sins of Christians, because God has
afforded them the greatest means and opportunities of Knowledge; that
Revelation which God has made of his Will to the World by our Blessed Savior,
is the clearest Light that ever Mankind had, and the mercies which the Gospel
brings are the greatest that ever were offered to the Sons of Men; the free
Pardon and Remission of all our Sins, and the assistance of God's Grace and
Holy Spirit, to help the weakness of our Nature, and enable us to do what God
requires of us. So that we who sin after Baptism, after the knowledge of
Christianity, and those great Blessings which the Gospel bestows on Mankind,
are of all Persons in the World the most inexcusable. The Sins of Heathens bear
no proportion to ours, because they never enjoyed those means of Knowledge,
never had those Blessings conferred upon them, which Christians are Partakers
of; so that we may apply to our selves those severe words of the Apostle in
this Epistle, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Hear how
our Savior aggravates the Faults of Men upon this account, of the wilfulness
of them, and their being committed against the express Knowledge of God's Will;
Luke 12. 47, 48. The Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes;
for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required; and to whom
Men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. The Means and Mercies
of the Gospel are so many Talents committed to our Trust, of the neglect
whereof a severe Account will be taken at the Day of Judgment. If we be wilful
Offenders, there is no Excuse for us, and little hopes of Pardon. If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, (says the Apostle
in this Epistle) there remains no more sacrifice for sin. I know the Apostle
speaks this particularly of the Sin of Apostasy from Christianity; but it is in
proportion true of all other Sins, which those who have received the Knowledge
of the Truth are guilty of. They, who after they have entertained Christianity,
and made some progress in it, and been in some measure reformed by it, do again
relapse into any vicious course, do thereby render their Condition very
dangerous. So St. Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. If after they have escaped
the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them than the beginning. For it had been better for them, not to have
known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment delivered unto them. Therefore we may do well to consider
seriously what we do, when, under the Means and Opportunities of Knowledge
which the Gospel affords us, and the inestimable Blessings and Favors which it
confers upon us, we live in any wicked and vicious course. Our Sins are not of
a common rate, when they have so much of Wilfulness and Unworthiness in them.
If Men shall be severely punished for living against the Light of Nature; what
vengeance shall be poured on those who offend against the Glorious Light of the
Gospel? This is the Condemnation, that Light is come, etc.

3dly, The Consideration of what has been said is Matter of Comfort to those,
who upon every Failing and Infirmity are afraid they have committed the
unpardonable Sin, and that it is impossible for them to be restored by
Repentance. There are many who being of a dark and melancholy Temper, are apt
to represent things worse to themselves than there is reason for, and do many
times fancy themselves guilty of great Crimes, in the doing or neglecting of
those things which in their nature are indifferent, and are apt to aggravate
and blow up every little Infirmity into an unpardonable Sin. Most Men are apt
to extenuate their Sins, and not to be sensible enough of the Evil and
Heinousness of them; but it is the peculiar Infelicity of Melancholy Persons,
to look upon their Faults as blacker and greater, than in truth they are; and
whatsoever they hear and read in Scripture, that is spoken against the grossest
and most enormous Offenders, they apply to themselves; and when they hear of
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and the Sin unto Death, or read this Text which
I am now treating of, they presently conclude that they are guilty of these
Sins, and that this is a description of their Case. Whereas the Sin against the
holy Ghost is of that nature, that probably none but those that saw our
Savior's Miracles are capable of committing it; and excepting that, there is
no Sin whatsoever that is unpardonable. As for the Sin unto Death, and that
here spoken of in the Text, I have shown that they are a total Apostasy from
the Christian Religion, more especially to the Heathen Idolatry; which these
Persons I am speaking of, have no reason to imagine themselves guilty of. And
though great and notorious Crimes committed by Christians, may come near to
this, and it may be very hard for those who are guilty of them, to recover
themselves again to Repentance; yet to be sure, for the common Frailties and
Infirmities of Human Nature, there is an open way of Pardon in the Gospel, and
they are many times forgiven to us upon a General Repentance; so that upon
account of these, which is commonly the case of the Persons I am speaking of,
there is not the least ground of Despair; and though it be hard many times for
such Persons to receive Comfort, yet it is easy to give it, and that upon sure
Grounds, and as clear Evidence of Scripture, as there is for any thing; so that
the first thing that such Persons, who are so apt to judge thus hardly of
themselves, are to be convinced of (if possible) is this, that they ought
rather to trust the Judgment of others concerning themselves, than their own
Imagination, which is so distempered, that it cannot make a true Representation
of things. I know that where Melancholy does mightily prevail, it is hard to
persuade People of this: but 'till they be persuaded of it, I am sure all the
Reason in the World will signify nothing to them.

4thly, This should make Men afraid of great and presumptuous Sins, which come
near Apostasy from Christianity; such as deliberate Murder, Adultery, gross
Fraud and Oppression, or notorious and habitual Intemperance. For what great
difference is there, whether Men renounce Christianity; or professing to
believe it, do in their Works deny it? Some of these Sins which I have
mentioned, particularly Murder and Adultery, were ranked in the same degree
with Apostasy, by the Ancient Church; and so severe was the Discipline of many
Churches, that Persons guilty of these Crimes, were never admitted to the Peace
and Communion of the Church again, whatever Testimony they gave of their
Repentance. I will not say but this was too rigorous; but this shows how
inconsistent with Christianity these Crimes, and others of the like degree of
heinousness, were in those days thought to be. They did not indeed, as
Tertullian tells us, think such Persons absolutely incapable of the Mercy of
God; but after such a Fall, so notorious a Contradiction to their Christian
Profession, they thought it unfit afterward that they should ever be reckoned
in the number of Christians.

5thly, It may be useful for us upon this Occasion to reflect a little upon the
ancient Discipline of the Church, which in some places (as I have told you) was
so severe, as in case of some great Crimes after Baptism, as Apostasy to the
Heathen Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery, never to admit those that were guilty
of them, to the Peace and Communion of the Church; but in all Churches was so
strict, as not to admit those who fell after Baptism into great and notorious
Crimes, to Reconciliation with the Church, but after a long and tedious course
of Penance, after the greatest and most public Testimonies of Sorrow and
Repentance, after long Fasting and Tears, and the greatest signs of Humiliation
that can be imagined. In case of the greatest Offenses they were seldom
reconciled, till they came to lie upon their Deathbeds: And in case of other
scandalous Sins, not 'till after the Humiliation of many Years. This perhaps
may be thought too great Severity; but I am sure we are as much too remiss now,
as they were over rigorous then: but were the Ancient Discipline of the Church
in any degree put in practice now, what case would the generality of Christians
be in? In what Herds and Shoals would Men be driven out of the Communion of the
Church? It Is true, the prodigious Degeneracy and Corruption of Christians has
long since broke these Bounds, and it is morally impossible to revive the
strictness of the ancient Discipline in any measure, till the World grow
better: but yet we ought to reflect, with shame and confusion of Face, upon the
purer Ages of the Church, and sadly to consider, how few among us would in
those Days have been accounted Christians; and upon this Consideration to be
provoked to an Emulation of those Better Times, and to a Reformation of those
Faults and Miscarriages, which in the best days of Christianity were reckoned
inconsistent with the Christian Profession; and to remember, that though the
Discipline of the Church be not now the same it was then, yet the Judgment and
Severity of God is; and that those who live in any vicious course of Life,
though they continue in the Communion of the Church, yet they shall be shut out
of the Kingdom of God. We are sure that the Judgment of God will be according
to Truth, against them which commit such things.

6thly, and lastly, The Consideration of what has been said, should confirm
and establish us in the Profession of our Holy Religion. It Is true, we are not
now in danger of apostatizing from Christianity to the Heathen Idolatry; but we
have too many sad Examples of those who apostatize from the Profession of the
Gospel, which they have taken upon them in Baptism, to Atheism and Infidelity,
to all manner of Impiety and Lewdness. There are many who daily fall off from
the Profession of the Reformed Religion, to the gross Errors and Superstitions
of the Roman Church, which in many things does too nearly resemble the old
Pagan Idolatry. And what the Apostle here says of the Apostates of his time, is
proportionably true of those of our days, that they who thus fall away, it is
extremely difficult to renew them again to Repentance. And it ought to be
remembered, that the guilt of this kind of Apostasy has driven some to Despair;
as in the Case of Spira, who, for resisting the Light and Convictions of his
Mind, was cast into those Agonies, and filled with such Terrors, as if the very
pains of Hell had taken hold of him; and in that fearful Despair, and in the
midst of those Horrors, he breathed out his Soul.

Let us then hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; and let us
take heed how we contradict the Profession of our Faith, by any Impiety and
Wickedness in our Lives; remembering, that it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. I will conclude with the words of the Apostle
immediately after the Text, The earth which drinks in the rain that comes
often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and briars, is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. And how gladly
would I add the next words! But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

SERMON VI. Christ the Author: and Obedience the Condition of Salvation.
HEB. V. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him.
THIS is spoken of Christ, our great High Priest under the Gospel; upon the
Excellency of whose Person, and the Efficacy of his Sacrifice for the Eternal
Benefit and Salvation of Mankind, the Apostle insists so largely in this, and
the following Chapters; but the Sum of all is briefly comprehended in the
Text, that our High Priest being made perfect, became the Author of eternal
salvation to them that obey him.

In which words we have these four things considerable,

1st, The great Blessing and Benefit here spoken of, and that is Eternal
Salvation; and this implies in it, not only our Deliverance from Hell, and
Redemption from Eternal Misery; but the obtaining of Eternal Life and Happiness
for us.

2dly, The Author of this great Blessing and Benefit to Mankind; and that is
Jesus Christ, the Son of God; who is here represented to us under the notion of
our High Priest, who, by making Atonement for us, and reconciling us to God, is
said to be the Author of Eternal Salvation to Mankind.

3dly, The Way and Means whereby he became the Author of our Salvation; being
made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation. The word is (...),
having consummated his work, and finished his Course, and received the Reward
of it. For this word has an allusion to those that run in a Race, where he
that wins receives the Crown. And to this the Apostle plainly alludes, Phil. 3.
12. where he says, not as though I had already attained, (...), not as if I had
already taken hold of the Prize; but I am pressing, or reaching forward toward
it; (...), or were already perfect; that is, not as if I had finished my
Course, or had the Prize or Crown in my hand; but I am pressing forward toward
it. In like manner, our blessed Savior, when he had finished the Course of his
Humiliation and Obedience, which was accomplished in his Sufferings, and had
received the Reward of them, being risen from the Dead, and exalted to the
Right Hand of God, and crowned with Glory and Honor, he is said to be (...)
made perfect; and therefore when he was giving up the Ghost upon the Cross, he
said, John 19. 30. (...), it is finished, or perfected; that is, he had done
all that was necessary to be done, by way of suffering, for our Redemption. And
the same word is likewise used Luke 13. 32. concerning our Savior's
Sufferings, I do cures to day and to morrow, (...), and the third day I shall
be perfected; this he spoke concerning his own death. And therefore, Chap. 2.
10. God is said to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect through
Sufferings; (...). And thus our High Priest being made perfect in this Sense,
that is, having finished his Course, which was accomplished in his Sufferings,
and having received the Reward of them, in being exalted at the Right Hand of
God, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to us.

4thly, You have here the qualification of the Persons, who are made Partakers
of this great Benefit, or the Condition upon which it is suspended, and that is
Obedience. He became the Author of eternal Salvation to them that obey him.

These are the main things contained in the Text. For the fuller Explication
whereof, I shall take into consideration these five things.

1st. How, and by what means Christ is the Author of our Salvation.

2dly, What Obedience the Gospel requires as a Condition, and is pleased to
accept as a Qualification, in those who hope for eternal Salvation.

3dly, We will consider the possibility of performing this Condition, by that
Grace and Assistance which is offered, and ready to be afforded to us by the
Gospel.

4thly, The necessity of this Obedience, in order to Eternal Life and Happiness.

And 5thly, I shall show that this is no prejudice to the Law of Faith, and the
free Grace and Mercy of God, declared in the Gospel.

1st, We will consider how, and by what means Christ is the Author of our
Salvation; and this is contained in these words, Being made perfect, he became
the Author of Eternal Salvation, that is (as I told you before) having finished
his Course, which was accomplished in his last Sufferings; and having received
the Reward of them, being exalted at the right hand of God, he became the
Author of eternal Salvation to us; so that by all that he did, and suffered for
us, in the days of his Flesh, and in the state of his Humiliation, and by all
that he still continues to do for us, now that he is in Heaven at the right
hand of God; he has effected and brought about the great Work of our
Salvation. His Doctrine and his Life, his Death and Sufferings, his
Resurrection from the Dead, and his powerful Intercession for us at the Right
Hand of God, have all a great influence upon the reforming and saving of
Mankind; and by all these Ways and Means, he is the Author and Cause of our
Salvation; as a Rule, and as a Pattern, as a Price and Propitiation, and as a
Patron and Advocate that is continually pleading our Cause, and interceding
with God on our behalf, for mercy and grace to help in time of need.

And indeed our condition required an High Priest who was qualified in all
these respects, for the recovery of Mankind out of that corrupt and degenerate
state into which it was sunk; an High Priest whose lips should preserve
knowledge, and from whose mouth we might learn the Law of God; whose life
should be a perfect Pattern of Holiness to us, and his Death a propitiation for
the sins of the whole World; and by whose Grace and Assistance, we should be
endowed with Power and Strength to mortify our Lusts, and to perfect Holiness
in the Fear of God; and therefore such an High Priest became us, who was holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, who might have compassion on
the ignorant, and them that are out of the way, and being himself compast with
infirmities, might have the feeling of ours, being in all points tempted as we
are, only without sin; and, in a word, might be able to save to the utmost all
those that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
us.

By these Qualifications our High Priest is described in this Epistle; and by
these he is every way suited to all our Defects and Infirmities, all our Wants
and Necessities; to instruct our Ignorance by his Doctrine, and to lead us in
the Path of Righteousness by his most Holy and most Exemplary Life; to expiate
the guilt of our Sins by his Death; and to procure Grace and Assistance for us,
by his prevalent Intercession on our behalf. By all these ways, and in all
these respects, he is said to be the Author of Eternal Salvation.

1st, By the Holiness and Purity of his Doctrine, whereby we are perfectly
instructed in the Will of God and our Duty, and powerfully excited and
persuaded to the Practice of it. The Rules and Directions of a holy Life were
very obscure before, and the Motives and Encouragements to Virtue but weak and
ineffectual, in comparison of what they are now rendered by the Revelation of
the Gospel. The general corruption of Mankind, and the vicious Practice of the
World, had in a great measure blurred and defaced the Natural Law; so that the
Heathen World, for many Ages, had but a very dark and doubtful knowledge of
their Duty, especially as to several instances of it. The Custom of several
Vices had so prevailed among Mankind, as almost quite to extinguish the natural
Sense of their Evil and Deformity. And the Jews, who enjoyed a considerable
degree of Divine Revelation, had no strict regard to the Morality of their
Actions; and contenting themselves with some kind of outward Conformity to the
bare Letter of the Ten Commandments, were almost wholly taken up with little
Ceremonies and Observances, in which they placed the main of their Religion,
almost wholly neglecting the greater Duties and weightier matters of the Law.

And therefore our Blessed Savior, to free Mankind from these wanderings and
uncertainties about the Will of God, revealed the Moral Law, and explained the
full force and meaning of it, clearing all doubts, and supplying all the
defects of it, by a more particular and explicit Declaration of the several
parts of our Duty, and by Precepts of greater Perfection, than the World was
sufficiently acquainted withal before; of greater Humility and more Universal
Charity; of abstaining from Revenge, and forgiving Injuries, and returning to
our Enemies Good for Evil, and Love for ill will, and Blessings and Prayers for
Curses and Persecutions. These Virtues indeed were sometimes, and yet but very
rarely, recommended before in the Counsels of wise Men; but either not in that
degree of Perfection, or not under that degree of Necessity, and as having the
force of Laws, and laying an universal obligation of indispensable Duty upon
all Mankind.

And as our blessed Savior has given a greater clearness, and Certainty, and
Perfection, to the rule of our Duty, so he has revealed, and brought into a
clearer Light, more powerful Motives and Encouragements to the constant and
careful Practice of it; for Life and Immortality are brought to light by the
Gospel; the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead being a plain and convincing
Demonstration, of the Immortality of our Souls, and another Life after this,
and an Evidence to us both of his Power, and of the fidelity of his promise, to
raise us from the Dead. Not but that Mankind had some obscure Apprehensions of
these things before. Good Men had always good hopes of another Life, and future
Rewards in another World; and the worst of Men were not without some fears of
the Judgment and Vengeance of another World: but Men had disputed themselves
into great doubts and uncertainties about these things; and as Men that are in
doubt, are almost indifferent which way they go; so the uncertain apprehensions
which Men had of a future State, and of the Rewards and Punishments of another
World, had but a very faint influence upon the minds of Men, and wanted that
pressing and determining force to Virtue and a good Life, which a firm Belief
and clear Conviction of these things, would have infused into them.

But now the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ has scattered all these
Clouds, and chased away that gross Darkness which hid the other World from our
sight, and has removed all doubts concerning the Immortality of Men's Souls,
and their future State; and now the Kingdom of Heaven, with all its Treasures
of Life, and Happiness, and Glory, lies open to our view, and Hell is also
naked before us, and Destruction has no covering. So that the hopes and fears
of Men are now perfectly awakened, and all sorts of Considerations that may
serve to quicken and encourage our Obedience, and to deter and affright Men
from a wicked Life, are exposed to the view of all Men, and do stare every
Man's Conscience in the face. And this is that which renders the Gospel so
admirable and powerful an Instrument for the reforming of Mankind, and, as the
Apostle calls it, the mighty power of God unto Salvation; because therein Life
and Immortality are set before us, as the certain and glorious Reward of our
Obedience; and therein also the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. So that considering the perfection
of our Rule, and the powerful enforcements of it upon the Consciences of Men,
by the clear discovery and firm assurance of the Eternal Recompense of another
World; nothing can be imagined better suited to its end, than the Doctrine of
the Gospel is to make Men wise, and holy, and good, unto Salvation; both by
instructing them perfectly in their Duty, and urging them powerfully to the
practice of it.

2dly, The Example of our Savior's life is likewise another excellent Means to
this End. The Law lays an Obligation upon us; but a pattern gives life and
encouragement, and renders our Duty more easy, and practicable, and familiar
to us; for here we see obedience to the Divine Law practiced in our own Nature,
and performed by a Man like our selves, in all things like unto us, Sin only
excepted. It Is true indeed, this exception makes a great difference, and seems
to take off very much from the encouraging Force and Virtue of this Example. No
wonder if he that was without Sin, and was God as well as Man, performed all
Righteousness; and therefore, where is the encouragement of this example? That
our Nature, pure and uncorrupted, supported and assisted by the Divinity to
which it was united, should be perfectly conformed to the Law of God, as it is
no strange thing, so neither does it seem to have that force and encouragement
in it, which an Example more suited to our weakness might have had. But then
this cannot be denied, that it has the advantage of perfection, which a
Pattern ought to have, and to which, though we can never attain, yet we may
always be aspiring toward it; and certainly we cannot better learn, how God
would have Men to live, than by seeing how God himself lived, when he was
pleased to assume our Nature, and to become Man.

And then, we are to consider, that the Son of God did not assume our Nature in
its highest Glory and Perfection, but compast with Infirmities, and liable in
all points to be tempted like as we are; but still it was without Sin; and
therefore God does not exact from us perfect Obedience, and that we should
fulfill all Righteousness, as he did; he makes allowance for the corruption of
our Nature, and is pleased to accept of our sincere, though very imperfect
Obedience. But after all this, his human Nature was united to the Divinity, and
he had the Spirit without measure; and this would indeed make a wide difference
between us and our Pattern, as to the purpose of Holiness and Obedience, if we
were destitute of that assistance which is necessary to enable us to the
discharge of our Duty: But this God offers, and is ready to afford to us, for
he has promised to give his holy Spirit to them that ask him; and the Spirit
of him that raised up Christ Jesus from the Dead, dwells in all good men, who
sincerely desire to do the Will of God; in the working out our Salvation, God
works in us both to will and to do.

So that as to that Obedience which the Gospel requires of us, if we be not
wanting to our selves; if we do not receive the Grace of God in vain, and
quench and resist his blessed Spirit, we may be as really assisted as the Son
of God himself was; for, in this respect, all true and sincere Christians are
the Sons of God; so that St. Paul tells us, Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

So that if all things be duly considered, the Life of our blessed Savior, as
it is the most perfect, so in the main, it is a very proper Pattern for our
imitation, and could not have come nearer to us, without wanting that
perfection which is necessary to a complete and absolute Pattern. The Son of
God condescended to every thing that might render him the most familiar and
equal Example to us, excepting that, which as it was impossible, so had been
infinitely dishonorable to him, and would have spoiled the perfection of his
Example; he came as near to us as was fit or possible, being in all things like
unto us, Sin only excepted; that is, abating that one thing, which he came to
destroy and abolish, and which would have destroyed the very end of his coming;
for if he had not been without Sin, he could neither have made an expiation for
Sin, nor have been a perfect Pattern of Holiness and Obedience.

And as the Life of our blessed Savior had all the perfection that is
requisite to an absolute Pattern (so that by considering his Temper and Spirit,
and the actions of his Life, we may reform all the vicious inclinations of our
Minds, and the exorbitances of our Passions, and the errors and irregularities
of our Lives) so it is a very powerful Example, and of great force to oblige
and provoke us to the imitation of it; for it is the Example of one whom we
ought to reverence, and have reason to love, above any Person in the World: The
Example of our Prince and Sovereign Lord, of our best Friend and greatest
Benefactor, of the High Priest of our Profession, and the Captain of our
Salvation, of the Author and Finisher of our Faith, of one who came down from
Heaven for our sakes, and was contented to assume our Nature, together with the
infirmities of it, and to live in a low and mean condition, for no other reason
but that he might have the opportunity to instruct and lead Mankind in the way
to Life, to deliver us from Sin and Wrath, and to bring us to God and
Happiness. It Is the Example of one who laid down his Life for us, and sealed
his Love to us in his Blood, and whilst we were Enemies, did and suffered more
for us, than ever any Man did for his Friend.

And surely these Considerations cannot but mightily recommend and endear to us
this Example of our Lord and Savior. We are ambitious to imitate those whom we
highly esteem and reverence, and are apt to have their Examples in great
veneration, from whom we have received great Kindnesses and Benefits, and are
always endeavoring to be like those whom we love, and are apt to conform our
selves to the Will and Pleasure of those from whom we have received great
Favors, and who are continually heaping great Obligations upon us.

So that whether we consider the Excellency of our Pattern, or the mighty
Endearments of it to us, by that infinite Love and Kindness which he has
expressed toward us, we have all the temptation, and all the provocation in the
World, to endeavor to be like him; for who would not gladly tread in the steps
of the Son of God, and of the best Friend that the Sons of Men ever had? Who
would not follow that Example to which we stand indebted for the greatest
Blessings and Benefits that ever were procured for Mankind? Thus you see of
what force and advantage the Example of our blessed Savior is toward the
Recovery and Salvation of Mankind.

3dly, He is the Author of Eternal Salvation, as he has purchased it for us,
by the Merit of his Obedience and Sufferings, by which he has obtained Eternal
Redemption for us; not only deliverance from the wrath to come, but Eternal
Life and Happiness, when by our Sins we had justly incurred the wrath and
displeasure of Almighty God, and were liable to Eternal Death and Misery. He
was contented to be substituted a Sacrifice for us, to bear our Sins in his own
Body on the Tree, and to expiate the guilt of all our Offenses by his own
Sufferings. He died for us, that is, not only for our Benefit and Advantage,
but in our place and stead; so that if he had not died, we had eternally
perrish'd; and because he died, we are saved from that eternal Ruin and
Punishment, which was due to us for our Sins.

And this, though it be no where in Scripture called by the Name or Term of
Satisfaction, yet, which is the same thing in effect, it is called the price of
our Redemption; for as we are Sinners, we are liable and indebted to the
Justice of God, and our Blessed Savior by his Death and Sufferings has
discharged this Obligation; which Discharge, since it was obtained for us by
the shedding of his precious Blood, without which, the Scripture expressly says,
there had been no Remission of Sin, why it may not properly enough be called
Payment and Satisfaction, I confess I cannot understand. Not that God was angry
with his Son, for he was always well pleased with him; or that our Savior
suffered the very same which the Sinner should have done in his own Person, the
proper Pains and Torments of the damned: but that his perfect Obedience and
grievous Sufferings, undergone for our sakes, and upon our account, were of
that Value and Esteem with God, and his voluntary Sacrifice of himself in our
stead, so highly acceptable and well pleasing to him, that he thereupon was
pleased to enter into a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind; wherein he
has promised and engaged himself to forgive the Sins of all those who
sincerely repent and believe, and to make them partakers of Eternal Life. And
hence it is, that the Blood of Christ, which was shed for us upon the Cross, is
called the Blood of the Covenant; as being the Sanction of that new Covenant of
the Gospel, into which God is entered with Mankind; and not only the
Confirmation, but the very Foundation of it; for which reason, the Cup in the
Lord's Supper, (which represents to us the Blood of Christ) is called the New
Testament in his Blood, which was shed for many for the remission of Sins.

4thly, and lastly, Christ is said to be the Author of our Salvation, in
respect of his powerful and perpetual Intercession for us at the right Hand of
God. And this seems to be more especially intimated and intended, in that
Expression here in the Text, that being made perfect, he became the Author of
eternal Salvation to them that obey him. Which Words of his being perfected,
do, as I have showed before, more immediately refer to his Sufferings, and the
Reward that followed them, his Exaltation at the right hand of God, where he
lives for ever to make Intercession for us; by which perpetual and most
prevalent Intercession of his, he procures all those Benefits to be bestowed
upon us, which he purchased for us by his Death; the forgiveness of our Sins,
and our Acceptance with God, and perfect Restitution to his Favor, upon our
Faith and Repentance, and the Grace and Assistance of God's Holy Spirit to
enable us to a sincere Discharge of our Duty, to strengthen us against all the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to keep us from all Evil,
and to preserve us to his Heavenly Kingdom.

And this is that which our Apostle calls obtaining of Mercy, and finding Grace
to help in time of need, chapter 4. v. 16. of this Epist. Our blessed Savior, now
that he is advanced into Heaven, and exalted on the right hand of the Majesty
on high, does out of the tenderest Affection and Compassion to Mankind, still
prosecute that great and merciful Design of our Salvation, which was begun by
him here on Earth, and in Virtue of his meritorious Obedience and Sufferings
does offer up our Prayers to God, and as it were plead our Cause with God, and
represent to him all our Wants and Necessities, and obtain a favorable Answer
of our Petitions put up to God in his Name, and all necessary supplies of Grace
and Strength, Proportionable to our Temptations and Infirmities.

And by Virtue of this powerful Intercession of our blessed Savior and
Redeemer, our Sins are pardoned upon our sincere Repentance, our Prayers are
graciously answered, our Wants are abundantly supplied, and the Grace and
Assistance of God's Spirit are plentifully afforded to us, to excite us to our
Duty, to strengthen us in well doing, to comfort us in Afflictions, to support
us under the greatest Trials and Sufferings, and to keep us through Faith unto
Salvation.

And for this reason, as the purchasing of our Salvation is in Scripture
attributed to the Death and Sufferings of Christ; so the perfecting and
finishing of it is ascribed to the prevalency of his Intercession at the right
Hand of God for us. So the Apostle tells us, chapter 7. v. 25. That he is able to
save to the uttermost all those that come to God by him; seeing he ever lives
to make Intercession for us. He dyed once to purchase Salvation for us; and
that we may not fall short of it, but receive the full Benefit of this
Purchase, he lives for ever to make Intercession for us; and thus he saves to
the uttermost all those that come to God by him; that is, he takes care of the
whole business of our Salvation from first to last. And now that he is in
Heaven, he is as intent to procure our Welfare and Happiness, and as tenderly
concerned for us, as when he lived here among us upon Earth, as when he hung
upon the Cross, and poured out his Soul an Offering for our Sins; for he
appears at the right Hand of God in our Nature, that which he assumed for our
sakes, which was made subject to, and sensible of our Infirmities, and which
was tempted in all things like as we are, only without Sin; and therefore he
knows how to pity and succor them that are tempted; and from the remembrance
of his own Sufferings, is prompted to a compassionate Sense of ours, and never
cease in virtue of his Blood, which was shed for us, to plead our Cause with
God, and to intercede powerfully on our behalf.

So that the Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Intercession on our behalf, is
founded in the Redemption, which he wrought for us, by his Blood and
Sufferings; which, being entered into Heaven, he represents to God on our
Behalf. As the high Priest under the Law did enter into the holy place, with
the Blood of the Sacrifices that had been offered, and in virtue of that Blood,
interceded for the People: So Christ by his own Blood entered into the Holy
Place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us; as the Apostle speaks, chapter 9.
v. 12. He entered into the Holy Place, that is into Heaven it self, to make
Intercession for us, as the Apostle explains himself, v. 24. Christ is not
entered into the holy places which are made with hands; but into Heaven it self,
to appear in the presence of God for us. And chapter 10. v. 12. speaking of
Christ's appearing for us at the right Hand of God, this Man (says he) after he
had offered one Sacrifice for Sin for ever (that is, a Sacrifice of perpetual
Virtue and Efficacy) sat down at the right Hand of God, that is to intercede
for us in virtue of that Sacrifice.

From all which it appears, that the Virtue of Christ's Mediation and
Intercession for us in Heaven, is founded in his Sacrifice, and the price of
our Redemption which he paid on Earth, in shedding his Blood for us.

From whence the Apostle reasons, that there is but one Mediator between God
and Men, by whom we are to address our Prayers to God; 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all. His Mediation is founded in his Ransom, or the
Price which he paid for our Redemption. The Apostle indeed does not say there
is but one Mediator between God and Man in express words, but surely he means
so; if by saying there is one God, he means there is but one God; for they are
joined together, and the very same Expression used concerning both; There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and Men: that is, there is but one God,
and one Mediator. But then, they of the Church of Rome endeavor to avoid this
plain Text, by distinguishing between a Mediator of Redemption, and a Mediator
of Intercession: But now if Christ's Mediation, by way of Intercession, be
founded in the Virtue of his Redemption; then if there be but one Mediator of
Redemption, then there is but one Mediator of Intercession in Heaven for us.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a Ransom for all. So that the Power and Prevalency of his
Intercession is founded in his Ransom, that is, the Price of our Redemption;
in virtue whereof alone he intercedes with God for us, as the Apostle to the
Hebrews does most plainly assert. So that all other Intercessors in Heaven for
us, are excluded from offering and presenting our Prayers to God, besides our
High Priest, who is at the right hand of God, and lives for ever, to make
intercession for us, and by virtue of his Intercession, is able to save to the
uttermost all those that come to God by him, that is, who put up their Prayers
to God in the alone Virtue of his Mediation. So that as there is no need of any
other, if his Intercession be available to save to the uttermost: So there is
great danger in applying to any other (whether Saint or Angel, or even the
Blessed Virgin,) if the benefit of his Intercession be limited to those who
come to God by him. And thus I have shown by what means Christ is the Author of
our Salvation; which was the first thing I proposed to be considered. I proceed
to the

Second thing I proposed to enquire into; namely, what Obedience the Gospel
requires as a Condition, and is pleased to accept as a Qualification in those
who hope for Eternal Salvation. And this I shall explain, first Negatively, and
then Positively.

1st, Negatively; It is not a mere outward profession of the Christian
Religion, and owning of Christ for our Lord and Lawgiver, that will be
accepted in this case. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, (says our
Savior) shall enter into the Kingdom of God. By which we may very reasonably
understand, all that profession of Religion, which falls short of Obedience and
a Holy Life; as the profession of Faith in Christ, being baptized into his Name
and Religion, the mere Belief of his Doctrine, and the owning of him for our
Lord and Savior; no, nor the external Worship of him, and profession of
Subjection to him, by Prayer and hearing his Word, and communicating in the
Holy Sacrament. No, though this be set off in the most glorious manner, by
prophesying and working Miracles in his Name; for so it follows in the next
words, Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many
wondrous works. We have eat and drank in thy presence, and have heard thee
preach in our Streets. But he tells us, that nothing of all this, without
Obedience to his Laws, will be sufficient to gain us admission into Heaven.

2dly, Positively; That which God requires as a Condition, and will accept as a
Qualification in those who hope for Eternal Life, is Faith in Christ, and a
sincere and universal Obedience to the Precepts of his Holy Gospel. Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of God: but he
that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. And here in the Text it is
expressly said, That Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to them that obey
him, (...), to them that hearken to him; that is, to them that do so hear and
believe his Gospel, as to obey it; to them, and no other, he is the Author of
Eternal Salvation.

And that we may the more clearly and distinctly understand what Obedience it
is, which the Gospel exacts as an indispensable Condition of Eternal Salvation,
and a necessary qualification in all those who hope to be made partakers of it;
we may be pleased to consider, that there is a virtual and an actual Obedience
to the Laws of God; a perfect and a sincere Obedience to them; the explication
of these Terms, will give us a distinct conception of the thing we are speaking
of.

1st, There is a virtual, and there is an actual Obedience to the Laws of God.
By an actual Obedience, I mean the Practice and Exercise of the several Graces
and Virtues of Christianity, in the course and tenor of a holy Life; when out
of a good Conversation Men do show forth their Works, and by the outward
actions of their Lives, do give real Testimony of their Piety, Justice,
Sobriety, Humility, Meekness, and Charity, and all other Christian Graces and
Virtues, as occasion is ministered for the Practice and Exercise of them.

By a virtual Obedience, I mean a sincere belief of the Gospel, of the Holiness
and Equity of its Precepts, of the Truth of its Promises, and of the Terror of
its Threatenings, and a true Repentance for all our Sins. This is Obedience in
the Root and Principle; for he who sincerely believes the Gospel, and does
truly repent of the Errors and Miscarriages of his Life, is firmly resolved to
obey the Commandments of God, and to walk before him, in Holiness and
Righteousness all the days of his Life; so that there is nothing that prevents
or hinders this Man's actual Obedience to the Laws of God, in the course of a
holy and good Life, but only the want of time and opportunity for it. And this
was the case of those, who, upon the hearing of the Gospel when it was first
preached to them, did heartily embrace it, and turn from their Sins, and the
Worship of Idols, to the true and and living God, but perhaps were cut off soon
after; (as there were many, who being but newly gained to Christianity, were
presently put to Death, and suffered Martyrdom for that Profession;) There is
no doubt to be made, but that in this case, a virtual Obedience was in such
Persons a sufficient qualification for Eternal Life.

But where there is time and opportunity for the Exercise of our Obedience, and
the practice of the virtues of a holy Life, there actual Obedience to the Laws
and Precepts of the Gospel, is necessary to qualify us for Eternal Happiness;
so that though a man do sincerely believe the Gospel, and truly repent of his
Sins, and resolve upon a better Life; yet if he do not afterward in the course
of his Life put this resolution in practice, and bring forth fruits meet for
Repentance, and amendment of Life, and persevere in a Holy Course, his first
Resolution of Obedience, though it were sincere, will not avail him to
Salvation. Nay, if he should continue for some time in the Resolution and
Practice of a holy and virtuous Life, and afterward fall off from it, and turn
from the holy Commandment delivered unto him, his latter end would be worse
than his beginning; all his righteousness that he has done would not be
remembered; he should die in his iniquity. For without holiness no man shall
see the Lord. If any man draw back, God's Soul will have no pleasure in him.
This is so very clear and plain from Scripture, that no Man can entertain a
contrary persuasion, without contradicting the whole tenor of the Bible.

The Sum of what I have said is this, that a virtual Obedience, and sincere
Faith and Repentance are sufficient, where there is no time and opportunity for
actual Obedience and the practice of a holy Life: but where there is
opportunity for actual Obedience, and the continued practice of a good Life,
and perseverance therein; they are indispensably necessary in order to our
Eternal Salvation, and a well-grounded hope and assurance of it.

2dly, There is a perfect, and there is a sincere Obedience. Perfect Obedience
consists in the exact Conformity of our hearts and lives to the Law of God,
without the least imperfection, and without failing in any point or degree of
our Duty. And this Obedience, as it is not consistent with the frailty and
infirmity of corrupt Nature, and the imperfection of our present State, so
neither does God require it of us as a necessary Condition of Eternal Life. We
are indeed commanded to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is
perfect: But we are not to understand this strictly and rigorously; for that is
not only impossible to Men in this present State of Imperfection, but
absolutely impossible to Humane Nature, for Men to be perfect, as God is
perfect: but the plain meaning of this Precept is, that we should imitate those
Divine Perfections of Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, and Purity, and
endeavor to be as like God in all these as we can, and be still aspiring after
a nearer resemblance of him, as may be evident to any one who considers the
connection and occasion of these words.

By a sincere Obedience I mean such a conformity of our lives and actions to
the Law of God, as to the general course and tenor of them, that we do not
live in the habitual practice of any known Sin, or in the customary neglect of
any material and considerable part of our known Duty; and that we be not
wilfully and deliberately guilty of the single act of heinous and notorious
Sins, as I have formerly explained this matter more at large, in another
Discourse. And this Obedience, even in the best of Men, is mixed with great
Frailty and Imperfection; but yet because it is the utmost that we can do in
this State of Infirmity and Imperfection, the terms of the Gospel are so
merciful and gracious, as that God is pleased for the sake of the meritorious
Obedience and Sufferings of our Blessed Savior, to accept this sincere, though
imperfect Obedience, and to reward it with Eternal Life. And this, I doubt not,
after all the intricate disputes, and infinite Controversies about this
business, is the true and clear state of this matter.

And this sincere Obedience which the Gospel requires of us, as a Condition of
our Happiness, though it be sometimes called by Divines, Evangelical
Perfection; yet it is but very improperly so called; for nothing is properly
perfect to which any thing is wanting; and great defects and imperfections must
needs be acknowledged in the Obedience of the best and holiest Men upon Earth;
and they who pretend to Perfection in this Life, do neither understand the Law
of God, nor themselves, but (as St. John says of such Persons) they deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them; and besides other Imperfections,
these two are evident in them, Ignorance and Pride.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken to this second Particular, namely,
what Obedience the Gospel requires as a Condition, and is pleased to accept as
a Qualification for Eternal Life.

SERMON VII. The Possibility and Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its
consistence with free Grace.
HEB. V. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation
unto all them that obey him.
FOR the Explication of these Words, I proposed to consider these Five Things.

1st. How, and by what Means Christ is the Author of our Salvation.

2dly, What Obedience the Gospel requires as a Condition, and is pleased to
accept as a Qualification, in those who hope for eternal Salvation.

3dly, The Possibility of our performing this Condition, by that Grace and
Assistance which is offered, and ready to be afforded to us by the Gospel.

4thly, The Necessity of this Obedience, in order to eternal Life and Happiness.

5thly, The Consistency of this method and means of our Salvation with the Law
of Faith, and the free Grace and Mercy of God declared in the Gospel.

I have handled the Two first of these, and now proceed to the

Third Thing I proposed to consider, viz. The possibility of our performing
this Condition, by that Grace and Assistance which is offered and ready to be
afforded to us by the Gospel. For if Christ be the Author of eternal Salvation
only to those who obey him; then those who live in disobedience to the Gospel,
are in a state of Damnation. But there cannot be the guilt of Disobedience,
where Obedience is impossible; no Man being guilty, or justly liable to
Punishment, for the not doing of that, which it was no ways possible for him to
do. Therefore the Covenant of the Gospel, into which God is entered with
Mankind, does necessarily suppose the possibility of performing the Condition
of it; otherwise it leaves them in as bad a Condition as they were in before,
because it only offers new Blessings and Benefits to us, but sets us never the
nearer the obtaining of them, if so be the Condition upon which they are
granted be altogether impossible to us; nay it renders our State many degrees
worse, if our not performing the Condition of such gracious Offers bring us
under new and greater guilt.

If it be said, that some few Persons have great Benefit by it, because they by
an especial and effectual Grace shall be enabled to perform the Conditions of
this Covenant; is not this a mighty straitning to the Grace and Mercy of the
Gospel, to confine it within so narrow a compass, as still to leave the
greatest part of Mankind in a worse Condition, than if Salvation had never been
offered to them? As it certainly does, if (as this Doctrine does necessarily
suppose) the Guilt and Punishment of Men shall be greatly increased and
heightened by their Contempt of, and Disobedience to the Gospel; when at the
same time it is acknowledged, that it was not possible for those Men to obey
it, for want of that special and effectual Grace, which is necessary to enable
them thereto. I do not love to handle these Points contentiously, but this in
my Apprehension does as much derogate from the Amplitude and Riches of God's
Grace in the Gospel, as any thing that can easily be said.

And therefore, for the right stating and clearing of this Matter, I shall
endeavor to make out these Three Things.

1. That we are not sufficient of our selves, and by any power in us, to
perform the Condition of the Gospel.

2. That the Grace of God is ready to enable and assist us to the Performance
of these Conditions, if we be not wanting to our selves.

3. That what the Grace of God is ready to enable us to do, if we be not
wanting to our selves, that may properly be said to be possible to us, and, in
some sense, in our Power.

1. That we are not sufficient of our selves, and by any Power in us, to
perform the Condition of the Gospel. The Grace of God does clearly appear in
the whole business of our Salvation: By Grace ye are saved (says the Apostle)
and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. Faith is the Gift of God,
and so is Repentance. It is God that works in us both to will and to do of his
own goodness; that is, who both enclines and excites us to that which is good,
and enables us to do it. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing. And
through Christ strengthening me (says St. Paul) I am able to do all things; all
things which God requires of us, and expects to be done by us in order to our
Salvation. Without the Grace of Christ, we are without strength; and are not
sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think a good thought; that is,
we are not sufficient of our selves to design or resolve upon any thing that is
good; but our sufficiency is of God.

The Depravation of our Nature has brought a great Impotency and Disability
upon us to that which is good; and we have made our selves much weaker by evil
Practice; by the Power of evil Habits, we are enslaved to our Lusts, and sold
under Sin. So that if at any time we are convinced of our Duty, and from that
Conviction have an Inclination to that which is good, evil is present to us.
When the Law of God gives us the knowledge of our Duty, and stares our
Consciences in the Face, there is another Law in our Members, warring against
the Law of our Minds, and bringing us into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which
is in our Members. Sin brings us under the Power of Satan, and gives him
dominion over us. For his Servants ye are whom ye obey; so that he rules and
bears sway in us, and we are led Captive by him at his pleasure. Evil and
vicious Habits are a kind of second Nature super-induced upon us, which takes
away our Power and Liberty to that which is good, and renders it impossible to
us to raise and rescue our selves; so that we are Prisoners and Captives, 'till
the Son of God set us free; and dead in Trespasses and Sins, 'till he give us
Life. And therefore the Prophet represents the Recovery of our selves from the
Bondage of Sin, by such things as are naturally impossible, to show how great
our Weakness and Impotency is; Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian cleanse his Skin,
or the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also do good, who are accustomed to do
evil. And by how much stronger the Chains of our Sins are, and the more unable
we are to break loose from them; by so much the greater and more evident is the
necessity of the Divine Assistance, and of the Power of God's Grace, to knock
off those Fetters, and to rescue us from this Bondage and Slavery.

2. The Grace of God is ready to assist and enable us to the Performance of
these Conditions, that is, to Faith and Repentance, and all the purposes of
Obedience and a Holy Life; if we be not wanting to our selves, and do not
reject or neglect to make use of that Grace, which God offers us, and is ready
to afford to us in a very plentiful Manner. And this is that which renders all
the Mercies of the Gospel effectual (if it be not our own Fault, and wilful
Neglect) to the great End and Design of our Salvation; and without this all the
gracious offers of the Gospel would signify nothing at all to our Advantage.

And this likewise is that which renders the Unbelief and Impenitency and
Disobedience of Men utterly inexcusable; because nothing of all this does
proceed from want of Power, but of Will to do better. And therefore this is so
necessary an Encouragement to all the endeavors of Obedience and a good Life,
that Men should be assured of God's readiness to assist and help them in the
doing of their duty, that without this the revelation of the Gospel, though
never so clear, would signify nothing to us, all the Precepts and Directions
for a good Life, and the most vehement Persuasions and Exhortations to
Obedience, would have no Force and Life in them; for what signifies it to
direct the dead, and speak to them that cannot hear, and to persuade Men, though
it were with all the earnestness in the World, to those things which it is
impossible for them to do.

Therefore our blessed Savior, when he had laid down, and explained the
Precepts of Holiness, and Virtue, in his Sermon upon the Mount, to encourage
them to what he had been directing and proposing to them, he assures them that
God is ready to afford his Grace and Assistance to all those that are sincerely
desirous to do his Will, and do earnestly implore his Grace and Assistance to
that purpose, Matthew. 7. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Ask, (says he) and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every
one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. So that if any Man want the Grace and Assistance
of God's holy Spirit, it is his own fault; it is either for want of seeking, or
for want of earnestness in asking; for our Savior expressly assures us, that he
denies it to none; for every one that asks, receives.

And to give us a more lively and sensible Assurance of this, he represents the
care and kindness of God to Men, by the Affections of earthly Parents to their
Children, who though they be many times evil themselves, yet are not wont to deny
their Children necessary good things, when they decently and dutifully beg them
at their Hands; What Man is there of you, whom if his Son ask Bread, will he
give him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? If ye then
being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how much more shall
your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him? Here is
a general Promise and Declaration, that upon our humble and earnest Prayer to
God, he will grant us whatever is good and necessary, by which is certainly
intended in the first place, Spiritual good Things, because these are the best
and most necessary; and to satisfy us that our Savior did in the first place,
and more especially mean these, St. Luke does particularly instance in the
Grace and Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, Lube 11. 13. How much more shall
your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? The holy
Spirit, that is, the continual Presence and Influence of it to all the purposes
of Guidance and Direction, of Grace and Assistance, of Comfort and Support in
our Christian Course.

And what else is the meaning of that Parable of our Savior's concerning the
Talents entrusted with every Man, according to his Capacity and Opportunities,
Matthew. 25, I say, what else can be the meaning of it but this? That God is
beforehand with every Man, by affording the Advantages and Oportunities of
being happy, and such a measure of Grace and Assistance to that end, which if
he faithfully improve, he shall be admitted into the Joy of his Lord.

And upon this Consideration of the gracious Promises of the Gospel to this
purpose, it is, that the Apostle St. Paul does so earnestly exhort Christians
to endeavor after the highest Degree of universal Holiness and Purity, that we
are capable of in this Life; 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these Promises,
dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. And so likewise Phil. 2. 12,
13. Wherefore, my beloved, work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling
(that is, with great Care and Concernment, lest you should fall short of it)
for it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
The Consideration of God's readiness to assit us, and of his Grace which is
always at hand to stir up our Wills to that which is good, and to strengthen us
in the doing of it, ought to be a great Argument and Encouragement to us, to
put forth our utmost Endeavors, and so cooperate with the Grace of God toward
our own Salvation.

And the Apostle St. Peter uses the same Argument to press Men to use their
utmost Diligence, to make their calling and election sure, by abounding in all
the Virtues of a good Life; 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. According as his Divine Power has
given us all things which pertain to Life and Godliness, (that is, has so
plentifully furnished us with all the requisites to a godly Life) through the
knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue, (that is, by
knowledge of the Gospel and the Grace therein offered to us) whereby he has
given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these ye might be
Partakers of a Divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is in the
World through Lust. And then from the consideration of this Divine Power,
conveyed to us by the Gospel, and the Promises of it, he exhorts Men to give
all diligence, to add to their Faith Virtue, and Knowledge, and Temperance, and
Patience, and Godliness, and brotherly Love, and Charity.

And indeed the Scripture every where ascribes our Regeneration and
Sanctification, the Beginning, and Progress, and Perseverance of our Obedience,
to the powerful Grace and Assistance of God's holy Spirit; we are said to be
regenerate and born again of the Spirit, to be renewed and sanctified by the
Holy Ghost, to be led by the Spirit, and by the Spirit to mortify the deeds of
the Flesh, and, in a word, to be kept by the mighty Power of God through Faith
unto Salvation.

3. What the Grace of God is ready to enable us to do, if we be not wanting to
our selves, may properly be said to be possible to us, and in some sense, in
our Power. That may be said to be possible to us, which though we cannot do of
our selves, as of our selves, (that is by our own Natural Power) yet we can do
by the Help and Assistance of another, if that Assistance be ready to be
afforded to us; as we are sure the Grace of God's Holy Spirit is, because he
has promised it to them that seek it, and he is faithful who has promised.

That cannot be said to be wholly out of a Man's Power, which he may have for
asking; that which we are able to do by the Strength and Assistance of another,
is not impossible to us. Surely St. Paul, did no ways derogate from the Grace
of God, when he said, I am able to do all things through Christ strengthening me;
he reckons himself able to do all that, which by the strength of Christ he was
enabled to do.

And this is the true Ground of all the Persuasions and Exhortations, which we
meet with in Scripture, to Holiness and Obedience, which would all be, not only
to no purpose, but very unreasonable, if we were wholly destitute of Power to
do what God commands: but if he be always ready at hand to assist us by a Grace
sufficient for us, if he cooperate with us in the Work of our Salvation, then
is there abundant ground of Encouragement to our Endeavors; and if we fall
short of eternal Salvation, it is wholly our own fault; it is not because God
is wanting to us in those Aids and Assistances of his Grace which are
necessary; but because we are wanting to our selves, in not seeking God's Grace
more earnestly, or by neglecting to make use of it when it is afforded to us.
For it is really all one, both to the encouragement of our Endeavors, and to
the rendering of our Disobedience inexcusable, whether we be able of our selves
to perform the Condition of the Gospel, or God be ready to assist us by his
Grace and Holy Spirit to that purpose.

Wherefore, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 12. 12, 13, 14, 15. Lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make strait paths for your feet,
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.
Follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; looking diligently
lest any man fail of the Grace of God; intimating, that it is want of care and
diligence on our part, if the Grace of God fail of its end, and be not
effectual to all the purposes of Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience. God does
not withold his Grace from us: but Men may receive it in vain, if they do not
make use of it. And thus I have done with the third thing I proposed to
consider from these words. I proceed to the

Fourth, viz. To consider the Necessity of this Obedience, in order to our
obtaining of Eternal Life and Happiness. Christ is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to them that obey him; that is, to such, and only to such, as live in
Obedience to the Precepts of his holy Gospel, to them who frame the general
course of their lives according to his Laws. Some Men seem to be so afraid of
the Merit of Obedience and good Works, that they are loath to assert the
Necessity of them, and do it with so much caution, as if they were not
thoroughly persuaded of it, or did apprehend some dangerous consequence of it:
but this fear is perfectly groundless; as if Merit could not be excluded,
without casting off our Duty, and releasing our selves from any Necessary
Obligation to be good. For any Man surely may easily discern a plain difference
between a worthiness of desert, and a fitness of receiving a Rebel, being
penitent and sorry for what he has done; though he cannot deserve a pardon,
yet he may thereby be qualified and made meet to receive it; though Repentance
do not make him worthy, yet it may make him capable of it, which an obstinate
Rebel, and one that persists in his disloyalty, is not. This is a thing so
plain of it self, that it would be waste of time and words to insist longer
upon the proof of it.

Now the Necessity of Obedience, in order to eternal Life and Happiness, relies
upon these three grounds.

1st, Upon the Constitution and Appointment of God.

2dly, The general Reason of Rewards.

3dly, Upon the particular Nature of that Reward, which God will confer upon us
for our Obedience.

1st, The Constitution and Appointment of God. Eternal Life is the Gift of God;
and he may do what he will with his own, he may dispense his Gifts and Favors
upon what Terms and Conditions he pleases; and therefore, if he has plainly
declared, that to them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for Glory,
and Honor, and Immortality, he will give eternal Life; that without holiness,
no Man shall see the Lord; but if we have our fruit unto holiness, our End
shall be everlasting Life; who shall resist his Will, or dispute his Pleasure?
The Right and Authority of God in this matter is so unquestionable, that it
admits of no contest; and the Blessings and Benefits proposed, are so
infinitely great and unvaluable, that no condition of obtaining them, which is
possible to be performed by us, can be thought hard and unequal; so that we
ought thankfully to receive so great a favor, let the terms and conditions of
it be what they will; and if there were no other reason for the imposing of
these Conditions upon us, of Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience, but merely
the Will and Pleasure of God, this were enough to silence all Objections
against it.

But 2dly, The Necessity of Obedience, in order to eternal Life, is likewise
founded in the Reason of Rewards in general. For though the measure and degree
of our Reward, so infinitely beyond the proportion of our best Duty and
Service, as eternal Life and Happiness is, I say, though the measure and degree
of this Reward be founded in the immense Bounty and Goodness of God; yet the
Reason of Reward in general, is necessarily founded in our Obedience to God's
Laws; for according to the true nature and reason of things, nothing but
Obedience is capable of Reward. For though Authority may pardon the breach and
transgression of Laws, and remit the punishment due thereto; yet to reward the
contempt of Laws, and wilful disobedience to them, is directly contrary to the
design of Government, and does plainly overthrow the very Reason and End of all
Laws, and makes Obedience and Disobedience to be all one, if so be they are
equally capable of Reward; and therefore nothing can be more absurd and
senseless, than for any Man to hope to be rewarded by God, who does not live in
a sincere Obedience to his Laws. Every man that has this hope in him, (that
is, in Christ Jesus, to be saved by him) purifieth himself, even as he is pure;
that is, endeavors to be like him in the purity and obedience of his life; and
nothing surely can be more unreasonable, than to expect to be rewarded by the
great Governor and Judge of the World, if we be disobedient to his Laws; for
where Obedience to Law is refused, there all reason and equity of Reward
cease. No wise Prince can think fit to reward Disloyalty and Contempt of his
Laws; because to reward it, would be to encourage it; much less will God, the
great and infinitely wise Governor of the World.

^ dly, the Necessity of Obedience will yet more evidently appear, if we
consider the particular Nature of that Reward, which God will confer upon us
for our Obedience. The happiness of Heaven, which is the Reward promised in the
Gospel, is described to us by the sight and enjoyment of God. Now to render us
capable of this blessed Reward, it is necessary that we be like God; but
nothing but Obedience and Holiness, and being renewed after the Image of him
who created us in righteousness, can make us like to God. For he that would be
like God must be holy, and just, and good, and patient, and merciful, as God
is; and this alone can make us capable of the blessed sight and enjoyment of
God; for unless we be like him, we cannot see him as he is, and if we should be
admitted into Heaven, we could not find any pleasure and happiness in communion
with him. Blessed are the pure in heart (says our Savior) for they shall see
God. Without Holiness (says the Apostle) no man shall see the Lord. And indeed,
it is in the very nature of the thing impossible, that a wicked Man (whilst he
remains so) should ever be happy, because there can be no agreeable and
delightful Society between those that are of a quite contrary temper and
disposition to one another, between him who is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, and a sinful and impure Creature. For what fellowship (says the
Apostle) can righteousness have with unrighteousness? what communion has light
with darkness, or God with Belial? that is, with the wicked and disobedient.
Till we become like to God in the frame and temper of our minds, there can be
no happy Society between him and us; we could neither delight our selves in
God, nor he take any pleasure in us; for he is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him. The wicked shall not stand in
his sight, he hates all the workers of iniquity. It cannot be otherwise, but
that there must be an eternal jarring and discord between the righteous and
holy God, and wicked and unrighteous Men. I will behold thy face (says David)
in righteousness. There is no looking God in the face, upon any other terms. If
we have been workers of iniquity God will cast us out of his fight, and in
great anger bid us to depart from him; and we also shall desire him to depart
from us, as being unable to bear the sight of him.

So that there is great reason why Holiness and Obedience should be made the
Conditions of Eternal Life and Happiness, since in the very Nature of the thing
it is so necessary a Qualification for the blessed sight and enjoyment of God,
who is the Cause and Fountain of Happiness. I come in the

Fifth and last place, To show that this Method and Means of our Salvation, is
no prejudice to the Law of Faith, and to the free Grace and Mercy of God
declared in the Gospel. The Gospel is called the Law of Faith, and the Law of
Grace, in opposition to the Jewish Dispensation, which is called the Law, or
Covenant of Works, because it consisted so much in external Rites and
Observances, which were but types and shadows of good things to come, (as the
Apostle calls them in this Epistle;) and which, when they were come, that Law
did expire of it self, and was out of date, the obligation and observance of it
was no longer necessary; but a better Covenant, which was established upon
better Promises, came in the place of it, and Men were justified by Faith, that
is, by sincerely embracing the Christian Religion, and were no longer under an
obligation to that external, and servile, and imperfect Dispensation, which
consisted in Circumcision, and in almost an endless number of external
Ceremonies. These are the works of the Law so often spoken of by St. Paul,
concerning which, the Jews had not only an opinion of the necessity of them, to
a Man's Justification and Salvation, but likewise of the Merit of them; in
opposition to both which opinions, St. Paul calls the Covenant of the Gospel,
the Law of Faith, and the Law of Grace.

But there is no where the least intimation given, either by our Savior, or
his Apostles, that Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel (which are in
substance the Moral Law cleared and perfected) is not necessary to our
acceptance with God, and the obtaining of Eternal Life; but on the contrary,
it is our Savior's express Direction to the young Man, who asked, what good
thing he should do, that he might obtain Eternal Life; If thou will (says he)
enter into Life, keep the Commandments; and that he might understand what
Commandments he meant, he instanceth in the Precepts of the Moral Law. And
indeed, the whole tenor of our Savior's Sermons, and the Precepts and
Writings of the Apostles, are full and express to this purpose. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Whosoever hears these
sayings of mine (that is, these Precepts which I have delivered) and does them
not, I will liken him to a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand, and
the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it. If ye know these things,
happy are ye, if ye do them. In every Nation, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him. In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but Faith, that is acted and inspired
by Charity. And that the Apostle here means, that Charity, or Love, which is
the fulfilling of the Law, is evident from what he says elsewhere; that neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but the keeping of the
Commandments of God; In which Text it is plain, that the Apostle speaks of the
terms of our Justification, and what is available with God to that purpose. And
St. James to the same purpose, tells us, that by the works of Obedience our
Faith is made perfect, and that Faith without Works is dead; and surely a dead
Faith will neither justify nor save any Man. St. John likewise very earnestly
cautions us to take heed of any such Doctrine, as would take away the necessity
of Righteousness and Obedience; Little Children (says he) let no man deceive
you, he that does Righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. To all which,
I shall only add the plain words of my Text, that Christ became the Author of
eternal Salvation to them that obey him.

So that no Man has reason to fear, that this Doctrine of the necessity of
Obedience to our Acceptance with God, and the obtaining of eternal life, should
be any ways prejudicial to the Law of Faith, and the Law of Grace. For so long
as these three things are but asserted and secured,

1st. That Faith is the Root and Principle of Obedience and a holy Life, and
that without it, it is impossible to please God.

2dly, That we stand continually in need of the Divine Grace and Assistance, to
enable us to perform that Obedience, which the Gospel requires of us, and is
pleased to accept in order to eternal life. And,

3dly, That the forgiveness of our Sins, and the Reward of eternal Life, are
founded in the free Grace and Mercy of God, conferring these Blessings upon us,
not for the merit of our Obedience, but only for the merit and satisfaction of
the Obedience and Sufferings of our blessed Savior and Redeemer; I say, so
long as we assert these three things, we give all that the Gospel any where
ascribes to Faith, and to the Grace of God revealed in the Gospel.

I have been careful to express these things more fully and distinctly, that no
Man may imagine, that whilst we assert the Necessity of Obedience and a Holy
Life, we have any design to derogate in the least from the Faith and the Grace
of God; but only to engage and encourage Men to Holiness and a good Life, by
convincing them of the absolute and indispensable necessity of it, in order to
eternal Salvation. For all that I have said, is in plain English no more but
this, that it is necessary for a Man to be a good Man, that he may get to
Heaven; and whoever finds fault with this Doctrine, finds fault with the Gospel
it self, and the main end and design of the Grace of God therein revealed to
Mankind, which offers Salvation to Men upon no other terms than these which I
have mentioned; and to preach and press this Doctrine, is certainly, if any
thing in the World can be so, to pursue the great End and Design of the
Christian Religion, so plainly and expressly declared by St. Paul, Tit. 2. 11,
12. The grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. And if the Grace of God
declared in the Gospel, have this effect upon us, then we may with Confidence
wait for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good works;
and then he adds, these things teach, and exhort, and rebuke with all
Authority; that is, declare and inculcate this Doctrine, and rebuke severely
those who teach or practice contrary to it. And he repeats it again with a more
vehement Charge to Titus, to press upon Men the necessity of Obedience and good
Works, Chap. 3. 8. This is is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God, be careful to
maintain good Works.

All that now remains, is to make some useful Inferences from what has been
said upon this Argument, and so to conclude this Discourse.

First of all, To convince us that an empty Profession of the Christian
Religion, how specious and glorious soever it be, if it be destitute of the
fruits of Obedience and a holy Life, will by no means avail to bring us to
Heaven. No profession of Faith in Christ, no Subjection to him, though we be
baptized in his Name, and list our selves in the number of his Disciples and
Followers, though we have made a constant Profession of all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, and have performed all the external parts and duties of
Religion, have gone constantly to Church, and frequented the Service of God,
and have joined in public Prayers to God with great appearance of Devotion,
and have heard his Word with great Reverence and Attention, and received the
blessed Sacrament with all imaginable expressions of Love and Gratitude to our
blessed Redeemer; nay, though we had heard our blessed Savior himself teach in
our streets, and had eaten and drunken in his presence; yet if all this while
we have not done the will of God, and obeyed his Laws, none of all these will
things signify any thing to bring us to Heaven, and make us Partakers of that
Salvation, which he has purchased for Mankind.

But we cannot plead so much for our selves, as those did, of whom our Savior
speaks. None of us shall be able to allege for our selves at the great day,
that we had prophesyed in his Name, and in his name had cast out Devils, and in
his name had done many wonderful Works; and yet if we could allege all this,
it would do us no good. All that such can say for themselves is, that they have
called him Lord, Lord, that is, they have made profession of his Religion, and
been called by his Name, that they have paid an outward Honor and Respect to
him, and declared a mighty Love and Affection for him; but they have not done
his will, but have hated to be reformed, and have cast his Commandments behind
their backs, they have only born the Leaves of an outward Profession, but have
brought forth no fruit unto Holiness, and therefore can have no reasonable
expectation, that their End should be everlasting Life. So that when these Men
shall appear before the great and terrible Judge of the World, they shall have
nothing to say, but those vain Words, Lord, Lord; to which our Savior will
answer in that Day, why call ye me Lord, Lord, when ye would not do the things
which I said? Notwithstanding all your profession of Faith in me, and
subjection to me, ye have been workers of Iniquity, therefore depart from me, I
know ye not whence ye are.

Secondly, The Consideration of what has been said should stir us up to a
thankful acknowledgment of what the Author of our Salvation has done for us;
and there is great reason for thankfulness, whether we consider the greatness
of the Benefit conferred upon us, or the way and manner in which it was
purchased, or the easy and reasonable terms upon which it may be obtained.

1st, If we consider the greatness of the Benefit conferred upon us, and that
is Salvation, eternal Salvation, which comprehends in it all the Blessings and
Benefits of the Gospel, both the Means and the End, our Happiness, and the Way
to it, by saving us from our Sins; from the guilt of them, by our Justification
in the Blood of Christ; and from the Power and Dominion of them, by the
sanctifying grace and virtue of the Holy Ghost.

And it comprehends the End, our Deliverance from Hell and the Wrath to come,
and the bestowing of Happiness upon us, a great and lasting Happiness, great as
our Wishes, and immortal as our Souls; all this is comprehended in eternal
Salvation.

2dly, If we consider the way and manner in which this great Benefit was
purchased and procured for us; in a way of infinite Kindness and Condescension,
in the lowest Humiliation, and the unparalled Sufferings of the Son of God;
for never was there any sorrow like unto his sorrow, wherewith the Lord
afflicted him in the day of his fierce Anger; in his taking upon him the form
of a Servant, and the person of a Sinner, and his becoming obedient to death,
even the death of the Cross, which was the Punishment of the vilest Slaves, and
the most heinous Malefactors. The Son of God came down from Heaven, from the
highest pitch of Glory and Happiness, into this lower World, this Vale of
Tears, and sink of Sin and Sorrow; and was contented himself to suffer, to save
us from eternal Ruin; to be the most despicable, and the most miserable Man
that ever was, that he might raise us to Glory and Honor, and advance us to a
state of the greatest Happiness that Humane Nature is capable of.

3dly, If we consider the easy and reasonable Terms upon which we may be made
Partakers of this unspeakable Benefit, and that is by a constant and sincere
and universal Obedience to the Laws of God, which supposes Repentance toward
God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Root and Principle of all the
Virtues of a good Life; that is, by doing that which best becomes us, and which
is most agreeable to the original Frame of our Nature, and to the dictates of
our Reason, and which, setting aside the consideration of the Reward, is really
best for our present Benefit and Advantage, our Comfort and Happiness, even in
this World; for God, in giving Laws to us, has imposed nothing upon us, but
what in all reason ought to have been our choice, if he had not imposed it;
nothing but what is for our good, and is in its own nature necessary to make us
capable of that Happiness which he has promised to us. And what can be more
gracious, than to make one Benefit the Condition of a greater? Than to promise
to make us happy for ever, if we will but do that which upon all accounts is
really best, and most for our Advantage in this present Life?

Thirdly, Here is abundant Encouragement given to our Obedience; we have the
divine Assistance promised to us, to enable us to the performance of the most
difficult parts of our Duty; we have the holy Spirit of God to help our
Infirmities, to excite us to that which is good, and to help and strengthen us
in the doing of it.

For our further Encouragement we are assured of the divine Acceptance in case
of our sincere Obedience, notwithstanding the manifold Failings and
Imperfections of it, for the sake of the perfect Righteousness and Obedience,
and the meritorious Sufferings of our blessed Savior: And though when we have
done all that we can do, we are unprofitable Servants, and have done nothing
but what was our duty, yet God is pleased to accept what we can do, because it
is sincere, and to forgive the defects and imperfections of our Obedience, for
his sake, who fulfilled all righteousness.

And besides all this, we have the encouragement of a great and everlasting
Reward, infinitely beyond all proportion of any service and Obedience that* we
can perform. And if God be ready to assist and strengthen us in the doing of
our duty, and be willing so graciously to accept, and to reward at such a rate
the Sincerity of our endeavors to please him, notwithstanding all the failings
and imperfections of our best service and Obedience; what can we possibly
desire more for our encouragement, to patient continuance in well-doing, and to
be steadfast and unmovable, and abundant in the work of the Lord.

Fourthly, and lastly, The consideration of what has been said upon this
Argument may serve severely to rebuke the groundless Presumption of those, who
rely with so much confidence upon Christ for eternal Salvation, without any
conscience or care to keep his Commandments; as if Salvation lay upon his
Hands, and he knew not how to dispose of it, and were glad of any one that
would come and take it off upon any terms. No, he came to save us from our
Sins, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar
people zealous of good Works.

So that the Salvation which he has purchased for us, does necessarily imply
our forsaking of our Sins, and returning to God and our Duty; and his Death and
Sufferings are not more an argument of his great Love to Mankind, than they are
a demonstration of his perfect hatred of Sin. So that if we continue in the
Love and Practice of Sin, we defeat the whole design of his coming into the
World, and of all that he has done and suffered for us; and the Redemption
which Christ has wrought for us will not avail us in the least. Salvation is
far from the wicked, (says David, Psalm. 119. 155.) If we have been workers of
Iniquity; the Savior of the World, when he comes to judge it, will bid us to
depart from him.

From all that has been said, it is evident, that it is the greatest
Presumption in the World, for any Man to hope to obtain eternal Salvation by
any device whatsoever, or in the Communion of any Church whatsoever, without
Obedience and a holy Life. For though our Obedience cannot merit; yet it is
necessary to qualify and dispose us for it: though it does not make us strictly
worthy; yet it makes us meet to be made partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light.

SERMON VIII. The Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Commission and Promise
which he gave to his Apostles.
MAT. XXVIII. 18, 19, 20. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.
THESE Words are the last that our Blessed Savior spoke to his Apostles,
immediately before his Ascension into Heaven; and there are these Three things
contained in them.

I. A Declaration of his own Authority; All power is given unto me both in
heaven and in earth.

II. A Commission to his Disciples, grounded upon that Authority; Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you.

III. A Promise to encourage them in this work; And lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world.

I. Here Is our Savior's Declaration of his own Authority; All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth. Here Is an unlimited Power and Authority given
him over all Creatures in Heaven and Earth. This, the Scripture tells us, was
conferred upon him, as a Reward of his Sufferings; Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10. He
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is
above every name; that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; that is, that all
Creatures, Angels, and Men, and Devils, should do Homage, and acknowledge
Subjection to him.

II. Here is the Commission he gave to his Apostles, by virtue of this
Authority; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. The Commission which he here
gives, is founded in the Authority he had before received. Having all Power
committed to him, he constitutes and appoints the Apostles, and their
Successors, to manage the Affairs of this his spiritual Kingdom upon Earth. And
this seems to be the same Commission, which St. John mentions in other words,
John 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you; that is, as my
Father commissioned me before, so now having received full Authority from him,
I commission you.

Now in this Commission, which our Savior gave to his Disciples, I shall take
notice

First, Of the general Import and Design of it.

Secondly, A more particular Declaration how they were to manage this Design.

First, The general Import and Design of this Commission; Go ye, and teach all
Nations. The word which we translate teach, is (...), disciple all Nations,
endeavor to make all the World Christians. One would think here was a Power
plainly enough given them, to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, as well as to
the Jews. Which will more fully appear, if we compare this passage in St.
Matthew with the other Evangelists. St. Mark, chapter 16. 15. has it; Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. From which Text I
suppose St. Francis thought himself bound to preach to Beasts and Birds, and
accordingly did it very often, and with wonderful success, as they tell us in
the Legend of his Life. But to extend our Savior's Commission so far, is want
of common sense; in which St. Francis (though they tell us he had other Gifts and
Graces to an eminent degree) was plainly defective.

But to proceed, St. Luke, chapter 24. 47. tells us, our Savior commanded, that
Repentance and remission of Sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. So that their Commission did plainly extend to
the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews; only they were to begin with the Jews,
and to preach the Gospel first to them, and when they had gone over Judea and
Samaria, then to pass to other Nations, as St. Luke does most expressly declare,
Acts 1. 8. Ye shall receive power; after that the holy Ghost is come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth.

But see the strange power of Prejudice, to blind the Eyes even of good Men, in
the plainest matters. The Disciples of our Savior, for all they had
entertained a new Religion, yet they retained the old Pride and Prejudice of
their Nation, against the rest of the World; as if none but themselves had any
share in the favor of God, or were to have any part in the Salvation of the
Messiah.

Our Savior did so far consider this Prejudice of theirs, that he never in his
life time acquainted them with this matter, so as to make them fully to
understand it, because they were not able to bear it. And it is very probable,
that this is one of those things which our Savior meant, John 16. 12, 13. I
have yet many things to say unto you; but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when
the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. That is, he
should lead them into the knowledge of those Truths, of which they were not
then capable. And though our Savior, after his Resurrection, seems to have
declared this sufficiently to them; yet by their practice after his Ascension,
it appears that they understood all this only of the Jews, namely that they
were to preach the Gospel first to the Jews that were at Jerusalem, and in
Judea, and then to those that were dispersed in other Nations; for it is clear
from the History of their first Preaching, recorded in the Acts, that they
preached to none but to the Jews, and the Proselytes of the Jewish Religion. So
strong was their Prejudice, that they had not the least suspicion that this
Blessing of the Gospel was intended for the Heathen World; nor were they
convinced to the contrary, 'till St. Peter had a special Vision and Revelation
to this purpose, and the holy Ghost came upon the Gentiles in miraculous gifts,
as he had done before upon the Jews that were converted to Christianity. And
thus the Spirit of God led them into this Truth, and then they understood this
Command of our Savior's in a larger Sense. And to this St. Peter plainly
refers, Acts 10. 42. where he tells us, how that Christ after his Resurrection
appeared to them, and commanded them to preach unto the People. So likewise do
Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. 46. where they speak thus to the Jews, It was
necessary that the word should first he preached to you, but seeing you put it
from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded us. Now he
no where commanded this, but in this Commission, which he gave them before his
Ascension.

Secondly, You have here a particular declaration how they were to manage this
work of making Disciples to the Christian Religion.

1. By baptizing them into the Christian Faith.

2. By instructing them in the Precepts and Practices of a Christian Life.

1. By baptizing them into the Christian Faith, which is here called baptizing
them into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Baptism is a solemn Rite appointed by our Savior for the initiating of Persons
into the Christian Religion: But it was a Ceremony in use before, both among
the Jews and Gentiles. The Heathen observed it at the initiating Persons into
their Religious Mysteries; and the Jews, when they admitted Proselytes to their
Religion; at which time the Males (as Maimonides tells us) were both
circumcised and baptized, the Women were only baptized. One Circumstance of the
Baptism of grown Persons was, that standing in the Water up to the Neck, they
recited several Precepts of the Law. And as the Jewish Writers further tell us,
this Ceremony did not only belong to them that were of grown Years, but to the
Children of Proselytes, if it were desired, upon condition, that when they came
to Years they should continue in that Religion.

Now though this was a religious Ceremony used both by Jews and Gentiles, and
without any Divine Institution, that we know of, our blessed Savior (who in
none of his Institutions seems to have favored unnecessary Innovations) was so
far from the superstition of declining it upon this account, that it had been
in religious use both among Jews and Gentiles, that he seems the rather to have
chosen it for that very reason. For seeing it was a common Rite of all
Religions, and in it self very significant of that Purity which is the great
design of all Religion, it was the more likely to find the easier Acceptance,
and to be most suitable to that, which he intended to be the universal Religion
of the World.

As for the form of Baptism, into the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, it plainly refers to that short Creed, or Profession of Faith,
which was required of those that were to be baptized, answerable to the
reciting of the Precepts of the Law, at the baptizing of Proselytes among the
Jews; now the Articles of this Creed were reduced to these three Heads, of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and contains what was necessary to be believed
concerning each of these. And this probably is that which the Apostle calls the
Doctrine of Baptism, Heb. 6. 2. viz. a short Summary of the Christian Faith,
the Profession whereof was to be made at Baptism; of which the most ancient
Fathers make so frequent mention, calling it the rule of Faith. It was a great
while indeed before Christians tied themselves strictly to that very form of
Words, which we now call the Apostles Creed, but the Sense was the same, though
every one expressed it in his own Words; nay the same Father reciting it upon
several Occasions, does not confine himself to the very same Expressions: A
plain indication that they were not then strictly bound up to any form of
Words, but retaining the sense and substance of the Articles, every one expressed
them as he pleased. So that to baptize in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, is to perform this Rite or Sacrament by the
Authority of, and with special Relation to the three Persons of the blessed
Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as the chief Objects of the Christian
Faith, whereof solemn Profession was then made. So that upon this form in
Baptism appointed by our Savior, compared with what is elsewhere said in
Scripture, concerning the Divinity of the Son, and the holy Ghost, is
principally founded the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, I mean in that
simplicity, in which the Scripture has delivered it, and not as it has been
since confounded and entangled in the Cobwebs and Niceties of the Schools. The
Scripture indeed no where calls them Persons, but speaks of them, as we do of
several Persons, and therefore that word is not unfitly used to express the
difference between them, or at least we do not know a fitter word for that
purpose.

By baptizing then in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is meant,
the initiating of Men by this solemn Rite or Ceremony into the Christian
Religion, upon their profession of the necessary Doctrines of it, concerning
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and a solemn Stipulation and Engagement to
live according to those Doctrines: Which promise of a suitable Life and
Practice was likewise made at the same time, as Justin Martyr and other of the
ancient Fathers do testify.

But before I leave this Head, it is very fit to take particular notice what
use the Anabaptists make of this Text, so as in effect to lay the whole stress
of their Cause upon it; as if by virtue of this Command of our Savior's, and
the manner wherein it is expressed, all Infants, even those of Christian Parents,
who are themselves already admitted into the new Covenant of the Gospel, were
excluded from Baptism; because it is here said by our Savior, Go ye, and
disciple all Nations, baptizing them; from whence they infer; (and very clearly
and strongly as they think) that none are to be baptized* but such as are first
thoroughly instructed in the Christian Religion, and made Disciples, which
Infants are not, but only those who are grown to some Maturity of Years and
Understanding: But the Opinion and Practice of the ancient Church in this
matter, is a sufficient Bar to this Inference, at least to the clearness of it.
And indeed it cannot reasonably be imagined, that the Apostles, who had all of
them been bred up in the Jewish Religion, which constantly, and by virtue of a
divine Precept and Institution, admitted Infants into that Church, and to the
benefits of that Covenant, by the Rite of Circumcision, and likewise the
Infants of Proselytes by Baptism, (as I observed before) I say no Man can
reasonably imagine, that the Apostles could understand our Savior, as
intending by any consequence from this Text, to exclude the Children of
Christians out of the Christian Church, and to debar them of the benefits of
the New Covenant of the Gospel: The Children of Christians being every whit as
capable of being taken into this new Covenant, and of partaking of the Benefits
of it, as Children of the Jews were of being admitted into the old: Unless we
will suppose (which at first sight seems very harsh and unreasonable) that by
the terms of the Christian Religion, Children are in a much worse condition,
than the Children of the Jews were under the Law. So that the parity of Reason
being so plain, nothing less than an express Prohibition from our Savior, and
an exception of Children from Baptism, can be thought sufficient to deprive the
Children of Christians of any Privilege, of which the Jewish were capable. For
the plain meaning of this Commission to the Apostles is, to go and proselyte
all Nations to the Christian Religion, and to admit them solemnly into it by
Baptism, as the Jews were wont to proselyte Men to their Religion by
Circumcision and Baptism; by which Rites also they took in the Children of the
Proselytes, upon promise that when they came to Years they should continue in
that Religion. And if this was our Savior's meaning, the Apostles had no
reason, from the Tenor of their Commission, to understand that the Children of
Christian Proselytes were any more excluded, than the Children of Proselytes to
the Jewish Religion, unless our Savior had expressly excepted them; for it is a
favorable Case, and in a matter of Privilege, and therefore ought not to be
determined to debar Children of it, upon any obscure consequence from a Text,
which it is certain was never so understood by the Christian Church, for 1500
Years together. I have done with the first part of their Commission, which was
to disciple or proselyte all Nations to the Christian Religion, and to admit
them into the Christian Church, by the Rite or Sacrament of Baptism. I proceed
to consider the

Second part of their Commission, which was to instruct Men in the Precepts and
Duties of a Christian Life, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. You see how their Commission bounds and limits them, they
were to teach others those Precepts which Christ had taught and delivered to
them; they had no Power by virtue of this Commission to make new Laws, which
should be of universal and perpetual Obligation, and consequently necessary to
the Salvation of all Christians; they were only to be the Publishers, but not
the Authors of this new Religion. And therefore St. Paul, when the Corinthians
consulted him about several things relating to Marriage and Virginity, he only
gives his advice, but would not take upon him to make a Law in those cases that
should be binding to all Christians. And for the same Reason Christians do
generally at this day, think themselves absolved from the Obligation of that
Canon, which was made even in a Council of the Apostles, as to all those
Branches of it, the reason whereof is now ceased. But notwithstanding this, the
Authority which our Savior conferred upon his Apostles to teach his Doctrine,
does in the nature of it necessarily imply a Power of governing the Societies
of Christians, under such Officers, and by such Rules, as are most suitable to
the nature of such a Society, and most fit to promote the great Ends of the
Christian Religion: For without this power of governing, they cannot be
supposed to be endowed with sufficient Authority to teach; and therefore in
pursuance of this Commission, we find that the Apostles did govern the
Societies of Christians by such Rules and Constitutions, as were fitted to the
then present circumstances of Christianity. And as they did appoint temporary
Officers upon emergent Occasions, so they constituted others that were of
perpetual use in the Church, for the instructing and governing of Christians,
and that in such a subordination to one another, as would be most effectual to
the attaining of the end of Government; which subordination of Governors, has
not only been used in all Religions, but in all the well regulated Civil
Societies that ever were in the World. And this may suffice to have spoken of
the second part of their Commission.

The Third and last thing in the Text, is the Promise which our Savior here
makes for the encouragement of the Apostles in this Work; Lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World; that is, though I be going from you in
person, yet I will still be present with you by my Power and Spirit. And surely
this must needs be a great Encouragement to have him engaged for their
Assistance, who had all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him, as he tells
them at the 18th. verse.

I shall endeavor therefore, as far as the time will permit, to explain to you
the true meaning and extent of this Promise. That it is primarily made to the
Apostles no Man can doubt, that considers that it was spoken to them
immediately by our Savior; and in regard to them, the meaning of it is plainly
this, that our Savior would send down the holy Ghost upon them, in miraculous
Gifts, to qualify and enable them for the more speedy planting and propagating
of the Gospel in the World, and that he would be with them, and assist them
extraordinarily in this Work.

And that this is the primary meaning of it, in regard to the Apostles, will be
very plain, by considering how this Promise is expressed by the other
Evangelists; Mark 16. 17. instead of this Promise, you have these words,
immediately after our Savior had given them Commission to go and preach the
Gospel, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall
be damned. And then it follows, These signs shall follow them that believe; in
my Name they shall cast out Devils, and shall speak with new Tongues. And Luke
24. 39. instead of lo, I am with you, it is said, Bohold, I send the promise of
my Father upon you, that is, the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost; for it
follows in the next Words, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be
endowed with power from on high. This St. Luke himself interprets of the
Promise of the Holy Ghost, Acts 1. 4, 5. He commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he,
ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost, not many days hence. And, v. 8. Ye shall receive
power after that the holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost part of the Earth. So that no Man that compares these Texts together,
can doubt, but that this was the primary meaning of this Promise, as it was
made to the Apostles.

But then it is as plain likewise, that this Promise is to be extended farther
than to the Persons of the Apostles, even to all those that should afterward
succeed them in this Work of Preaching the Gospel, and baptizing, because our
Savior adds, that he would be with them to the end of the World; which Words
because they reach far beyond the Apostles Times, (as I shall show by and by)
must necessarily be extended to such Persons in after Ages, as should carry on
the same Work.

There are two famous Controversies about the Sense of these Words, in which
this Promise is expressed.

The First is concerning the Circumstance of time mentioned in this Promise,
always, to the end of the World.

The other concerning the Substance of the Promise it self, what is meant by
our Savior's being with them. In the first we have to deal with the
Enthusiasts, in the latter with the Papists. I shall examine the Pretenses of
both these, as briefly and plainly as I can.

First, Concerning the Circumstance of time expressed in these words, always, to
the end of the world. The Enthusiasts would persuade us, that the meaning of
these Phrases is not to be extended beyond that Age, and that this Promise is
to be limited to the Apostles Persons, and that the Sense of it is, that Christ
would be with the Apostles (...), all their Days, so long as they should live,
and that would be, (...), to the end of that Age; thus they translate it, and
with no worse design than to take away the Necessity of a Gospel Ministry.

But this Pretense will vanish, if we can make good these two things.

1. That the Letter of this Promise extends farther than the Persons of the
Apostles, and the continuance of that Age.

2. However that be, it is certain that the reason of it extends to all that
should succeed them in their Ministry, to the end of the World.

1. The Letter of this Promise extends farther than the Persons of the
Apostles, and the continuance of that Age. I will easily grant that the Phrase
(...) signifies only continually, I will be with you continually; but then the
other Phrase (...), until the end of the World, is several times in Scripture
undeniably used for the End and Dissolution of all things, and cannot with any
Probability be shown to be ever used otherwise. In this Sense it is
unquestionably used three times, Matthew. 13. The Harvest is the end of the
World. v. 39. So shall it be at the end of the world. v. 40. and v. 49. it is
said, that at the end of the World, the Angels shall come forth, and sever the
wicked from the j^st, and cast them into the Furnace; which must either be
understood of the end of the World, and of the day of Judgment, or there will
be no clear Text in the whole Bible to that purpose; and it is very probable,
that this Phrase is used in the same Sense, Matthew. 24. 3. where the Disciples
ask our Savior, What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the
world? as will appear to any one that considers our Savior's Answer to this
Question; the latter part whereof cannot, without too much Violence, be
accommodated to any thing but the final Dissolution of the World. Now if this
Phrase be every where else in Scripture used in this Sense, there is no reason
why it should be taken otherwise in the Text, only to serve the purpose of an
unreasonable Opinion.

I know there are Phrases very near akin to this, which are used in a quite
different Sense, namely, for the expiration of the Jewish State; and that we
may know how to distinguish them, it is observable, that when the Scripture
speaks of the end of the World, it is called (...), the end of the Age, in the
singular Number; but when it speaks of the Times before the Gospel, it always
expresses them in the plural; the reason of which is, that famous Tradition
among the Jews, of the House of Elias, which distributed the whole duration of
the World into three Ages; the Age before the Law, the Age under the Law, and
the Age of the Messiah; and this last Age they looked on with great difference
from the rest, as the famous and glorious Age, which was to be as it were the
beginning of a new World: And therefore the Jews in their Writings constantly
call it the seculum futurum, the Age, or the World to come: And therefore the
Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews, calls the State of the Gospel by that
name, as best known to them, Heb. 2. 5. But unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we now speak; that is, the Law was given
by the disposition of Angels; but the dispensation of the Gospel, which is
called the World to come, was managed and administered by the Son of God. So
likewise Heb. 6. 5. those miraculous Powers which accompanied the first
preaching of the Gospel, are called (...), the Powers of the World to come,
that is, of the Gospel Age.

So that this last Age of the Gospel, is that which the Scripture by way of
Eminency calls the Age; those that went before are constantly called (...), the
Ages, in the plural number. So we find, Ephesians. 3. 9. the Gospel is called the
dispensation of the Mystery that was hid in God, (...) from Ages; and you have
the same Phrase, Col. 1. 26. Upon the same account, the expiration of the
Jewish State, is in Scripture called the last times, and the last days. Heb. 1.
2. But in these last days, God has spoken to us by his Son: 1 Cor. 10. 11.
These things are written for our Admonition, upon whom (...) (...), the ends of
the Ages are come. In the same Sense the Apostle, Heb. 9. 26. speaking of
Christ, says, that he appeared, (...), at the end of the Ages, to take away
Sin; that is, at the Conclusion of the Ages which had gone before, in the last
Age. So that if we will be governed in the Interpretation of this Text, by the
constant use of this Phrase in Scripture, the Letter of this Promise will
extend to the end of the World.

2. But however this be, it is certain that the Reason of this Promise does
extend to all those that should succeed the Apostles in their Ministry, to the
end of the World: I will suppose now (to give our Adversaries their utmost
scope) that which we have no reason to grant, that the Letter of this Promise
reaches only to the Apostles and their Age, and that our Savior's meaning was
no more but this, that he would send down the holy Ghost upon them in
miraculous Gifts, to qualify and enable them for the speedy planting and
propagating of the Gospel in the World, and that he would be with them, 'till
this Work was done. Now supposing there were nothing more than this intended in
the letter of it, this ought not much to trouble us, so long as it is certain,
that the Reason of it does extend to the Successors of the Apostles in all Ages
of the World. I do not mean, that the Reason of this Promise does give us
sufficient Assurance, that God will assist the Teachers and Governors of his
Church in all Ages, in the same extraordinary manner, as he did the Apostles,
because there is not the like reason and necessity for it; but that we have
sufficient Assurance from the Reason of this Promise, that God will not be
wanting to us, in such fitting and necessary Assistance, as the state of
Religion, and the welfare of it in every Age shall require: For can we imagine
that God would use such extraordinary means to plant a Religion in the World.
and take no care of it afterward? That he who had begun so good a Work, so
great and glorious a Design* would let it fall to the ground for want of any
thing that was necessary to the Support of it?

This is reasonable in it self; but we are not also without good ground for
thus extending the general reason of particular Promises beyond the Letter of
them. The Apostle has gone before us in this, for Heb. 13. 5, 6. he there
extends two particular Promises of the Old Testament to all Christians, Let
your Conversation (says he) be without Cove tousness, and be content with such
things as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
And again, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto me.
These Promises were made to particulur Persons; the first of them to Joshua,
and the other to David; but yet the Apostle applies them to all Christians, and
to good Men in all Ages, because the general Ground and Reason of them extended
so far. He who gave Joshua and David this encouragement to their Duty, will
certainly be as good to us, if we do ours.

And thus I have done with the first Controver^ie about the Sense of these
Words, which concerns the Circumstance of time mentioned in this Promise,
always, to the end of the World, and have plainly shown, that both the Letter
and the Reason of this Promise does extend further than the Persons of the
Apostles, and the continuance of that Age, even to all that should succeed them
in their Ministry to the end of the World. I come now to consider,

Secondly, The Substance of the Promise it self, namely, what is meant by our
Savior's being with them. And here our Adversaries of the Church of Rome would
fain persuade us, that this Promise is made to the Church of Rome, and that the
meaning of it is, that that Church should always be infallible, and never err
in the Faith. But as there is no mention of the Church of Rome in this Promise,
nor any where else in Scripture upon the like Occasion, whereby we might be
directed to understand this Promise to be made to that Church; so to any
unprejudiced Person, the plain and obvious Sense of this Promise can be no
other than this, that our Savior having commissionated the Apostles to go and
preach the Christian Religion in the World, he promises to assist them in this
work, and those that should succeed them in it, to the end of the World. But
how any Man can construe this Promise, so as to make it signify the perpetual
Infallibility of the Roman Church, I cannot for my life devise; and yet this is
one of the main Texts upon which they build that old and tottering Fabric of
their Infallibility.

Here is a general Promise of Assistance to the Pastors and Governors of the
Church, in all Ages to the end of the World; but that this Assistance shall
always be to the degree of Infallibility, (as it was to the Apostles) can
neither be concluded from the letter of this Promise, nor from the Reason of
it; much less can it be from hence concluded, that the Assistance here
promised* if it were to the degree of Infallibility, is to be limited and
confined to the supreme Pastor and Governor of the Roman Church.

That the Assistance here promised shall always be to the degree of
Infallibility, can by no means be concluded from the Letter of this Promise.
Indeed there is no Pretense or Color for it; he must have a very peculiar
Sagacity, that can find out in these words, I am with you always, a promise of
infallible Assistance. Is not the Promise which God made to Joshua, and which
the Apostle to the Hebrews applies to all Christians, and to all Good Men in
all Ages, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, the very same in sense with
this, I will be with you always? and yet surely, no Man did ever imagine, that
by virtue of this Promise, every Christian, and every good Man is infallible.

But neither can it be inferred from the Reason of this Promise, that this
Assistance shall always be to the degree of Infallibility. It was so indeed to
the Apostles; the miraculous Gifts of the holy Ghost, which were bestowed upon
them for the more speedy and effectual planting and propagating of the Gospel
in the World, were a divine Testimony and Confirmation to the Doctrine which
they delivered; and having this divine Testimony given to them, we are certain
that they were secured from Error in the delivery of that Doctrine. So that the
Apostles had no other Infallibility, but what depended upon, and was evidenced
by the miraculous Gifts wherewith they were endowed; and therefore without the
like Gifts, none can with Reason pretend to the like Infallibity. For
Infallibility signifies an extraordinary Assistance of God's Spirit, whereby
those who are thus assisted are secured from Error. This every confident Man
may, if he pleases, pretend to; but no Man is to be believed to have it, but
he who can give such Evidence of it, as is fit to satisfy reasonable Men, that
he has it. Now the only sufficient Evidence of such an extraordinary Divine
Assistance is the Power of Miracles. This indeed is the great external
Testimony of a Teacher come from God, if he do such Works as none can do,
except God be with him; and this Evidence the Prophets of old, and our Savior,
and his Apostles, always gave of their Infallibility. And if the Pope and
general Councils, can give the Testimony of such Miracles for their
Infallibility, as Moses, and our Savior, and his Apostles did work, we are
ready to acknowledge it. Such a Testimony as this would give the World a
thousand times more Satisfaction concerning their Infallibility* than all the
subtle Arguments of Bellarmine, and all their Writers. But if they cannot, they
may dispute about it to the end of the World; and every Man that has but the
same confidence may pretend to it, with as much reason as they do.

But to proceed in my Argument, here is a plain Reason why this extraordinary
Assistance should be granted to the Apostles at first; and another Reason as
plain, why it should not be continued afterward. It was reasonable, and in
some degree necessary, that the Apostles should be thus assisted at the first
publication of the Gospel, namely to give satisfaction to the World, that they
were faithful and true Witnesses of the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ. But
since this Doctrine and these Miracles are recorded to Posterity, by those very
Persons that were thus assisted, here is as plain a Reason, why after the
Gospel was planted and established in the World, this Infallibility should
cease. So long as we have an infallible Foundation of Faith, namely, the Divine
Revelation consigned in Writing, and transmitted down to us by Testimony of
undoubted Credit, what need is there now of a fixed and standing Infallibility
in the Church? But having handled this Argument more at large elsewhere, I
shall insist no further upon it here.

I have now done with the three things I propounded to discourse upon, from
this Text. You have heard what Authority our Savior had given him; what
Commission he gave to his Disciples; and what Assistance he has promised to
the Pastors and Governors of his Church to the end of the World; namely such an
Assistance, as is suitable to the exigencies of the Church, in the several Ages
and States of Christianity; which Assistance was at first very extraordinary
and miraculous. God was pleased to give witness to the first Teachers and
Publishers of the Gospel, with signs and wonders, and diverse Miracles, and
Gifts of the holy Ghost; and this at first was in a very great degree
necessary, it not being otherwise imaginable, how Christianity could have born
up against all that Force and violent Opposition which was raised against it:
But this extraordinary assistance was but a temporary and transient
Dispensation. God did, as it were, pass by, in the strong and mighty Wind, in
the Earthquake, and in the Fire: but he was in the still Voice, that is, he
designed to settle and continue in that Dispensation, in that more calm and
secret way of Assistance, which offers less Violence to the Nature of Man, but
which was intended for the constant and permanent Dispensation. So that we have
no reason to think, that God has now forsaken his Church, though he be not
with it in so sensible and extraordinary a manner.

But then if any particular Church desire and expect this blessed Presence and
Assistance of God's holy Spirit, we must remember, that there is a Condition to
be performed on our parts. For how absolute soever this Promise may be, in
respect of the Church universal; it is certainly conditional, to any particular
Church, as sad experience in many Instances has shown. God has long since
left the Church of Jerusalem, where the Gospel was first published; he has left
the Church of Antioch, where the Believers of the Gospel were first called
Christians; he has left the famous Churches of Asia, to that degree of
Desolation, that the Ruins and Places of some of them, are hardly at this Day
certainly known. And this may also be the fate of any particular Church, not
excepting Rome her self, for all her Pride and Confidence to the contrary.
Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of God: toward them that fell
Severity; but toward us Goodness, if we continue in his Goodness: otherwise we
also shall be cut off.

This, as I observed before, is spoken particularly to the Roman Church; the
Apostle supposes that the Church of Rome her self may be guilty of Apostasy
from the Faith, and cut off by Unbelief, and indeed seems to foretell it; which
how it consists with their confident Pretense to Infallibility, let them look
to it.

And let all particular Churches look to themselves, that they do not forfeit
this Promise of Divine Assistance. For Christ has not so tied himself to any
particular Church, but that if they forsake him, he may leave them, and remove
his Candlestick from them. There have been many sad Instances of this, since
the first planting of Christianity; and we have no small Reason to apprehend
that it may come to be our own case; for certainly we have many of those marks
of Ruin among us, which did foretell the Destruction of the Jewish Church and
Nation; horrible Profaneness and Contempt of Religion, Division and Animosities
to the highest degree, and an universal Dissoluteness and Corruption of
Manners. And why should we, who do the same things, think our selves exempted
from the same Fate? What can we expect, but that God should deal with us, as he
did with them, Take away the Kingdom of God from us, and give it to a Nation
that will bring forth the fruits of it?

The Condition of this great Promise here in the Text, to the Pastors and
Governors of the Christian Church, is the faithful Execution of their
Commission; if they do sincerely endeavor to gain Men to the Belief and
Practice of Christianity, Christ has promised to be with them. The performance
of this Condition does primarily concern the chief Governors of the Church,
and next to them, the Ministers of the Gospel in general, that they would be
diligent and faithful in their respective Stations, teaching Men to observe all
things, whatsoever Christ has commanded. And if we would make this our great
Work, to instruct our respective Charges, in the necessary Doctrines of Faith,
and the indispensable Duties of a good Life, we should have far less trouble
with them about other matters. And that we may do this Work effectually, we
must be serious in our Instructions, and exemplary in our Lives. Serious in our
Instructions; this certainly the Apostle requires in the highest degree, when
he charge Ministers, so to speak, as the Oracles of God, to which nothing can
be more contrary, than to trifle with the Word of God, and to speak of the
weightiest matters in the World, the great and everlasting Concernments of the
Souls of Men, in so slight and indecent a manner, as is not only beneath the
Gravity of the Pulpit, but even of a well regulated Stage. Can any thing be
more unsuitable, than to hear a Minister of God from this solemn place to break
Jests upon Sin, and to quibble upon the Vices of the Age? This is to shoot
without a Bullet, and as if we had no mind to do Execution, but only to make
Men smile at the mention of their Faults; this is so nauseous a Folly, and of
so pernicious consequence to Religion, that hardly any thing too severe can be
said of it.

And then if we would have our Instructions effectual, we must be exemplary in
our Lives. Aristotle tells us, that the manners of the Speaker have (...), the
most sovereign power of Persuasion. And therefore Cato puts it into the
definition of an Orator, that he is, vir bonus, dicendi peritus, a good Man,
and an eloquent Speaker. This is true as to all kinds of Persuasion; the good
Opinion which Men have of the Speaker, gives great weight to his Words, and
does strangely dispose the Minds of Men to entertain his Counsels. But the
Reputation of Goodness is more especially necessary and useful to those whose
proper Work it is to persuade Men to be good; and therefore the Apostle, when
he had charged Titus to put Men in mind of their Duty, he immediately adds, in
all things showing thy self a Pattern of good Works. None so fit to teach others
their Duty, and none so likely to gain Men to it, as those who practice it
themselves; because hereby we convince Men that we are in earnest, when they
see that we persuade them to nothing, but what we choose to do our selves. This
is the way to stop the Mouths of Men, and to confute their Malice, by an
exemplary piety and Virtue. So St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the
will of God, that by well doing ye put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.

SERMON IX. The Difficulties of a Christian Life considered.
LUKE XIII. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
THERE are two great Mistakes about the Nature of Religion, equally false, and
equally pernicious to the Souls of Men; and the Devil, whose great design it
is, to keep Men off from Religion by any Means, makes use of both these
Mistakes, to serve his own Purpose and Design upon the several Tempers of Men.
Those who are melancholy and serious, he disheartens and discourageth from
attempting it, by the extreme trouble and difficulty of it, representing it in
so horrid and frightful a Shape, encumbered with such Difficulties, and
attended with such Troubles and Sufferings, as are insuperable, and intolerable
to Human Nature; whereby he persuades Men, that they had better never attempt
it, since they may despair to go through with it.

On the other hand, those who are sanguine and full of hopes, he possesses with
a quite contrary Apprehension; that the business of Religion is so short and
easy a Work, that it may be done at any time, and if need be, at the last
Moment of our Lives, though it is not so well to put it upon the last hazard; and
by this means, a great part of Mankind are lulled in security, and adjourn the
business of Religion from time to time; and because it is so easy, and so much
in their Power, they satisfy themselves with an indeterminate Resolution to
set about that business some time or other before they die, and so to repent,
and make their Peace with God once for all.

These Pretenses contradict one another, and therefore cannot be both true, but
they may both be false, as indeed they are, and Truth lies between them;
Religion being neither so slight and easy a Work as some would have it, nor so
extremely difficult and intolerable, as others would represent it. To confute
the false apprehensions which some have of the easiness of it, our Savior
tells us, there must be some striving; and to satisfy us, that the
difficulties of Religion are not so great and insuperable, as some would make
them, our Savior tells us, that those who strive shall succeed and enter in;
but those who only seek, that is, do not vigorously set about the business of
Religion, but only make some faint Attempts to get to Heaven, shall not be able
to enter in. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, but shall not be able.

The occasion of which words of our Blessed Savior, was a Question, that was
put to him, by one of his Disciples, concerning the number of those, that
should be Saved, v. 23. One said unto him, Lord, are there few, that be Saved?
To which curious Question, our Savior (according to his manner, when such kind
of Questions were put to him) does not give a direct Answer, because it was
neither Necessary, nor Useful for his Hearers to be Resolved in it, it did not
concern them, to know what Number of Persons should be Saved, but what course
they should take that they might be of that Number; and therefore, instead of
satisfying their Curiosities, he puts them upon their Duty; admonishing them,
instead of concerning themselves what should become of others, to take care of
themselves. And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for
many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. He does
not say, that but few shall be saved; (as some have presumptuously ventured to
determine) but only few in comparison of those many, that shall seek to enter
in, and shall not be able.

In these Words we may consider these Two Things.

First, The Duty enjoined, Strive to enter in at the strait gate.

Secondly, The Reason or Argument to enforce it, for many shall seek to enter
in, and shall not be able.

First, The Duty enjoined; Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Which words
being Metaphorical, I shall strip them of the Metaphor, that so we may see the
plain meaning of them. Now by this Metaphor, or rather Allegory, these Three
Things are plainly intended.

1st. The Course of a Holy and Christian Life, in order to the obtaining of
Eternal Happiness, is here represented to us by a way, which every Man, that
would come to Heaven, must walk in. For so St. Matthew. (who expresses this more
fully) makes mention of a way; as well as a gate, by which we must enter into
it; Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leads to Life. And this,
though it be not expressed by St. Luke, is necessarily understood, Strive to
enter in by the strait gate, that is, into the way that leads to life.

2dly. The first Difficulties of a Holy and Religious Course of Life, are here
represented to us by a strait Gate. For the Gate at which we enter, and the way
in which we walk, can signify nothing else, but the beginning and progress of
a Holy and Religious Course.

3dly. Our Diligence and Constancy in this Course, are represented by striving,
a word which has a great Force and Emphasis in it, (...), a Metaphor taken
from the earnest Contention which was used in the Olympic Games, by those who
strove for Mastery in running or wrestling, or any of the other Exercises which
were there used.

Secondly, Here is a Reason added to enforce the Exhortation or Duty; for many
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; that is, there are a great many
that will do something in Christianity, and make some faint attempts to get to
Heaven, who yet shall fall short of it, for want of such a firm Resolution and
Earnestness of Endeavor, as is necessary to the attaining of it.

Having thus explained the Words, I shall take occasion from the first part of
them, namely, the Duty or Exhortation, to handle these three Points, very
useful for us to consider, and to be well instructed in.

1st. The Difficulties of a Holy and Christian Course.

2dly, The firm Resolution, and earnest Endeavor that is required on our part,
for the conquering of these Difficulties.

3dly, That these Difficulties are not so great and insuperable, as to be a
just Discouragement to our Endeavors; if we will strive, we may master them.

First, The Difficulties of a Holy and Christian Course. And these are either
from our selves, or from something without us.

1. From our selves, from the Original Corruption and Depravation of our
Nature, and the power of evil Habits and Customs, contracted by vicious
Practices. Our Natures are vitiated and depraved, inclined to evil, and
impotent to good; besides that being habituated to Sin and Vice, it is a matter
of infinite Difficulty to break off a Custom, and to turn the course of our
Life another way. Now because this is the difficulty of our first Entrance into
Religion, it is represented by a strait Gate which is hard to get through.

2. There are likewise other difficulties from without; as namely, the
Opposition and Persecution of the World, which was very raging and violent in
the first beginnings of Christianity. And this our Savior represents by the
ruggedness and roughness of the Way, as St. Matthew. expresses it, Chap. 7. 14.
Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to Life, (...), confragosa
est via, (so Grotius renders it) the Way is craggy, full of Afflictions and
Troubles.

So that these are the two great Difficulties in a Christian Course,
Indisposition from within, and Opposition from without.

1. Indisposition from within. And this makes Religion so much the more
difficult, because it checks us at our very first Entrance upon our Christian
Course, and makes us unwilling to set out. The Corruption of our Nature, and
those vicious Habits which by a long custom of Sin we have contracted, do
strongly incline us the contrary way, so that a Man must offer great Force and
Violence to himself, that will conquer this Difficulty. It is one of the
hardest things in the World to break off a vicious Habit, and to get loose from
the Tyranny of Custom. The Prophet Jeremiah speaks of it, as next to a natural
Impossibility, chap. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard
his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. This
requires great Striving indeed. Nothing shows the Spirit, and Resolution of a
Man more, than to contend with an inveterate Habit; for in this case a Man
strives against the very bent and inclination of his Soul; and it is easier to
set a Man against all the World, than to make him fight with himself: and yet
this every Man must do, who from any wicked course of Life, betakes himself
seriously to Religion; he must as it were lay violent Hands upon himself, and
fight with the Man he was before; and this in Scripture is emphatically expressed
to us, by crucifying the old Man, with the Affections and Lusts thereof. A
Christian when he first enters upon a Holy and good Course of life, is
represented as two Persons or Parties at civil Wars one with another; the Old,
and the New Man: So that whoever will be a Christian must put off himself, and
become another Man; and it is no easy matter for a Man to quit himself.

2. In our Christian Course, we must likewise expect to meet with great
Opposition from without. Blessed be God, Christianity has generally been for
many Ages free from this Difficulty, which attended the first Profession of it;
it was then indeed a very steep and craggy way, very rough and thorny, not to
be traveled in without Sweat and Blood; then the Dangers and Hazards of that
Profession were such, as were not to be encountered by a mere moral Resolution,
and the natural Strength of Flesh and Blood; the Persecution that attended it
was so hot, and the Torments which threatened it so terrible, that the sensual
and inconsiderate part of Mankind would rather venture Hell at a distance, than
run themselves upon so present and evident a Danger.

But since these Ages of Persecution, this Difficulty has been in a great
measure removed. Not but that the true Religion has still its Enemies in the
world; but they are not let loose, as they were in those times: It is still
persecuted and exposed to the Malice and Reproach, but not to the Rage and Fury
of unreasonable Men. In the calmest times there is hardly any Man can be a
strict and sincere Christian, without being liable to Hatred and Contempt,
without denying himself many of those worldly Advantages, which those who make
no Conscience of the strict Laws of Christianity may make to themselves; so
that at all times it requires a good degree of Constancy and Resolution to
persevere in a Holy Course, and to bear up against the Opposition of the World,
and to withstand its Temptations, to be harmless and blameless in the midst of
a crooked and perverse Nation; not to be infected with the eminent and frequent
Examples of Vice, and carried down with the stream of a corrupt and degenerare
Age. So that though our Difficulties be not always the same, and equal to those
which the Primitive Christians encountered, yet there is enough to exercise our
best Resolution and Care; though the main Body of the Enemies of Christianity be
broken, and the Sons of Anak be destroyed out of the Land; yet some of the old
Inhabitants are still left, to be Thorns in our Sides, and Pricks in our Eyes,
that true Religion may always have something to exercise its Force and Vigor
upon. I have done with the first Point, the Difficulties of a Christian Course.
I proceed to the

Second, The earnest Endeavor that is to be used on our Part, for the
conquering of these Difficulties. And to the business of Religion, if we will
set upon it in good earnest, these three things are required.

1st, A mighty Resolution to engage us in a Holy and Christian Course.

2dly, Great Diligence and Industry to carry us on in it.

3dly, An invincible Constancy to carry us through it, and make us persevere in
it to the end.

1st, A mighty Resolution to engage us in a Holy and Good Course. For want of
this, most Men miscarry and stumble at the very Threshold, and never get
through the strait Gate, never master the Difficulties of the first Entrance.
Many are well disposed toward Religion, and have fits of good Inclination that
way, (especially in their young and tender Years) but they want firmness of
Resolution to conquer the Difficulties of the first entrance upon a religious
and virtuous Life; like the young Man that came to our Savior, well inclined
to do some good thing, that be might inherit eternal Life; but when it came to
the point, he gave back, he was divided betwixt Christ and the World, and had
not Resolution enough to part with all for him.

Many Men (I doubt not) have frequent Thoughts and Deliberations about a better
Course of Life, and are in a good Mind to take up, and break off that lewd and
riotous Course they are in; but they cannot bring themselves to a fixed Purpose
and Resolution: and yet without this nothing is to be done, the double minded
Man is unstable in all his ways. There must be no Indifferency and
Irresoluteness in our Minds, if we will be Christians; we must not stop at the
Gate, but resolve to press in. We see that Men can take up peremptory
Resolutions in other matters, to be rich and great in the World, and they can
be true and steadfast to these Resolutions; and why should not Men resolve to be
Wise and Happy, and stand to these Resolutions, and make them good? God is more
ready to assist and strengthen these kind of resolutions than any other; and I
am sure no man has so much reason to resolve upon any thing, as to live a Holy
and Virtuous Life; no other resolution can do a man that good, and bring him
that comfort and happiness, that this will.

2dly, The business of Religion, as it requires a mighty Resolution to engage
us in a holy and good course, so likewise a great Diligence to carry us on in
it. When we are got through the strait gate, we must account to meet with many
difficulties in our way; there are in the course of a Christian's Life many
Duties to be performed, which require great pains and care; many Temptations to
be resisted, which will keep us continually upon our guard; a great part of the
Way is up Hill, and not to be climbed without Labor; and the Scripture
frequently calls upon us, to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling,
that is, with great Care and Industry; to give all diligence to make our
calling and election sure; to follow Holiness, (...), to pursue it with great
earnestness. Nothing of this World that is of value, is to be had upon other
terms; and we have low thoughts of Heaven, if we think any pains too much to
get thither.

3dly, The business of Religion requires an invincible Constancy to carry us
through it, and to make us persevere in it to the End. Resolution may make a
good entrance; but it requires great Constancy and Firmness of Mind, to hold
out in a good Course. A good Resolution may be taken up, upon a present heat,
and may cool again; but nothing but a constant and steady temper of Mind will
make a man persevere; and yet without this, no Man shall ever reach Heaven. He
that continues to the end shall be saved; but if any Man draw back, God's Soul
will have no pleasure in him. God puts this Case by the Prophet, and determines
it, Ezekiel 18. 24. When the righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness,
shall he live? all his Righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned;
in his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in
them he shall die; nay, so far will his Righteousness be from availing him, if
he do not persevere in it, that it will render his Condition much worse, to
have gone so far toward Heaven, and at last to turn his Back upon it. So St.
Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. For if after they have escaped the Pollutions
of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they
are again entangled therein and overcome; the latter end is worse with them
than the beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known the way
of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them. I proceed to the

Third Point, namely, That the Difficulties of a Holy and a Christian Life are
not so great and insuperable, as to be a just ground of discouragement to our
Endeavors. All that I have said concerning the Difficulties of Religion, was
with no design to damp, but rather to quicken our Industry; for, upon the whole
matter, when all things are duly considered, it will appear, that Christ's yoke
is easy, and his burden light; that the Commandments of God are not grievous;
no, not this Commandment of striving to enter in at the strait gate; which I
shall endeavor to make manifest, by taking these Four things into
consideration.

1. The Assistance which the Gospel offers to us. God has there promised to
give his holy Spirit to them that ask him; and by the assistance of God's Holy
Spirit, we may be able to conquer all those difficulties. Indeed if we were
left to our selves, to the impotency and weakness of our own Nature, we should
never be able to cope with these Difficulties; every Temptation would be too
hard for us; every little Opposition would discourage us: but God is with us,
and there is nothing too hard for him. If the Principles of a Holy Life, were
only the Birth of our own Resolution, they would easily be born down; but they
are from God, of a Heavenly Birth and Original; and whatsoever is born of God,
overcomes the World. John 1. 12, 13. As many as received him, to them gave he
power ((...), the privilege) to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe on his Name, which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

God considers the Impotency of Humane Nature, in this depraved and degenerate
state into which we are sunk, and therefore he has not left us to our selves;
but when he commands us to work out our own Salvation, he tells us for our
Encouragement, that he himself works in us both to will and to do; he does not
bid us to be strong in our own strength, for he knows we have no strength of
our own, but to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and what
may not even a weak Creature do, that is so, powerfully assisted? If we will
but make use of this strength, nothing can be too hard for us. All that God
expects from us is, That we should comply with the motions of his Spirit, and
be as sincere in the Use of our own endeavors, as he is in the offers of his
Grace and assistance.

2. Let us consider, That the greatest Difficulties are at first; it is but
making one manful Onset, and sustaining the first Brunt, and the Difficulties
will abate and grow less, and our strength will every day increase and grow
more. The Gate is strait: but when we have once got through it, our feet will
be set in an open place. After some struggling to get through, we shall every
day find our selves at more Ease and Liberty. It will be very hard at first, to
master our vicious Inclinations, to change the habit of our Minds, and the
course of our. Lives, and to act contrary to what we have been long accustomed:
but this Trouble lasts but for a little while; these Pangs of the New Birth,
though they be sharp, yet they are not usually of long continuance.

It does indeed require great Resolution and firmness of Mind, to Encounter the
first Difficulties of Religion: but if we can but stand it out for one brunt,
our Enemy will give way, and the pleasure of Victory will tempt us on. It is
troublesome to conflict with great Difficulties, and Men are loath to be brought
to it: but when we are engaged, it is one of the greatest pleasures in the
World to prevail and Conquer. Many Men are loath to go to War; but after a
little Success, they are as loath to give over; that which was a terror to them
at first, turns into a pleasure.

3. Consider that Custom will make any course of life tolerable, and most
things easy. Religion, and the practice of a Holy Life is difficult at first:
but after we are once habituated to it, the trouble will wear off by degrees,
and that which was grievous will become easy; nay, by degrees, much more
pleasant than ever the contrary practice was. We see the daily experience of
this, in the most difficult and laborious Employments of this World; a little
pains tires a Man at first, but when he is once seasoned and enured to Labor,
Idleness becomes more tedious and troublesome to him than the hardest work.
Custom will make any thing easy, though it be a little unnatural. Nothing is
more unnatural than Sin; it is not according to our Original Nature and Frame,
but it is the Corruption and Depravation of it, a second Nature superinduced
upon us by Custom: whereas the practice of Holiness and Virtue is agreeable to
our Original and Primitive State, and Sin and Vice are the perverting of
Nature, contrary to our Reason, and the design of our Beings, and to all
Obligations of Duty and Interest: But by returning to God and our Duty, we
return to our Primitive State, we act naturally, and according to the intention
of our Beings; and when the force of a contrary Custom is taken off, and the
Bias clapped on the other side, we shall run the ways of God's Commandments with
more delight and satisfaction, than ever we found in the Ways of Sin.

For Sin is a violence upon our Natures, and that is always uneasy, yet it is
made more tolerable by Custom: but Religion restores Men to their natural
State, and then we are at ease and rest. Religion is at first a yoke and
burden: but unless we take this upon us, we shall never find rest to our Souls.

4thly and lastly, consider the Reward that Religion propounds, and this must
needs sweeten and mitigate all the Troubles and Difficulties that are
occasioned by it. This strait gate, through which we must enter, and this
craggy way which we are to climb up, leads to life; and he is a lazy man
indeed, that will not strive and struggle for Life. All that a man can do, he
will do for his Life, for this miserable Life, which is so short and uncertain,
and born to trouble as the sparks fly upward; a Life not worth the having, nor
worth the keeping with any great care and trouble, if it were not in order to a
better and happier life. But it is not this life which our Savior means; that
indeed were not worth all this striving for: It Is Eternal Life; a State of
Perfect and endless Happiness; of joys unspeakable and full of glory. And who
would not not strive to enter in at that gate, which leads to so much Felicity?
Can a Man possibly take too much pains, be at too much trouble for a few Days,
to be happy for ever?

So often as I consider what incredible Industry Men use for the Things of this
Life, and to get a small Portion of this World, I am ready to conclude, That
either Men do not Believe the Rewards of another World, or that they do not
understand them; else they could not think much to be at the same pains for
Heaven, that they can cheerfully bestow for the obtaining of these Corruptible
things. Can we be so unconscionable, as to think God unreasonable, when he
offers Heaven and Everlasting Happiness to us, upon as easy Terms, as any
thing in this World is ordinarily to be had? And are not we very foolish and
unwise, to put away Eternal Life from us, when we may have it upon Terms so
infinitely below the true worth and value of it?

I have now done with the Three Things which I propounded to speak to from the
first part of these Words, which are so many Arguments to enforce the
Exhortation here in the Text; to strive to enter in at the strait gate, and to
give all Diligence, by the course of a Holy and Virtuous life, to get to
Heaven; and we may assure our selves, that nothing less than this will bring us
thither. So our Savior tells us, in the latter part of the Text; that many
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. I proceed now to the

Second part of the Text; the Reason or Argument whereby this Exhortation is
enforced; Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you,
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Every seeking to enter in will
not gain our admission into Heaven; therefore there must be striving: For Men
may do many things in Religion, and make several faint Attempts to get to
Heaven, and yet at last fall short of it, for want of that earnest Contention
and Endeavor which is necessary to the attaining of it. We must make Religion
our business, and set about it with all our might, and persevere and hold out
in it, if ever we hope to be admitted to Heaven; for many shall seek to enter,
that shall be shut out.

Now what this seeking is, which is here opposed to striving to enter in at the
strait gate, our Savior declares after the Text, v. 25. When once the Master
of the House is risen up, and has shut to the door; and ye begin to stand
without, and knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall
answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are: Then shall ye begin to
say, we have eaten and drunk in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our
streets; but he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are; depart
from me all ye workers of Iniquity. St. Matthew. mentions some other Pretenses
which they should make; upon which they should lay claim to Heaven, Mat. 7. 21,
22, 23. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.
Many will say unto me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesyed in thy
Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works? And then will I profess unto them; I never knew you, depart from me ye
that work Iniquity. After all their seeking to enter in, and notwithstanding
all these Pretenses, they shall be shut out, and be for ever banished from the
Presence of God. This shall be their doom, which will be much the heavier,
because of the disappointment of their confident expectation and hope. So St.
Luke tells us, v. 28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; when ye
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of
God, and ye your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and from
the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the
Kingdom of God. To which St. Matthew adds, Chap. 8. v. 12. But the Children of
the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And then our Savior concludes (Luke 13. 30.) Behold, there
are last that shall be first, and first which shall be last. From all which it
appears, with what Confidence many Men, upon these false Pretenses (which our
Savior calls seeking to enter in) shall lay claim to Heaven, and how strangely
they shall be disappointed of their expectation and hope; when they shall find
themselves cast out of Heaven, who they thought had outdone all others in
Religion, and were the only Members of the true Church, and the Children and
Heirs of the Kingdom; and shall see others, whom they thought to be out of the
Pale of the true Church, and excluded from all terms of Salvation, come from
all Quarters, and find free Admission into Heaven; and shall find themselves so
grossly and widely mistaken, that those very Persons, whom they thought to be
last, and of all others farthest from Salvation, shall be first; and they
themselves, whom they took for the Children of the Kingdom, and such as should
be admitted into Heaven in the first place, shall be rejected and cast out.

So that by seeking to enter, we may understand all those things which Men may
do in Religion, upon which they shall pretend to lay claim to Heaven, nay and
confidently hope to obtain it; and yet shall be shamefully disappointed, and
fall short of it. Whatever Men think, and believe, and do in Religion, what
Privileges soever Men pretend, what Ways and Means soever Men endeavor to
appease the Deity, and to recommend themselves to the Divine Favor and
Acceptance, all this is but seeking to enter in, and is not that striving which
our Savior requires. If Men do not do the will of God, but are workers of
Iniquity, it will all signify nothing to the obtaining of Eternal Happiness.

Our Savior here instanceth in Men's Profession of his Religion, calling him
Lord, Lord; in their personal Familiarity and Conversation with him, by eating
and drinking in his Presence and Company; in their having heard him preach the
Doctrine of Life and Salvation, thou have taught in our streets; in their
having prophesied, and wrought great Miracles in his Name and by his Power,
Have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out devils? and in thy
Name done many wonderful Works? These were great and glorious Things which they
boasted of; and yet nothing of all this will do, if Men do not the Will of God;
notwithstanding all this, he will say unto them, I know ye not whence ye are,
depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity.

And by a plain Parity of Reason, whatever else Men do in Religion, what
Attempts soever Men may make to get to Heaven, upon what Privileges or
Pretenses soever they may lay claim to eternal Life, they will certainly fall
short of it, if they do not do the will of God, but are workers of Iniquity. My
business therefore at this time shall be, to discover the several false Claims
and Pretenses which Men may make to Heaven, and yet shall never enter into it.
And to this purpose, I shall instance in several Particulars, by one or more of
which, Men commonly delude themselves, and are apt to entertain vain and
ill-grounded hopes of eternal Salvation.

1st, Some trust to the external Profession of the true Religion.

2dly, Others have attained to a good degree of Knowledge in Religion, and they
rely much upon that.

3dly, There are others that find themselves much affected with the Word of
God, and the Doctrines contained in it.

4thly, Others are very strict and devout in the external Worship of God.

5thly, Others confide much in their being Members of the only true Church, in
which alone Salvation is to be had, and in the manifold Privileges and
Advantages which therein they have above others of getting to Heaven.

6thly, Others think their great Zeal for God, and his true Religion, will
certainly save them.

7thly, Others go a great way in the real Practice of Religion.

8thly, Others rely much upon the Sincerity of their Repentance and Conversion,
whereby they are put into a state of Grace, and become the Children of God, and
Heirs of everlasting Life; and being once truly so, they can never fall from
that State, so as finally to miscarry.

Lastly, Others venture all upon a Deathbed Repentance, and their Import unity
with God to receive them to Mercy at the last.

I shall briefly go over these particulars, which are the several ways whereby
Men seek to enter into Heaven, and hope to get thither at last; and shall show
the Insufficiency of them; and that there is something beyond all this
necessary to be done for the attainment of Everlasting Salvation.

1st, Some trust to the mere external Profession of the true Religion, and
think it enough to call Christ, Lord, Lord, to be baptized in his Name, and
thereby to be admitted Members of the Christian Church. What the Apostle says
of the Profession of the Jewish Religion, and the outward Badge of it,
Circumcision, may be applied to the Profession of Christianity made in Baptism,
Romans 2. 17, 25, 28, 29. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law,
and make thy boast of God. Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the
Law; but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made
Uncircumcision: For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter. The Case is the same of those who make only an outward Profession of
Christianity. Baptism verily profitteth, if we perform the Condition of that
Covenant which we entered into by Baptism; but if we do not, our Baptism is no
Baptism: For he is not a Christian, which is one outwardly, nor is that Baptism
which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Christian which is one inwardly, and
Baptism is of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in Water only. So St. Peter
tells us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. that Baptism is not only the washing of the Body with
Water, and the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh; but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God.

The Promise of eternal Life and Happiness is not made to the external
Profession of Religion, without the sincere and real Practice of it. Why call
ye me, Lord, Lord, (says our Savior) and do not the things which I say? The
Scripture has no where said, he that is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes and is baptized, he that repents and is baptized, shall be saved.
This deserves to be seriously considered by a great many Christians, who have
nothing to show for their Christianity, but their Names; whose best Title to
Heaven is their Baptism, an Engagement entered into by others in their Name, but
never confirmed and made good by any Act of their own; a thing which was done
before they remember, and which has no other effect upon their Hearts and
Lives, than if it were quite forgotten.

2dly, There are others who have attained to a good degree of Knowledge in
Religion, and they hope that will save them. But if our Knowledge in Religion,
though never so clear and great, do not descend into our Hearts and Lives, and
govern our Actions, all our hopes of Heaven are built upon a false and sandy
Foundation. So our Savior tells us, Matthew. 7. 26. Every one that hears these
Sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish Man, which
built his House upon the Sand. And John 13. 17. If ye know these things; happy
are ye, if ye do them.

There is not a greater Cheat in Religion, nothing wherein Men do more grossly
impose upon themselves, than in this matter, as if the Knowledge of Religion,
without the Practice of it, would bring Men to Heaven. How diligent are many in
reading and hearing the Word of God, who yet take no care to practice it in
their Lives? Like those in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33. 31. of whom God complains,
They come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before thee as my
People, and they hear my Words; but they will not do them. None do so
foolishly, and yet so deservedly miss of Happiness, as those who are very
careful to learn the way to Heaven, and when they have done, will take no pains
at all to get thither.

3dly, There are others who find themselves much affected with the Word of God,
and the Preaching of it; and this they take for a very good Sign, that it has
its due effect upon them. And this happens very frequently, that the Word of
God makes considerable Impressions upon Men for the present, and they are
greatly affected with it, and troubled for their Sins, and afraid of the
Judgments of God, and the terrible Vengeance of another World; and upon this
they take up some Resolutions of a better Course, which after a little while
vanish and come to nothing. This was the Temper of the People of Israel, they
delighted to hear the Prophet speak to them in the Name of God, Ezekiel. 33. 32.
And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant
Voice, and can play well upon an Instrument; for they hear thy words, but they
do them not. Mark 6. 20. it is said that Herod had a great reverence for John
the Baptist, that he observed him, and heard him gladly; but yet for all that,
he continued the same cruel and bad Man that he was before. And in the Parable
of the Sower, Matthew. 13. 20. there are one sort of Hearers mentioned, who, when
they heard the word, received it with joy; but having no root in themselves,
they endured but for a while, and when Tribulation or Persecution arises,
because of the Word, presently they are offended. There are many Men who have
sudden Motions in Religion, and are mightily affected for the present: but it
must be a rooted and fixed Principle that will endure, and hold out against
great Difficulties and Opposition. Acts 24. 25. it is said, that when St. Paul
reasoned of Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled; and nothing is more frequent, than for Men to be mightily strartled
at the Preaching of the Word, when their Judgments are convinced and born down,
and their Consciences touched to the quick; a lively representation of the Evil
of Sin, and the infinite Danger of a sinful Course, may stir up the Passions of
Grief and Fear, and dart such stings into the Consciences of Men, as may make
them extremely restless and unquiet, and work some good Thoughts and
Inclinations in them toward a better Course; and yet like Metals, when the
heat is over, they may be the harder for having been melted down.

4thly, Others show great Strictness and Devotion in the Worship of God, and
this they hope will be accepted, and can not fail to bring them to Heaven: and
yet some of the worst of Men have been very eminent for this. The Pharisees
were the most exact People in the World in matter of external Ceremony and
Devotion; and yet for all this, our Savior plainly tells them, that they were
farther from the Kingdom of God, than those who seemed to be farthest, than
Publicans and Harlots; and that because they were so very bad, under so great a
pretense of Devotion, therefore they should receive the greater Damnation.

Not but that External Devotion is a necessary expression of Religion, and
highly acceptable to God, when it proceeds from a pious and devout Mind, and
when Men are really such in their Hearts and Lives, as their external Devotion
represents them to be: But when the outward Garb of Religion is only made a
Cloak for Sin and Wickedness, when there is nothing within to answer all the
Show that we see without, nothing is more odious and abominable to God. These
are mere Engines and Puppits in Religion, all the Motions we see without proceed
from an artificial Contrivance, and not from any inward Principle of Life; and
as no Creature is more ridiculous than an Ape, because the Beast makes some
pretense to human Shape; so nothing is more fulsome than this hypocritical
Devotion, because it looks like Religion, but is the farthest from it of any
thing in the World.

5thly, Others confide very much in their being Members of the only true
Church, in which alone Salvation is to be had, and in the manifold Privileges
and Advantages which they have thereby above others, of getting to Heaven. Thus
the Jews confined Salvation to themselves, and looked upon all the rest of the
World as excluded from it. And not only so, but they believed that by one means
or other every Israelite should be saved. So that they were the Jewish
Catholic Church, out of which there was no hope of Salvation for any.

The same Pretense is made by some Christians at this day, who engross
Salvation to themselves, and will allow none to go to Heaven out of the
Communion of their Church; and have so ordered the matter, that hardly any that
are in it can miscarry. They are Members of an infallible Church, which cannot
possibly err in Matters of Faith, they have not only eat and drunk in Christ's
presence, but have eat and drunk his very Corporal Presence, the natural
Substance of his Flesh and Blood; they have not only our blessed Savior, but
innumerable other Intercessors in Heaven; they have not only their own Merits
to plead for them, but in case they be defective, they may have the Merits of
others assigned and made over to them, out of the infinite Stock and Treasure
of the Church, upon which they may challenge Eternal Life, as of right and due
belonging to them; and by a due course of Confession and Absolution, may quit
scores with God for all their Sins from time to time. Or if they have neglected
all this, they may, after the most flagitious course of Life, upon Attrition
(that is, upon some Trouble for Sin, out of fear of Hell and Damnation) joined
with Confession, and Absolution, get to Heaven at last; provided the Priest
mean honestly, and do not for want of Intention, deprive them of the saving
Benefit and Effect of this Sacrament.

But is it possible Men can be deluded at this Rate! as to think that
Confidence of their own good Condition, and want of Charity to others, will
carry them to Heaven? That any Church has the Privilege to save impenitent
Sinners? And they are really impenitent, who do not exercise such a Repentance,
as the Gospel plainly requires; and if Men die in this state, whatever Church
they are of, the great Judge of the World has told us, that he will not know
them, but will bid them to depart from him, because they have been Workers of
Iniquity.

6thly, Others think that their Zeal for God and his true Religion will
certainly save them. But Zeal, if it be not according to Knowledge, if it be
mistaken in its Object, or be irregular and excessive in the degree, is so far
from being a Virtue, that it may be a great Sin and Fault; and though it be for
the Truth, yet if it be destitute of Charity, and separated from the Virtues of
a good Life, it will not avail us. So St. Paul tells us, that though a Man should
give his Body to be burnt; yet if he have not Charity, it is nothing.

7thly, Others go a great way in the real Practice of Religion, and this sure
willdo the business. And it is very true, and certain in experience, that
Religion may have a considerable Awe and Influence upon Men's Hearts and Lives,
and yet they may fall short of Happiness. Men may in many considerable
Instances perform their Duty to God and Man; and yet the retaining of one Lust,
the practice of any one known Sin, may hinder them from entering in at the
strait Gate. Herod did not only hear John gladly, but did many things in
Obedience to his Doctrine; and yet he was a very bad Man. The Pharisee thanked
God (and it may be truly) that he was not like other Men, an extortioner, or
unjust, or an adulterer; and yet the penitent Publican was justified before
him. The young Man who came to our Savior to know what he should do to enter
into Life, and of whom our Savior testifies, that he was not far from the
Kingdom of God, and that he wanted but one thing; yet for want of that he
miscarried. And St. James assures us, that if a Man keep the whole Law, and yet
fail in one point, he is guilty of all. If we be workers of Iniquity in any one
kind Christ will disown us, and bid us depart from him.

8thly, Others rely upon the Sincerity of their Repentance and Conversion,
whereby they are put into a state of Grace, from whence they can never finally
fall. They did once very heartily repent of their wicked Lives, and did change
their Course, and were really reformed, and continued a great while in that
good Course. And all this may be certainly true; but it is as certain that they
are relapsed into their former evil Course: And if so, the Prophet has told us
their Doom, that if the righteous Man forsake his Righteousness, his
Righteousness shall not be remembered; but in the Sin that he has sinned, in
that shall he die. So that a Righteous Man may turn from his Righteousress, and
commit Iniquity and dye in it. For the Prophet does not here (as some vainly
pretend) put a case, which is impossible in Fact should happen, unless they
will say, that the other Case which he puts together with it, of the wicked
Man's turning away from his wickedness, and doing that which is lawful and
right, is likewise impossible, which God forbid. And that Men may fall from a
state of Grace is no matter of Discouragement to good Men; but a good caution
against Security, and an Argument to greater Care and Watchfulness, according
to that of the Apostle, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall; which
Admonition were surely to little purpose, if it were impossible for them that
stand to fall.

Lastly, Others venture all upon a Death bed Repentance, and their Importunity
with God to receive them to Mercy at last. This indeed is only to seek, and not
to strive to enter in; and these perhaps are they whom our Savior represents
as standing without, and knocking at the door, saying Lord, Lord, open unto us;
Or as St. Matthew expresses it, Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,
which is most probably meant of the day of Judgment, when their Case is brought
to the last extremity; and next to that is the day of Death, when Men are
entering into a state of endless Happiness or Misery. And no wonder, if the
Sinner would then be glad, when he can no longer continue in this World, to be
admitted into Happiness in the next: but the Door is then shut to most Sinners,
and it is a Miracle of God's Grace and Mercy, if any Repentance that Men can
then exercise, (which at the best must needs be very confused and imperfect)
will then be accepted; if any Importunity which Men can then use, will be
available. For with what Face can we expect, that after all the evil Actions of
a long Life, God should be mollified toward us by a few good Words, and accept
of a forced and constrained Repentance for all our wilful and deliberate
Crimes, and that he should forgive us all our Sins upon a little Importunity,
when we can sin no longer, and would repent no sooner.

Let us then by all that has been said, be effectually persuaded to mind the
business of Religion in good earnest, and with all our might, especially the
Practice of it, in the exercise of all the Graces and Virtues of a good Life.
Let us heartily repent of all the Sins of our past Life, and resolve upon a
better course for the future; and let us not delay and put off this necessary
Work to the most unfit and improper time of old Age, and Sickness, and Death:
but let us set about it presently, and enter upon a good Course, and make all
the Speed and Progress in it we can.

And let us remember, that whatever we do in Religion will not bring us to
Heaven, if we do not do the will of our Father which is in Heaven; if we do not
give up our selves to a constant and universal Obedience of his Laws. This is
to strive to enter in at the strait Gate: And though we strive to enter in a
Thousand other Ways, we shall not be able; and after all our Confidence and
Conceit of our selves, and our own Righteousness, and Security of our Salvation
from the Privileges of any Church, it will be a strange Damp and
Disappointment to us, to see the sincere Christians, who have done the Will of
God, and lived in Obedience to his Laws, to come from all quarters, and
Churches in the World, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, when we who thought our selves the Children of the Kingdom,
shall be cast out, because we have been Workers of Iniquity. I will conclude
all with those plain Words of the Apostle, Romans 2. 7, 8, 9. To them, who by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and Immortality;
eternal Life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth,
but obey Unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, tribulat on, and anguish upon
every Soul of Man that does evil; in the day when God shall judge the Secrets
of Men by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel.

SERMON X. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.
Sermon I.
LUKE XVI. 19, 20. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in Purple
and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously every day: And there was a certain
Beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of Sores.
I Intend by God's Assistance to go over this Parable, than which I think there
is none in the whole Gospel, which is more apt to affect Men, or which is more
artificially contrived, and in the Circumstances whereof a greater Decorum is
observed.

It is a great Question among Interpreters, whether this Narration concerning
the Rich Man and Lazarus be a Parable, or a History, or a mixture of both: That
it is not a History, the resemblance between it, and others of our Savior's
Parables, will easily convince any Man that is not contentious; besides that,
in some ancient Copies, it is ushered in with this Preface, And he spoke a
Parable to his Disciples, A certain Rich Man, etc.

But yet, as some of the Ancients have not improbably conjectured, it seems to
be such a kind of Parable, as had something of a real Foundation; as namely,
that there was such a poor Man as Lazarus is here described, and of that Name
among the Jews: For in a mere Parable it is altogether unusual to name Persons,
nor is this done in any other of our Savior's Parables.

But whether this be so or not, is not worth the disputing, because it alters
not the case as to our Savior's purpose, and the Instructions which we may
learn from it.

In the handling of this Parable, I shall explain it as I go along, and draw
two sorts of Instructions or Observations from it.

The First sort of Observations shall be from the Circumstances which serve for
the Decorum of the Parable: And these I will not warrant to be all intended by
our Savior; but only to be true in themselves and useful, and to have a
probable rise from some Circumstances of the Parable; and therefore I shall
speak but very briefly to them.

The Second sort of Observations shall be such, as are grounded upon the main
Scope and Intent of the Parable; and these I shall insist more largely upon. I
begin,

First, With those Observations and Instructions which I shall gather up from
the Circumstances which serve for the Decorum of the Parable; and I shall take
them in order as they lie in the Parable.

Ver. 19. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every Day. Some think that our Savior in this
description reflected upon Herod, because he describes this Rich Man to be
clothed in Purple. But this Conjecture is without reason; for besides that, it
was not our Savior's Custom in his Preaching, to give secret Girds to the
Magistrate; it is certain that it was long after our Savior's time, that Purple
was appropriated to Kings. It was then, and a great while after, the wear of
rich and powerful Men, and of the Favorites and great Men of the Court, who
are frequently in ancient Histories called the Purpurati, those that wore
Purple.

That which I observe from hence, is, that the rich Man is not here censured
for enjoying what he had, for wearing rich Apparel, and keeping a great Table.
This of it self, if it be according to a Man's Estate and Quality, and without
intemperance, is so far from being a fault, that it is a commendable virtue.
But here was his Fault, that he made all to serve his own Sensuality and
Luxury, without any consideration of the Wants and Necessities of others:
Whereas, one of the great Uses of the plentiful Tables of Rich Men, is from the
superfluity of them to feed the Poor and the hungry.

Ver. 20. And there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus; as if our Savior had
said, for instance, poor Lazarus whom ye all knew. And here I cannot but take
notice of the Decorum which our Savior uses. He would not name any Rich Man,
because that was invidious, and apt to provoke. He endeavors to make all Men
sensible of their Duty; but he would provoke none of them by any peevish
Reflection; for nothing is more improper than to provoke those whom we intend
to persuade. While a Man's Reason is calm and undisturbed, it is capable of
Truth fairly propounded; but if we once stir up Men's Passions, it is like
muddying of the Waters, they can discern nothing clearly afterward. But to
proceed in the Parable.

There was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at the Rich Man's
gate full of Sores, and was desirous to be fed with the crumbs which fell from
his Table, moreover the Dogs came and licked his sores. Here are three great
Aggravations of the Rich Man's uncharitableness.

1st, That here was an Object presented it self to him.

2dly, Such an Object as would move any ones Pity, a Man reduced to extreme
Misery and Necessity.

3dly, A little Relief would have contented him.

1st, Here was an Object presented it self to him, Lazarus laid at the Rich
Man's Gate; so that so often as he went out of his own House and came in, he
could not but take notice of him. Good Men that are charitably disposed, will
enquire out Objects for their Charity, and not always stay 'till they thrust
themselves upon them: But he is a very bad Man, who, when an Object of great
Pity and Charity is presented, is so far from relenting toward him, that he
stops his Ear to his Cry, and turns away his Face from him. He is an
uncharitable Man, who being Rich, and hearing of the Miseries of others, does
not take them into Consideration: But what we see with our Eyes is much more
apt to affect us. So that this was an Argument of a very cruel disposition in
the Rich Man, that having so many Occasions of seeing Lazarus, he should never
be moved to commiserate him.

2dly, Here was such an Object presented to him, as would move any ones Pity, a
Man reduced to extreme Misery and Necessity. Here was no common Object of
Charity, a Man, not only in extreme Want, but in great Pain and Anguish, and so
helpless, that he was unable to keep off the Dogs from being troublesome to
him. And yet this did not move him.

3dly, A very little Relief would have contented this Poor Man, and have been a
great Kindness to him; that which the Rich Man might have spared without the
least Prejudice to himself. He would have been glad to have been fed with the
crumbs which fell from the Rich Man's table; and yet the Parable intimates,
that the Rich Man was so hardhearted, as not to afford him these.

Ver. 22. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom. Here was a great and sudden Change! He, who when
he was alive was neglected by Men, and contumeliously exposed like a dead
Carcass to the Dogs, when he dies, is attended on by the Angels, and by them
safely conveyed into a state of unspeakable Happiness. He, who lay at the Rich
Man's Gate, and could find no entrance there, is admitted into Heaven. The
Beggar died, and was carried into Abraham's bosom.

It Is very observable, that our Savior in this Parable represents Men as
passing immediately out of this Life into a state of Happiness or Torment. And
as in no other place of Scripture, so neither in this, where it had been so
proper, does our Savior give the least Intimation of the state of Purgatory,
which the Church of Rome has devised, and makes so much Profit and Advantage
of, which, because it is so visible and apparent, we may without
Uncharitableness suppose to be the reason why they keep such a stir about it.

And was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. It was an ancient
Tradition among the Jews, that the Angels did attend good Men at their Death,
and carry their Souls into Paradise, which is here called Abraham's bosom. And
this was a proper place for Lazarus, who had been neglected by the Rich Man; to
be conveyed into Abraham's Bosom, who was of a quite contrary temper, and loved
to entertain and relieve Strangers.

And Paradise is fitly called Abraham's bosom, because the Jews had so great a
Veneration for Abraham, and that deservedly for his eminent Faith and
Obedience, that they gave him the first place among the blessed. Hence is the
Expression, Matthew. 8. 11. of sitting down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of God. Now this Expression of being in Abraham's bosom, is an
Allusion to the Custom of Feasts among the Jews, where the most esteemed and
beloved Guest sat next him that was chief at the Feast, and leaned on his
Bosom. Hence St. John is called the Disciple whom Jesus loved, because when he
sat at Meat, he leaned on his Bosom* John 13. 23. Hence likewise is the
Expression of our Savior's being in the Bosom of his Father, to signify his
dearness to him, John 1. 18. No Man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

I proceed. The Rich Man also died, and was buried. The Rich Man also died;
this is very elegant and emphatical, insinuating to us, what the Scripture so
often takes notice of, that Riches, for all Men's confidence in them, will not
deliver from Death. This Rich Man indeed was out of Danger of being starved and
famisht, as poor Lazarus was: But Death had other ways to come at him. It is
probable enough, that he might be surfeted by faring sumptously every day. The
Rich Man also died.

And was buried. And here again we may observe the strict Decorum which our
Savior uses in this Parable. It is not said of Lazarus, that he was buried,
but only that he died; it is probable that he was flung out of the way into
some Pit or other: But of the Rich Man it is said, he was buried. And this is
all the Advantage which a Rich Man has by a great Estate after he is dead, to
have a pompous and solemn Funeral; which yet signifies nothing to him after
Death, because he is insensible of it.

Ver. 23. And in Hell he lift up his Eyes being in Torments, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. As corporal Acts are attributed to God in
Scripture, so likewise to separated Souls.

In Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torments; Intimating to us, that this
sensual and voluptuous Man had stupidly past away his Life without any serious
Thoughts and Consideration: but now at last he was awakned, when it was too
late, and began to consider. In Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torments.

O the Stupidity of Sinners! who run on blindly in their Course, and never open
their Eyes 'till they are fallen into the Pit; who cannot be brought to
consider, 'till Consideration will do them no good; 'till it serve to no other
purpose, but to enrage their Consciences, and to multiply the Stings of them.

Thus it was with this Rich Man, he lift up his Eyes being in Torments, and
sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. Our Savior represents him as
seeing that which would then most probably come to his Mind. Feeling his own
Misery, he began to consider the happy Condition of the poor Man whom he had so
cruelly neglected. And indeed one great part of the Torment of Hell consists in
those Reflections, which Men shall make upon the Happiness which they have
wilfully lost and neglected, and the Sins whereby they have plunged themselves
into that miserable State.

Ver. 24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue;
for I am tormented in this Flame. See how the Scene is changed; now he is fain
to beg Relief of the Beggar, who had sued to him in vain.

Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my
Tongue. Here is another very decent Circumstance; the Rich Man is represented
as not having the Face to beg any great Relief from Lazarus, toward whom he
had been so hard-hearted. To dip the tip of his Finger in Water, to cool his
Tongue, had been a very great Favor from Lazarus, to whom the Rich Man had
denied even the Crumbs which fell from his Table.

For I am tormented in this Flame. The Scripture loves to make use of sensible
Representations, to set forth to us the Happiness and Misery of the next Life;
partly by way of Condescension to our Understandings, and partly to work more
powerfully upon our Affections. For whilst we are in the Body, and immerst in
Sense, we are most apt to be moved by such Descriptions of things as are
sensible; and therefore the Torments of wicked Men in Hell, are usually in
Scripture described to us, by one of the quickest and sharpest Pains that Human
Nature is ordinarily acquainted withal, namely, by the pain of Burning; Fire
being the most active thing in Nature, and therefore capable of causing the
sharpest Pains.

But we cannot from these and the like Expressions of Scripture certainly
determine that this is the true and proper Pain of Hell: All that we can infer
from these Descriptions is this, that the Sufferings of wicked Men in the other
World, shall be very terrible, and as great, and probably greater than can
possibly be described to us by any thing that we are now acquainted withal; for
who knows the Power of God's Anger, and the utmost of what Omnipotent Justice
can do to Sinners? For as the Glory of Heaven, and the Joys of God's Presence
are now inconceivable; so likewise are the Torments of Hell, and the Miseries
of the Damned. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
Heart of Man, those dreadful things which God prepares for them that hate him.
Who can imagine the utmost significancy of those Phrases which the Scripture
uses to set forth this to us, of God's being a consuming Fire, of being
tormented in Flames, of God's Wrath and Jealousy smoking against Sinners, and
all the Curses that are written in his Book, falling upon them? Who can
conceive the Horror of those Expressions of the Worm that dies not, and the
Fire that is not quenched, of God's pouring out the Vials of his Wrath, of
being delivered over to the Tormentor, of being cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone? These forms of Speech seem to be borrowed from those things which
among Men are most dreadful and affrighting, and to be calculated and
accommodated to our Capacities, and not so much intended to express to us the
proper and real Torments of Hell, as to convey to us in a more sensible and
affecting manner the sense of what the Scripture says in general, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Ver. 25. But Abraham said, Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented. Abraham said, Son, remember. It is very observable, how our
Savior chooses to represent to us the discourse between Abraham and the Rich
Man; though there was the greatest difference between them imaginable, the one
was in Heaven, and the other in Hell, yet they treated one another civily.
Abraham is brought in giving the common terms of Civility to this wretched
wicked Man, and calling him Son; Son remember. It was indeed a very severe
thing which he said to him, he put him in mind of his former Prosperity, and of
his Fault in his unmerciful Usage of Lazarus; Remember Son, that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus, etc. But yet whilst he
speaks such sharp things to him, he 'bates bad Language. A Man may say very
severe things, where a just Occasion requires it; but he must use no reviling;
rem ipsam dic, mitte male loqui, say the thing, but use no bad Language. And
this, as one says, is the true art of Chiding, the proper Style wherein we must
use to reprove. If we do it with Malice, and Anger, and Contempt, it is
misbecoming, even though we despair of doing good: but if we hope for any good
Effect, we are like to miss of it this way; for as the Apostle says
excellently, the wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God.

Some think that Abraham gives the Rich Man the Title of Son ironically, and by
way of Jeer: but without all reason. For surely there is not so much bad Nature
in Heaven, as to scoff at those who are in Misery. Besides that we find our
Savior observing this Decorum of good Language in other of his Parables; as
particularly, in that of the King who invited Guests to the Marriage of his
Son, Matthew. 22. 11. When the King saw there the Man, that came without his
wedding Garment, though he past a very severe Sentence upon him, yet he gives him
the common terms of Civility; Friend, how came thou hither?

This should teach us Christians, how we ought to demean our selves toward
those who are at the greatest distance from us, and how we ought to behave our
selves toward one another in the greatest Differences of Religion. None sure
can be at greater distance, than Abraham in Paradise, and the Rich Man in Hell;
and yet our Savior would not represent them as at terms of Defiance with one
another. One might have expected that Abraham should have reviled this poor
Wretch, and disdained to have spoken to him: But this is not the Temper of
Heaven, nor ought it to be of good Men upon Earth, even toward the worst of
Men.

How does this condemn our Rudeness and Impatience with one another in our
religious Differences! We think no Terms bad enough to use toward one another:
and yet one of the most famous Disputes that we find mentioned in Scripture,
and that between the most opposite Parties that can be imagined, was managed
after another Fashion; I mean that recorded by St. Jude between Michael the
Archangel, and the Devil, v. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending
with the Devil, he disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring a railing
Accusation, he durst not allow himself this, no not in the heat of Dispute,
when Persons are most apt to fly out into Passion, because it was indecent, and
would have been displeasing to God; this I believe is the true reason why it is
said, he durst not bring a railing Accusation. And yet I may add another, which
is not improper for our Consideration, I am sure it has a good Moral; the
Devil would have been too hard for him at railing, he was better skilled at
that Weapon, and more expert at that kind of Dispute.

Which Consideration may be a good Argument to us against reviling any Man. If
we revile the good, we are unjust, because they deserve it not: if we revile
the bad, we are unwise, because we shall get nothing by it. I could almost envy
the Character which was given of one of the Romans; Nescivit quid esset male
dicere, he knew not what it was to give bad Language.

I proceeed. Son, remember that thou in thy Life time receivedst thy good
things. Thy good things, those which thou did value and esteem so highly, and
did place thy chief Happiness in, as if there had been no other good to be
sought after. Thy good things, and indeed so he used them, as if he had been
the sole Lord and Proprietor of them, and they had not been committed to him,
as a Steward, to be dispensed for his Master's use, for the clothing of the
naked, and the feeding of the hungry, and the relieving of those in distress.

Ver. 27, 28. Then he said, I pray thee therefore Father, that thou would
send him to my Father's house: For I have five Brethren; that he may testify
unto them, lest they also come into this place of Torment. Here the Rich Man,
though in Hell, is represented as retaining some tenderness for his Relations, as
solicitous lest they should be involved in the same Misery with himself. The
last piece of that which commonly remains in Men, is natural Affection, which
is not so much a Virtue, as a natural Principle, and is common to many brute
Beasts. When a Man puts off this, we may give him up for lost to all manner of
Goodness. To be without natural Affection, is the worst Character can be given
of a Man. Our Savior represents this Rich Man in Hell as not so totally
degenerate as to be quite destitute of this.

I think some attribute this Motion of the Rich Man concerning his Brethren to
another Cause; as if he had desired it, not out of kindness to them, but out of
regard to himself, as being afraid that if his Brethren, who probably were
corrupted by his Example, had perished by that means, it would have been an
Aggravation of his Torments. But this Conjecture is too subtle, and without
any good ground; for every Man carries his Burden of Guilt with him out of
this World, and it is not increased by any Consequence of our Actions here. For
the Crime of a bad Example is the same, whether Men follow it or not, because
he that gives bad Example to others, does what in him lies to draw them into
Sin; and if they do not follow it, that is no mitigation of his Fault.

I have but one Observation more, and that is from the mention of his Brethren
as his nearest Relations, which is a great Aggravation of the Rich-Man's
Uncharitableness, because he is represented as having no Children to take care
for, and yet he would not consider the Poor.

And thus I have, as briefly as I could, endeavored to explain this Parable,
and have made such Observations from the Circumstances of it, as may be useful
for Instruction. But as I premised at first, I will not warrant all these
Observations to be certainly intended by our Savior; I know very well that
every Circumstance of a Parable is not to be pressed too far, the Moral
Accommodation does chiefly belong to the main Scope of it, and many
Circumstances are only brought in to fill up the Parable, and to make handsomer
way for that which is most material, and principally intended: But so long as
the Observations are true and useful, and have a fair Color and Occasion from
the Circumstances, it is well enough; to be sure there is no harm done. I
proceed to the second sort of Observations, namely, such as are drawn from the
main scope and intent of the Parable, which I promised to speak more largely
to; and they are Six, which I shall handle in order.

First, I observe that Uncharitableness and Unmercifulness to the Poor, is a
great and damning Sin. We find no other fault imputed to the Rich Man but this,
that he took no care out of his Superfluity and Abundance to relieve this poor
Man that lay at his Gate. He is not charged for want of Justice, but of
Charity; not for having got a great Estate by Fraud or Oppression, but that in
the midst of this Abundance he had no Consideration and Pity for those that
were in want.

I shall endeavor to make out this Observation by the parts of it.

1st, That Unmercifulness and Uncharitableness to the Poor is a great Sin.

2dly, Such a Sin, as alone and without any other guilt, is sufficient to ruin
a Man for ever. I shall speak to these severally.

1st, That Unmercifulness and Uncharitableness to the Poor is a very great Sin.
It contains in its very Nature two black Crimes, Inhumanity and Impiety.

1. Inhumanity; it is an Argrment of a cruel and savage Disposition, not to
pity those that are in Want and Misery. And he does not truly pity the Miseries
of others, that does not relieve them when he has Ability and Opportunity in
his Hands. Tenderness and Compassion for the Sufferings of others is a Virtue
so proper to our Nature, that it is therefore called Humanity, as if it were
essential to Human Nature, and as if without this, we did not deserve the Name
of Men. To see a Man like our selves, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh,
laboring under Want and Necessity, and yet not to be moved to commiserate him,
this is a sign that we have put off our own Nature, otherwise we should pity
the Sufferings of it in others. For whenever we behold a Man like our own
selves groaning under Want and pressed with Necessity, and do not relent toward
him, and are not ready to relieve him, we are hard-hearted to our own Nature,
and do in some sense what the Apostle says no Man ever did (that is, none
retaining the Temper and Affections of a Man) hate his own Flesh.

This the Scripture speaks of as a most barbarous sort of Inhumanity, and calls
it Murder, 1 John 3. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer; and not to
relieve our Brother in want is to hate him; for this is the Instance which the
Apostle gives at the 17th. verse, Whosoever has this Worlds Goods, and sees his
Brother in want, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him; whosoever does
not consider the Poor, is a Manslayer and a Murderer, he is cruel to his own
Nature, nay were he sufficiently sensible of the Condition of Humane Nature, he
is cruel to himself.

See thou a Poor Man in great Misery and Want, there is nothing has befallen
him, but what is common to Man, what might have been thy Lot and Portion as
well as his, and what may happen to thee or thine another time. Make it
therefore thine own Case; (for so the Providence of God may make it one time or
other, and thou provokest him to make it so speedily, by thy unmerciful
Disposition toward the Poor;) I say, make it thine own case, if thou were in
the Poor Man's Condition, and he in thine, consult thine own Bowels, and tell
me how thou would wish him to be affected toward thee. Would thou be
willing that he should slight and repulse thee, and shut up his Bowels of
Compassion from thee? If not, then do not thou deal so with him, consider that
it may be thine own case, therefore do not thou give the World any bad Example
in this kind, do not teach Men to be unmerciful, lest they learn of thee, and
thou find the ill Effects of it, when it comes to be thine own Condition. This
is the first Aggravation of this Sin, the Inhumanity of it. But,

2. Besides the Inhumanity of this Sin, it is likewise a great Impiety toward
God. Unmercifulness to the Poor has this fourfold Impiety in it; it is a
Contempt of God; an Usurpation upon his Right; a slighting of his Providence;
and a plain Demonstration that we do not love God, and that all our Pretenses
to Religion are hypocritical and insincere.

1. It is a Contempt of God, and a reproaching of him; so Solomon tells us,
Pro. 14. 31. He that oppresses the Poor, (not only he that deals unjustly
with a Poor Man, but he that is uncharitable toward him, as appears by the
Opposition, but he that honors him has Mercy on the Poor; here Oppression
of the Poor is opposed to want of Charity toward him;) He that oppresses the
Poor reproacheth his Maker; how is that? He despises God who made him after
his own Image and Likeness: For the Poor Man bears the Image of God as well as
the Rich; so that thou can not oppress or neglect him, without some
reflection upon God, whose Image he bears.

2. The uncharitable Man is an Usurper upon God's Right. The Earth is the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof, and he has given it to the Children of Men,
not absolutely to dispose of as they please, but in trust, and with certain
reservations, so as to be accountable to him for the disposal of it. In respect
of other Men, we are indeed true Proprietors of our Estates: but in respect of
God, we are but Stewards; and he will call us to an Account how we have laid
them out. So much as we need is ours; but beyond what will support us, and be a
convenient Provision for our Family, in the Rank wherein God has placed us,
all that is given to us, that we may give it to others. And if God has been
liberal to us in the Blessings of this Life, it is on purpose to give us an
Opportunity, and to engage us to be so to others that stand in need of our
Charity; and we are false to our Trust, if we keep those things to our selves,
which we receive from God for this very end that we might distribute them to
others, according to the proportion of our Ability and their Necessity. This is
to hide our Lord's Talent in a Napkin, and that which thou storest up in this
Case is unjustly detained by thee; for God intended it should have been for
Bread for the hungry, and for Clothes for the naked, for the Relief and Support
of those who were ready to perish.

3. The uncharitable Man is impious in slighting of God's Providence. He does
not consider that Riches and Poverty are of the Lord, that he can soon change
our Condition, and that it is an easy thing with him to make a Rich Man poor.
We do not sufficiently reverence the Providence which rules the World, if when
God has blessed us with Plenty and Abundance, we have no pity and regard for
those that are in need. God can soon turn the Wheel, and lay thee as low as the
poor Man whom thou do neglect. He can cast down the mighty from their Seat,
and exalt the humble and Meek; fill the hungry with good things, and send the
rich empty away.

God's Providence could easily have disposed of things otherwise, to have
secured every Man from want: but he has on purpose ordered this variety of
Conditions, high and low, rich and poor, not that some Men might have an
Advantage to insult over and despise others, but that there might be an
Opportunity for the exercise of several Virtues; that the poor might have an
Opportunity to exercise their Dependence upon God, and their Patience and
Submission to his Will; and that the rich might show their Temperance, and
Moderation, and Charity.

4. Unmercifulness to the Poor is a plain Demonstration that we do not love
God, and that all our other pretenses to Religion are hypocritical and
insincere. St. James tells us, that pure Religion and undefiled before God and
the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and the Widow, Ja. 1. 27. That the
Wisdom which is from above is full of Mercy and good fruits, chapter 3. 17. St.
John represents this uncharitable Disposition as utterly inconsistent with the
true Love of God, 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever has this Worlds Goods, and sees his
Brother have need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him; how
dwells the love of God in him? In vain does such a Man pretend to love God;
nay chapter 4. v. 20. he tells us that it is impossible such a Man should love God.
If a Man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? This deserves to be seriosly considered by those who make a great show of
Devotion, and are at great pains in Prayer, and Fasting, and reading, and
hearing the Word of God, and in all other frugal Exercises of Religion, which
stand them in no Money; lest all their Labor be lost for want of this one
necessary and essential part, lest with the young Man in the Gospel, after they
have kept all other Commandments, they be rejected by Christ for lack of this
one thing. I have done with the first part of the Observation, that
Unmercifulness is a very great Sin. I proceed to the

2d, That it is such a Sin, as alone, and* without any other Guilt, is
sufficient to ruin a Man for ever. The Parable lays the Rich Man's Condemnation
upon this; it was the guilt of this Sin that tormented him when he was in Hell.
The Scripture is full of severe Threatenings against this Sin. Prove. 21. 13.
Whosoever stops his Ears at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, but
shall not be heard. God will have no regard or pity for the Man that regards
not the Poor. That is a terrible Text, Ja. 2. 13. He shall have Judgment
without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy.

Our Savior has two Parables to represent to us the Danger of this Sin; this
here in the Text, and that in Luke 12. concerning the Covetous Man that
enlarged his Barns, and was still laying up, but laid nothing out upon the
Poor; upon which our Savior makes this Observation, which is the Moral of the
Parable, v. 21. So is he that lays up Treasure for himself, and is not rich
toward God; So shall he be, such an issue of his Folly may every one expect,
who lays up Treasure for himself, but does not lay up Riches with God. How is
that? The Scripture tells us, by Works of Mercy and Charity; this our Savior
calls laying up for our selves Treasures in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 20. And Luke 12.
33. he calls giving of Alms, providing for our selves Bags that wax not old, a
Treasure in Heaven that fails not.

There is no particular Grace and Virtue to which the Promise of eternal Life
is so frequently made in Scripture, as to this of Mercy and Charity to the
Poor. Matthew. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find Mercy. Which
Promise, as it does not exclude a Reward in this World, so it seems principally
to respect the Mercy of God at the great Day. Luke 14. 12, 13, 14. When thou
make a Feast, invite not the Rich, for they will recompense thee again: but
invite the Poor, and the maimed, and the lame, and the blind, for they cannot
recompense thee; but thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.
Luke 16. 9. Make therefore to your selves friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when ye shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this World,
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good Foundation, as
the word (...) is sometimes used, a good Treasure against the time which is to
come, that they may lay hold of eternal Life.

But the most considerable Text of all other to this purpose, is in Matthew. 25.
where our Savior gives us a description of the Judgment of the great Day: And
if that be a true and proper representation of the process of that Day, then
the grand enquiry will be, what Works of Charity have been done or neglected by
us, and accordingly Sentence shall be past upon us.

The proper Result from all this Discourse is to persuade Men to this necessary
Duty. Our eternal Happiness does not so much depend upon the exercise of any
one single Grace or Virtue, as this of Charity and Mercy. Faith and Repentance
are more general and fundamental Graces, and as it were the Parents of all the
rest: But of all single Virtues the Scripture lays the greatest weight upon
this of Charity; and if we do truly believe the Precepts of the Gospel, and the
Promises and Threatenings of it, we cannot but have a principal regard to it.

I know how averse Men generally are to this Duty, which makes them so full of
Excuses and Objections against it.

1. They have Children to provide for. This is not the case of all, and they
whose case it is, may do well to consider, that it will not be amiss to leave a
Blessing, as well as an Inheritance to their Children.

2. They tell us, they intend to do something when they die. I doubt that very
much; but granting their Intention to be real, why should Men choose to spoil a
good Work, and to take away the Grace and Acceptableness of it, by the manner
of doing? It shows a great backwardness to the Work, when we defer it as long
as we can. He that will not do good, till he be enforced by the last necessity,
diu noluit, was long unwilling. It is one of the worst Complements we can put
upon God, to give a thing to him when we can keep it no longer.

3. Others say they may come to want themselves, and it is Prudence to provide
against that. To this I answer,

(1.) I believe that no Man ever came the sooner to want for his Charity. David
has an express Observation to the contrary, Psa. 37. 25. I have been young and
now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging
bread. And though he use a general word, yet that by the righteous here he
intended the merciful Man, is evident from the next words, he is ever merciful
and lends.

And besides David's Observation, we have express Promises of God to secure us
against this Fear. Psa. 41. 1, 2. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the
Lord will deliver him in time of trouble, the Lord will preserve him and keep
him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth. Pro. 28. 27. He that gives
unto the Poor shall not lack.

(2.) Thou may come to want, though thou give nothing; thou may lose that
which thou have spared in this kind as well as the rest; thou may lose all,
and then thou art no better secured against want, than if thou had been
charitable. Besides that, when thou art brought to Poverty, thou will want the
Comfort of having done this Duty, and may justly look upon the neglect of
this Duty as one of the Causes of thy Poverty.

(3.) After all our Care to provide for our selves, we must trust the
Providence of God; and a Man can in no case so safely commit himself to God, as
in well-doing. If the Providence of God (as we all believe) be peculiarly
concerned to bless one Man more than another, I dare say the charitable Man
will not have the least Portion.

4. There is a worse Objection than all these made by some grave Men, who would
be glad under a pretense of Piety to slip themselves out of this Duty; and that
is this, that it savours of Popery to press good Works with so much earnestness
upon Men, as if we could merit Heaven by them; So that they dare not be
charitable out of a pious Fear, as they pretend, lest hereby they should
entertain the Doctrine of Merit.

But if the Truth were known, I doubt Covetousness lies at the bottom of this
Objection: However it is fit it should be answered. And,

(1.) I say that no Man that is not prejudiced either by his Education or
Interest, can think that a Creature can merit any thing at the hand of God, to
whom all that we can possibly do, is antecedently due; much less that we can
merit so great a Reward as that of Eternal Happiness.

(2.) Though we deny the Merit of good Works, yet we firmly believe the necessity
of them to Eternal Life. And that they are necessary to Eternal Life, is as
good an Argument to persuade a wise Man to do them, as if they were
meritorious; unless a Man be so vainglorious as to think Heaven not worth the
having, unless he purchase it himself at a valuable Consideration.

And now let me earnestly entreat you, as you love God and your own Souls, not
to neglect this Duty; lest you bring your selves to the same miserable state
with this Rich Man, to whom the least Charity that could be asked was denied.
Our Savior has purposely left this Parable on record, to be a testimony and a
witness to us; lest we being guilty of the same sin, should come into the same
place of torment.

And if any ask me, according to what proportion of his Estate he ought to be
charitable? I cannot determine that. Only, let no Man neglect his Duty, because
I cannot (and it may be no one else can) tell him the exact proportion of his
Charity to his Estate. There are some Duties that are strictly determined, as
those of Justice; but God has left our Charity to be a free will Offering. In
the proportion of this Duty, every one must determine himself by Prudence and
the Love of God: God has left this Duty undetermined, to try the largeness of
our Hearts toward him; only to encourage us to be abundant in this Grace, he
has promised, that according to the proportion of our Charity, shall be the
degree of our Happiness, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows plentifully, shall reap
plentifully. But let us be sure to do something in this kind; any part of our
Estate rather than none.

I will conclude with that excellent Counsel of the Son of Syrach, Eccl. 4. My
Son defraud not the Poor, and make not the needy Eye to wait long; make not a
hungry Soul sorrowful, neither provoke a Man in his distress; add not more
trouble to a Heart that is vexed, defer not to give to him that is in need.
Reject not the supplication of the afflicted, nor turn away thy face from a
poor Man; turn not away thy Eye from the needy, and give him none occasion to
curse thee. For if he curse thee in the bitterness of his Soul, his Prayer
shall be heard of him that made him. Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine
Ear to the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness. Be as a father
to the fatherless, and instead of a husband to their mother; so shall thou be
as the Son of the most high, and he shall love thee more than thy Mother does.

SERMON XI. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.
Sermon II.
LUKE XVI. 19, 20. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in Purple
and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously every day: And there was a certain
Beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of Sores.
I Proceed to our Second Observation, that a Man may be poor and miserable in
this World, and yet dear to God. This beggar Lazarus, though he was so much
slighted, and despised in his lifetime by this great rich Man, yet it appeared
when he came to die, that he was not neglected by God, for he gave his Angels
charge concerning him, to convey him to Happiness; v. 22. The Beggar died, and
was carried into Abraham's bosom.

But this Truth is not only represented to us in a Parable, but exemplified in
the Life of our blessed Savior. Never was any Man so dear to God as he was,
for he was his only begotten Son, his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased:
And yet how poor and mean was his Condition in this World! Insomuch that the
Jews were offended at him, and could not own one that appeared in so much
Meanness, for the true Messiah. He was born of mean Parents, and persecuted as
soon as he was born; he was destitute of worldly Accommodations; The Foxes had
holes, and the Birds of the Air had nests; but the Son of Man had not where to
lay his head. He was despised and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief.

God could have sent his Son into the World with Majesty and great Glory, and
have made all the Kings of the Earth to have bowed before him, and paid Homage
to him: but the Wisdom of God chose rather that he should appear in a poor and
humble, in a suffering and afflicted Condition, to confound the Pride of the
World, who measure the Love of God by these outward things, and think that God
hates all those whom he permits to be afflicted.

Now it was not possible to give a greater and clearer Demonstration of this
Truth, that Goodness and Suffering may meet together in the same Person, than
in the Son of God, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; yet it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to Grief.

Afflictions in this World are so far from being a sign of God's Hatred, that
they are an Argument of his Love and Care; whom the Lord loves he chastneth,
and scourges every Son whom he receives. Those he designs for great things
hereafter, he trains up by great Hardships in this World, and by many
Tribulations prepares them for a Kingdom. This course God took more especially
in the first planting of Christianity; the poor chiefly were those that
received the Gospel. Not many mighty, nor many noble; but the base things of
the World, and the things that were despised did God choose. Hearken, my beloved
Brethren, says St. James, chapter 2. 5. Has not God chosen the poor in this
World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them
that love him?

Now this Consideration should persuade to Patience under the greatest
Sufferings and Afflictions in this world. God may be our Father, and chasten us
severely; nay this very thing is rather an Argument that he is so. God may love
us though the World hate us. It Is but exercising a little Patience, and these
Storms will blow over, and we shall be removed into a calmer Region, where all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes; and death and sorrow shall be no more. This
was the Portion of the Son of God here; but it is a faithful saying, that if we
be dead with him, we shall also live with him, if we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him. Therefore those who suffer in this world ought not to be
moved, as though some strange thing happened unto them; but should rather rejoice,
in as much as they are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory
shall be revealed, they also may be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet 4. 12 13. I
proceed to a

Third Observation, which is the different Estate of good and bad men after
this life; Lazarus dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom:
the rich man dyed, and went to hell. This the Justice of the Divine Providence
seems to require; so that if there had been no Revelation of God to this
purpose, it is a thing very credible to Natural Reason, whether we consider God
or our selves. If we consider God; our Reason tells us, that he is the holy and
righteous Governor of the World, and consequently, that he loves Goodness and
hates Sin, and therefore is concerned to countenance the one, and
discountenance the other, in such a solemn and public manner, as may vindicate
his Holiness and Justice to the whole World. Now the Dispensations of his
Providence are promiscuous in this world; and therefore it seems very
reasonable, that there should be a general Assizes, a fair and open Trial; when
God will render to every Man according to his works.

And if we consider our selves, this will appear very credible; for this has
been the constant Opinion, not only of the common People, but of the wisest
Persons, who had only the light of Nature to guide them. Nay if we do but
search our own Consciences, we shall find an inward and secret acknowledgment
of this, in that inward peace and satisfaction we find in any good Action, and
in that shame and fear and horror that haunts a Man after the commission of
any, though never so secret a Sin.

And as Reason and Scripture together do assure us of a future Judgment; so
likewise, that Men, when they pass out of this World, shall meet with the
proper Consequences and Rewards of their Actions in the other. And though the
Happiness or Misery of Men be not so complete as it shall be after the public
Judgment; yet it is unspeakably great. Lazarus is represented as very happy
immediately after his passing out of this World, he is said to be carried into
Abraham's bosom; by which the Jews express the Happiness of the future State.
And the Rich Man is represented, as in great Anguish and Torment. But what the
Happiness of good Men, and the Misery of wicked Men shall be in the other
State, we can but now imperfectly and unskilfully describe. Each of these I
have in another Discourse spoken Sermon. on Romans 6. 21, 22.
something to. I proceed to a

Fourth Observation, the vast difference between Men's Conditions in this
World, and the other. The Rich Man prospered here, and was afterward tormented:
Lazarus was poor and miserable in this World, and happy in the other; v. 25.
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And it is very
agreeable to the Wisdom of God, to make such a difference between Men's
Conditions in this World and the other; and that for these two Reasons.

1st, For the trying of Men's Virtue.

2dly, In order to the Recompencing of it.

1. For the Trial of Men's Virtue. For this End principally God ordains the
Sufferings of good Men, and permits the best of his Servants many times to be
involved in the greatest Calamities, to try their Faith in him, and Love to
him; to improve their Virtue, and to prevent those Sins into which the mighty
Temptations of a perpetual Prosperity are apt to draw even the best of Men; to
take off their Affections from the love of this vain World, and to engage and
fix them there, where they shall never repent that they have placed them; to
prove their Sincerity toward God, and to exercise their Patience and
Submission to his Will; to prepare them for the Glory of the next Life, and to
make the Happiness of Heaven more welcome to them, when they shall come to it.

2dly, In order to the Recompencing of Men; that they who will take up with the
Pleasures and Enjoyments of this present World, and take no care for their
future State, that they who will gratify their Senses, and neglect their
immortal Souls, may inherit the proper Consequences of their wretched Choice.
And on the other hand, that they who love God above all things, and had rather
endure the greatest Evils, than do the least, that they who look beyond the
present Scene of things, and believe the reality and Eternity of the other
State, and live accordingly, may not be disappointed in their Hopes, and serve
God, and suffer for him for nothing. From this consideration of the Difference
between the Condition of Men in this World and the other, we may infer,

1. That no Man should measure his Felicity or Unhappiness by his Lot in this
World. If thou receivest thy good things, art rich and honorable, and have as
much of the things of this World as thine Heart can wish, art splendidly
attired, and farest sumptuously every day; art in no trouble like other Men,
neither art plagued like other folk; do not upon this bless thy self as the
happy Man. On the other Hand, art thou poor and miserable, destitute of all the
Conveniences and Accommodations of this Life? Do not repine at thy Lot, and
murmur at God for having dealt hardly with thee. No Man can be pronounced happy
or miserable for what befalls him in this Life; no Man knows Love or Hatred by
these things; this Life is but a short and inconsiderable duration, and it
matters not much what Entertainment we meet withal, as we are passing through
this World: The state of Eternity is that, wherein the Happiness or Misery of
Men shall be determined. He is the happy Man who is so in that Life which shall
never have an end; and he is miserable that shall be so for ever.

2. We should not set too great a value upon the blessings of this Life. We may
receive our good things here, and be tormented hereafter; nay this very thing
will be no inconsiderable part of our Torment, none of the least Aggravations
of our Misery, that we did receive our good Things. Nothing afflicts a Man
more, and touches him more sensibly when he is in Misery, than the remembrance
of his former Prosperity; had he never been happy, his Misery would be the less.

Therefore we should be so far from applauding our selves in the Prosperity of
this World, that we should rather be afraid of receiving our good things here;
lest God should put us off with these things, and this should be all our
Portion, and lest our Misery in the next World should be the greater for our
having been happy.

The Felicities of this World are transient, and though our Happiness were never
so complete, yet it is going off, and passing away; and when it is gone and
past, if Misery succeed it, it had better never have been. Remember, thou in
thy life time receivedst thy good things; these things are only for our life
time, and how short is that! Did Men seriously consider this, they would not
set such a price upon any of the transient Enjoyments of this Life, as for the
sake of them to neglect the great Concernments of another World. We are apt to
be dazzled with the present glittering of worldly Glory and Prosperity: But if
we would look upon these things as they will be shortly gone from us, how
little would they signify! The Rich Man here in the Parable did, no doubt,
think himself a much happier Man than poor Lazarus that lay at his Door; and
yet after a little while, how glad would he have been to have changed
Conditions with this poor Man! When he was in Torments, then no doubt he wished
that he had suffered all the Misery and Want in this World which Lazarus did,
provided he might have been comforted as he was, and carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom. We should value this World, and look upon it, as this Rich Man
did, not when he enjoyed it, but when he was taken from it; and we should
esteem it and use it while we may, as he wished he had done when it was too late.

3. We should not be excessively troubled, if we meet with Hardship and
Affliction here in this World; because those whom God designs for the greatest
Happiness hereafter, may receive evil things here. Thus our blessed Savior,
the Captain of our Salvation, was made perfect through Sufferings; this was the
method which God used toward his own Son, first he suffered, and then entered
into Glory. He suffered more than any of us can bear; and yet he supported
himself under all his Sufferings by the consideration of the Glory that would
follow; for the Joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised
the shame.

The same Consideration should arm us with Patience and Constancy under the
greatest Evils of this life. The Evils that we lie under are passing and going
off; but the Happiness is to come. And if the Happiness of the next World were
no greater, nor of longer continuance, than the Miseries of this World; or if
they did equally answer one another; yet a wise Man would choose to have Misery
first, and his Happiness last. For if his Happiness were first, all the
Pleasure and Comfort of it would be eaten out, by dismal Apprehensions of what
was to follow: but his Sufferings, if they were first, would be sweetened by the
consideration of his future Happiness; and the bitterness of his Sufferings
would give a quicker Relish to his Happiness when it should come, and make it
greater.

But a good Man under the Sufferings of this life, has not only this Comfort,
that his Happiness is to come, but likewise that it shall be infinitely greater
than his Sufferings; that these are but short, but that shall never have an
end. And this was that which fortified the first Christians against all that
the Malice and Cruelty of the World could do against them. They thought
themselves well paid, if through many Tribulations they might at last enter
into the Kingdom of God; because they believed that the Joys of the next life
would abundantly recompense all their Labors and Sufferings in this World.
They expected a mighty Reward far beyond all their Sufferings; they were firmly
persuaded that they should be vast Gainers at the last. So the Apostle tells us
of himself, Romans 8. 18. I reckon that the Sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed. And to the
same purpose, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Our light Afflictions, which are but for a
moment, work for us an eternal weight of Glory, whilst we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. If
we would consider all things together, and fix our Eyes as much upon the
Happiness and Glory of the next World, as upon the Pomp and Splendour of this,
if we would look as much at the things which are not seen, as the things which
are seen, we should easily perceive, that he who suffers in this World does not
renounce his Happiness, only puts it out to Interest, upon terms of the
greatest Advantage.

4. We should do all things with a Regard to our future and eternal State. It
matters not much what our Condition is in this World, because that is to
continue but for a little while: but we ought to have a great and serious
Regard to that State that never shall have an end. Therefore whenever we are
doing any thing, we should consider what Influence such an Action will have
upon the Happiness or Misery of the next Life. We should measure every Action,
and every Condition of our Lives by the reference of them to Eternity. To be
rich and great in this world will contribute nothing to our future Happiness;
all these things which we so much dote upon, and pursue with so much eagerness,
will not commend any Man to God; they will signify nothing when we come to
appear before our Judge. Death will strip us of these things, and in the other
World, the Soul of the poorest Man that ever lived shall be upon equal Terms
with the richest. Nothing but Holiness and Virtue will then avail us; and it is
but a little while and we shall all certainly be of this Mind, that the best
thing Men can do in this World, is to provide for the other. I proceed to a

Fifth Observation, that the State of Men in the next World is fixed and
unchangable; which I ground upon v. 26. Between us and you there is a great
Gulf fixed, so that they that would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can
they pass to us, that would come from thence. By which Words our Savior seems
not only to intend, that they that are in Heaven and Hell can have no
Communication and Intercourse with one another; but likewise that they are
lodged in an immutable State. Those that are happy are like to continue so; and
those that are miserable are immutably fixed in that State.

1. As to those that are in Happiness there can be no great doubt. For what can
tempt Men that have so narrowly escaped the Dangers and Temptations of a wicked
World, and are possessed of so great a Happiness by the free Grace and Mercy of
God, to do any thing whereby they may forfeit their Happiness; or so much as to
entertain a Thought of offending that God, to whom they cannot but be sensible
how infinitely they are obliged. In this imperfect state few Men have so little
Goodness as to sin without a Temptation; but in that state where Men are
perfectly good, and can have no Temptation to be otherwise, it is not
imaginable that they should fall from that state.

2. As to the state of the damned, that that likewise is immutable, the
Scripture does seem plainly enough to assert, when it calls it an everlasting
Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and uses such Expressions to set
forth the continuance of their Misery, as signify the longest and most
interminable Duration, expressions of as great an Extent as those which are
used to signify the Eternal Happiness of the blessed; and as large and
unlimited, as any are to be had in those Languages wherein the Scriptures are
written.

Besides that wicked Men in the other World are in Scripture represented, as in
the same Condition with the Devils, of whom there is no ground to believe that
any of them ever did or will repent. Not because Repentance is impossible in
it is own nature to those that are in extreme Misery; but because there is no
place left for it. Being under an irreversible Doom, there is no encouragement
to Repentance, no hope of Mercy and Pardon, without which Repentance is
impossible. For if a Man did utterly despair of Pardon, and were assured upon
good ground, that God would never show Mercy to him, in this case a Man would
grow desperate, and not care what he did. He that knows that whatever he does,
he is miserable and undone, will not matter how he demeans himself. All motives
to Repentance are gone after a Man once knows it will be to no purpose. And
this the Scripture seems to represent to us, as the case of the Devils and
damned Spirits. Because their state is finally determined, and they are
concluded under an irreversible Sentence, therefore Repentance is impossible to
them.

Sorry, no doubt, they are, and heartily troubled that by their own Sin and
Folly they have brought this Misery upon themselves; and they cannot but
conceive an everlasting Displeasure against themselves, for having been the
Cause and Authors of their own Ruin; and the Reflection upon this will be a
perpetual spring of Discontent, and fill their Minds with eternal Rage and
Vexation; and so long as they feel the intolerable Punishments of Sin, and
groan under the insupportable Torments of it, and see no end of this miserable
State, no hope of getting out of it, they can be no otherwise affected, than
with Discontent at themselves, and Rage and Fury against God.

They are indeed penitent so far, as to be troubled at themselves for what they
have done; but this Trouble works no Change and Alteration in them; they still
hate God who inflicts these Punishments upon them, and who they believe is
determined to continue them in this miserable state. The present Anguish of
their Condition, and their despair of bettering it, makes them mad; and their
Minds are so distracted by the wildness of their Passions, and their Spirits so
exasperated and set on Fire by their own giddy Motions, that there can be no
rest and silence in their Souls, not so much as the liberty of one calm and
sedate Thought.

Or if at any time they reflect upon the evil of their Sins, and should
entertain any thought of returning to God and their Duty, they are presently
checked with this Consideration, that their case is determined, that God is
implacably offended with them, and is inexorably and peremptorily resolved to
make them miserable for ever; and during this Persuasion, no Man can return to
the love of God and Goodness, without which there can be no Repentance.

This Consideration, of the immutable state of Men after this Life, should
engage us with all seriousness and diligence to endeavor to secure our future
Happiness. God has set before us good and evil, Life and Death, and we may yet
choose which we please; but in the other World, we must stand to that Choice
which we have made here, and inherit the Consequences of it.

By Sin Mankind is brought into a miserable State; but our Condition is not
desperate and past Remedy. God has sent his Son to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. So that though our Case be bad, it need
not continue so, if it be not our own fault. There is a possibility now of
changing our Condition for the better, and of laying the foundation of a
perpetual Happiness for our selves. The Grace of God calls upon us, and is
ready to assist us; so that no Man's Case is so bad, but there is a possibility
of bettering it, if we be not wanting to our selves, and will make use of the
Grace which God offers, who is never wanting to the sincere endeavors of Men.
Under the Influence and Assistance of this Grace, those who are dead in
trespasses and sins, may pass from death to life, may be turned from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. So long as we are in this World
there is a possibility of being translated from one state to another, from the
dominion of Satan, into the kingdom of God's dear Son. But if we neglect the
oportunities of this life, and stand out against the offers of God's Grace and
Mercy, there will no Overtures be made to us in the other World. After this
life is ended, God will try us no more; our final miscarriage in this World
will prove fatal to us in the other, and we shall not be permitted to live over
again to correct our Errors. As the Tree falls, so it shall lie; such a State
as we are settled in, when we go out of this World, shall be fixed in the other,
and there will be no possibility of changing it. We are yet in the hand of our
own Counsel, and by God's Grace we may mould and fashion our own Fortune. But
if we trifle away this Advantage, we shall fall into the hands of the living
God, out of which there is no Redemption. God has yet left Heaven and Hell to
our choice, and we had need to look about us, and choose well, who can choose but
once for all and for ever. There is yet a space and opportunity left us of
Repentance; but so soon as we step out of this Life, and are entered upon the
other World, our Condition will be sealed, never to be reverst. And because
after this Life there will be no further hopes of Mercy, there will be no
possibility of Repentance. This is the accepted time, this is the day of
Salvation; therefore to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts;
lest God swear in his Wrath that we shall not enter into his rest. I proceed to
a

Sixth Observation, that a standing Revelation of God is Evidence sufficient
for Divine things. They have Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them; that
is, they have the Books of Moses and the Prophets, written by Men divinely
inspired, these do sufficiently declare to them the Will of God and their Duty;
and it is unreasonable to demand or expect that God should do more for their
Conviction and Satisfaction.

I know very well the Text speaks only of the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
those of the New being not then extant, when this Parable was delivered. But
what is here said concerning the Scriptures of the Old Testament, is equally
applicable to the New; and though Abraham do only recommend Moses and the
Prophets, there is no doubt but he would have said the same concerning Christ
and his Apostles, if the Books of the New Testament had been then extant. So
that what I shall say upon this Observation, does indifferently concern the
whole Scripture.

And that I may make out this Observation more fully, I shall take these Five
things into consideration.

1st, What we are to understand by a Divine Revelation.

2dly, Give a brief Account of the several kinds of it.

3dly, Show what Advantage this standing Revelation of the Scriptures has
above any other way of conveying the Will of God to the World.

4thly, That there is sufficient Evidence for the Divinity of the Scriptures.

5thly, That it is unreasonable to expect that God should do more for our
Conviction, than to afford such a standing Revelation of his Mind and Will. I
shall go over these as briefly as I can. I begin with the

1st, What we are to understand by a Divine Revelation. By a Divine Revelation
we are to understand a supernatural Discovery or Manifestation of any thing to
us; I say supernatural, because it may either be immediately by God; or by the
mediation of Angels, as most, if not all the Revelations of the Old Testament
were. A supernatural Discovery or Manifestation, either immediately to our
Minds, by our Understandings and inward Faculties; (for I do not so well
undestand the distinction between Understanding and Imagination, as to be
careful to take notice of it,) or else mediately to our Understandings by the
mediation of our outward Senses, as by an external Appearance to our bodily
Eyes, or by a Voice and Sound to the Sense of Hearing. A Discovery or
Manifestation of a thing, whether it be such as cannot be known at all by the
use of our natural Reason and Understanding; or such as may be discovered by
natural Light, but is more clearly revealed or made known, or we are awakened
to a more particular and attentive consideration of it. For it is not at all
unsuitable to the Wisdom of God, to make a supernatural Discovery to us of such
things as may be known by the light of Nature, either to give us a clearer
manifestation of such Truths as were more obscurely known, and did as it were
lie buried in our Undestandings; or else to quicken our Minds to a more serious
and lively consideration of those Truths.

2dly. For the several kinds of Divine Revelation. That they were various, the
Apostle to the Hebrews tell us, chapter 1. 1. God who at sundry times, and in
several manners, spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets; where by Prophets we are
to understand not only those who did foretell future things; but any Person that
was divinely inspired, and to whom God was pleased to make any supernatural
Discovery of himself.

Now the several Kinds of Revelation taken notice of by the Jews, are Visions;
Dreams; Prophecy; Oracle; Inspiration, or that which they call the Holy Ghost;
voice Bath-col; or that which was the highest of all, which they call gradus
Mosaicus, the degree of Revelation which was peculiar to Moses. The Jewish
Writers, especially Maimonides, have many subtle Observations about the
differences of these several kinds of Revelation, which depend upon subtle and
Philosophical Distinctions of the Faculties of Perception; as that some of
these Revelations were by impression only upon the Understanding; some only
upon the Imagination; some upon both; some upon the outward Senses: But the
simple and plain difference between them, so far as there is any ground in
Scripture to distinguish them, seems to be this; Vision was a Representation of
something to a Man, when he was waking, in opposition to Dreams, which were
Representations made to Men in their Sleep. Prophecy might be either Dream or
Vision, and the Jews observe that it was always one of these two ways, which
they grounded upon Numb. 12. 6. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord
will make my self known to him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream.
But Prophecy in the strict Notion of it, had this peculiarly belonging to it,
that it was not only monitory or instructive, but did foretell some Event of
Concernment to others; and the Jewish Doctors tell us, that it was a clearer
Revelation, and carried greater assurance along with it; and that this was
common to all the three, that there was something of Ecstasy and Transport of
Mind in all these.

The fourth sort of Revelation, which was by Oracle, which is called Vrim and
Thummim, was a rendering of Answers to Questions, by the High Priest looking
upon the Stones in the Breast Plate, which how it was done, is uncertain.

The fifth sort of Revelation is that which they call the Holy Ghost, which was
a more calm and gentle Inspiration, without any extraordinary Transport of Mind
or Ecstasy; such as David had in the writing of the Psalms.

The lowest of all was that which they called Bath-col, which was by a Voice
from Heaven; and this is the Way of Revelation, which the Jews observed did
only continue among them from the Days of the Prophet Malachi to our Savior.

The highest of all was that which they called gradus Mosaicus, to which the
Jews give several Prerogatives above all the other ways of Revelation; as that
it was done by Impression merely upon the Understanding, without Ecstasy, or
Rapture, or Transport, when he was waking, and in his ordinary Temper, and his
Senses not bound up either by Ecstasy or Sleep, that it was a Revelation
immediately from God himself, and not by the Mediation of Angels; without any
Fear, or Amazement, or Fainting, which was incident to other Prophets; and the
Spirit of Prophecy rested upon him, and he could exert it arbitrarily, and put
it forth when he would. Of which, thus much is evidently true from the Story of
him, that the Spirit of Prophecy did rest more constantly upon him, and that
he could exert it with greater freedom, and without any discernable Amazement
or Transport from his ordinary Temper: But that it was by Impression merely
upon his Understanding, as that is a distinct Faculty from the Imagination, is
not so certain; that it was always by an immediate Communication from God,
without the Mediation of Angels, seems not to be true; for St. Stephen tells
us, that the Law was given by the disposition of Angels, Acts 7. 53. And St.
Paul, that it was ordained by the Angels in the hand of a Mediator, that is
Moses, Gal. 3. 19. But that the Revelation which was made to him, had some
singular Prerogatives above those of other Prophets, is plain from Scripture,
Numb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. when Aaron and Miriam contended with Moses as being equal
to him, God tells them that there was a vast difference between him and other
Prophets; Hear now my Words, if there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will
make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream. My
Servant Moses is not so, -- With him will I speak Mouth to Mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark Speeches, etc. Exodus 33. 11. And the Lord spoke
unto Moses face to face, as a Man speaks unto his Friend. Deuteronomy. 34. 10. And
there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face. All which signifies at least this, that God made the clearest,
and most familiar, and most perfect Discoveries to Moses of any of the
Prophets; only our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom God has discovered his Will to
us under the New Testament, did excel Moses; Moses being but a faithful Servant
that is, humilis amicus, a meaner sort of Friend; but the Lord Jesus Christ,
the only begotten Son of God, who came from the bosom of his Father, and was
intimately acquainted with the secrets of his Will, and had not the Spirit
given him by measure, but the most plentiful Effusion of it, being anointed
above his Fellows.

Now these being the several sorts and degrees of Revelation, which God has
made of himself to the World, the Holy Scriptures are a System or Collection of
these, the authentic Instrument or Record, by which the things revealed any of
these ways, are transmitted to us, and is therefore called the Word of God, as
containing those things which God in several Ages has spoken to the World;
that is matters of Divine Revelation, which are necessary to be known by Men,
in order to their Eternal Happiness. And this being now the great and standing
Revelation of God, which is to continue to the end of the World, I intend to
limit my Discourse solely to this, as being the only Revelation which we are
concerned to enquire after.

And therefore in the 3d Place to show you what Advantages this standing
Revelation of the Scriptures has, above private Revelations made to particular
Persons, and frequently repeated and renewed in several Ages; that so it may
appear both agreeable to the Wisdom of God to settle Revelations in this way, as
being more commodious; and likewise to his Goodness, it being a real Privilege
which these later Ages of the World enjoy, that they have a more fixed and
certain way of being acquainted with the Will of God, than those Ages had,
which were governed by such private Revelations, as were now and then made to
particular Persons. And the Advantages are these.

1. It is a more certain way of conveyance of things, and more secure and free
from Imposture. Suppose a Revelation made to a particular Person, which is of
general Concernment, that this may have a general and lasting effect, he must
impart it to others, as many as he can, and give them the best Assurance he can
of it; and these must relate it to others; and so it must pass from hand to
hand, to be delivered from Parents to their Children. Now this way of conveying
a Revelation by Oral Report must needs be liable to many Uncertainties, both by
involuntary Mistakes, through Weakness of Memory or Understanding; and wilful
Falsifications and Impostures, out of Malice and Design. So that the effect of
an unrecorded Revelation can neither be large nor lasting, it can but reach a
few Persons, and continue a little while in its full Credibility; and the
further it goes, the weaker, like Circles made in Water, which the more they
enlarge themselves, and the longer they continue, the less discernible they
are, 'till at length they quite disappear. Whereas being once recorded by
Persons secured from Error, by Supernatural and Divine Assistance, they are not
liable to those easy Falsifications or Mistakes, which traditional Reports and
Relations are necessarily, through human Malice or Weakness, liable to.

2. It is a more general and universal way of Conveyance; Which is evident from
the common Experience of the World, who have pitched upon this way of writing
things in Books, as that which does most easily convey the knowledge and notice
of things to the generality of Men.

3. It is a more uniform way of Conveyance; that is, things that are once
written and propagated that way, lie equally open to all, and come in a manner
with equal Credit to all; it being not morally possible that a common Book,
that passes through all hands, and which is of vast Importance and
Concernment, should be liable to any material Corruption, without a general
Conspiracy and Agreement, which cannot be, but that it must be generally known.
So that considering the commonness, and universal Concernment of this Book of
the Scriptures, all Men are in a manner equally, that is, every Man is
sufficiently and competently assured of the credit of it; that is, that we are
not in any material thing imposed upon by false Copies. But in traditional
Revelation it is quite otherwise; Tradition being a very unequal and ununiform
way of Conveyance. For seeing it may be of general Concernment, and all cannot
have it at the first hand, that is, immediately from him to whom it was made;
but some at the second, others at the third, fourth, or fifth hand, or much
further off; the Credit of it will be necessarily weakened by every Remove. A
Report that comes through many Hands, being like the Argument we call
Induction; and as the Strength and Goodness of that depends upon the Truth of
every one of those Instances that make it up, so that if any of them fail, the
whole Argument is naught; so the credit of a Report that passes through twenty
hands, depends upon the Integrity and Sufficiency of all the Relators, and
whatever there is either of Falsehood and Malice, or of Incapacity of
Understanding, or Frailty of Memory in any of the Relators, so much Weakness is
derived into the Report or Testimony; and consequently the assurance which we
can have of a private Revelation, which is delivered traditionally through a
great many Persons, must needs be very unequal.

4. It is a more lasting way of Conveyance. Which likewise appears by
Experience, we having now nothing at all of the History of ancient times, but
what is conveyed down to us in Writing.

5. It is a more human way of Conveyance, which requires less of Miracle and
supernatural Interposition for the Preservation of it. This Book of the
Scriptures may with ordinary human Care be transmitted entire, and free from
any material Error, to all succeeding Ages. But Revelations unwritten, if they
have any lasting and considerable Effect, they must at least in every Age be
renewed and repeated; otherwise in a very short space, either through the
unfaithfulness, or carelessness and frailty of Men, they will either be quite
lost, or so corrupted and depraved, that they will signify nothing.

From all which it appears, that we have so little cause to murmur and repine
at the Providence of God, which in these later Ages of the World does not make
those more immediate Discoveries and Manifestations of himself to us, that he
did to former Ages, that we have rather great reason to admire the Wisdom and
Goodness of God's Providence, which has privileged us with this standing
Revelation of his written Word, which has so many ways the Advantage of
frequent and extraordinary Revelation, and in respect of the generality of
Mankind, is much more useful and effectual to its end* I know there are some
that have endeavored to persuade the World, that Doctrines may much better be
preserved by common Rumor and Report, than by Writing and Record; but I hope
there is no Man so destitute of common Sense as to believe them, contrary to
the Experience of all Men.

I come now to the 4th thing I proposed to be considered; namely, That there is
sufficient Evidence of the Divinity of the Scriptures. By the Divinity of the
Scriptures, I mean, that they were revealed by God, and that the things
contained in them were not invented by Men, but discovered to Men by God; and
that the Penmen of these Books did not write their own private Conceptions,
but were inspired by the Holy Ghost. Now if we can be satisfied of this, we
ought to receive the Scriptures with the same Reverence, as if an Angel from
Heaven should declare these things unto us, or as if God should immediately
reveal them to our Minds; for nothing can come with greater Authority than
this, that we believe it to be revealed by God; and provided we be assured of
this, it matters not which way; the thing has the same Authority.

Now that we have sufficient Evidence of the Divinity of the Scriptures, will
best appear, by considering what is sufficient to give Authority to a Book, so
that no prudent or reasonable Man can question, but that the Book was writ by
him whose Name it bears. For what Evidence we would accept of, for the
Authority of other Books, we must not refuse in this case for the Scriptures;
if we do, we deal unequally, and it is a sign that we do not want Evidence for
the Authority of the Scriptures, but that we have no mind to believe them.

Now the utmost Authority that any Book is capable of, is, that it has been
transmitted down to us by the general and uncontrolled Testimony of all Ages,
and that the Authority of it was never questioned in that Age wherein it was
written, nor invalidated ever since.

And this Evidence we have for the Authority of the Scriptures. As for the Old
Testament, I shall not now labor in the proof of that by Arguments proper to it
self, but shall take the Divinity of them upon the Authority of the New, which,
if it be proved, is sufficient Evidence for it, though there were no other.

Now for the Scriptures of the New Testament, I desire but these two things to
be granted to me at first.

1. That all were written by those Persons whose Names they bear; and for this
we have as much Authority, as for any Books in the World, and so much as may
satisfy Men in other cases, and therefore not to be rejected in this.

2. That those who wrote those Books were Men of Integrity, and did not
wilfully falsify in any thing; and this cannot reasonably be denied, because
these very Persons gave the utmost Evidence that Men could give of their
Integrity. The highest Attestation that any Man can give of the Truth of what
he relates, is to lay down his Life for the Testimony of it; and this the
Apostles did.

Now if this be granted, that they did not falsify in their Relations
concerning the Miracles of Christ, and his Resurrection, and the miraculous
Gifts which were bestowed upon the Apostles after his Ascension; this is as
great an Evidence as the World can give, and as the thing is capable of, that
our Savior was a Teacher come from God, and that the Apostles were
extraordinarily assisted by the Holy Ghost; and if this be granted, what can be
desired more to prove the Divinity of their Writings?

But it may be said, that though the Apostles were granted to be Men of
Integrity, and that they did not wilfully falsify in their Relations, yet they
might be mistaken about those Matters. But that they were not, we have as much
Evidence as can be for any thing of this Nature, namely, that the things which
are related are plain sensible matters of Fact, about which no Man need mistake
unless he will; and they did not write things upon the report of others, who
might possibly have designs to deceive, but upon the surest Evidence in the
World, their own Knowledge, and the Testimony of their Senses; the things that
we have seen and heard testify we unto you. So that if they were mistaken in
these things, no Man can be sure of any thing; and by the same Reason that we
disbelieve the Authority of the Scriptures upon this account, we must believe
nothing at all. This is in short the whole force of the Argument for the
Divinity of the Scriptures, which I might have enlarged infinitely upon; but I
design now only briefly to represent to you, that we, who live at the distance
of so many Ages from the time of this Revelation, are not destitute of
sufficient Evidence for the Authority of the Scriptures, and such Evidence, as
they who reject in other Cases, are esteemed unreasonable. I should come now to
the

5th, and last Thing, namely, that it is unreasonable to expect, that God
should do more for our Conviction, than to afford us a standing Revelation of
his Mind and Will, such as the Books of the holy Scriptures are. But this I
shall refer to another Opportunity, in a particular Discourse upon the 31 verse,
which contains the main Design, the Sum, and Substance of this whole Parable.

SERMON XII. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.
Sermon III. Preached at Whitehall, Anno 1678.
LUKE XVI. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.
THESE Words are the Conclusion of that excellent Parable of our Savior
concerning the Rich Man and Lazarus, and they are the final Answer which
Abraham gives to the Rich Man's last Request; who being in great Torment, and
not able to obtain any Ease for himself, is represented as concerned for his
Relations, whom he had left behind him upon Earth; lest they also by their own
Carelessness and Folly should plunge themselves into the same Misery that he
was in, and therefore he begs of Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to his
Father's House, where he had five Brethren, that he might testify unto them,
lest they also should come into that place of Torment. To which Request Abraham
answers, that there was no necessity of such an extraordinary course to be used
toward those who had sufficient means of Conviction so near at hand, if they
would but hearken to them, and make use of them. Abraham says unto him, they
have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them.

But the Rich Man presses his Request further, upon this Reason, that they
might not perhaps be moved by Moses and the Prophets, nay it was likely they
would not be moved by them; for they had always had them, and yet they remained
impenitent: But if a special Messenger should be sent to them from the dead,
this certainly could not fail to awaken them, and bring them to Repentance, v.
30. And he said, nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent. To which Abraham makes this peremptory Reply, If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the dead.

In which Words Abraham absolutely denies that there is any such Probability,
much less Certainty, that those who reject a public credible Revelation of
God, such as that of the Holy Scriptures is, should be effectually convinced by
a Messenger from the dead. And our Savior brings in Ahraham delivering himself
very positively in this matter, and therefore we may presume it to be our
Savior's own Sense, and may rely upon it for a Truth; which however at first
sight it may not be so evident, yet I hope in the progress of this Discourse to
make it sufficiently clear.

But before I undertake that, I shall premise a Caution or two to prevent all
Mistake in this matter.

First, That we are not to understand these Words too strictly and rigorously,
as if the thing were simply and in it self impossible, that a Man who is not
convinced by hearing or reading Moses and the Prophets, should be brought to
Repentance any other way. For it is very possible in the Nature of the thing,
yea and likely enough, that a Man who is not convinced by calm Evidence and
Persuasion, may yet be very much wrought upon by a strange and amazing
Accident; and if one, whom he had known when he was alive, should appear to him
from the dead, and declare the certainty of a future State, and the condition
of things in another World, there is little doubt to be made, but that this
would more rouse and awaken him to consider his Danger, than all the
Threatenings of God's Word; and it is very possible that, by the Concurrence of
God's Grace, this might prove an effectual Means to convince such a Man, and to
bring him to Repentance. And yet for all this, it is not probable upon the
whole matter, and if all Circumstances be duly considered, that this should
generally have a permanent effect upon Men, so as thoroughly to reclaim such
Persons as do obstinately resist the Light and Counsels of God's Word.

Secondly, Another Caution I would give is this, That we are not to understand
these Words so, as to weaken the force of that Argument from Miracles for the
Proof and Confirmation of a Divine Doctrine; as if our Savior intended to
insinuate, that Miracles are not a proper and sufficient Argument to convince
Men. For our Savior does not here oppose Moses and the Prophets to a
miraculous Testimony; but he advances the public Evidence and Testimony which
Moses and the Prophets had above the Evidence of a single and private Miracle;
for Moses and the Prophets had their Confirmation from Miracles; and Miracles
are the great Evidence and Attestation which God has always given to the
Divinity of any Person or Doctrine; and therefore Abraham cannot be thought to
speak any thing to the Prejudice of Miracles, when he says, If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, tho one rose from the
dead. Nay so far is he from that, that this reasoning of his is rather for the
Advantage of Miracles. For Moses and the Prophets had the Confirmation of many
and great, of public and unquestionable Miracles; a credible Relation whereof
was conveyed down to after Ages. So that if rational Means of Conviction were
the thing desired, it was not likely that those, who were not persuaded by
Moses and the Prophets, which were acknowledged by themselves to have had the
Confirmation of so many undoubted Miracles, should in reason be convinced by a
private and single Miracle.

These Considerations being premised by way of Caution, I come now to make out
the Truth of what is here asserted in the Text. And for the full clearing of
this matter, I shall speak to these two Propositions.

First, That it is unreasonable to expect that God should do more for the
Conviction of Men, than to afford them a standing Revelation of his Mind and
Will; such as that of the holy Scriptures is. And if so, then

Secondly, That upon the whole matter it is very improbable, that those who
reject this public Revelation of God, should be effectually convinced, though
one should speak to them from the dead.

First, That it is unreasonable to expect that God should do more for the
Conviction of Men, than to afford them a standing Revelation of his Mind and
Will; such as that of the Holy Scriptures is. This is strongly implied in
Abraham's first Answer, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them;
as if he had said, having such Means of Conviction so near at hand, why should
they desire and expect any other? It is in this case of the Scriptures, as in
that of God's Providence; God does not commonly prove his Providence to Men by
extraordinary instances of his Power, and by changing the Course of Nature, to
convince every Man in the World that he governs it: but by standing Testimonies
of his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness; by these God does sufficiently satisfy
considerate Men of his Government and Care of the World; and though he do seldom
manifest himself in supernatural and extraordinary ways, yet he has not left
himself without a Witness, by the constant course of Nature, in the returns of
Day and Night, in the Revolutions of the Seasons of the Year, in that he gives
us rain from Heaven and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with food and
gladness. And these standing Arguments of his Providence, though they be not so
much taken notice of, because they are so common, yet are they daily Miracles,
and we can hardly imagine greater, and we should be strangely amazed at them,
but that they are so very frequent and familiar.

The case is the same as to Divine Revelation. God has not thought fit to
gratify the perverse Curiosity of Men, by affording to every Man a particular
and immediate Revelation of his Mind and Will: but he has given us a standing
Revelation, which at first had the greatest and most miraculous Confirmation,
and he has still left us sufficient Means of being assured of the Truth of
this Revelation, and of the Confirmation that was at first given to it; and we
tempt God, by demanding extraordinary Signs, when we may receive so abundant
Satisfaction in an ordinary way. This being admitted, I shall proceed in the

Second Place to show, That it is upon the whole Matter, and all Circumstances
considered, very improbable, that those who reject this public Revelation from
God, should be effectually convinced, though one should speak to them from the
dead. And this is that which is expressly asserted here in the Text, If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
from the dead. Not but that any Man would be very much startled and amazed, if
one should come from the dead to warn him of the Danger of his wicked Life; but
yet for all that, it is very unlikely that they who obstinately and perversely
refuse to be convinced by Moses and the Prophets, would be effectually
persuaded, (that is, so as to be brought to Repentance and Reformation of their
Lives) though one should rise from the dead. And that for these Reasons.

1. Because if such Miracles were frequent and familiar, it is very probable
they would have but very little effect; and unless we suppose them common and
ordinary, we have no Reason to expect them at all.

2. Men have as great or greater Reason to believe the Threatenings of God's
Word, as the Discourse of one that should speak to them from the dead.

3. The very same reason which makes Men to reject the Counsels of God in his
Word, would in all probability hinder them from being convinced by a particular
Miracle.

4. Experience does abundantly testify, how ineffectual extraordinary ways are
to convince those who are obstinately addicted and wedded to their Lusts.

5. An effectual Persuasion (that is, such a Belief as produces Repentance,
and a good Life) is the Gift of God, and depends upon the Operation and
Concurrence of God's Grace, which there is no reason to expect either in an
extraordinary way, or in an extraordinary degree, after Men have obstinately
rejected the ordinary Means which God has appointed to that end.

1. If such Miracles, as a special Messenger from the dead to warn and admonish
Men, were frequent and familiar, it is very probable they would have but very
little effect upon Men; and unless we suppose them common and ordinary, we have
no reason to expect them at all. For it is unreasonable at first sight, that
the worst and more obstinate sort of Sinners should expect this, as a peculiar
Favor and Privilege to themselves, and that God should not do as much for
others, who have deserved it more, and would probably make better use of it;
and if these things were common, it is very probable that Men would not be much
moved by them. It may be, while the Apprehension of such a thing were fresh
upon them, they would take up some good Resolutions; as Sinners usually do,
while they are under present Convictions of Conscience, and the Hand of God, by
some great Affliction or Sickness, lies heavy upon them: but still they would
be apt to defer their Repentance, and put it off 'till the present Amazement
were a little over, and the terror of their first Apprehensions were abated
and worn off by degrees, and after a little while they would return to their
former Course. And this is too too probable, from what we see Men do in other
cases not very much remote from this. It is a very terrible and amazing thing
to see a Man die, and solemnly take his last leave of the World. The very
Circumstances of dying Men are apt to strike us with horror; to hear such a Man
how sensibly he will speak of the other World, as if he were just come from it,
rather than going to it; how severely he will condemn himself for the Folly and
Wickedness of his Life; with what Passion he will wish that he had lived
better, and served God more sincerely; how seriously he will resolve upon a
better Life, if God would be pleased to raise him up, and try him but once
more; with what Zeal and Earnestness he will commend to his best Friends and
nearest Relations, a religious and virtuous Course of Life, as the only thing
that will minister Comfort to them when they come to be in his Condition. Such
Discourses as these, are very apt to move and affect Men for the time, and to
stir up in them very good Resolutions, whilst the present Fit and Impression
lasts: but because these sights are very frequent, they have seldom any great
and permanent effect upon Men. Men consider that it is a very common Case, and
Sinners take Example and Encouragement from one another; every one is affected
for the present, but few are so effectually convinced, as to betake themselves
to a better Course.

And if Apparitions from the dead were as common, as it is for Men to die, we
may reasonably presume that the Discourses of dead and dying, of those that are
going, and those who come from the dead, would have much the same effect upon
the generality of Men.

But if we suppose this a singular Case, (which there is no reason to do) in
that case the Effect would probably be this; a Man that were strongly addicted
to his Lusts, and had no Mind to leave them, would be apt when the Fright were
over, to be easily persuaded that all this was merely the work of Fancy and
Imagination; and the rather, because such things did not happen to others, as
well as to himself.

2. We have as great or greater Reason to believe the Warnings or Threatenings
of God's Word, as the Discourses of one that should come to us from the dead.
For the Threatenings of God's Word against such Sins as natural Light convinces
Men of, have the natural Guilt and Fears of Men on their side, the particular
Testimony of every Man's Conscience, and the concurrent Testimony of Mankind to
the Probability of the thing; and to give us full Assurance of the Truth and
Reality of them, we have a credible Relation of great and unquestionable
Miracles wrought on purpose to give Testimony to those Persons who denounced
those Threatenings, that they came from God. So that here is a very public and
authentic Testimony given to the Threatenings of God's Word, more suitable to
the generality of Mankind, and of greater Authority than a private Apparition,
or a single Miracle; and if that will not convince Men, why should we suppose
that this will?

3. The Very same Reason which makes Men to reject the Counsels of God in his
Word, would, in all probability, hinder Men from being convinced by an
Apparition from the Dead. It is not generally for want of Evidence, that Men do
not yield a full and effectual Assent to the Truth of God's Word, I mean, that
they do not Believe it so as to Obey it: but from the Interest of some Lust.
The true cause is not in Men's Understandings, and because there is not Reason
enough to satisfy them, that the Scriptures are the Word of God; but in the
obstinacy of their Wills, which are enslaved to their Lusts. And the Disease
being there, it is not to be Cured by more Evidence; but by more Consideration,
and by the Grace of God, and better Resolutions.

The Man is addicted to some Vice or other, and that makes him unwilling to
entertain those Truths which would check and control him in his Course. The
light of God's word is offensive to him, and therefore he would shut it out.
This Account our blessed Savior gives of the Enmity of the Jews against him
and his Doctrine, John 3. 19. Light is come into the World, and Men love
darkness rather than light, because their Deeds are evil: for every one that
does evil, hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. Upon the same account it is, that Men resist the Doctrine
of the Holy Scriptures; not because they have sufficient Reason to doubt of
their Divine Authority; but because they are unwilling to be governed by them,
and to conform their Lives to the Laws and Precepts of that Holy Book: For the
Wills of Men have a great Influence upon their Undestandings, to make assent
easy or difficult; and as Men are apt to assent to what they have a mind to,
so they are slow to believe any thing which crosses their Humors and
Inclinations; so that though greater Evidence were offered, it is likely it would
not prevail with them, because the matter does not stick there. Their Wills are
distempered, Men hate to be reformed, and this makes them cast the Laws of God
behind their Backs; and if God himself should speak to them from Heaven, as he
did to the People of Israel; yet for all that, they might continue a
stiff-necked and rebellious People. Though the Evidence were such as their
Understandings could not resist; yet their Wills might still hold out, and the
present condition of their Minds might have no lasting influence upon their
Hearts and Lives; ^uch a violent Conviction might affect them for the present,
but the Sense of it might perhaps wear off by degrees, and then they would
return to their former hardness. Men, by a long and obstinate continuance in
sin, may bring themselves to the Temper and Disposition of Devils; who, though
they believe and tremble at the thoughts of God and his Threatenings, yet they
are wicked still; for so long as Men retain a strong affection for their Lusts,
they will break through all Conviction, and what Evidence soever be offered to
them, they will find some way or other to avoid it, and to delude themselves.
The plain truth of the case is this, (if Men will honestly speak their
Consciences, they cannot deny it) they do not call for more Evidence, either
because they want it, or are willing to be convinced by it; but that they may
seem to have some Excuse for themselves, for not being convinced by that
Evidence which is afforded to them.

4thly, Experience does abundantly testify, how ineffectual extraordinary ways
are to convince and reclaim men of depraved Minds, and such as are obstinately
addicted to their Lusts. We find many remarkable Experiments of this in the
History of the Bible. What Wonders were wrought in the sight of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians! yet they were hardened under all these Plagues. Balaam, who greedily
followed the wages of unrighteousness, was not to be stopped by the admonition of
an Angel. The Jews, after so many Miracles which their Eyes had seen, continued
to be a stiff neck'd and gainsaying People; so that it is hard to say which
was more prodigious, the Wonders which God wrought for them, or their
Rebellions against him; and when in the fullness of time, the Son of God came
and did among them the works which never man did, such, as one would have
thought, might have brought the worst People in the World to Repentance, those
of Tire and Sydon, of Sodom and Gomorrah; yet they Repented not. Yea the very
thing, which the rich man here in my Text, requested of Abraham for his
Brethren, was done among them; Lazarus did rise from the dead, and testified
unto them, and they were not persuaded.

And which is yet more, our Savior himself, according to his own Prediction
while he was alive, rose again from the dead the third day, and was visibly
taken up into Heaven; and yet how few among them did believe, and give glory to
God! So that we see the very thing here spoken of in the Text, made good in a
famous instance; they who believed not Moses and the Prophets, which testified
of the Messiah, were not persuaded when he rose from the dead.

And does not our own Experience tell us, how little effect the extraordinary
Providence of God have had upon those who were not reclaimed by his Word. It
is not long since God showed himself among us, by terrible things in
Righteousness, and visited us with three of his sorest Judgments, War, and
Pestilence, and Fire; and yet how does all manner of Wickedness and Impiety
still reign and rage among us! It is a very sad Consideration, to see how
little those who have outlived these Plagues, have been reformed by them; we
have not returned to the Lord, nor sought him for all this.

I may appeal to the experience of particular Persons. How frequently do we see
Men, after great Afflictions, and tedious Sufferings, and dangerous sicknesses,
return to their former Evil Courses! and though they have been upon the brink of
Eternity, and the ternors of Death have compassed them about, and the pains of
Hell have almost taken hold of them, though they have had as lively and sensible
Convictions of another World, as if they had spoken with those that had come
from thence, or even been there themselves; yet they have taken no warning, but
upon their Deliverance and Recovery, have been as mad, as furious Sinners as
they were before; so that it ought to be no such wonder to us, which the Text
tells us, that if Men hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Especially, if we consider in the

5th and last place, That an effectual persuasion (that is, such a Belief as
produces Repentance and a good Life) is the gift of God, and depends upon the
operation and concurrence of his Grace, which is not to be expected in an
extraordinary way, where Men have obstinately rejected the ordinary means
appointed by God for that end. To be effectually persuaded to change our Lives,
and become new Men, is a Work not to be done without the assistance of God's
Grace; and there is little reason to expect that God will afford his Grace to
those, who reject and despise the Counsels of his Word. The Doctrine of
Salvation contained in the Holy Scriptures, and the Promises and Threatenings of
God's Word, are the ordinary Means which God has appointed for the Conversion
of Men, and to bring them to Repentance; and if we sincerely use these means,
we may confidently expect the concurrence of God's grace, to make them
effectual: but if we neglect and resist these means, in confidence that God
should attempt our Recovery by some extraordinary ways; though he should gratify
our presumptuous and unreasonable Curiosity, so far as to send one from the
dead to testify unto us; yet we have no reason to expect the assistance of his
Grace, to make such a Conviction effectual to our Repentance, when we have so
long despised his Word, and resisted his Spirit, which are the power of God
unto Salvation.

Without his Grace and Assistance, the most probable means will prove
ineffectual, to alter and change our corrupt Natures; by Grace we are saved,
and that not of our selves; it is the Gift of God. This Grace is revealed to us
in the Gospel; and the Assistances of it are conveyed to us by the Gospel; and
it is great presumption to promise to our selves, the assistance of God's Grace
in any other way than he has been pleased to promise it to us.

And thus I have shown you, as briefly and plainly as I could, how unlikely it
is, that those who obstinately reject a clear and public Revelation of God,
should be effectually convinced and brought to Repentance by any Apparitions
from the dead.

I shall only make two or three Inferences from this Discourse which I have
made, and so conclude.

1st. Since the Scriptures are the public and standing Revelation of God's
Will to Men, and the ordinary Means of Salvation, we may hence conclude, That
People ought to have them in such a Language as they can understand. This our
Savior plainly supposes in the Discourse which he represents between Abraham,
and the Rich Man, desiring that Lazarus might be sent from the dead to his
Brethren, to testify unto them; to which Request Abraham would not have given
this Answer and Advice, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them,
had he supposed that the Scriptures then were, or for the future ought to be
locked up from the People in an unknown Tongue; for the Rich Man might very well
have replied, nay, Father Abraham, but they are not permitted to have Moses and
the Prophets in such a Language as they can understand; and therefore there is
more need why one should be sent from the Dead to testify unto them.

Nor would Abraham have said again, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded. For how should Men hear what they cannot
understand, so as to be persuaded by it.

It is evident then, that our Savior, according to the Reasoning of this
Parable, takes it for granted, that the Holy Scriptures are the standing and
ordinary means of bringing Men to Faith and Repentance, and that the People are
to have the free use of them. But since our Savior's time, the Church of Rome
has found a mighty inconvenience in this, and therefore has taken the
Scriptures out of the Hands of the People. They will not now let them have
Moses and the Prophets, the Gospel of our blessed Savior, and the Writings of
his Apostles, because they are really afraid they should hear them, and by
hearing of them, be convinced and persuaded of the Errors and Corruptions of
their Church; but instead of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, they
have put into their Hands a Legend of famous Apparitions of Men from the dead,
testifying unto them concerning Purgatory and Transubstantiation, and the
Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, and the great benefit and
refreshment which Souls in Purgatory have by the Indulgences of the Pope, and
the Prayers of the living put up to Saints and Angels on their behalf; so that
in the Church of Rome, quite contrary to our Savior's method, Men are
persuaded of their Religion, of their New Articles of Faith, and Ways of
Worship, not by Moses and the Prophets, not by the Doctirne of the Holy
Scriptures (for they every where testify against them) but by absurd Romances,
and ill-contriv'd Fictions of Apparitions from the Dead. I will dismiss this
matter with this one Observation, that however interested and confident Men may
set a bold face upon any thing, yet it cannot to considerate Men but seem a
very hard case, that there should be no Salvation to be had out of the Church
of Rome; and yet the ordinary, and (in our Savior's Judgment) the most
effectual Means of Salvatioin are not to be had in it.

But I pass from this, to that which does more immediately concern our Practice.

2dly, Let us hear and obey that public Revelation of God's Will, which in so
much Mercy to Mankind, he has been pleased to afford to us. This is an
inestimable Privilege and Advantage which the World in many Ages was destitute
of, having no other Guide to conduct them to eternal Happiness but the Light of
Nature, and some particular Revelations, which now and then God was pleased to
make of his Will to Men: But now God has set up a great and standing Light in
the World, the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures; and by the Gospel of his
blessed Son, has given the knowledge of Salvation to all Men, for the
remission of their Sins, through the tender Mercies of God, whereby the day
spring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of
peace, to convince us of the Error of our ways, and to direct us in our Duty.
We, upon whom the ends of the world are come, do enjoy all the Advantages of
divine Revelation which the World ever had, and as great as the World ever
shall have. God in these last days has spoken unto us by his Son, and if we
will not hear him, God will employ no other extraordinary Prophet and Messenger
to us. If the wrath of God so clearly revealed from Heaven by the Gospel of our
blesled Savior, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men; if the
Terror of the great day, and the fear of eternal Torment; if the dreadful
Sufferings of the Son of God for our Sins, and the merciful offers of Pardon
and Reconciliation in his Blood, and the glorious hopes of eternal Life and
Happiness will not prevail with us to leave our Sins, and to amend our Lives,
we have no reason to expect that God should use any farther means to reclaim
us; that he should ever make any more Attempts for our Recovery. And therefore,

3dly, and lastly, Those who are not brought to Repentance, and effectually
persuaded by this clear and public Revelation which God has made of his Will
to Men in the Holy Scriptures, have reason to look upon their Case as desperate.

Methinks it should not be a desirable thing to any of us to be convinced by an
Apparition, the thing is so dreadful and full of Terror; besides that it argues
Men to be strangely hardened in a bad Course, and obstinately bent upon their
evil ways, when nothing will affright them from their Sins, but what will
almost put them out of their Wits; when nothing will keep them from running
into Hell, but a fearful and ghastly Messenger from thence. What a terrible
sight would it be to any of us, to meet one of our Companions, whom we had
lately known in this World, fresh come out of those Flames, with the smell of
Fire and Brimstone upon him! What Imagination can paint to it self the dread
and horror of such a Spectacle! The Rich Man here in the Parable, when he was
in Hell, is represented as sensible of the inconvenience of this, and therefore
he did not desire to be sent himself to his Brethren, but desired that Lazarus
might go and testify unto them; he was apprehensive how frightful a sight he
himself must needs have been to them, and therefore he desires that they might
have a gentler warning by one, who from out of Abraham's Bosom had seen the
Miseries of the damned, but enjoyed the State of the blessed.

But let not us tempt God by any such unreasonable Demand, who speaks to us
every day by the plain Declarations of his Word, and has of late Years called
so loudly upon us by the Voice of his Providence to repent and turn to him; by
so many Miracles of Mercy and Deliverance, as God hardly ever wrought for any
Prince and People, and by such terrible Vollies of Judgments, and full Viols of
wrath, as have seldom been poured out upon any Nation. God speaks to you by his
Ministers, Men like your selves (God knows, poor frail and sinful Men,) but we
are sure, that when we call you to Repentance, we deliver to you the Will and
Pleasure, the Counsels and Commands of the great God, which (whatever Account
may be made of us) do certainly challenge your most awful Attention and Regard.
And we are sensibel that we are called to a very difficult and unpleasant work,
to content with the Lusts and Vices of Men, to strive against the strong and
impetuous Stream of a wicked and perverse Generation; and nothing in the World
could move us to this unwelcome and grievous Importunity, but a great and just
Sense of our own Duty, and your Danger. And if we will not take these Warnings,
why should we expect that God should vouchsafe to send an express Messenger to
us from the other World, to certify us how all things are there, and that not
so much to help the weakness of our Faith, as to humor the perverseness of our
Infidelity? And why should we imagine that this Course would prove more
effectual? Let us not deceive our selves, the same Lusts which now detain Men
so strongly in Impenitency and Unbelief, would in all probability hurry them on
to Hell, though an Angel from Heaven should meet them in their way, to give a
stop to them. This indeed might startle us; but nothing is like to save us, if
the Word of God and his Grace do not.

But are we in earnest, and would we be persuaded, if one should rise from the
dead? God has condescended thus far to us, there is one risen from the dead to
testify unto us, Jesus the Son of God, who died for our Sins, and rose again
for our Justification, and is ascended into Heaven, and set down at the right
hand of God, to assure us of a blessed Resurrection and a glorious Immortality.
And if this will not satisfy us, God will gratify our Curiosity no farther.
If we will not believe him, whom God has sent, and to convince us that he has
sent him, has raised him up from the dead, we shall die in our Sins, and
perish in our Impenitency. God has in great Mercy to Mankind done that which
is abundantly sufficient to convince those who are of a teachable Temper and
Disposition: But in great Wisdom and Justice he has not thought fit to provide
any Remedy for the wilful Obstinacy and intractable Perverseness of Men.

Now God who has the Hearts of all Men in his Hands, persuade us all, to break
off our Sins by Repentance, and to give Glory to God, before Death and Darkness
come, and the day of our final Visitation overtake us, when we may perhaps be
surprised by a sudden stroke, of seized upon by a violent Disease, and may have
no sense and apprehension of our approaching Danger, or if we have, may find no
place for Repentance, though we seek it with Tears; which God grant may never
happen to be the case of any of us, for his Mercy's sake in Christ Jesus, To
whom with the Father, etc.

SERMON XIII. The Children of this World Wiser than the Children of Light.
Preached at Whitehall, Anno 1683.
LUKE XVI. 8. For the Children of this World are in their Generation wiser than
the Children of Light.
THESE Words are in the Parable of the Rich Man's Steward, who being called
upon to give up his Accounts, in order to his being discharged from his Office,
cast about with himself, what course he had best to take, to provide for his
subsistence, when he should be turned out of his Employment. At last he
resolves upon this, That he will go to his Lords Debtors, and take a favorable
Account of them; and instead of a hundred measures of Oil, write down fifty,
and instead of a hundred measures of wheat, write down four score; that by this
means he might oblige them to be kind to him in his Necessity. The Lord hearing
of this, commends the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely; That is, he
took notice of his Dishonesty; but praised his Shrewdness and Sagacity, as
having done prudently for himself, though he did not deal justly with him; and
this is usual among Men. When we see a Man ingeniously bad, to commend his Wit,
and to say it is great pity, he does not use it better, and apply it to good
purposes. Upon the whole, our Savior makes this Observation; that the Children
of this World, are in their Generation wiser than the Children of Light; as if
he had said, thus did this worldly Wiseman, thus provident was he for his
future Security and Subsistence. He no sooner understands that he is to be
turned out of his Office, but he considers what Provision to make for himself
against that time. And is it not pity, that good Men do not apply this Wisdom
to better and greater purposes? For is not every Man such a Steward, entrusted
by God with the Blessings of this Life; and many opportunities of doing good?
For all which, since he must shortly give an Account, he ought in all Reason so
to use them, as thereby to provide for the Happiness of another Life, against
this temporal Life have an end.

And this is all the Parallel intended in this Parable, as we may see by our
Savior's Application of it. For Paralels are not to be stretched to an exact
Parallel in all the Parts and Circumstances of them; but only to be applied to
the particular point and purpose intended. A Parable, and the Moral
accommodation of it, being (as one well observes) not like two Plains, which
touch one another in every part; but like a Globe upon a Plain, which only
touches in one Point. Thus our Savior separates the Wisdom of this Steward
from his Injustice, and proposes that to our imitation; The Children of this
World are in their Generation wiser than the Children of Light.

The Words are a Comparison; in which we have

1st. The Persons compared, the Children of this World, and the Children of
Light. It is a very usual Phrase among the Hebrews, when they would express any
thing to partake of such a Nature, or Quality, to call it the Son or Child of
such a thing. Thus good Men are called the Children of God, and bad Men the
Children of the Devil; those who mind earthly things, and make the things of
this World their greatest aim and Design, are called the Children of this World
and those who are better enlightened with the Knowledge of their own
immortality, and the Belief of a future state after this life, are called the
Children of Light.

2dly. Here is the thing, wherein they are compared, and that is, as to their
Wisdom and Prudence.

3dly. The Object of this Prudence, which is not the same in both; as if the
Sense were, that the Children of this World are wiser than the Children of
Light, as to the things of this World; but here are two several Objects
intended, about which the prudence of these two sorts of Persons is
respectively exercised; the concernments of this World and the other. And our
Savior's meaning is, that the Children of this world are wiser in their
generation; that is, in their way, viz. as to the Interests and Concernments of
this World, than the Children of Light are in theirs, viz. as to the Interests
and Concernments of the other World.

4thly. Here is a decision of the matter, and which of them it is that excels
in point of Prudence, in their way; and our Savior gives it to the Children of
this World; they are wiser in their generation, than the Children of Light.

Now this Proposition is not to be taken in the utmost strictness and rigor;
as if it were universally true, and without any exception; as if no Man had
ever been so Wise and Provident for his Soul, and the Concernments of another
World, as Worldly Men are for the Interests and Concernments of this Life. For
there are some that are Fools at large, and imprudent in their whole conduct
and management, both as to the Affairs of this World, and the other; who are in
too strict a sense, the Children of this world. They mind nothing but this
World, and yet are grossly imprudent, even in their prosecution of their
temporal Interests. They neglect and fore-go all other worldly Advantages, for
the sake of a little sensual Pleasure; and then they lose and destroy that too,
by an over hot and eager pursuit of it, and turn it at last into Gall and
Wormwood. And there are others, (as St. Paul for instance) who, I doubt not,
have been as prudent, and zealous, and industrious for the promoting of
Religion, and the Salvation of themselves and others, as any Man can be about
the Affairs of this present Life; and I hope there are some such in every Age,
but God knows they are very few, and their Wisdom and Industry is seldom so
equal, and constant, and uniform, as that of the Men of this World.

So that we are to understand this Saying of our Savior's with the same
Allowance as we generally do all Moral and Proverbial Speeches, that they are
true for the most part, and the Instances and Exceptions to the contrary are
very rate. It is seldom seen, that good Men are so wise for the Concernments of
their Souls, and of Religion, as many worldly Men are for their worldly
Interests.

In speaking to this Proposition, I shall do these three things.

First, Confirm and illustrate the Truth of it, by considering the several
Parts and Properties of Wisdom.

Secondly, Give some probable Account of this, by considering what Advantages
the Children of this world have above the Children of light.

Thirdly, I shall draw some Inferences from the whole, by way of Application.

First, I shall endeavor to confirm and illustrate the Truth of this, by
considering the several parts and properties of Wisdom. Now this is Wisdom, to
mind and regard our chief end, and by all means to promote it; and this Regard
to our chief End does express it self chiefly in these particulars; in our
being firmly fixed and resolved upon it; in choosing the fittest Means for the
compassing and accomplishing of it; in a diligent Use of those Means; in an
invincible Constancy and Perseverance in the prosecution of it; and in making
all things to submit and to stoop to it. These are the principal parts and
properties of Wisdom; and I shall show, that in all these the Children of this
World do usually excel the Children of Light.

1st. They are usually more firmly fixed and resolved upon their End. Whatever
they set up for their End, Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures, they are fixed upon
it, and steady in the Prosecution of it. If they set up for Riches or Honor,
they neglect and despise Pleasure, if it cross either of those Ends. And this
fixed Resolution of the End is the great spring of Action, and that which
inspires Men with Vigor and Diligence in the use of Means; and the more
resolved Men are upon the End, the more active and industrious they will be in
the use of Means; for the End governs the Means, and gives Law and Measure to
our Activity and Industry in the use of them, and sweetens and allays the
Trouble and Difficulty of them.

So that where the End is once firmly fixed and resolved upon, there will not be
wanting fervor of Prosecution; but if we be wavering and unsteady as to our
End, this will weaken our Hands, and quench the heat of our endeavors, and
abate the eagerness of our Pursuit, and according to the degree of it, will
derive a debility and inconstancy into all our Motions. The double minded Man
(as St. James says) being unstable in all his ways. Now the Children of this
world are commonly more fixed and resolved upon their End, than the Children of
light. It Is rare to see the whole Life and Actions of a good Man, so constantly
and uniformly conspiring to the furtherance of his great End, so directly
tending to the Salvation of his Soul, and the increase of his Glory and
Happiness in another World; as the Actions of a worldly Man, and the whole
Course of his Life do, to the advancing of his worldly Interests. The covetous
or ambitious Man seldom do any thing, to the best of their knowledge, that is
impertinent to their End, much less contrary to it; through every thing that
they do, one may plainly see the End they aim at, and that they are always true
to it: Whereas the best Men do many things, which are plainly cross and
contrary to their End, and a great many more, which have no relatioin to it;
and when they mind it, it is rather by fits and starts, than in any even course
and tenor of Actions.

And of this we have a famous instance in that worldly and secular Church,
which now for several hundreds of Years has more steadily pursued the End of
secular Greatness and Dominion, than any other Church has done the Ends of
true Religion, the Glory of God, and the Salvation of the Souls of Men, so that
there is hardly any Doctrine or Practice peculiar to that Church, and differing
from our common Christianity, but it has a direct and visible tendency to the
promoting of some worldly Interest or other. For instance, Why do they deny the
People the Holy Scriptures and the Service of God, in a language which they can
understand? but that by keeping them in Ignorance, they may have them in more
perfect Slavery and Subjection to them? Why do they forbid their Priests to
marry? but that they may have no Interest distinct from that of their Church,
and leave all to it when they die? To what end is Auricular Confession? but to
keep People in awe, by the knowledge of their Secrets? Why must the Laity only
receive the Sacrament in one kind, but to draw a greater Reverence to the
Priest, whose Privilege it shall be to receive in both? And why is the
Intention of the Priest necessary to the efficacy of the Sacraments? but to
persuade the People, that notwithstanding the gracious Intention of God toward
Mankind, they cannot be saved without the good will of the Priest? The
Doctrines of Purgatory and Indulgences are a plain device to make their Markets
of the Sins and Souls of Men. I might instance in a hundred things more in that
Church, which are of the same tendency. This St. John foretold should be the
Character of the Spirit of Antichrist, that it should be a worldly Spirit, and
the Doctrines of it should serve a Secular Interest and Design, 1 John 4. 5.
They are of the World, and they speak from the World, and the World hears them.
What Church is there in the World, so true throughout to the interest of
Religion, as this worldly Church has been to its own Secular Power and
Greatness?

2dly. The Children of this world are wiser in the choice of Means in order to
their End; and this is a great part of Wisdom. For some Means will bring about
an End, with less pains, and difficulty, and expense of Time than others. And
the Men of the World are very ingenious in discerning the fitness and force of
Means to their several Ends. To what a certainty have Men reduced all the ways
and arts of Gain, and growing rich, and of rising to Honor and Preferment?
What long Trains will Men lay to bring about their desired End? What subtle
methods have Men divised, to insinuate themselves into Court; and when they are
there, to plant themselves in the Eye of their Prince, and in the Sunshine of
his Favor? and then they have as many ways of worming others out, as of
screwing themselves in.

But in the Concernments of our souls, and the Affairs of another World, how
dull and injudicious are we? and how awkardly and untowardly do we apply Means
to Ends, as if Men were only wise to do evil, but to do good had no
understanding, as the Prophet complains? By what incongruous and irregular
Means do many (who would seem to be, and sometimes perhaps are very zealous in
Religion) endeavor (as they think) to promote God's Glory, by pious Frauds and
counterfeit Miracles, and telling officious Lies for God? What a compass do
many Men fetch to go to Heaven, by innumerable devices of Will Worship, by
voluntary Severities, neither pleasing to God, nor profitable to Men? By
tedious Pilgrimages, and senseless Ceremonies, and innumerable little external
Observances, of no Virtue and Efficacy in Religion? and by wandering through a
wilderness of Opinions, and the bushes and brakes of unprofitable Questions,
and Controversies? Whereas the way to Heaven lies plain and straight before us,
consisting in Simplicity of Belief, and in Holiness and Innocence of Life. Not
but that there are great differences in the Church of Rome, between the Secular
Priests and and the Regular; between the Jansenists and the Jesuits: but they
still unite in a common Interest, and are subject to Antichrist their common
Head. They do not separate from one another, and excommunicate one another, and
declare against one another, that they are not of the true Church. Satan never
casts out Satan; and though he love Divisions among Christians, yet he always
takes care, that his own Kingdom be not divided against it self, so as to
endanger the Ruin of it. And whenever they have any hopeful design for the
extirpation of Protestants, they can lay aside their Enmities, and be
reconciled in such a design. Then the Pope and the Kings of the Earth take
counsel together, and like Herod and Pilate, when Christ was to be crucified,
can be made Friends at a days warning. Whereas the Divisions of the true Church
are pernicious to it; and as we see at this Day among our selves, our senseless
Differences and wild Heats on both sides, do contribute to the setting up of
Popery, and the ruin of the Reformed Religion; and yet no Persuasion, no
Experience can make us wiser.

3dly. The Children of this world are commonly more diligent in the Use of
Means for the obtaining of their End; they will sweat and toil, and take any
Pains, rise up early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of Carefulness;
their thoughts are continually running upon their Business, and they catch at
every Opportunity of promoting it; they will pinch Nature, and harass it; and
rob themselves of their Rest, and all the Comfort of their Lives, to raise
their Fortune and Estate. What Drudges were Caesar and Alexander in the way of
Fame and Ambition? How did they tire themselves and others with long and
tedious Marches? To what Inconveniences and Dangers did they expose themselves
and Thousands more? What Havoc and Destruction did they make in the World,
that they might gain to themselves the empty Title of Conquerors of it? When
the Men of the World engage in any Design, how intent are they upon it, and
with what vigor do they prosecute it? They do not counterfeit a Diligence, and
seen to be more serious and industrious than in truth they are; they are rather
Hypocrites the other way, and would conceal their Covetousness and Ambition,
and not seem to aspire after Riches, and Honors, so much as indeed they do.

But in the pursuit of better things, how cold and remiss are we? With what a
careless indifference do most Men mind their Souls? How negligent and formal,
and many times Hypocritical are they in the Service of God, and the Exercise of
Religion? With what a pitiful Courage, and with what faint Spirits do they
resist Sin, and encounter the Temptations of it; and how often, and how easily
are they foiled and baffled by them?

4thly. The Men of the World are more invincibly constant and pertinacious in
the pursuit of Earthly things; they are not to be birbed or taken off by favor
or fair Words; not to be daunted by Difficulties, or dashed out of Countenance
by the Frowns and Reproaches of Men. Offer an Ambitious Man any thing short of
his End and Aim, to take him off from the prosecution of it; he scorns the
motion, and thinks you go about to fool him out of his Interest. Bait a
Covetous Man with Temptations of Pleasure, to get his Money from him; how
generously will this mean spirited Man trample upon Pleasure, when it would
tempt him from his Design of being rich?

Difficulties do not daunt them, but whet their Courage, and quicken their
Endeavors, and set a keener edge upon their Spirits. Give an Ambitious Man
almost a demonstration of the impossibility of his attempt; contra audentior
ibit, he will go on so much the more boldly and resolutely. In the ways of
Religion Men are apt to be discouraged and put out of Countenance, by Contempt
and Reproach: but a Covetous Man is not to be jeered and flurted out of his
Money and Estate; he can be content to be Rich, and give leave to those that
are not so, to laugh at him.

Populus mihi sibilat, at mihi plaudo.

The Rich Worldling can hug himself and his Bags, when the World hisseth at
him; he can bear to be hated, and persecuted, and have all manner of Evil spoke
against him for Money sake, And in the pursuit of these Designs, Men will, with
great Resolution, encounter Enmity and Opposition, and endure great Sufferings
and Persecution. How many have been Martyrs to their Lusts, and have Sacrificed
their Ease and Health, and even their Lives in the prosecution of their
Ambitious, and Covetous, and Voluptuous Designs?

But on the other hand, how easily are Men checked and diverted from a good
Course, by the Temptations and Advantages of this World? How many are cold in
their Zeal for Religion, by the Favor and Friendship of this World? And as
their Goods and Estate have grown greater, their Devotion has grown less. How
apt are they to be terrified at the apprehension of Danger and Sufferings; and
by their fearful Imagination, to make them greater than they are; and with the
People of Israel, to be disheartened from all further Attemps of entering into
the land of promise, because it is full of Giants and the Sons of Anak? How
easily was Peter frighted into the denial of his Master? And when our Savior
was apprehended, how did his Disciples forsake him, and fly from him? And though
they were constant afterward to the Death, yet it was a great while before
they were perfectly armed and steeled against the fear of Suffering.

5thly. The men of the World will make all things stoop and submit to that,
which is their great End and Design; their End rules them, and governs them,
and gives Law to all their Actions; they will make an Advantage of every thing,
and if it will not serve their End one way or other, they will have nothing to
do with it. If an ambitious Man seek Wealth, it is but in order to his Design,
to purchase Friends, and strengthen his Interest, and make his rising the
easier; he will lay his whole Estate at the stake, rather than miss of his End.
The covetous Man will quit his Pleasure, when it lies cross to his Interest; if
he have any expensive Lust, and chargeable Vice, he will turn it off, or
exchange it for some more frugal and profitable Sin.

But in the affairs of Religion, and the concernments of our Souls, how
frequently do Men act without a due Regard and consideration of their great
End? and instead of making other things submit to it, they often bow and bend
it to their inferior Interests. They make Heaven stoop to Earth, and Religion
to serve a worldly Design; and the glory of God to give way to gain; and the
great Concernments of their Souls, and their eternal Salvation, to their
Temporal Profit and Advantage. The Men of the World are generally true to their
great End, and pay it that Respect which is due to it, and will suffer nothing
to take place of it in their Esteem and Affection; and if Men were as wise for
their Souls and for another World, they would bring all things to their great
End, and make all the Concernments of this Temporal Life to yield and give way
to the great Concernments of their Eternal Happiness. I proceed in the

Second Place to give some Account of this, whence it comes to pass, that the
Children of this World are wiser in their generation than the Children of
Light. And this I shall do, by considering what Advantages the Children of this
World have, as to the Affairs of this World, above what good Men have, as to
the Concernments of another World. I shall instance in four or five of the
chief.

1st, The Things of this World are present and sensible, and because of their
nearness to us, are apt to strike powerfully upon our Senses, and to affect us
mightily, to excite our Desires after them, and to work strongly upon our Hopes
and Fears: but the things of another World being remote from us, are lessened
by their distance, and consequently are not apt to work so powerfully upon our
Minds; they are invisible to us, and only discerned by Faith, which is a more
obscure and less certain Perception of things, than we have of those Objects
which are presented to our bodily Eyes. The things which God has prepared for
them that love him, the Glory and Happiness of the next World, are things which
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard. The Children of Light do not see God, as the
Children of this World see Mammon.

2dly, The sensual Delights and Enjoyments of this World, are better suited and
more agreeable to the corrupt and degenerate Nature of Men, than Spiritual and
heavenly things are to those that are regenerate. In this lapsed and degenerate
state of Mankind, Appetite and Sense are apt to prevail above Reason; and
therefore those things which are most delightful to Sense we savor and mind,
and love to busy our selves about them, because they are most suitable to the
animal life, which is the governing Principle of corrupt Nature.

And the Reason of this is plain, because that Principle in worldly and sensual
Men which pursues earthly things, is in those who are unregenerate, entire and
undivided, and consequently the Affections and Inclinations of the whole Man do
all tend one way, and run out toward those things in a full and undivided
Stream: Whereas good Men are but regenerate in part, and though they have a
principle of spiritual Life in them, yet their Affections are divided, and
there is a great struggling and conslict between flesh and Spirit, and it is a
great while before the spiritual Principle does clearly prevail, and get a
perfect Victory over our sensual Appetites and Inclinations. Men's Affections to
the World are entire and unbroken, and therefore they pursue these things with
all their might: But the best Men are but good in part; and that heavenly
Principle which is in them, is very much hindered in its Operations by a
contrary Principle, our earthly and sensual Inclinations, which are hardly ever
perfectly subdued and brought under in this World.

3dly, The worldly Man's Faith, and Hope, and Fear of present and sensible
things, is commonly stronger than a good Man's Faith, and Hope, and Fear of
things future and eternal. Now Faith, and Hope, and Fear, are the great
Principles which govern and bear sway in the Actions and lives of Men. If a Man
be once firmly persuaded of the reality of a thing, and that it is good for
him, and possessed with good hopes of obtaining it, and great fears and
apprehensions of the Danger of missing it, this Man may almost be put upon any
thing. The Merchant trafficks, and the Husbandman plows and sows in Faith and
Hope, because he is convinced that Bread is necessary to the support of Life,
and hopes that God will so bless his Labors, that he shall reap the fruit of
them; and plainly sees, that if he do not take this Pains, he must starve. But
how few are there that believe, and hope, and fear concerning the things of
another World, as the Children of this world do concerning the things of this
World? If any Man asks me, how I know this? I appeal to Experience; it is plain
and visible in the Lives and Actions and Endeavors of Men. Good Men are seldom
so effectually and thoroughly persuaded of the Principles of Religion, and the
truth of the Sayings contained in the holy Scriptures, as the men of the World
are of their own Sayings and Proverbs. Men do not believe that Honesty is the
best Policy, or as Solomon expresses it, that he that walks uprightly
walks surely; as the Men of the World believe their own Maxims, that a Man
may be too honest to live; that plain Dealing is a Jewel, but he that wears it
shall die a Beggar. Few Men's hopes of Heaven are so powerful and vigorous, and
have so sensible an effect upon their Lives, as the worldly Man's hopes of Gain
and Advantage. Men are not so afraid to swear, as they are to speak Treason;
they ae not so firmly persuaded of the danger of Sin to their Souls and Bodies
in another World, as of the danger to which some Crimes against the Laws of Men
do expose their Temporal Lives and Safety; and therefore they will many times
venture to offend God, rather than incur the Penalty of human Laws.

4thly, The Men of the World have but one Design, and are wholly intent upon
it, and this is a great Advantage. he that has but one things to mind, may
easily be skilled and excel it. When a Man makes one thing his whole business,
no wonder if he be very knowing and wise in that. Now the Men of the World mind
worldly things, and have no care and concernment for any thing else. It is a
saying I think of Thomas Aquinas, Cave ab illo qui unicum legit librum: He is a
dangerous Man that reads but one Book; he that gives his Mind but to one thing,
must needs be too hard for any Man at that. Application to one thing,
especially in matters of Practice, gains a Man perfect Experience in it, and
Experience furnishes him with Observations about it, and these make him wise
and prudent in that thing.

But good Men, though they have a great affection for Heaven and heavenly things,
yet the business and necessities of this Life, do very much divert and take
them off from the Care of better Things, they are divided between the
Concernments of this Life and the other; and though there be but one thing
necessary in comparison, yet the Conveniences of this Life are to be regarded;
and though our Souls be our main care, yet some Consideration must be had of our
Bodies, that they may be fit for the service of our Souls; some Provision must
be made for their present Support, so long as we continue in these earthy
Tabernacles; and this will necessarily engage us in the World, so that we
cannot always and wholly apply our selves to heavenly things, and mind them, as
the Men of the World do the Things of this World.

5thly, and lastly, The Men of the World have a greater Compass and Liberty in
the Pursuit of their worldly Designs, than good Men have in the Prosecution of
their Interest. The Children of Light are limited and confined to the use of
lawful Means for the compassing of their ends; but the Men of the World are not
so strait laced, quocunque modo rem, they are resolved upon the Point, and will
stick at no Means to compass their End. They do not stand upon the nice
Distinctions of good and evil, of right and wrong, invented by speculative and
scrupulous Men, to puzle business, and to hinder and disappoint great Designs.
If Ahab have a Mind to Naboth's Vineyard, and Naboth will not let him be
honest, and have it for a valuable Consideration, he will try to get it a
cheaper way. Naboth shall by false Witness be made a Traitor, and his Vineyard
by this Means shall be forfeited to him. And thus the unjust Steward in the
Parable provided for himself, he wronged his Lord, to secure a retreat to
himself in the time of his Distress.

The Third and last thing only remains, to make some Inferences from what has
been said, by way of Application. And

1st, Notwithstanding the Commendation which has been given of the Wisdom of
this World, yet upon the whole matter, it is not much to be valued and admired.
It is indeed great in its way and kind: but it is applied to little and low
Purposes, employed about the Concernments of a short Time and a few Days, about
the worst and meanest part of our selves, and accompanied with the neglect of
greater and better things, such as concern our Soul, and our whole Duration,
even our Happiness to all Eternity. And therefore that which the World admires
and cries up for Wisdom, is in the esteem of God, who judges of things
according to Truth, but Vanity and Folly. The wisdom of the world (says St.
Paul) is foolishness with God. The Rich Man in the Parable, who increased his
Goods, and enlarged his Barns, and laid up for many Years, did applaud himself,
and was no doubt applauded by others for a very wise Man: but because he laid
up Treasure for himself, and was not rich toward God, that is, did not employ
his Estate to good and charitable Purposes, therefore God, who calls no body
out of his right Name, calls this Man Fool; Thou Fool, this night shall thy
Soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall all these things be? And our
Savior here in the Text, while he commends the Wisdom of the Children of this
World, he adds that which is a considerable blemish and abatement to it, The
Children of this World are wiser, (...), for their Age, for the concernments of
this present Life; but this is but a short and purblind Wisdom, which sees but
a little way, and considers only things present and near at hand: whereas true
Wisdom has a larger and farther Prospect, and regards the future as well as
the present, and takes care to provide for it. Nay our Savior gives the Wisdom
of this World it is utmost due, when he says, The Children of this World are
wise for their generation; for this is the very best that can be said of it, it
seldom looks so far, and holds out so long. Many Men have survived their own
Projects, and have lived to see the Folly and ill Fate of their covetous and
ambitious Designs. So the Prophet tells us, Jet. 17. 11. As the Partridge
sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that gets riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
Fool.

This is Wisdom, to regard our main Interest; but if we be wrong in our End,
(as all worldly Men are) the faster and farther we go, the more fatal is our
Error and Mistake. The Children of this World are out in their End, and
mistaken in the Main; they are wise for this World, which is inconsiderable to
Eternity; wise for a little while, and Fools for ever.

2dly, From what has been said we may infer, that if we lose our Souls, and
come short of eternal Happiness, it is through our own Fault and gross Neglect;
for we see that Men are wise enough for this World; and the same Prudence, and
Care, and Diligence applied to the Concernments of our Souls, would infallibly
make us happy. Nay our Savior here in the Text tells us, that usually less
Wisdom and Industry, than the Men of this World use about the things of this
World, is exercised by the Children of Light, who yet at last, through the
Mercy of God, do attain eternal Life.

So that it is very plain, that if Men would but take that care for their
immortal Souls, which they generally do for their frail and dying Bodies, and
be as heartily concerned for the unseen World, and for Eternity, as they are
for things visible and temporal, they would with much more certainty gain
Heaven, than any Man can obtain worldly Riches and Honors. And can we in
Conscience desire more, than to be happy for ever, upon as easy and upon more
certain Terms, than any Man can be rich or great in this World? For we may miss
of these things after all our Travel and Pains about them; or if we get them,
we may lose them again: But if we seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, if we be sincerely good, we are sure to have the Reward of it,
even that eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, has promised; if we lay up
for our selves Treasures in Heaven, they will be safe and secure there, where
no Moth can corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal.

If we would seriously think of the other World, and were thoroughly possessed
with a firm belief of the eternity of that Happiness or Misery, which remains
for Men after this Life, we should pray to God, and hear his Word, and perform
all the duties of Religion, with the same Care and Concernment, with the same
fervor and intention of Mind, as Men prosecute their worldly business. Were we
fully persuaded of the unseen Glories and Torments of the other World, we
should be much more affected with them, than with all the Temptations and
Terrors of Sense; because in Reason they are much more considerable. The
disgrace of the Pillory will fright Men from Perjury; and will not everlasting
Shame and Confusion? The fear of Death will deter many Men from robbing and
stealing, who would perhaps venture upon these Crimes, if there were no danger
in them; and will not the Horrors of the second Death, of the Worm that dies
not, and the Fire that is not quenched, have as great an awe and influence upon
us? If they have not, it is a sign, that we do not equally believe the danger
of Human Laws, and the Damnation of Hell.

Surely Men have not the same belief of Heaven, and Affection for it, that they
have for this World. If they had, their Care and Diligence about these things
would be more equal. For we are not so weak as we make our selves; we are not
yet so degenerate, but if we would set our selves seriously to it, and
earnestly beg the Assistance of God's Grace, we might come to know our
Duty,(...) Pains for the deceitful Riches; than we do for the true; and be
contented to hazard more for a corruptible Crown, than we for an incorruptible!
That they should love Pleasure more, than we do God, and mind their Bodies and
temporal Estates more, than we do our Souls and our eternal Happiness!

Do but observe the Men of the World, what a Pace they go, what large and
nimble steps they take in the pursuit of earthly things, they do not seek
Riches as if they sought them not, and love the World as if they loved it not,
and enjoy the present delights of this World, as if they possessed them not; though
the fashion of this world passes away: but we seek Heaven, as if we sought it
not, and love God as if we loved him not, and mind Eternity and the World to
come, as if we minded them not; and yet the fashion of that World does not pass
away.

But to all this it may be said, you have already told us, that the Children of
this world have so many Advantages above the Children of Light, that it is no
wonder if they excel and outstrip them; and it is very true, that in many
respects they have the Advantage of them. But if the Children of Light would
look about them, and take all things into consideration, they might see
something very considerable to balance the Advantages on the other side. It is
true, the things of this World are present and sensible: but so long as we have
sufficient Assurance of the reality of a future State, and of the Rewards and
Punishments of it, the Greatness and Eternity of these is such an amazing
Consideration, that no distance can render them inconsiderable to a prudent and
thinking Man. And though the Men of the World have an entire Principle, which is
not divided between God and the World; whereas in good Men there is a great
conflict of contrary Principles, the Flesh and Spirit: yet this disadvantage is
likewise balanced by that powerful Assistance of God's Grace, which is
promised to all good Men, who heartily beg it of him, and are sincerely
resolved to make use of it. And lastly, though the Men of the World have many
Ways to compass their Ends: yet the Children of Light have one great and
infallible one. All the Means which the Men of the World use to accomplish
their Designs, may fail and miscarry; for the Race is not to the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong, nor yet Bread to the wise, nor Riches to Men of
understanding, nor Favor to Men of skill; but time and chance happen to all:
but he that sincerely serves God, and uses the Means for the attaining of
everlasting Salvation, is sure to attain it; if we seek the righteousness of
God as we ought, we shall certainly be admitted into his Kingdom. And this
surely is an unspeakable Advantage which the Children of Light have above the
Children of this World, that if we faithfully use the Means, we cannot fail of
the End, if we have our fruit unto holiness, our end shall be everlasting Life;
Which God of his infinite Goodness grant to us all, for his Mercy's sake.

FINIS.

