The most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.


Several Discourses UPON The Attributes of GOD, Viz. Concerning the Perfection
of God. Concerning our Imitation of the Divine Perfections. The Happiness of
God. The Unchangeableness of God. The Knowledge of God. The Wisdom, Glory, and
Sovereignty of God. The Wisdom of God, in the Creation of the World. The Wisdom
of God, in his Providence. The Wisdom of God, in the Redemption of Mankind. The
Justice of God, in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments. The Truth of
God. The Holiness of God.


To which is annexed a Spital Sermon, Of doing Good.

By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The SIXTH VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1699.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Sixth Volume.
SERMON. I. Concerning the Perfection of God. MATTHEW. V.48. BE ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

SERMON. II. Concerning our Imitation of the Divine Perfections. MATTHEW. V.48. Be
ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

p. 27 SERMON. III. The Happiness of God. 1 TIMOTHY I.11. The Blessed God -- The
whole Verse runs thus, According to the glorious Gospel of the Blessed God,
which was committed to my trust.

p. 67 SERMON. IV. The Unchangeableness of God. JAMES I.17. With whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning.

The whole Period runs thus, Do not err, my beloved Brethren, every good Gift,
and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

p. 97 SERMON. V, VI. The Knowledge of God. 1 SAMUEL II.3. The Lord is a God of
Knowledge.

p. 153, 123 SERMON. VII. The Wisdom, Glory, and Sovereignty of God. JUDE 25. To
the only wise God our Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and Power, now
and ever.

p. 187 SERMON. VIII. The Wisdom of God, in the Creation of the World. PSALM.
CIV.24. O Lord; how manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all.

p. 219 SERMON. IX. The Wisdom of God, in his Providence. Preached at Kensington.
1 PETER V.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

p. 243 SERMON. X. The Wisdom of God in the Redemption of Mankind. 1 COR. I.24.
Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.

p. 275 SERMON. XI. The Justice of God in the distribution of Rewards and
Punishments. GENESIS XVIII.25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

p. 305 SERMON. XII. The Truth of God. DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.4. -- A God of Truth.

p. 337 SERMON. XIII. The Holiness of God, 1 PET. I.16. Be ye holy, for I am holy.

p. 369 ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Discourses of the Divine Goodness, being more than can be contained in
this Volume, are, together with those of the remaining Attributes, reserved for
the next: But to complete this, here follows a single Sermon upon another
Subject. SERMON. XIV. Of doing Good. Being a Spital Sermon Preached at
Christ-Church on Easter-Tuesday, April, 14th. 1691. GALA. VI.9, 10. Let us not
be weary in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: As we
have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, especially unto them
who are of the household of faith.

p. 401
SERMON. I. Vol. VI.
Concerning the Perfection of God.
MATTHEW. V.48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect.


THESE words are the Conclusion which our Savior draws from those Precepts
which he had given his Disciples of greater perfection, than any Laws that were
extant in the world before. V. 44. I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for those that
despitefully use you, and persecute you. And to persuade them hereto, he
propounds to them the Pattern of the Divine Perfection; telling them, that
being thus affected toward their Enemies, they should resemble God, v. 45.
That ye may be the Children of your heavenly Father; for he makes the Sun to
rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends Rain on the just, and on the
unjust.

And then he tells us, that if we be not thus affected toward our Enemies, and
those that have been injurious to us, we are so far from being like God, that
we are but just level with the worst of Men, v. 46, 47. For if ye love them
which love you, what reward have you? do not even the Publicans the same? And
if ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the
Publicans so? And then concludes, that if we would attain that perfection which
the Christian Religion designs to advance Men to, we must endeavor to be like
God in these perfections of Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience; Be ye therefore
perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. In which words we have,

First, The absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature supposed; as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect.

Secondly, It is propounded as a Pattern to our imitation. Be ye therefore
perfect, etc.

In handling of these words, I shall do these four things.

I. Consider how we are to conceive of the Divine Perfection.

II. I shall lay down some Rules whereby we may govern and rectify our
Opinions concerning the Attributes and Perfections of God.

III. How far we are to imitate the Perfections of God, and particularly what
those Divine Qualities are, which our Savior does here more especially
propound to our imitation.

IV. I shall endeavor to clear the true meaning of this Precept, and to show
that the Duty here intended by our Savior is not impossible to us; and then
conclude this Discourse with some useful Inferences from the whole.

I. I shall consider how we are to conceive of the Divine Perfections. These
two ways.

1. By ascribing all imaginable and possible Perfection to God.

2. By separating and removing all manner of Imperfection from him.

1. By ascribing all imaginable, and possible Perfection to God; absolute and
universal Perfection, not limited to a certain kind, or to certain particulars;
but whatever we can conceive, and imagine to be a Perfection, is to be ascribed
to him; yea and beyond this, whatever possible Perfection there is, or possible
degree of any Perfection, which our short Understandings cannot conceive or
comprehend, is to be ascribed to him. For we are not to confine the Perfection
of God to our imagination, as if we could find out the Almighty to Perfection:
But on the contrary, to believe the Perfection of the Divine Nature to be
boundless and unlimited, and infinitely to exceed our highest thoughts and
apprehensions.

More particularly, all kinds and all degrees of Perfection are to be ascribed
to God, which either do not imply a plain Contradiction, or do not argue some
Imperfection, or are not evidently inconsistent with some other and greater
Perfection.

Some things may seem to be Perfections, which in truth are not; because they
are plainly impossible, and involve a Contradiction; as that what has once
been, should by any Power be made not to have been; or that a thing, which by
its Nature is limited and confined to one place, should at the same time be in
another. These things in Reason are impossible, and therefore not to be
supposed to fall under any Power how unlimited soever. For if we once ascribe
Contradictions to God, we destroy his Being; because then to be, and not to be,
Power, and no Power would be all one.

And then there are some Perfections, which do argue and suppose Imperfections
in them; as Motion, the quickness and swiftness thereof in Creatures is a
Perfection, but then it supposes a finite and limited Nature: For a boundless
and immense Being, that is every where present at once, has no need to move
from one place to another; and therefore though Motion be a Perfection in
Creatures, there is no Reason to ascribe it to God, because it supposes a
greater Imperfection.

And there are also some imaginable degrees of Perfection, which because they
are inconsistent with other Perfections, are not to be admitted in the Divine
Nature. For instance, such degrees of Goodness and Mercy may be imagined, as
would quite exclude and shut out Justice; and on the other hand such a
strictness and a rigor of Justice, as would leave no room at all for Patience
and Mercy; and therefore such degrees are not really to be esteemed
Perfections. For this is a certain truth, that nothing is a Divine Perfection,
which evidently clasheth with any other necessary and essential Perfection of
the Divine Nature. We must so consider the Perfections of God, that they may
accord and consist together; and therefore it cannot be a Perfection of God to
be so good and gracious, as to encourage Sin, and to overthrow the Reverence of
his own Laws and Government. It Is not Goodness, but Easiness and Weakness, to
be contented to be perpetually injured and affronted. It Is not Patience, to be
willing to be everlastingly trampled upon. So likewise on the other hand, it is
not a Perfection to be so severe and rigorous, as to smite a Sinner in the
instant that he offends, not to be able to refrain from Punishment, and to give
time for Repentance.

But whatever Perfection is conceivable or possible, and argues no
Imperfection, nor is repugnant to any other necessary Perfection, is to be
ascribed to God; for this is the most natural and easy conception that we can
have of God, that he is the most perfect Being. This natural Light does first
suggest and offer to the Minds of Men, and we cannot conceive of God as mere
Power and Will without Wisdom and Goodness. Hence it is that the Greeks call
God very often, (...), the best of Beings, and the Latin Optimus, Maximus, the
best and the Greatest, beatissima and perfectissima natura, constans and
perfecta Ratio, the happiest and most perfect Nature, immutible and absolute
Reason; and many other such expressions which we meet with in the Writings of
the Heathen Philosophers. I readily grant, that the first and most obvious
thought which men have of God, is that of his Greatness and Majesty; but this
necessarily involves or infers his Goodness; as Seneca excellently reasons,
Primus Deorum cultus est Deos credere, dein reddere illis majestatem suam,
reddere bonitatem, sine qua nulla Majestas, The first Worship of the Gods is to
believe their Being; next to ascribe to them Greatness and Majesty, to ascribe
to them Goodness, without which there can be no Majesty.

And we shall find all along in Plato, and Tully, and the best and wisest
Writers among the Heathen, that they every where attribute the highest
Excellencies and Perfections to the Divine Nature, and do steer and govern all
their Discourses of God by this Principle, that Perfection is to be ascrbied to
him: And whenever any thing is said of God, they examine whether it be a
Perfection or not; if it be, they give it him as his due; if it be not, they
lay it aside, as a thing not fit to be spoken of him.

And in the Scripture we do every where find Perfection ascribed to the Nature,
and Works, and Laws of God, to every thing that belongs to him, or proceeds
from him: Job 37.16. Do thou know the wondrous works of him that is perfect
in knowledge? And again, Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find
out the Almighty to perfection? Ps. 18.30 As for God his way is perfect Ps.
19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect.

I shall not need to consider particularly the several Perfections of the
Divine Nature, I shall only give you a brief Scheme and Draught of them.
Whatever Perfection can be imagined either in the manner of Being or Acting is
to be ascribed to God; therefore as to his Nature we say that he is a Spirit,
that is, that he is not mere Body or Matter, because that would exclude several
other Perfections; for mere Matter is incapable both of Knowledge and Liberty,
being determined by necessary Laws of Motion; and yet without Knowledge and
Liberty, there can be no Wisdom nor Goodness. We say of God, that he is of
himself, and without Cause, and does not owe his Being to any other; and
consequently that he is necessarily, and that he cannot but be, and cannot be
otherwise than he is; for that which is of its self did not choose whether it
would be or not, nor whether it would be thus or otherwise; for to suppose any
thing to deliberate or consult about it is own Being, is to suppose it to be
before it is.

We must say of God likewise that he is immense, and every where present,
because to be limited is an Imperfection; and that he is eternal, that is, ever
was, and shall be; for to cease to be, is a greater Imperfection than sometime
not to have been.

And then we are to say of God, that he is the Cause of all other Beings, that
they are made by him and depend upon him; that he knows all things, and can do
all things in the most perfect manner, by a glance of his Mind, and by the mere
beck and nod of his Will, without long study or deliberation, without laborious
pains and endeavors, and consequently that nothing is exempted from his
Knowledge, and Power, and Providence, and that he administers all things in a
way of Goodness and Wisdom, of Justice and Truth; and therefore all things are
to be referred to him, as their last end. All these Perfections, and all other
that are possible, we are to look upon the Divine Nature as fully and immutably
possessed of, and that in an higher and more excellent degree, than our finite
Understandings are able to conceive or comprehend.

2. As we are to ascribe all imaginable, possible Perfections to God, so we are
to separate and remove all manner of Imperfection from him. We must not obscure
or blemish the Divine Nature with the least shadow or blot of Imperfection. If
we once admit of this, to ascribe any thing to God which argues Imperfection,
we strike at the foundation, and destroy one of the clearest and most essential
Notions, which Men have of God. And therefore we find the Scripture very
careful to remove all kind of natural or moral Imperfection from God. Genesis
18.25. That be far from Thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee; shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of
truth and without iniquity. Romans 9.14. What shall we say then, is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid, far be it from him.

Hence it is that in Scripture Holiness is so frequently ascribed to God, which
signifies the purity and freedom of the Divine Nature from that which we call
Sin; and God is very solicitous to give us such a notion of himself, as may
remove Sin and unrighteousness at the greatest distance from him, because that
is the greatest of Imperfections. Is it an Imperfection to countenance Sin? the
Scripture acquits God of it. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Thou art not a God that has
pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with Thee. Is it an
Imperfection to go from ones word, or to change ones mind? this likewise is
removed from God. 1 Samuel 15.29. The strength of Israel will not lie or repent,
he is not a man, that he should repent. Is it an Imperfection to want any
thing, to be liable to any thing, to depend upon any thing without one's self
for their happiness? this also is to be set far from him. Job 22.2, 3. Can a
man be profitable to God? or is it a gain to him, that thou make thy way
perfect? Job 35.6, 7. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou art righteous,
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man. Is it
an Imperfection to tempt, or to be tempted to Sin? this is to be separated from
God, He cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man, says St.
James. Chap. 1.17. And to mention no more, is it an Imperfection to be in any
respect mutable? This is denied of God, with him there is no variableness, or
shadow of turning. Thus you see how we are to conceive of the Perfections of
God, by ascribing all imaginable and possible Perfection to him, and removing
all shadow of Imperfection from him. I proceed in the

II. Place, to lay down some Rules by which we may rectify and govern our
Opinions concerning the Attributes and Perfections of God: The best I can think
of, are these following.

First, Let us begin with the most natural, and plain, and easy Perfections of
God, and lay them for a foundation, and rectify all our other Apprehensions of
God, and Reasonings about him, by these; and these are his Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, to which most of the rest may be reduced. Right Apprehensions and a
firm Belief of these will make it easily credible to us, that all things were
made and are governed, by him; for his Goodness will dispose and incline him to
communicate Being to other things, and to take care of them when they are made.
An infinite Power and Wisdom render him able to do all this without any labor
or difficulty, and without any disturbance of his ease or happiness, as
Epicurus would seem vainly to fear; who in truth did not believe a God, but
pretended only to deny his Providence, and that he either made or governed the
world; because he was loath to lay so much trouble upon him. Vain man! as if
those things which are impossible and difficult to our Weakness and Folly,
might not be infinitely easy to infinite Power and Wisdom.

Particularly the Goodness and Justice of God are not so difficult to
apprehend, as the Disputes and Controversies about them have rendered them to
many. When we consider infinite Knowledge and Power, we may easily lose our
selves, and go out of our depth, by wading too far into them: There is
something concerning these, that is unimaginable, and unaccountable to our
Reason; we may not be able to understand how Something may be produced from
Nothing; because it argues such an excess of Power, as we cannot comprehend;
but yet we are forced to acknowledge, that either the World must be produced
from Nothing, or that Matter was eternally of it self, which is every whit as
hard to imagine, as that infinite Power should be able to produce it from
nothing. So likewise we are not able to conceive, how God can certainly know
future Events, which depend upon voluntary and uncertain Causes, because we
cannot comprehend infinite Knowledge; but this we may easily be satisfied in,
that infinite Power and Knowledge may be able to do, and know many things,
which we cannot conceive how they can be known or done, no more than a Child
can imagine how a great Mathematician can demonstrate his Propositions. Only
this we are sure of, as we can be of any thing, that no Power can do that which
is evidently impossible, and implies a plain Contradiction.

We are not able perhaps to reconcile the particular Providence of God with
his universal Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, because we cannot see to the end
of his Ways and Works at one view, and see every part with relation to the
whole; which would appear very wise, if we knew the whole series of things, and
saw the entire design together, as God himself does, to whom (as Solomon tells
us) all his ways are known from the beginning.

So that however we may be at a loss in our Conceptions of God's infinite
Knowledge and Power, yet Goodness, and Justice, and Truth, are Notions easy
and familiar; and if we could not understand these, the whole Bible would be
insignificant to us. For all Revelation from God supposes us to know what is
meant by Goodness, Justice, and Truth: And therefore no man can entertain any
Notion of God, which plainly contradicts these. And it is foolish for any man
to pretend, that he cannot know what Goodness, and Justice, and Truth in God
are: for if we do not know this, it is all one to us, whether God be good or
not, nor could we imitate his Goodness; for he that imitates, endeavors to
make himself like something that he knows, and must of necessity have some Idea
of that to which he aims to be like: So that if we had no certain and settled
Notion of the Goodness, and Justice, and Truth of God, he would be altogether
an unintelligible Being; and Religion, which consists in the imitation of him,
would be utterly impossible.

Now these being the most easy, and intelligible Perfections of God, by which
he is said in Scripture to declare his Name, that is, to make himself known to
us, we should govern all our Reasonings about God (as concerning his Decrees,
and his concurrence with the Free Actions of Men, and his particular
Providence, which are things more dark and obscure) by what is more clear; and
we shall find in Scripture, that in all these points holy Men do constantly
appeal to these unquestionable and intelligible Perfections of God. Will thou
destroy the righteous with the wicked? (says Abraham) That be far from thee.
Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? We may be mistaken; but God
certainly knows who are wicked, and who are righteous; and he knows how to
punish the wicked, and save the righteous: But we cannot be mistaken in this
Principle, that the Judge of all the world will do right. Thus Moses satisfies
himself, and others concerning the particular Providence of God toward the
People of Israel. Deuteronomy. 32.3, 4. I will publish the name of the Lord: All his
ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is He.
This we certainly know of God. So St. Paul, Romans 2.2. Thou art inexcusable, O
Man! Whatsoever Excuse men may pretend for their faults, he lays down this for
a Principle, We are sure the Judgment of God is according to truth.

Secondly, Let us always consider the Perfections of God in conjunction, and so
as to reconcile them with one another. Do not consider God as mere Power and
Sovereignty, as mere Mercy and Goodness, as mere Justice and Severity; but as
all these together, and in such a measure and degree as may make them
consistent with one another. The greatest mistakes in Religion are certainly
sprung from this root, from separating the Perfections of God, and considering
them singly, and framing such wide and large notions of one, as to exclude
another: whereas the Perfections of God agree together, and that is not a
Divine Perfection, which contradicts any other Perfection. Among men indeed an
eminent degree of any one Excellency does usually shut out some other; and
therefore it is observed, that Power and Moderation, Love and Discretion, do
not often meet together; that a great Memory and a small Judgment, a good Wit
and an ill Nature, are many times found in conjunction: But in infinite
Perfection all Perfections do eminently meet and consist together; and it is
not necessary that one Excellency should be raised upon the ruins of another.

And if this had been well considered, Men would not, by being too intent upon
God's Sovereignty, with neglect of his other Perfections, have spoken those
hard things about Predestination: for the Sovereignty of God does by no means
set him above the Eternal Laws of Goodness, and Truth, and Righteousness. And
if this were considered, men would not, by poring upon the Justice and Severity
of God, be so swallowed up in despair: for God is not so severe, but he is
merciful to the penitent, and has left a retreat for the returning Sinner. If
this were well considered, it would check the presumption of those, who
encourage themselves in sin, by fancying to themselves a God all of Mercy and
Goodness; and because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed,
therefore their heart is fully set in them to do evil: For it is not Goodness
and Mercy finally to bear with and forgive obstinate Offenders; but want of
Prudence and good Government.

Thirdly, Among different Opinions concerning God (as there always have been,
and will be in the world) choose those which are farthest from extremity;
because Truth as well as Virtue usually lies between the Extremes. And here I
will instance in that Controversy, which has much disquieted the Church almost
in all Ages, concerning the Decrees of God; about which there are two Extremes,
the one that God peremptorily decrees the final condition of every particular
person, that is, their everlasting happiness or misery, without any regard or
consideration of the good or bad Actions of Men. The other, that God decrees
nothing concerning any particular person, but only in general that men found
under such and such Qualifications shall be happy or miserable, and puts it
into their own power to qualify themselves. Now he that is doubtful in this
matter, as every man must be that understands the difficulties on both sides,
had best take up in the middle Opinion, that God decrees the final condition of
particular persons with respect to certain Qualifications, which speaking
absolutely are not in every Man's power; but yet, under the influence of God's
grace, which is never wanting to the sincere endeavors of men, may be said to
be in our power, in the same sense, as St. Paul says, I am able to do all
things through Christ strengthening me: For besides that this in all probability
is the Truth, there will be this advantage in it, that he that stands in the
middle, is like to be more moderate toward the Dissenters on both sides, than
either of them will be to one onother; because the middle is not so far from
either Extreme, as the Extremes are from one another. At the worst, he stands
fairest for an impartial enquiry after Truth, and when he has satisfied himself
where the Truth lies, he may more silently pass over to it, without any great
imputation of inconstancy; which cannot but be remarkable in him, who passes
from one Extreme to another.

Fourthly, and lastly, Entertain no Opinion concerning God, that does evidently
contradict the Practice of Religion, and a good Life, though never so specious
and subtle Arguments may be used to persuade it. Truth is most easily seen,
and discerned in those Reasonings and Opinions which tend to practice; because
the absurdity and inconvenience of them is soonest discovered: whereas we
cannot so certainly find out the truth or falsehood of those Opinions, which
speculative Men devise in their Studies, without any consideration whether they
serve any real purpose of Life, or not. Men indeed are very apt to form those
notions, which are most remote from common sense and use; because more pains
and wit are required to make them plausible: but there needs no other Argument
to make a wise man despise them, than that they are unprofitable, and signify
nothing to our practice, and to make men truly better.

This is universally true in all kind of knowledge, but most considerable in
the knowledge of God and Religion; because that knowledge is of the greatest
consideration. We need not scruple to admit some things, not so evident to
Natural Reason, if we be satisfied of the truth of them, from an higher and
more cogent Reason: As that God has revealed it, and said it; this general
Reason may persuade us of a thing that is above and beyond Natural Reason: But
we may not admit any thing for a Divine Revelation, which evidently contradicts
and weakens the practice of an holy Life; because this is the main end of all
Divine Revelation; and we know God, only in order to the service and imitation
of him.

Let us then look upon all knowledge that contradicts practice, as vain and
false, because it destroys its end. There are many things that seem probable
enough in Speculation, which yet we most pertinaciously deny, because they are
not practicable; and there are many things, which seem doubtful in Speculation,
and would admit of great dispute, which yet because they are found true in
practice and experience, are to be taken for certain and unquestionable. The
(...), the idle Reasoning of the Stoics, was a thing contemned by the wiser
Philosophers, as a vain and useless subtilty. Zeno pretends to demonstrate
there is no Motion; and what is the consequence of this Speculation, but that
Men must stand still? But so long as a man finds he can walk, all the Sophistry
in the world will not persuade him, that Motion is impossible. In like manner,
they that would persuade us, that men can do nothing, nor contribute any more
to their own Sanctification, than Stocks or Stones, and upon Scripture
Metaphors misunderstood, (as our being dead in trespasses and sins, and created
to good works) graft Notions which are impossible and absurd in practice, do
not consider that the natural consequence of this is, that men must do nothing
at all in Religion, never think of God, nor pray to him, nor read his Word, nor
go to Church; but sit still, and be wholly passive to the operations of God's
grace: but however this may seem plausible, and men may think they add much to
the glory of God's grace, while they deny any power in the Creature; yet every
considerate Man will presently apprehend, that this is by no means to be
admitted, because it contradicts Practice, and makes all the Commands and
Exhortations of God's Word vain, and to no purpose; because it destroys
Religion, and discourages the endeavors of Men; makes them sloathful and
careless of working out their own Salvation; than which nothing can set a man
farther from God's grace and assistance, and more immediately dispose him for
ruin; and upon some such false Reasoning as this, the sloathful Servant in the
Parable hid his talent in a napkin, and buried it in the earth; but when he was
called to account, his excuse was not admitted, but he was cast into utter
darkness. The two other Particulars, namely how far we are to imitate the
Divine Perfections, and particularly what those Divine Qualities are, which our
Savior does here more especially propound to our imitation, and likewise to
clear the true meaning of this Precept, and to show that the Duty here
enjoined, Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, is not
impossible to us. Both these I shall refer to another Opportunity.

SERMON II. Vol. VI.
Concerning our imitation of the Divine Perfections.
MATTHEW. V.48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect.


IN these words we have, First, The absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature
supposed, not only in those before mentioned, of Goodness, and Mercy, and
Patience; but in all other Excellencies whatsoever.

Secondly, The Perfection of God is propounded as a Pattern for our Imitation.

In the handling of these two Particulars, I propounded to proceed in this
method.

I. To show how we are to conceive of the Divine Perfection.

II. To lay down some Rules, by which we may rectify and govern our Opinions
concerning the Attributes and Perfections of God.

III. To show how far we are to imitate the Perfections of God, and
particularly what those Divine Qualities are, which our Savior does here more
especially propound to our imitation.

IV. To clear the true meaning of this Precept, and to show that the Duty here
intended by our Savior is not impossible to us; and then to draw some useful
Inferences from the whole.

The two first I have already spoken to, I now proceed to the third particular,
which is to show how far we are to imitate the Perfections of God, and
particularly what those Divine Qualities are, which our Savior does here more
especially propound to our imitation. For though these words do suppose the
absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature, yet because there are several
Perfections of God which are incommunicable, and a Creature, as such, is
utterly incapable of them, these cannot be supposed to be intended for a
Pattern to us. As the necessity and independency of the Divine Nature; and the
Self-sufficiency of it to his own happiness; to be the Original Cause of all
things, and consequently supreme Lord and Governor; the Immensity and Eternity
of his Being; these, and perhaps several other Perfections, are incommunicable
to a Creature; and it would be an unsufferable pride, and a kind of High
Treason against the Divine Majesty, and a sottish Ignorance of the necessary
bounds and limits of our own State, as we are Creatures, to think to resemble
God in these Excellencies, of which the condition of a Creature is utterly
incapable. This was the Sin of Lucifer, an ambition to step into the Throne of
God, and to be like the most high.

So that in our imitation of the Divine Perfection, we are to keep within the
station of Creatures, not affecting an Independency and Sovereignty like the
most high, and to be Omnipotent as he is, to have an arm like God, and to
thunder with a voice like him, as the expression is in Job: But to endeavor to
resemble him, pro modulo creaturae, according to the rate and capacity of a
Creature, in those Divine Qualities, and in such measures and degrees, as our
finite and dependent Nature is capable of.

More especially and chiefly in the moral Perfections of the Divine Nature,
such as are his Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, his Justice, and Truth, and
Faithfulness; these, and only these, the Scripture seems to comprehend under
the name of Holiness; not all the Excellencies of the Divine Nature in general,
but those which we call moral Excellencies and Perfections, such as those which
I have named; for with these, and hardly with any other, is the Holiness of God
joined in Scripture, as holy and righteous, holy and true, etc. And therefore
when God says, be ye holy, for I am holy, it signifies that we are to imitate
God in his Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, and Righteousness, and
Faithfulness, and Truth; for these are the Holiness of the Divine Nature, which
set him at the greatest distance from that which we call Moral Impurity and Sin.

For that which our Savior here in the Text more peculiarly recommends to our
imitation, is the Goodness of God, of which his Mercy and Patience are two
eminent Branches. The Mercy of God is his Goodness to those that are in Misery,
or are liable to it. The Patience of God is his Mercy in sparing those who have
deserved Punishment, and are liable to it. And the Goodness of God is then
greatest, when it is exercised toward the evil and unthankful; those who are
so far from deserving it, that they have given great and just Provocations to
the contrary. And this affection and temper of Mind, which is so remarkable in
God toward the unworthy and unthankful Sons of Men, our Savior recommends to
our imitation here in the Text. Be ye therefore Perfect, even as your Father
which is in Heaven is Perfect. Be ye therefore; this Particle of inference,
therefore, has a plain relation to something spoken before; and if we look
back to v. 44. we shall find our Savior there enjoining his Disciples to love
their Enemies, to bless them that curse them, to do good to them that hate
them, and to pray for those that despightfully use them, and persecute them.
And by what other argument does he enforce the Practice of this difficult Duty,
but by telling us, that this is to be like God, to be good to the evil and
unthankful, v. 45. That ye may be the Children of your Heavenly Father, who
makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and his Rain to fall on the
just, and on the unjust. God is good to all, and exercises great Mercy and
Patitience even toward the evil, and unjust. And then he concludes, that if
Perfection it self be fit to be a Pattern, we should labor after these
Qualities, Be ye therefore Perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
Perfect. So that though the universal Perfection of the Divine Nature be here
supposed, yet the Attributes of his Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, are here
particularly pointed at, and propounded to us for our Pattern; and the Precept
of imitating the Divine Perfection is more especially to be understood of those
Perfections which our Savior had been discours^^^ of before, viz. the Goodness
and Mercy of God. And that this is undoubtedly so, is evident from St. Luke's
rendering this Precept, Chapter 6.36. Be ye therefore, (...), benefici, ready to do
good, full of kindness and benignity; merciful, as your Father which is in
Heaven is merciful; that is, endeavor you to be such as I have described God
to be. And this St. Matthew calls Perfection, because the Goodness of God is
his great Perfection, and the Glory of the Divine Nature, that which reflects a
luster and beauty upon all his other Attributes, and takes off the terror of
them. From all which it is plain, what those Perfections of the Divine Nature
are, which our Savior does here particularly recommend to our imitation. I
come now in the

IV. and last place, To clear the true meaning of this Precept, and to show
that the Duty here required, and intended by our Savior (when he says, Be ye
perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect) is not impossible to us.
And to this purpose be pleased to consider these three or four things.

1. That our imitation of God is certainly restrained to the communicable
Perfections of God, and such as Creatures are capable of, as I have shown
before. For it is so far from being a Duty to affect or attempt to be like God
in his peculiar Perfections, that it was probably the Sin of the Apostate
Angels.

2. Our imitation of the Divine Perfections, which are communicable to
Creatures, is likewise to be restrained to such degrees of these Perfections,
as Creatures are capable of. For no Creature can ever be so perfectly Good, as
God is; nor partake of any other Excellency in that transcendent degree, in
which the Divine Nature is possessed of it.

3. But there is no manner of inconvenience in having a Pattern propounded to
us of so great Perfection, as is above our reach to attain to; and there may be
great Advantages in it. The way to excel in any kind is, optima quaeque exempla
ad imitandum proponere, to propose the highest and most perfect Examples to our
imitation. No Man can write after too perfect and good a Copy, and though he
can never reach the Perfection of it, yet he is like to learn more, than by one
less perfect. He that aims at the Heavens, which yet he is sure to come short
of, is like to shoot higher than he that aims at a mark within his reach.

Besides that the excellency of the Pattern, as it leaves room for continual
improvement, so it kindles Ambition, and makes Men strain and contend to the
utmost to do better: And though he can never hope to equal the Example before
him, yet he will endeavor to come as near it as he can. So that a perfect
Pattern is no hindrance, but an advantage rather to our improvement in any kind.

4. If any thing can be supposed to be our Duty, which is absolutely beyond our
Power, a Precept of this nature, may with as much reason be supposed to be so,
as any thing that can be instanced in: Because in such a case, if we do our
best, and be continnually pressing forward toward the Mark, though we can
never reach it, yet we do very commendably; and whatever the law may require to
try and raise our Obedience, yet in all equitable Interpretation, such a Will
and Endeavor will be acceptable with God for the Deed. For if the Perfection
of the Law do really exceed our Ability, and be beyond the possibility of our
Performance, the assurance we have of God's Goodness will sufficiently secure
us from any danger and prejudice upon on that account. And we may reasonably
presume, that to do all we can toward the fulfilling of this Precept, will be
as acceptable to God, and as beneficial to our selves, as if our Power had been
greater, and we had perfectly fulfilled it. If our Heavenly Father, to try the
readiness and cheerfulness of our Obedience, bid us do that which he knows we
cannot do, though we can do something toward it, we may be sure that he will
be very well pleased when he sees, that in obedience to him we have done all
that we could. And we may in this case reason as our Savior does; If we that
are evil would deal thus with our Children, how much more shall our Heavenly
Father? The Goodness of God signifies very little, if it does not signify
this, that in any instance of real and unquestionable Goodness, God is much
better than any Father upon Earth.

However, at the worst, that wherein we fall short of the Perfection of the
Law, may be supplied on our part, by an humble acknowledgment of our own
Weakness and Imperfection, and on God's part by Mercy and Forgiveness, for the
sake of the perfect Obedience of our blessed Redeemer. This is the least
benefit we can expect in this case from the Grace, and Mercy, and Equity of the
Gospel.

5. And lastly, which will fully clear this matter, this Precept does not
oblige us to come up to a perfect equality with the Pattern propounded to us,
but only imports a vigorous imitation of it; that we be perpetually ascending
and climbing up higher, still advancing from one degree of Goodness to another,
and continually aspiring after a nearer resemblance to God: And this certainly
is possible to us, to endeavor to be as like God as we can, in this weak and
imperfect state.

Whereas any Equality with God, even in the communicable Attributes of his
Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, is not only impossible to us in this state
of Sin and Imperfection, but above the condition of a Creature, even of the
Spirits of just Men made Perfect, and of the highest Angels in Glory: for their
Perfection is not absolute, but in comparison with our present state. And I
think there is no great Reason to doubt, but that the blessed Spirits above,
who continually behold the Face of their Father, are still writing after this
Copy, which is here propounded to us; and endeavoring to be perfect, as their
Father which is in Heaven is perfect; still aspiring after a nearer and more
perfect resemblance of God, whose Goodness and Mercy is so far beyond, and
before that of any Creature, that they may be for ever approaching nearer to
it, and yet never overtake it.

And this seems to be no inconsiderable ingredient, and enhancement of the
happiness of Heaven, that the Holiness of good men (which is the similitude of
God) is never at a stand, nor at it is full growth and period; but that the
glorified Saints (yea and blessed Angels too) may be continually growing and
improving, and they themselves still become better and happier to all eternity.
And this in my apprehension is no undervaluing the happiness of Heaven, that it
is not so perfect at first, as it shall be afterward; because it is granted on
all hands, that the happiness of those good Souls, who are already in bliss,
shall be more perfect and complete at the Resurrection. And why may it not then
be continually increasing, and be augmented still more and more, without any
stint or final period of it is perfection? In this world we are apt to faint in
a long course of goodness, and to be weary of well doing. But in the other
state, when men shall be strongly biased to goodness, and have nothing to pull
them back, it will then be so far from being a trouble, that methinks it should
be a mighty pleasure to the blessed, to find that there is no end of their
doing good and becoming better. For if conformity to God be the ground and
foundation of all Happiness, then our Blessedness will advance proportionably,
as we grow more and more like to him. This I confess were a dismal
Consideration, to think that in Heaven we should be liable to relapse, to go
backward, or fall from that holy and happy state. But this is a comfortable
Consideration, that our holiness and happiness shall never be at a stand, that
it is secure so far as it goes, and that we cannot lose what we have once
attained, as we may do in this world. This methinks should be a trouble to no
man, that as good and happy as he is at first, he shall still be better and
better, more and more happy without end.

But be that as it will, and as God pleases (for we do but talk in the dark
about our future state,) this is certain, that an equality with God in any of
his Perfections is not to be attained by any Creature, and therefore cannot be
thought to be the meaning of this Precept: But that which our Savior requires,
is a vigorous imitation of this Pattern; that we have this Example of the
Divine Perfection always before us, and that we be continually endeavoring, as
much as in us lies, to bring our selves to the nearest resemblance of God, that
possibly we can. And if this be our sincere care and study, we need not doubt
but that it will find acceptance with God, and that he will be graciously
pleased to esteem us for his Children; and if there need a pardon for it, that
God will forgive wherein we fall short of the Perfection of that Pattern, which
we can never imitate to Perfection.

And happy were it for us, if this were all the ground of our fear and trouble,
that when we had done all we could, we must still fall much short of the
perfection of God's Law, and the Duty therein laid upon us; alas! which of us
does near so much as we can, and is not conscious to himself that it is through
his own fault and neglect, that he is so unlike his heavenly Father in Goodness
and Mercy, in Righteousness and true Holiness; and that he still partakes in so
great a measure of those, not only unreasonable and brutish, but even devilish
Passions of Malice and Hatred, of Rage and Cruelty, of Impatience and
implacable Revenge; and that these ungodlike Qualities do so frequently prevail
upon us, and have so much dominion over us!

We are so far from being what we ought, in these and many other respects, that
we are far from what we might be, if we would mind our Duty with care and
conscience, and make it our sincere endeavor to subdue our selves to a
conformity to God, and to a perfect holiness in his fear.

Would we but often set God before our eyes, and represent to our selves those
excellent and amiable Perfections of the Divine Nature, which are so
comfortable and beneficial to us, and to which we stand so infinitely obliged,
his Goodness and Mercy and Patience, upon which all our hopes of Happiness do
depend, and to which we are indebted, that we are not miserable past recovery;
that Goodness and Patience which he continually exercises toward us, (for we
provoke him every day,) and exercises toward us on purpose to endear those
Perfections to us, from which we reap so much comfort and advantage; that by
the Pattern of Perfection it self, and the Example of him who is so much above
us, so no ways obliged to us, nor tied by any interest to be concerned for us,
and who being happy in himself neither hopes nor fears any thing from us; I say
by an Example that has all these advantages, we might be provoked to be so
affected toward one another (who have mutual Obligations one to another, and
mutual Expectations of Good or Evil one from another) as we have always found
God to be toward us, and as we desire he should still continue; and miserable
Creatures are we, when ever he cease to be so: And we have reason to fear he
will cease to be so, if this Example of his Goodness and Patience toward us,
do not transform us into the Image of the Divine Perfections, and prevail upon
us to imitate those Excellencies, which we have so much reason to approve and
admire, and be in love withal.

These Considerations taken both from ingenuity and interest should awaken our
sloth, and stir up our most resolute and vigorous endeavors after that
Perfection which our Savior here requires, and make us ashamed of our lazy
complaints, that our Duty is set so high, that the endeavors of our whole life
cannot reach it; when yet we have hardly made one step toward it, and are so
remiss and unconcerned about it, as if we could do it at any time with the
greatest ease, and at an hours warning, before we leave the world, could fulfill
this Precept of our Lord, of being perfect as our Father which is in Heaven is
perfect.

And yet let me tell you, so far as any of us are from resembling our heavenly
Father in some good degree and measure, so far are we distant from Heaven, and
the temper of the blessed; so far are we utterly unqualified for the blissful
sight and enjoyment of God: for unless we be first like him, we cannot see him
as he is: Only the pure in heart shall see God, and therefore every man that
has this hope in him, should purify himself even as he is pure.

And thus I have, as briefly as I could, dispatched the four things I propounded
for the Explication of this Text; namely, how we are to conceive of the Divine
Perfections, and to give some Rules to regulate and govern our Opinions
concerning the Attributes and Perfections of God; to explain the extent of this
Duty, and vindicate the possibility of it.

All that now remains, is to draw some useful Inferences from this Discourse
which I have made; and they shall be these two.

I. That the strongest and surest Reasonings in Religion, are grounded upon the
Essential Perfections of God.

II. That the truest and most substantial Practice of Religion, consists in the
imitation of God.

I. That the strongest and surest Reasonings in Religion are grounded upon the
Essential Perfections of God; so that even Divine Revelation it self does
suppose these for its Foundation, and can signify nothing to us, unless these
be first known and believed. Unless we be first persuaded of the Providence of
God, and his particular Care of Mankind, why should we believe that he would
make any Revelation of himself to Men? Unless it be naturally known to us, that
God is true, what foundation is there for the belief of his Word? And what
signify the Laws and Promises of God, unless natural Light do first assure us
of his Sovereign Authority and Faithfulness? So that the Principles of Natural
Religion, are the foundation of that which is Revealed; and therefore in Reason
nothing can be admitted to be a Revelation from God, which plainly contradicts
his Essential Perfection, and consequently if any pretends Divine Revelation
for this Doctrine, That God has from all Eternity absolutely decreed the
eternal ruin of the greatest part of Mankind, without any respect to the Sins
and Demerits of Men, I am as certain that this Doctrine cannot be of God, as I
am sure that God is Good and Just: because this grates upon the Notion that
Mankind have of Goodness and Justice. This is that which no good man would do,
and therefore cannot be believed of infinite Goodness; and therefore if an
Apostle or Angel from Heaven teach any Doctrine which plainly overthrows the
Goodness and Justice of God, let him be accursed. For every man has greater
assurance that God is Good and Just, than he can have of any subtle
Speculations about Predestination and the Decrees of God.

And for the same Reason I cannot believe, upon the pretended Authority or
Infallibility of any Man or Church in the world, that God would not have Men
understand their Public Prayers, and the Lessons of Scripture which are read
to them. A Lesson not to be understood is nonsense: a Lesson is something to be
learned, which how it can be without being understood, is hard to comprehend.

And as little can I believe upon the Authority of any Person or Church
whatsoever, that God should reveal his Will to Men in the holy Scriptures, with
a design to have it hid, and locked up from the generality of Mankind in an
unknown Tongue. And much less can I believe (which yet is the express Doctrine
of the Council of Trent) that the saving Efficacy of the Sacrament depends upon
the Intention of the Priest. Which is to say, that though people believe, and
live never so well, they may be damned by Sholes and whole Parishes together at
the pleasure of the Priest, and for no other reason, but because he is so
wicked, as not to intend to save them. Can any man believe this that has any
tolerable notion of God's Goodness? May we not in this case appeal, as Abraham
did, to the Goodness and Justice of God, and expostulate with greater Reason,
than he did, much after the same manner, will thou destroy the righteous for
the wicked; That be far from Thee to do after this manner, to damn the
righteous for the wicked, and that righteous people should lie at the mercy of
a wicked Priest, to be damned or saved at his pleasure, that be far from Thee;
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? And can there be a greater
affront to the Goodness and Justice of God, than to imagine he should deal with
men after this manner? If this be to do right, there is no possibility of doing
wrong.

And to give but one instance more, I can never believe, upon the Authority of
any Man, or Church whatsoever, that our Savior, in the Celebration of his last
Supper, did with his own hands give away his own Natural Body into the hands of
his Disciples, and give his Blood shed, before it was shed; That the whole
Doctrine of Christianity should mainly rely upon the Evidence of Miracles, the
assurance of which depends upon the certainty of Sense; and yet that an
Essential part of that Doctrine should overthrow the certainty of Sense. I can
never while I live believe these two things, that the last thing our Savior
did before his death should be to teach his Disciples not to believe their own
Senses, as he must do if he taught them Transubstantiation; and that the very
first thing he did after he was risen from the dead, should be to teach them
the quite contrary, by appealing to the certainty of Sense for the proof of his
Resurrection; for when they doubted of his Resurrection, Luke 24.38. He said
unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. If this be a good Argument,
that it was a real Body which they saw, because they saw and felt Flesh and
Bones: is it not as good an Argument on the other side, that what they saw in
the Sacrament was not his real and natural Body, because they could neither see
nor handle Flesh and Bones? So that I cannot believe Transubstantiation, unless
I can believe that Truth it self can contradict and destroy it self.

You see of what use it is to have right and steady Apprehensions of the Divine
Perfections, that, these being laid for a foundation, we may upon all occasions
have recourse to them, and govern our Opinions and Reasonings in Religion,
about all doubtful matters, by such Principles as are clear and unquestionable.
The

II. Inference is, That the truest and most substantial Practice of Religion
consists in the imitation of the Divine Perfections, especially the Moral
Perfections of the Divine Nature, which the Scripture is wont to comprehend
under the name of Holiness; and such are the Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience
of God, his Justice, and Truth, and Faithfulness. To imitate God in these is
true Religion; or as St. James expresses it, pure Religion, and undefiled,
(...), without any flaw or blemish, alluding to precious Stones, the greatest
commendation of which is to be clear and without flaw. Religio est imitari quem
colis, this is Religion to imitate him whom we worship. This the Heathens by
the light of Nature did discover to be the great End of Religion, and the best
Worship of the Deity, to be like God. Pythagoras was wont to say, that we
honor God most, when we are most like him in the temper and disposition of our
Minds; and Plato to the same purpose, that the height and Perfection of
Goodness, is to resemble God, as near as is possible; and that we resemble God
in being just, and holy, and wise. So likewise Hierocles, that a good man
imitates God in the measures of Love and Friendship, who hates no man, and
extends his benignity to all Mankind. Plutarch has an excellent Discourse
about the Patience of God toward Sinners, and gives this as one Reason why God
does not presently punish Offenders; that he might give an Example to us of
Gentleness and Patience, and check the fury and violence of men in revenging
Injuries upon one another; which nothing will do more effectually, than to
consider that Gentleness and Forbearance are an imitation of the Divine
Perfection. And then he cites an excellent saying of Plato, that God manifested
himself, and displayed his Perfections in the World for our imitation; true
Virtue being nothing else, but an imitation of the Divine Nature. For there is
no greater Benefit man can receive from God's hand, than to become virtuous by
the imitation and pursuit of those Excellencies and Perfections which are in
God. Seneca likewise has many passages to this purpose, inter viros bonos ac
Deum amicitia est, imo etiam necessitudo and similitudo, between God and good
men there is a friendship, yea and an intimacy and likeness; and that a
virtuous man is discipulus aemulatorque and vera progenies Dei, a disciple and
imitator, and the very genuine offspring of God. So that the light of Nature,
and the Reason of Mankind, have always placed the perfection of Religion in the
imitation of the Divine Excellencies and Perfections.

And this is very agreeable to the language and sense of the holy Scriptures,
which every where make the Practice of Religion to consist in our Conformity to
God, and the Laws which he has given us; which are nothing else but a
transcript of his Nature. The great business of Religion is to do the Will of
God, and this is the will of God, our sanctification; and our sanctification is
our conformity to the holiness of God; and this is the scope of the general
Exhortations of Scripture, to persuade us to holiness, that is, to an imitation
of the Moral Perfections of the Divine Nature. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore
these promises, dearly beloved! let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
speaking of the Christian Religion, which he calls the knowledge of him who
has called us to glory and virtue, whereby also (says he) are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we might be partakers of a
divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.
So that the holiness the Gospel designs to bring us to, is a participation of
the Divine Nature, which we can no otherwise partake of, but by an imitation of
the Divine Perfections. This is that which the Scripture expresses to us by the
terms of Regeneration, the New Man, and the New Creature. And therefore those
who are converted from a wicked and sinful state, and reclaimed to goodness,
are said to put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness,
and the holiness of truth. Ephesians. 4.23. To be renewed after the image of him
that created us. Coloss. 3.10. This is to be the sons and children of God, to
imitate and resemble God in our dispositions and manners. Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye
therefore, (...), imitators of God, as dear children. Philip. 2.15. That ye may
be blameless and sincere, the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation. 1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is
not of God. There have been great enquiries concerning the Marks of a Child of
God; this is the true Character, and that which in effect comprehends all
others, our imitation and resemblance of God in those Perfections wherein he is
set forth for a Pattern to us. And in this mainly consists the practice both of
Natural Religion, and of true Christianity.

But does not Religion consist very much in the Duties of God's Worship, in the
Exercises of Piety and Devotion, in constant and frequent Prayers to God, and
in the celebration of his Goodness by Praise and Thanksgiving, in reading, and
hearing, and meditating upon God's Word, in Fasting and Abstinence, and keeping
our bodies in subjection to our spirits, and in frequent receiving of the holy
Sacrament? To this I answer, That Religion does consist very much in the due
performance of these Duties, and they are unquestionable and necessary parts of
Religion, and the Means appointed by God for the begetting and increasing in us
such dispositions of mind, as render us most like to God, and for the
production of all the fruits of Goodness and Holiness and Righteousness in our
lives.

But then it is to be considered, that these Exercises of Piety and Devotion
are but the Means of Religion, and not the ultimate End and Design of it. All
these do but serve to bring us to a nearer resemblance of God; and where they
fail of this End, and are performed for their own sakes only, and we rest in
them, without aiming at any thing farther, they lose their nature; because they
are not used as Means, but rested in, as if they were the End of Religion. And
it is to be feared there are many which fall into this fatal mistake about
Religion, and think that if they do but serve God in their Families, and go to
Church, and behave themselves there with Devotion and Reverence, and at certain
seasons receive the Sacrament, they are truly religious, and very good
Christians; when all this while they take no care to improve themselves in real
Goodness, by an inward conformity of their Minds to God, and the real
reformation and amendment of their Lives, by mortifying their Lusts, and
subduing their Appetites and Passions to the Laws of Reason and Religion, by
putting on as the elect of God bowels of kindness; by being true and faithful;
righteous and just, patient and merciful, as their Father which is in heaven is
so; and by forbearing one another in case of provocation, and forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; by purifying
themselves as God is pure, and endeavoring to be holy in all manner of
conversation, as he who has called them is holy; when all this while they are
as covetous, and earthly minded, and to serve their covetousness will strain a
point of Truth or Justice, and hardly do an act of Charity in their whole
lives, but what is extorted from them by mere importunity, or some such urgent
necessity, in point of decency and reputation, that for shame of the World they
know not how to avoid it; when their Passions are as fierce and ungoverned,
their Hearts as full of Gall and Bitterness, their Tongues of slander and evil
speaking, their Humors as proud and surly and censorious, as theirs can be who
are openly profane, and seem to neglect and despise all Religion: And yet
because they serve God (as they call it) and make an external appearance of
Piety and Devotion, are good Churchmen, and attend upon the Ordinances of God,
they think they have discharged the whole business of Religion admirably well,
and are very good children of God, and in a state of great grace and favor
with him. Whereas the performance of all these Duties, and the use of all these
Means, separated from that which is the great End of Religion, the Conformity
of our selves to God, in those Qualities and Dispositions which I have
mentioned, is so far from finding acceptance with God, that it is an
abomination to him. So God every where declares in Scripture, telling us, that
the prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, and that he disdains to
be praised by men of unhallowed lips and lives; and that unless with the
praises we offer to him, we order our conversation aright, we shall not see the
salvation of God. With what contempt does he speak of this formal and external
Religion, without the power of it upon our hearts and lives! To what purpose is
the multitude of your Sacrifices to me? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of Rams, and ten thousands of rivers of Oil? he has showed thee, O man! what
is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Is not this the fast which I have
chosen, to break the bands of wickedness, and to let the oppressed go free, to
deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to
thine house; when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thy self from thine own flesh?

Nor is it hearing of the Word that will avail us, unless we be doers of it.
Blessed are they (says our Savior) that hear the word of God and keep it. He
that hears these sayings of mine, and does them, shall be likened to a wise
man, who has built his house upon a rock. Nor will bare receiving of the
Sacrament recommend us to God; but performing the Obligation, which thereby we
take upon our selves, to obstain from all sin and wickedness; otherwise we
tread under foot the Son of God, and profane the blood of the Covenant,
whereby we should be sanctified, as if it were an unholy thing. Can any man
think that to be Religion, which has no effect upon the lives of men, which
does not teach them to govern their words and actions, who reads those plain
words of St. James? If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion is vain. Pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world. When Religion produces these real Effects, then the Means of
Religion do truly serve the End of it, and we are not only hearers of the Word,
but doers of it, and shall be blessed in our deed.

So that as there is an obligation upon us to use the Means of Religion, which
God has instituted, with great care and conscience; so we should chiefly mind
that, which is the End of all Religion, which is to make us partakers of a
Divine Nature, and make us like to God, especially in those amiable and
excellent Qualities, which are the glory and beauty of the Divine Nature, his
Benignity and Goodness, his Mercy and Patience. These, because they are the
primary Perfections of God, are the principal Duties both of Natural and
Revealed Religion, and of an eternal and indispensable Obligation; because they
have their foundation in the Nature of God, which is fixed and unalterable. And
all positive Institutions, when they come in competition with these, are to
stoop and vail to them. Natural and Moral Duties, especially those of Goodness,
and Mercy, and Charity, are so strongly bound upon us, that nothing in any
revealed Religion can cancel the Obligation of them, or justify the violation
of these great and indispensable Laws. Our Savior in his Religion has declared
nothing to the prejudice of them: but on the contrary has straightened our
Obligation to them, as much as is possible. The Son of man came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them; so that they know not what manner of spirit they
are of, who think to please God by hating men, who are made after the image of
God, and by killing one another to do him good service; who to advance his
Cause and Religion in the World, will break through all the Obligations of
Nature and Civil Society, undermine Government, and disturb the Peace of
Mankind.

Whereas our Savior did not by any thing in his Religion design to alter the
Civil Government of the World, or to lessen and diminish the Rights of Princes,
or to set men loose from Allegiance to them, or to make Treason and Rebellion,
bloody Wars and barbarous Massacres lawful, for the propagating of his faith.
He had (as any one would imagine) as much Power as the Pope; but yet he deposed
no Princes, nor excommunicated and discharged their Subjects from their
Fidelity and Obedience to them, for their opposition to his Religion; he has
assumed no such Power to himself. By what Authority then does his Vicar do
these things? and who gave him this Authority? Our Lord tells us plainly, his
Kingdom was not of this world; and that without any distinction of in ordine ad
spiritualia, and therefore he wrested no Princes Kingdom out of his hands, nor
seized it as forfeited to himself.

But this Power the Pope claims to himself, and has exercised it many a time,
disturbing the Peace of Nations, and exercising the most barbarous Cruelties in
the World, under a pretense of Zeal for God and Religion: as if because
Religion is so very good a thing in it self, it would warrant men to do the
very worst things for its sake; which is the ready way to render Religion
contemptible and odious, and to make two of the best things in the World, God
and Religion, good for nothing.

If we would preserve in the Minds of Men any reverence and esteem for
Religion, we must take heed how we destroy the Principles of Natural Religion,
and undermine the Peace and Happiness of Humane Society, for the glory of God,
and under pretense of following Divine Revelation, and being led by a Church
that cannot err: for every Church does certainly err, that teaches any thing
plainly contrary to the Principles and Dictates ^f Natural Religion, and
utterly inconsistent with the essential Perfections of God, and with the Peace
and Order of the World: for God is not the God of Confusion, but of Order;
which St. Paul appealeth to, as a Principle of eternal Truth, and naturally
known: But they that pretend that Religion prompts men to Sedition and Cruelty,
do represent God as the God of confusion, and not of order.

Therefore whatever men may through an ignorant zeal, or for ambitious Ends,
pretend to be Religion; let us place it in that which is unquestionable, the
imitation of the Divine Perfections, and let us (as the Apostle exhorts) put
on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness, meekness, long-suffering,
and above all, let us put on Charity, which is the very bond of perfection. The
great Perfection of the Divine Nature, or rather the very Essence of God is
Love. So St. John speaks, God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him. And it is very remarkable that in these very qualities
of Charity, and Kindness, and Compassion, which we peculiarly call Humanity, we
approach nearest to the Divinity it self, and that the contrary Dispositions do
transform us into wild Beasts and Devils.

And yet as severely as I speak against these Principles and Practices, I have
an hearty pity and compassion for those who are under the power of so great a
Delusion, and upon a pretense of being made the only true Christians in the
world, are seduced from Humanity it self, and so far from being made good
Christians by these Principles, that they are hardly left to be Men; being
blinded, and led by the blind, they fall into the ditch of the grossest and
foulest Immoralities; such as are plainly enough condemned by the light of
Nature, if there were no Bible in the World.

Not but that we Protestants have our Faults and our Follies too, and those
(God knows) too many and too visible; we possess more Truth, but there is
little Peace among us; and yet God is as well and as often in Scripture called
the God of peace, as the God of truth. In this great Light and Liberty of the
Reformed Religion, we are apt to be wanton, and to quarrel and fall out; we are
full of Heats and Animosities, of Schisms and Divisions, and the way of peace
we have not known. God grant that at last in this our day (when it concerns us
so much) we may know the things that belong to our peace, before they be hid
from our eyes.

You see in what things the Practice of Religion mainly consists, in our
likeness to God, and resemblance of him in Holiness and Goodness; and without
this we are utterly incapable of happiness: we cannot see God, unless we be
like him. The Presence of God can administer no Pleasure, no Felicity to us,
till we be changed into his Image; till we come to this temper, to hate Sin,
and delight in purity and holiness, we can have no delightful communion with
the holy God; till our Passions be subdued, and our Souls dispossessed of those
devilish and ungodlike Qualities of Hatred and Malice, of Revenge and
Impatience, and till we be endued with the Spirit of universal Goodness and
Charity, we are not fit company for our heavenly Father; we are not qualified
to dwell with God, who is love and dwells in love. So far as we are defective
in these Divine Qualities and Perfections, so far we fall short of the temper
of Happiness.

There is a direct and eternal Opposition between the holy and good God, and
the evil dispositions of wicked men, and till this Opposition be removed, it is
impossible we should find any felicity in the enjoyment of God. Now the Nature
of God is fixed and unchangeable, God cannot recede from his own Perfection, and
therefore we must quit our sins: Thou can not change God, therefore change
thy self, and rather think of putting off thy corrupt Nature, which may be
changed, than of altering the Divine Nature, with whom is no variableness nor
shadow of turning. God condescended to take our Nature upon him, to make us
capable of Happiness; but if this will not do, he will not put off his own
Nature to make us happy.

SERMON III. Vol. VI.
The Happiness of God.
1 TIMOTHY 1.11. The Blessed God --

The whole Verse runs thus, According to the glorious Gospel of the Blessed
God, which was committed to my trust.


SINCE all Men naturally desire happiness, and thirst after it; methinks we
should all desire to know what it is, and where it is to be found, and how it
is to be attained by us, in that degree in which Creatures are capable of it.
What Job says of Wisdom, may be said also of Happiness, God understands the
way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. He only, who is perfectly
possessed of it himself, knows wherein it consists, and what are the true
ingredients of it.

So that to direct us in our search after happiness, the best way will be to
Contemplate and Consider the Divine Nature, which is the perfect Pattern and
Idea of Happiness, and the Original Spring and Fountain of all the Felicity
that Creatures are capable of. And to that end, I have pitched upon these
Words, wherein the Apostle attributes this Perfection of bessedness or
happiness to God, The Blessed God.

And though this be as Essential a part as any other of that Notion which Mankind
have of God from the Light of Nature, yet I no where find in all the New
Testament, this Attribute of Happiness given to God, but only twice in this
Epistle. It Is true indeed, the Title of Blessedness is frequently given both to
God and Christ, but in another Sense, and in a quite different Notion: As Mark
14.61. where the High Priest asks our Savior, Art thou the Christ, the Son of
the Blessed, (...), of him that is to be Celebrated and Praised; and 2 Cor.
11.31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for
evermore. So likewise, Romans 1.25. The Creator, blessed for evermore: Which
likewise is said of Christ, Romans 9.5. Of whom Christ came, who is over all, God
Blessed for evermore; that is, for ever to be praised and celebrated. But in
all these Texts the Greek Word is (...), which though we Translate Blessed, yet
it is a quite different Notion from the Title of Blessedness which is given to
God in the Text, where the Word is not (...), but (...), the Blessed, or the
Happy God; and this Title is not any where in all the New Testament, (that I
know of) given to God, but here in the Text, and Chap. 6. v. 15. where our Lord
Jesus Christ (who also is God) is called the blessed and the only Potentate.
And whether this Title of the Blessed, or the Happy God, be here in the Text
given to God the Father, or to his Eternal Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; is not
so much material to my present purpose to enquire. For, suppose it be Christ
who is here called the Blessed God; this however is certain, that Blessedness
or Happiness is a Title belonging to God, which is all that is necessary for a
Foundation of my present Discourse.

In speaking of this Argument, I shall do these three Things.

I. Show what we are to understand by the happiness of God, and what are the
essential Ingredients of it.

II. That this Title does belong to God, and that the Divine Nature is
perfectly blessed and happy.

III. How far Creatures are capable of Happiness, and by what Ways and Means
they may be made partakers of it: And shall then make some Inferences from my
Discourse upon this Argument.

I. I will consider what we are to understand by the blessedness or happiness
of God, and what are the essential Ingredients of it. Now the Notion of
happiness taken at its highest pitch (as we must necessarily do when we apply
it to God) is no other than a fixed and immovable state of Contentment and
Satisfaction, of Pleasure and Delight, resulting from the secure possession,
and enjoyment of all that is good and desirable, that is, of all Excellency and
Perfection; so that these following Ingredients must go to make up a perfect
state of happiness.

1. Perfect Knowledge, to understand what it is that constitutes happiness, and
to know when one is really possessed of it. For as he is not happy, who is so
only in Imagination or a Dream, without any real Foundation in the thing; for
he may be pleased with his Condition, and yet be far enough from being truly
happy: So on the other hand, he that has all other necessary Ingredients of
happiness, and only wants this, that he does not think himself so, cannot be
happy. For this we often see in the imperfect felicity of this World, that many
Men who have all the Materials and Circumstances of a worldly happiness about
them, yet by the unskilful management of the matter, and from a lightness and
injudiciousness of Mind, not knowing when they are well, they make an hard
shift, even when they are in as good Circumstances as it is almost possible for
Men to be in this World, to be very discontented and miserable in their own
Opinions. But God perfectly knows both what makes happiness, and that he is
possessed of it.

2. To perfect happiness is likewise required a full Power to do whatever
conduces to happiness, and likewise to check and control whatever would be an
hindrance and disturbance to it; and therefore no Being is as happy as it can
be, that is not All-sufficient, and has not within its Power and Reach
whatever is necessary to an happy Condition, and necessary to secure and
continue that happiness against all Attempts and Accidents whatsoever.

3. There is Wisdom also required to direct this Power, and manage it in such a
manner, as it may effectually conduce to this end; and this is very different
from mere Power, abstractedly considered; for one may have all the Materials of
happiness, and yet want the Wisdom and Skill to put them so together, as to
frame an happy Condition out of them; and he is not happy, who does not
thoroughly understand the proper method and means of compassing and securing
his own happiness.

4. Another most considerable and essential Ingredient of happiness is
Goodness; without which, as there can be no true Majesty and Greatness, so
neither can there be any felicity or happiness. Now Goodness is a generous
disposition of Mind to communicate and diffuse it self, by making others
partakers of its happiness in such degrees as they are capable of it, and as
Wisdom shall direct: For he is not so happy as he may be, who has not the
pleasure of making others so, and of seeing them put into an happy Condition by
his means, which is the highest pleasure (I had almost said pride, but I may
truly say glory) of a good and great Mind: For by such Communications of
himself, an Immense and Allsufficient Being does not lessen himself, or put any
thing out of his Power, but does rather enlarge and magnify himself; and does,
as I may say, give great Ease and Delight to a full and fruitful Being, without
the least diminution of his Power or Happiness. For the Cause and Original of
all other Beings, can make nothing so independent upon it self, as not still to
maintain his Interest in it, to have it always under his Power and Government;
and no Being can Rebel against his Maker, without extreme hazard to himself.

5. Perfect happiness does imply the exercise of all other Virtues, which are
suitable to so perfect a Being, upon all proper and sitting occasions; that is,
that so perfect a Being do nothing that is contrary to, or unbecoming his
Holiness and Righteousness, his Truth and Faithfulness, which are essential to
a perfect Being, and for such a Being to act contrary to them in any case,
would be to create disquiet and disturbance to it self: For this is a certain
Rule, and never fails, that nothing can act contrary to its own Nature without
reluctance and displeasure, which in moral Agents is that which we call Guilt;
for Guilt is nothing else but the Trouble and Disquiet which arises in one's
Mind, from the consciousness of having done something which is contrary to the
perfective Principles of his Being, that is, something that does not become
him, and which, being what he is, he ought not to have done; which we cannot
imagine ever to befall so perfect and immutable a Being as God is.

6. Perfect happiness implies in it the settled and secure Possession of all
those Excellencies and Perfections; for if any of these were liable to fail, or
be diminished, so much would be taken off from perfect and complete Happiness.
If the Deity were subject to any change, or impairment of his Condition, so
that either his Knowledge, or Power, or Wisdom, or Goodness, or any other
Perfection, could any ways decline or fall off, there would be a proportionable
abatement of happiness. And from all these does result in the

7 th, and last place, Infinite Contentment and Satisfaction, Pleasure and
Delight, which is the very Essence of happiness.

1. Infinite Contentment and Satisfaction in this Condition. And well may
happiness be contented with it self; that is, with such a Condition, that he
that is possessed of it, can neither desire it should be better, nor have any
cause to fear it should be worse.

2. Pleasure and Delight, which is something more than Contentment: For one may
be contented with an Affliction and painful Condition, in which he is far from
taking any Pleasure and Delight. No affliction is joyous for the present, but
grievous, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12. But there cannot be perfect happiness
without Pleasure in our Condition. Full Pleasure is a certain mixture of Love
and Joy, hard to be expressed in Words, but certainly known by inward Sense and
Experience.

And thus I have endeavored to describe to you, as well as I could, according
to our imperfect Conceptions and Expressions of God, the happiness of the
Divine Nature, and wherein it consists. I proceed to the

II. Thing I proposed, which was to show, that this Attribute of Perfection
does belong to God; and that the Divine Nature is perfectly Blessed and Happy;
and this is so universal an acknowledgment of Natural Light, that it would be a
very superfluous and impertinent Work, to trouble you with particular Citations
of Heathen Authors to this purpose; nothing being more frequent in them, than
to call the Deity, beatissimam and perfectissimam naturam, the most happy and
most perfect Being, and therefore happy, because Felicity does naturally result
from Perfection. It shall suffice to take notice of these Two things out of
Heathen Writers, to my present purpose.

1. That they accounted happiness so essential to the Notion of a God, that
this was one of the Ways which they took to find out what Properties were fit
to attribute to God, and what not, to consider what things are consistent with
happiness, or inconsistent with it; and whatever did signify happiness, and
was a perfection consistent with it, they ascribed to God, as a suitable
Property of the Divine Nature; and whatever was otherwise, they removed it from
God, as unfit to be said of Him.

2. Whatever differences there were among the Philosophers concerning the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, they all agreed in the perfect felicity of
it; even Epicurus himself, who so boldly attempted to strip the Divine Nature
of most of its Perfections, by denying that God either made or governed the
World, whereby he took away at once his being the first Cause and Original of
all things, and his Goodness likewise, and Wisdom, and Power, and Justice; or,
at least made all these useless, by taking away all occasion and opportunity
for the exercise of them; yet this Man does frequently own, and profess to
believe the happiness of the Divine Nature; and then out of an ignorant, and
officious kindness to the Deity, and (as he pretended) for the security of his
Felicity, did in effect take away his other Perfections; he would by no means
put God to the Trouble and Burden of making the World, or taking care of the
Affairs of it, lest this should discompose the Deity, or be an interruption or
disturbance of his Ease and Felicity. For thus Lucretius, the great Disciple of
Epicurus, describes his Opinion of the Divine Nature, Omnis enim divum, per se,
natura necesse est,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota a nostris rebus, sejunctaque long.
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri.
Nec been pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.


That is, It is necessary that the Divine Nature should be Happy, and therefore
altogether unconcerned in our Affairs; free from all grief and danger,
sufficient for it self, and standing in need of no body, neither pleased with
our Good Actions, nor provoked by our Faults. This was a very false Notion both
of God and Happiness, to imagine that the Care of the World should be a pain
and disturbance to Infinite Knowledge, and Power, and Goodness. But this is not
now my business to consider; that which is to my present purpose, is, That the
happiness of the Divine Nature was Universally owned; and that blessedness is
so inseparable from the Notion of a Deity, that whoever professes to believe a
God, must acknowledge him to be perfectly happy.

As for the Testimony of Scripture, I have already told you, that there are but
two Texts wherein this Title of (...), the happy or blessed, is given to God;
but by consequence the Scripture every where declares the happiness of the
Divine Nature, viz. wherever it speaks of the Excellency and Perfection of his
Being, of his Knowledge, and Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Righteousness, and of the Eternity and Unchangeableness of these, and of the
infinite Delight and Complacency which he takes in the Enjoyment of these
perfections. I shall now proceed to the

III. And last thing, which I proposed to consider, viz. How far Creatures are
capable of happiness, and by what ways and means they may be made partakers of
it. They are not capable of absolute and perfect happiness, because that
results from infinite perfection, which is no where to be found but in God: It
remains then that Creatures are only capable of being happy in a finite and
limited degree, by the resemblance of God, and by the enjoyment of him; by
being like to him, and by our likeness to him, being qualified for his favor,
and for the enjoyment of him.

As we are Creatures of a finite Power, and limited Understandings, and a
mutable Nature, we do necessarily want many of those perfections, which are the
Cause and Ingredients of a perfect happiness. We are far from being sufficient
for our own happiness; we are neither so of our selves, nor can we make our
selves so by our own Power; for neither are we wise enough for our own
direction, nor good enough for our own satisfaction. All the happiness that we
are capable of is, by communication from him, who is the Original and Fountain
of it; by our being made partakers of the Divine Nature, (as St. Peter speaks)
by our resemblance of God in those perfections which are the most essential
Ingredients of happiness, his Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth, and
Holiness; these do immediately qualify us for the Favor and Friendship of
Almighty God, and for the blessed sight and enjoyment of him; and the Favor of
God, and the Light of his Countenance lifted up upon us, and his Friendship and
Good Will to us, supplies all the defects of Power and Wisdom in us: For God
being our Friend, we have an Interest in all his Perfections, and a Security,
that as occasion requires, they will all be employed for our benefit and
advantage; so that though we are weak in our selves, we are strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, and are able to do all things through him
strengthening us; and though we want Wisdom, we may have free recourse to the
Fountain of it, and ask it of God, who gives to all liberally, and upbraideth
not. And it is next to having these perfections in our selves, to know where to
have them for asking, whenever we stand in need of them, so far as is necessary
to our happiness.

So that though our happiness depend upon another, yet if we be careful to
qualify our selves for it, (and God is always ready to assist us by his Grace
to this purpose) it is really and in effect in our own power; and we are every
whit as safe and happy in God's care and protection of us, as if we were
sufficient for our selves. However this is the highest happiness that the
Condition of a Creature is capable of, to have all our defects supplied in so
liberal a manner by the Bounty of another, and to have a free recourse to the
Fountain of Happiness, and at last to be admitted to the Blessed sight and
enjoyment of Him, in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand
are Pleasures for evermore. I have done with the Three Things I proposed to
speak to.

But to what purpose, may some say, is this long Description and Discourse of
happiness? How are we the Wiser and the Better for it? I Answer; very much, in
several respects.

1. This plainly shows us, That Atheism is a very melancholy and mischievous
thing; it would take away the Fountain of happiness, and the only perfect
Pattern of it; it endeavors at once to extinguish the Being of God, and all
the Life and Comfort of Mankind, so that we could neither form any Idea of
happiness, or be in any possibility of attaining it. For it is plain, we are
not sufficient for it of our selves; and if there be not a God, there is
nothing that can make us so? God is the true light of the World, and a thousand
times more necessary to the comfort and happiness of Mankind, than the Sun it
self, which is but a dark Shadow of that infinitely more bright and glorious
Being; the happy and only Potentate (as the Apostle describes him in the latter
end of this Epistle) who only has immortality, dwelling in that light which no
man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see, meaning in this
mortal state.

So that the greatest Enemies, and most injurious of all others to Mankind, are
those who would banish the Belief of a God out of the World; because this is to
lay the Ax to the root of the Tree, and at one blow to cut off all Hopes of
happiness from Mankind. So that he is a Fool indeed, that says in his heart
there is no God; that is, that wishes there were none; because it is not
possible for a Man to wish worse to himself, and more effectually to destroy
his own happiness.

2. If the Divine Nature be so infinitely and completely happy, this is a very
great confirmation of our Faith and Hope concerning the happiness of another
Life, which the Scripture describes to us, by the Sight and Enjoyment of God.
As we are Creatures, we are not capable of the happiness that is absolutely and
infinitely perfect, because our Nature is but finite, and limited; but the
blessed God who is infinitely happy himself, can also make us happy according
to our finite Measure and Capacity. For, as he that is the First and Original
Being, can communicate Being to other things, so He that is the Fountain of
Happiness, can derive and convey happiness to his Creatures.

And we shall the more easily believe this, when we consider that Goodness, as
it is the prime Perfection, so is it likewise the chief felicity of the Divine
Nature. It is his Glory and Delight to communicate himself, and shed abroad his
goodness; and the highest expression of the Divine Goodness, is to communicate
happiness to his Creatures, and to be willing that they should share and
partake with him in it. Base and Envious Natures are narrow and contracted, and
love to confine their Enjoyments and good Things to themselves, and are loath
that others should take part with them; but the most Noble and most Generous
Minds are most free and enlarged, and cannot be happy themselves unless they
find or make others so.

This is the highest pitch of Goodness, and consequently the highest
Contentment, and the supreme delight of the Divine Nature. Now it is natural to
every Being, to be most frequent and abundant in those Acts in which it finds
the greatest Pleasure; to be good, and to do good is the supreme Felicity of
God himself; therefore we may easily believe, that he is very ready and forward
to make us happy, by all the ways that are agreeable to his Wisdom and
Righteousness; and that He is also willing to make us abundantly so, and to
advance us to the highest degree of Felicity, of which our Nature is capable,
if we do not render our selves incapable of such a Blessing, by an obstinate
refusal of it, and utter indisposition for it.

This, I say, is very credible, because the happiness of God himself consists
in that propension and disposition of Nature, which tends to make others happy.
And if there can be any accession to that which is infinite, God himself finds
a new Pleasure and Felicity in the communication of his goodness to his
Creatures, and therefore is represented in Scripture, as glad of the Conversion
of a sinner, because the sinner hereby becomes capable of the happiness which
God designed for his Creatures, and is always ready to confer upon them,
whenever they are qualified for it, and he can, with the Honor of his other
Perfections, bestow it upon them.

There are Two things which raise our Hopes and expectation of Good from any
Person; if he be Able and Willing to bestow upon us what we hope for from him.
Now if any one can confer Happiness upon us, it is He who is infinitely possessed
of it, and has all the Treasures of it in himself; and that God only is; who,
as he is able, so is willing to make us happy, if we be qualified for it; and
it is no impairing of his happiness to make others happy; for even that
Goodness which inclines him to communicate happiness to others, is a great part
of his own Felicity; so that, as our Savior argues, because I live, you shall
live also; we may reason in like manner, that because God is happy, we shall be
happy also, if we do but sincerely desire and endeavor to qualify our selves
for it. The Goodness of God does strongly incline him to desire our happiness,
and makes him willing and ready to bestow it upon us, when ever we are capable
to receive it.

So that the Goodness of God is the great Foundation of all our Hopes, and the
firmest ground of our assurance of a Blessed Immortality. It is the happiness
of the Divine Nature to communicate himself; and the communications of God's
Goodness to us are the cause of our happiness; and therefore, both for our
Example and Encouragement, the Goodness of God ought always to be represented
to the greatest Advantage, and we should endeavor to possess our Minds with a
firm Belief and Persuasion of it, and to remove from the Divine Nature (which
we all acknowledge to have infinitely more goodness than is to be found in any
of the Sons of Men) whatever we would not attribute to a good Man, and to
vindicate God from all suspicion of Envy and Ill Will, of Cruelty and Arbitrary
dealing with his Creatures. And I cannot apprehend why Men should be averse
from these so agreeable and delightful apprehensions of God; or how it should
be any Man's Interest to lessen the Goodness of God; for most certainly the
better God is in himself, the better and happier it will be for us all, if it
be not our own fault.

3. From what has been said concerning the happiness of the Divine Nature, we
may learn wherein our happiness must consist, namely, in the Image and in the
Favor of God; in the Favor of God as the Cause of of our happiness; and in
the Image of God, as a necessary inward disposition and qualification for it.
Unless God love us, we cannot be happy, for miserable are they whom he hates;
for God to say of any Man, that his Soul has no pleasure in him, imports as
great Misery, and as dreadful a Curse as can be imagined, and his Soul can have
no pleasure in a bad Man; for he loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity, he
is not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with
him; the Wicked shall not stand in his sight; he hates all the workers of
Iniquity. Nay, if we could suppose that he could love and take pleasure in any
Person that is unlike to him (which is impossible) yet that Person could not be
happy, because he would want that inward Frame and Disposition of Mind, which
is necessary to happiness. For the very same Causes and Ingredients which make
up the happiness of God, must in an inferior degree be found in us, otherwise
we cannot be happy; no, though a Man were in Heaven, if he be still a bad Man,
Coelum, non animum mutavit, he has only changed the Climate, and is gone into
another Country, but he bears himself still about him, and his Mind is not
changed, which would signify a thousand times more to his happiness, than any
Place or outward Circumstance whatsoever. A bad Man, wheresoever he goes, has
a Root of Gall and Bitterness within him, and is miserable from himself; he
has a Fiend in his own Breast, and the Fuel of Hell in a guilty Conscience.

For there is a certain Temper and Disposition of Mind, that is necessary and
essential to happiness, and that is holiness and goodness, which is the Nature
of God; and so much as any Person departs from this Temper, so far he removes
himself, and runs away from happiness: And as Sin is a departure from God, so
the Punishment of it is likewise expressed by departing from him; Depart from me
ye Cursed; depart from me all ye that work Iniquity, I know you not.

And this is one great part of the Misery of those degenerate and accursed
Spirits, the Devils, who are for ever banished from the Presence of God, that
they are of a Temper quite contrary to God, Wicked and Impure, Envious and
Malicious, Mischievous and Cruel; and such a Temper is naturally a torment and
disquiet to it self. And here the Foundation of Hell is laid in the evil
disposition of our Minds; and 'till this be cured, and set right, it is as
impossible for any of us to be happy, as it is for a Limb that is out of joint
to be at ease. And the external presence of God, and a local Heaven (if we
could imagine such a Person to be admitted into it, and see all the Glories of
that place, and the Pleasures and Delights of that state) all this, I say,
would signify no more to make a bad Man happy, than heaps of Gold and
Diamonds, and Consorts of the most delicious Music, and a well-spread Table,
and a rich and costly Bed would contribute to a Man's Ease in the paroxysme of
a Fever, or in a violent fit of the Stone; because the Man has that within
which torments him, and 'till that be removed, he cannot possibly be at ease.
The Man's Spirit is out of order, and off the Hinges, and tossed from its Center,
and 'till that be set right, and restored to its proper place and state by
Goodness and Holiness, the Man will be perpetually restless, and cannot
possibly have any Ease or Peace in his Mind: For how can there be Peace, how
can there be happiness to him, who is of a Temper directly opposite to it? The
wicked, says the Prophet, Isa. 57.20, 21. is like the troubled Sea when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. So long as there is impurity
in our Hearts, and Guilt upon our Consciences, they will be restlesly working;
there is no peace says my God to the wicked. The Hebrew Word which we
translate Peace, signifies all kind of happiness; there can be no felicity to a
bad Man. The consideration whereof should put us upon the most serious and
earnest endeavors to be like God, that we may be capable of his Favor, and
partakers of his Felicity. The Divine Nature is the only perfect Idea of
happiness, and nothing but our conformity to it can make us happy.

I have been so long upon this Argument, on purpose to convince Men of the
Necessity of Holiness and Goodness, and all other Virtues, to our present and
future happiness. They understand not the nature of happiness, who hope for it,
or imagine they can attain it in any other way. The Author and the Fountain of
happiness, he that made us, and alone can make us happy, cannot make us so in
any other way, than by planting in us such a disposition of Mind, as is in
Truth a participation of the Divine Nature, and by endowing us with such
Qualities as are the necessary Materials and Ingredients of happiness. There is
no way to partake of the Felicity of God blessed for ever, but by becoming Holy
and Righteous, Good and Merciful as he is.

All Men naturally desire happiness, and seek after it, and are as they think
traveling toward it, but generally they mistake their way. Many are eager in
the pursuit of the Things of this World, and greedily catch at Pleasures and
Riches and Honor, as if these could make them happy; but when they come to
embrace them, they find that they are but Clouds and Shadows, and that there is
no real and substantial felicity in them. Many say, who will show us any good?
meaning the good things of this World, Corn, and Wine, and Oil; But would
thou be happy indeed? endeavor to be like the Pattern of happiness, and the
Fountain of it; Address thy self to him in the Prayer of the Psalmist, Lord
lift thou up upon me the light of thy Countenance, and that shall put more joy
and gladness into my heart, than the Men of the World can have, when their Corn
and their Wine increases.

Many say, lo here, and lo there! That happiness is in a great Place, or in a
plentiful Estate, or in the enjoyment of sensual Pleasures and Delights; but
believe them not; happiness is something that is nearer and more intimate to
us, than any of the Things of this World; it is within thee, in thine heart,
and in the very inward frame and disposition of thy mind.

In a Word, if ever we would be happy, we must be like the Blessed God, we must
be holy, and merciful, and good, and just, as he is, and then we are secure of
his Favor; for the righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance
will behold the upright. Then we shall be qualified for the enjoyment of him,
and take pleasure in communion with him, because we shall be like him. For the
surest foundation of Love and Friendship is a similitude of Temper and
Disposition; every thing naturally affects its own likeness, and moves toward
it, and greedily catches at it, and gladly runs into the Embraces of it. God
and Man must be like one another, before they can take pleasure in one another:
If we be unlike to God, it is in the nature of the thing impossible that we
should be happy in one another, and therefore there must be a change either in
God or us, to bring about this likeness. The Nature of God is inflexible, fixed,
and unchangeable; therefore change thy self Sinner, and endeavor to be like
God; for since he cannot depart from his Holiness, and Purity, thou must leave
thy Sins, and be holy as he is holy, if ever thou hopest to be happy, as he is:
Every Man that has this Hope in him, must purify himself, even as he is pure.

Now to this happy and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who
only has Immortality, and dwells in that Light which no Man can approach
unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see; To him be Honor, and Power
everlasting.

Amen.
SERMON IV. Vol. VI.
The Unchangeableness of God.
JAMES I.17. With whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

The whole Period runs thus,

Do not err, my beloved Brethren, every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning.


THE connection and dependence of these Words upon the former is briefly this;
the Apostle had asserted before, that God is not the Author of Sin and Evil, v.
13, 14. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God is
untemptable by evil, neither tempts he any Man: but every Man is tempted,
when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed; and here in the Text he
asserts, that God is the Fountain and Author of all Good; do not err, my
beloved Brethren; as if he had said, do not mistake me, though Sin and Evil be
not from God, but from our selves, and our own corrupt hearts; yet all good is
from God, and not from our selves: though we be the Authors of the sins we
commit; yet we are not so of the good that we do, that is from God; every good
Gift, and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights. Sin which is nothing but Evil and Imperfection, is not from God, but
wholly from our selves; but whatever is good and perfect, is not from our
selves, but from God; we are neither inclined to that which is good, nor are
able of our selves to perform it; both the inclination and the power are from
God, who is the Fountain of goodness and perfection, and can never be
otherwise, and can never change nor cease to be so, for with him is no
variableness nor shadow of turning.

Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift; all that goodness, and all those
degrees of perfection, which are in the Creatures, in the highest Angels or
Saints, in the best of the Sons of Men, whatever there is of Excellency and
Perfection, of Goodness or Happiness in any of them, is from above, that is
from Heaven, it is the gift of God, and comes down from that perfect good and
glorious Being, whom the Apostle here calls the Father of Lights, in allusion
to the Sun, which is a kind of universal Benefactor to the World, and liberally
dispenses his Light and Heat and Influence upon all things here below: but
then there is this difference, the Sun changes its habitudes and positions in
reference to us, and varies its Shadows, it rises and sets, comes nearer to
us, and goes farther from us; but it is otherwise with this intellectual and
immaterial Sun, the Father of Lights, with whom there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, (...), which are all astronomical words; the first (...)
signifies the various habitudes and positions wherein the Sun appears to us
every Day, at its rising, in the Meridian, and when it sets; (...) is a word
which belongs not to the daily, but to the yearly course of the Sun, which is
nearer to us, or farther from us, as he approaches nearer toward the Northern
or Southern Tropicks; and hence it is that it casts several shadows to People
in several Countries; and agreeably to this, the Word (...), casting of
shadows, being joined with (...), signifies the variation of the shadows
according to the Course and Motion of the Sun.

But God is an Eternal Spring of Light, which never rises or sets, which has
no mixture of shadow nor darkness, has no changes nor variations, but is
always the same free and liberal dispenser of good things to his Creatures; the
Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning; which
Words signify the immutable perfection and goodness of the Divine Nature,
which shall (by Gods assistance) be the subject of my present Discourse; In
which I shall proceed in this Method.

First, I shall briefly explain what is meant by the immutability, or
unchangeableness, of the Divine Nature.

Secondly, I shall show that this is a perfection essential to God, to be
immutably what he is, that is good and perfect.

Thirdly, I shall answer an Objection which lies against it, from the mention
so often made in Scripture of God's repenting himself. And

Fourthly, Apply the Consideration of it to our selves.

I. For the Explication of it. By the immutability of God, we mean that he
always is, and was, and to all Eternity will be the same, that he undergoes no
changes either of his Essence and Being, or of his Properties and Perfections.
In reference to the unchangeableness of his being, he is said to be eternal,
incorruptible, and only to have immortality. In reference to his perfections,
he is always the same infinitely Wise, and Good, and Powerful, and Holy, and
just Being; from whence it follows, that he is Constant and Immutable in all
his Decrees and Counsels, his Purposes and Promises. We are uncertain and
mutable in in our very Nature and Beings, and in all those Qualities and
Perfections which belong to us, in all our Purposes, Resolutions and Actions;
we are continually growing or decreasing in this or that quality, and do
frequently change from one extreme to another, from that which is more perfect
to the contrary, now knowing, and then ignorant, sometimes wise, and oftener
foolish, stronger and weaker, better or worse, as it happens, and as we order
our selves, continually waxing or waining in our Knowledge, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Power; we frequently change our Minds, and alter our Purposes,
and break our Promises, and contradict our firmest and most serious
Resolutions, and speak a thing and do it not, say it and do not bring it to
pass; but God is everlastingly the same in all his Perfections, constant to his
Intentions, steady to his Purpose, immutably fixed and persevering in all his
Decrees and Resolutions. I proceed to the

II. Thing I proposed, namely, To show that this Perfection is essential to
God, to be unchangeably what he is. And this I shall endeavor to make manifest
both from Natural Reason, and from the Divine Revelation of the Holy Scriptures.

1. From the Dictates of natural Reason, which tells us, that nothing Argues
greater weakness and imperfection than Inconstancy and Change. This is the
great Vanity of all Creatures, that they are uncertain, and do not long
continue in one state; this is the vanity of the World in general, that the
fashion of it passes away; and of Man in particular, that he is liable to so
many natural changes, by Age, and Diseases, and Death, for which Reason he is
said by the Psalmist, to be in his best estate altogether vanity; and that he
is liable to so many moral changes, to be deluded and deceived in his
Understanding, and to alter his Opinion so often, to be so fickle in his Will,
and to change so often his Purposes and Resolutions, according to the
alteration or appearance of things. We attribute Change and Inconstancy to
Persons of the weakest Age and Understanding, as Children, who are liable to be
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
4.14.

Now if the Divine Nature were subject to change, this would cast an universal
Cloud upon all the Divine Perfections, and obscure all other Excellencies, and
make them like the flower of the field, which, how gay and glorious soever, is
fading and perishing; and the greater the Divine Perfections are, the greater
Imperfection would mutability be; for as the corruption of the best things is
the worst, so the better any thing is, so much the worse it would be to have it
liable to Corruption and Change.

And as mutability in God would darken all his other Perfections, so would it
take away the Foundation and comfort of all Religion; the ground of our Faith,
and Hope, and Fear, of our Love and Esteem of God would be quite taken away. We
could have no great Honor or Esteem for a Being that is fickle and inconstant;
if his Power and Justice were uncertain, his Threatings would in a great
measure lose their awe and force; if his Truth and Faithfulness could fail, no
Promises and Declarations, how gracious soever, would be any security or firm
ground of Trust and Confidence.

And this Reasoning is not the result of Divine Revelation, but clearly founded
in the natural Notions and Suggestions of our Minds, as will appear by citing
one or two Testimonies to this burpose, of those who had no other Guide but
Natural Light. Plato in his Phoedo enquires, Whether the most perfect (that is
God) be always the same, or sometimes thus, and sometimes otherwise, that is
(says he) whether that which is Equality and Goodness and Bounty it self,
receives any the least Change at any time, and be not Constant and Uniform, and
of it self always the same, (...), and is never in any wise upon, any account,
subject to any Change or Alteration whatsoever? To which he answers, That it is
necessary that he should be the same and always alike. And lib. 2. de Repub.
where he lays down the Fundamental Laws and Constitutitions of Religion, he
mentions these two (which one would almost think he borrowed from St. James,
but that he lived so long before him) viz. First, That God is the Cause of all
good, and and in no wise of any evil; answerably to what our Apostle here
asserts, that God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man: but
that every good and perfect gift is from him. Secondly, That God does not
deceive us, by making various Representations of himself to us, sometimes in
one form, and sometimes in another; for he is unchangeable and always the same,
and cannot, (...), pass out of his own Idea, or be any other than what he is;
which he further confirms by this excellent Reasoning, That which is the best
and most perfect Being is not liable to any Alteration; but such a Being is
God, and therefore he cannot be changed by any thing that is weaker and less
perfect than himself, and he cannot will to change himself; for if he should,
it must either be for the better or for the worse; it cannot be for the better,
for being already possessed of all Perfection, there can be no accession of any
to him by any change; and certainly there is no Wise Being, as God is, that
will change for the worse, and therefore he concludes, (...), That being the
goodliest and best Being that is possible, he always continues simply the same.
Seneca likewise speaking of the immutability of God's Counsels ( l. 6. de
Benef.) Statuerunt (says he) quae non mutarent, neque unquam primi consilii
Deos poenitet, The Gods make unchangeable decrees, and never repent them of
their first counsel.

2. This will yet more clearly appear from the Divine Revelation of the Holy
Scriptures, which tell us that God is unchangeable in his Nature and in his
Perfections, in all his Decrees and Purposes and Promises. In his essence and
being, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am, this is his Name, whereby he made known
himself to the comfort of his People, and to the terror of the Egyptians their
Oppressors. Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Psalm.
102.27. Thou art the same, and thy years fail not. Mat. 3.6. I am the Lord and
change not. Hence it is that the Title of the living God is so frequently
attributed to him; and he swears by this, as denoting not only his eternity,
but his unchangeableness; As I live, says the Lord. Hither likewise we may
refer those Texts where he is called the incorruptible God, Romans 1.23; The
immortal King, 1 Timothy 1.17; and is said only to have immortality, 1 Timothy 1.16.
And he is immutable likewise in his perfections; hence it is so often said in
the Psalms, that his goodness and his mercy endure for ever; his righteousness
likewise is said to endure for ever. Psalm. 111.3. and Psalm. 36.6; To be like
the great Mountains, not only visible and conspicuous, but firm and immovable;
and the same likewise is said of his truth and faithfulness, Psalm. 117.2. His
truth endures for ever; and of his power Esa^ 26.4. In the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength.

And so likewise in his Decrees and Purposes and Promises, Psalm. 33.11. The
counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all
generations; Esa. 14.24. Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass,
and as I have purposed, so shall it stand. Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man that
he should lie, or as the Son of Man that he should repent; has he spoken, and
shall not he do it? has he said it, and shall not he bring it to pass? If he
has made any promise, or entered into any Covenant with us, it is firm and
immutable, Psalm. 89.33. He will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, his
covenant will he not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips.
His Covenant and his Promise are in themselves immutable; but for our further
assurance, God has given us his Oath, the highest sign of Immutability; so the
Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, chap. 6.18. That by two immutable things, (viz
his Promise and his Oath) in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might
have strong consolation, who are fled for refuge to the hope which is set
before us. I proceed to the

III. Thing I proposed, which is to answer an Objection, which may seem to lie
against what has been said, from the mention so often made in Scripture of
God's repenting himself; as Genesis 6.6. where it is said that it repented God
that he had made Man; 1 Samuel 15.11. That he repented that he had made Saul
King; and 2 Samuel 24.16. When the Angel had stretched out his hand over
Jerusalem to destroy it, it is said that the Lord repented him of the evil; and
Psalm. 135.14. the Lord says there that he will repent himself concerning his
servants.

To all which I answer, That this expression of God's repenting we are to
understand (as many others in Scripture) after the manner of Men, and as spoken
by way of Condescension and Accommodation to our Weakness and Capacity, and not
as casting any imputation of Mutability and Inconstancy upon God, as if out of
levity or for want of foresight, he did alter his Mind; but when God is said to
repent that he made Man, or that he made Saul King, the change was not in him,
but them; and it signifies not that God was absolutely deceived in his
expectation, but that things had fallen out contrary to all reasonable
Expectation; and therefore the Scripture clothes God with the Humane Passion of
repenting and grieving for what he had done, as Men use to do when they are
greatly disappointed and fall short of their Expectation.

And as for the other instances, wherein God is said to repent him of evils
threatened, the expression only signifies thus much, that God does not execute
that which seemed to us to have been his peremptory purpose and resolution,
that is, he is pleased to do otherwise than his threatening seemed openly to
express, because of some tacit Condition employed in it, which he did not think
fit to acquaint us with. And this does not at all derogate from the constancy
and immutability of God; for when God did threaten, he spoke what he did really
purpose and intend, if something did not intervene to prevent the Judgment
threatened, upon which he was resolved at that time when he threatened, to be
taken off and to stay his Hand; and in thus doing, God does not mutare
consilium sed sententiam; He does not change his inward Counsel and Purpose,
but takes off the sentence, which was past with reserved conditions and unknown
to us, on purpose to urge us the more effectually to Repentance.

And that God usually reserves such Conditions, not only in his Threatenings,
but sometimes also in his Promises, appears from that remarkable Text, Jer.
18.7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that
nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from the evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them: at what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it
do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good
wherewith I said I would benefit them. And from this very Consideration the
same Prophet encourages the People to repenpentance, Jer. 26.13. Therefore now
amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and
the Lord will repent him of the evil he has pronounced against you. And we
have a famous instance of this in the case of Niniveh, the destruction whereof
within forty days after, God had openly proclaimed by his Prophet; yet he stops
the Execution of the Sentence upon their Repentance, Jonah 3.10. The Men of
Niniveh turned from their evil ways, and the Lord repented of the evil he said
he would do unto them, and he did it not.

All that now remains is to apply this Doctrine of the immutability of the
Divine Nature to our selves; and the Consideration of it may serve to several
good Purposes, both in reference to bad and good Men.

First, In regard to sinners and wicked Men.

And, 1 st. The unchangeableness of God is matter of great terror to wicked
Men. Let but the sinner consider what God is, and the consideration of his
unchangeable nature must need terrify him; He is a holy God, and of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.12. He is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him, the foolish shall not stand in
his sight, he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. He is likewise
a just God, and will by no means clear the guilty, nor let sin go unpunisht,
Exodus 34.7. He is also omnipotent, and able to execute the vengeance threatened
against Sinners. Who knows the power of thine anger? Psalm. 90.11. Thou even
thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry.
Psalm. 76.7. Strong is the Lord God who judges. Rev. 18.8. And which gives a
sad accent to all this, he that is thus holy and just and powerful, continues
for ever the same, and will never alter or put off any of these Properties,
will never cease to hate iniquity, and to be an implacable Enemy to all
impenitent Sinners; and is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
this holy and just and omnipotent God who lives for ever, and can punish for
ever? Let all obstinate Sinners hear this and tremble; you cannot be more
obstinately bent to continue in your wicked ways, than God is peremptorily
resolved to make you miserable. If you be determined upon a sinful course; God
is also determined how he will deal with you, that he will not spare, but that
his anger and jealousy shall smoke against you, and that all the curses that
are written in his book shall light upon you, and that he will blot out your
name from under Heaven; he has sworn in his wrath, that unbelieving and
impenitent Sinners shall not enter into his rest; and for the greater assurance
of the thing, and that we may not think, that there is any condition employed in
these Threatenings, he has confirmed them by an Oath, that by this immutable
sign, in which it is impossible for God to lie, Sinners might have strong
terrors, and not be able to fly to any in hopes of refuge.

2 ly. The consideration of Gods unchangeableness, should likewise be a very
powerful Argument to urge Sinners to Repententance. If they will but leave
their sins and turn to him, they will find him ready to receive them upon their
Repentance and Submission; for he is a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger
and ready to forgive, he is unchangeably good, and his mercy endures for ever:
but if they will not come in, and submit to these Terms, there is nothing
before them but Ruin and Destruction, nothing then remains but a fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation to consume them. God has
declared to us the terms of our Pardon and Peace, and if we will not come up to
them, he is at a point, he cannot change his Nature, nor will he alter the
terms of his Covenant; there is a perfect and eternal opposition between the
Holy Nature of God, and an impenitent sinner; and it is impossible such an one
should be Happy, till this opposition be removed; and to do that, there are but
two ways imaginable, by changing God or by changing our selves; the Nature of
God is fixed and unalterable; God cannot recede from his own pure Nature;
therefore we must depart from our sinful and corrupt Nature: God cannot quit
his Holiness; therefore we must leave our Sins: we can have no hope to change
God; therefore we must change our selves. Rectify Sinner thine own corrupt
Nature, and renounce thy lusts, do not venture upon Impossibilities, rather
think of altering thy sinful nature, which may be changed, than of altering the
Divine Nature, which is essentially immutable, with whom is no variableness nor
shadow of turning. God has once condescended so far, as to take our nature
upon him, to make us capable of Happiness; but if this will not do, he can go
no lower, he will not, he cannot put off his own nature to make us Happy.

Secondly, In reference to Good Men, the consideration of Gods unchangeableness
is matter of great Consolation to them, in all the changes and vicissitudes of
the World; their main comfort and hope is built upon a Rock, the rock of ages,
as the expression is in the Prophet Isaiah 26.4. it relies upon the
unchangeable goodness and faithfulness of God, all whose promises are Yea and
Amen truth and certainty. All other Support, and Hopes may fail us: but God
will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, his covenant will he not break, nor
alter the thing which is gone out of his lips, as the Psalmist assures us,
Psalm. 89.33. Men may break their Word, and be less than their Promises: but God
is faithful, who has promised to give grace and glory, and to withhold no good
thing from them that walk uprightly; he is not as Man, that he should lie, or
as the Son of Man that he should repent; has he spoken and shall he not do it?
has he said it, and shall not he bring it to pass?

If there be any thing that has the appearance of a change in God, it is
usually on the merciful side, as when he stops the execution of his threatenings
upon the repentance of a sinful Nation; as in that remarkable Text which I
mentioned before, Jer. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it, if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them; and so likewise when his
faithful People and Servants are in great Distress, and there is no visible
help and means of relief, in this case likewise God is said to repent and to
appear for their rescue, Deuteronomy. 32.36. The Lord shall judge his people, and
repent himself for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone.

Thus we should comfort our selves in the greatest extremities, with the
consideration of the immutable goodness and faithfulness of God. The things of
the World are Mutable, and the Men of the World; even those things which seem
most constant, as the Heavens; and to be settled upon the surest Foundations, as
the Earth; yet these shall be changed, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. Of old have thou
laid the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands,
they shall perish, but thou shall endure, all of them shall wax old like a
garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end; from whence the Psalmist
infers this comfort to the Church and People of God, v. 28, The Children of thy
Servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.

Nothing that is mutable can be a solid Foundation of Comfort and Confidence.
Men are inconstant, and Riches are uncertain, and all other things which Men
commonly trust to, and therefore the Apostle charge them that are Rich in
this World, not to trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God. He only
that lives for ever is a firm Foundation of Hope and Confidence.

When God would comfort the Israelites in Egypt under their great Oppression,
he bids Moses only to declare to them his immutability, Exodus 3.14. Say unto
them, I am that I am, has sent me unto you; and this is the great comfort of
Christians, that he who is the same Savior, and their hope, is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; he that was, and that is, and that is to come,
in all durations the same.

We are continually changing, and are not the same we were; some of us were
Young and now are Old; once perhaps flourisht in great Prosperity, but now are
Poor and Needy; were once Strong and Healthful, but now Sickly and Weak; it
should comfort us in all these Changes, that God is still the same, and he
alone is instead of all other Comforts and Supports, when all other things
fail, we may rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our Salvation. Youth,
and Health, and Riches, and Friends, may forsake us; but God has promised,
that he will never leave us nor forsake us; that he will not leave us when we
are old, nor forsake us when our strength fails, when our strength fails, and
our heart fails, then is he the strength of our hearts, and our portion for
ever; and when our great change shall come, and the terrors of Death shall take
hold of us, we have still the same Comfort, the Lord lives, and blessed be the
God of our Salvation.

In a word, the Consideration of God's immutability should keep us fixed and
unmoved in all the Changes and Accidents of this World, and not apt to be
startled and surprised at them, according to that of the Psalmist, he shall not
be afraid of evil tidings, because his heart is fixed, trusting in God. This
should make us constant to him and his truth, steadfast and unmovable and
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know, that our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; it should make us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, in full assurance, that God will be
as good to us as his word, and in a firm hope and persuasion of that Eternal
Life, which God that cannot lie has promised.

SERMON V. Vol. VI.
The Knowledge of God
1 SAMUEL 2.3. The Lord is a God of Knowledge.


I Come now to speak of those Properties and Perfections which relate to the
Divine Understanding, and Will, and Manner, and Power of acting. Knowledge
considers things absolutely, and in themselves; Wisdom considers the respects
and relations of things one to another, and under the Notion of Means and Ends.
The Knowledge of God is a perfect comprehension of the Nature of all things,
with all their Powers, and Qualities, and Circumstances; the Wisdom of God is a
perfect Comprehension of the Respects and Relations of things one to another;
of their Harmony and Opposition; of their fitness and unfitness to such and
such Ends. The Knowledge of God only implies his bare Understanding of Things;
but his Wisdom implies the Skill of ordering and disposing things to the best
Ends and Purposes, to make every thing, and to govern and administer all things
in Number, Weight, and Measure. I shall, at present speak of the first of
these, the Knowledge of God, which, as I said, is a perfect Comprehension of
the Nature of all things, and of every thing belonging to their Nature; of the
Powers, and Qualities, and Circumstances of things.

These Words signify God to be the Fountain of Knowledge; that is, that he
possesses it himself, and communicates it to others. In the handling of this,
I shall

First, Endeavor to prove, that this Attribute belongs to God.

Secondly, Show the Perfection and the Prerogatives of the Divine Knowledge.

Thirdly, Draw some practical Inferences from the whole.

First, For the proof of it, I shall attempt it two ways.

1. From the Dictates of Natural Light and Reason. 2. From Scripture or Divine
Revelation.
1. From the Dictates of Natural Light and Reason. I begin with this first,
because, unless this be established, all Divine Revelation falls to the ground;
unless Natural Reason assures us, That God is endowed with Knowledge and
Understanding, it is in vain to enquire after Divine Revelation. For to make
any Revelation credible, two things are requisite on the part of the Revealer,
Ability and Integrity; that he have a perfect Knowledge and Understanding of
the thing which he reveals, so that he cannot be deceived himself; and so much
Goodness and Truth that he will not deceive us. Now unless our Reason assure us
that God is endowed with Knowledge and Understanding, the first Condition is
evidently wanting, viz. Ability, and consequently the second, Integrity; for
there cannot be goodness and veracity without Knowledge.

This being premised, I proceed to the proof of it from such Arguments as our
Natural Reason suggests to us. I have formerly told you, that the Divine
Perfections are not to be proved by way of Demonstration, but by way of
Conviction, by showing the Absurdities and Inconveniences of the contrary; for
if we deny Knowledge to God, we must deny it to be a Perfection; we must deny
it to be in any of the Creatures; we must attribute many other Imperfections to
God; all which are absurd to our Natural Reason; for Natural Reason dictates to
us, That Knowledge is a Perfection, that it is to be found in the Creatures,
and that the denial of it to God will argue many other Imperfections in the
Divine Nature; now these are so many Arguments which Natural Reason offers to
us to prove, that knowledge belongs to God.

1. It is a Perfection, and therefore belongs to God. Natural Reason tells us,
though the Scripture had not said it, That Knowledge excells Ignorance, as much
as Light does Darkness; now whatever is Perfect and Excellent, is to be
attributed to the Divine Nature, for this is the first Notion we have of God,
That He is a Being absolutely Perfect.

2. Knowledge is to be found in some of the Creatures, and therefore is much
more in God the Creator, because it is derived from him. Our very
Understandings whereby we know God, or any thing else, are an Argument that
Knowledge and Understanding are in God. If he gives wisdom to the wise, and
Knowledge to them that know Understanding, if he communicates this Perfection
to the Creatures, he himself is much more possessed of it. The Scripture indeed
uses this Argument, but I mention it as that which Natural Reason does suggest
to the most brutish and ignorant of Men. Psalm. 94.8, 9, 10. Understand ye
Brutish among the People, and ye Fools when will ye be wise? he that planted
the Ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the Eye, shall he not see?

3. The denial of this Perfection to God, argues many other Imperfections in
the Divine Nature. Nothing would more eclipse the Divine Nature, than to take
away this Perfection from it; this would bring an universal Obscurity upon
God's other Perfections; this would be to put out the Light of Heaven, and to
turn the brightness of the morning into the shadow of death. If we remove this
Perfection from God, we deny his Wisdom. He that does not know the Nature and
Qualities of Things, cannot know how to apply Means to Ends, to fit or suit one
thing to another: And we weaken his Power. What an impotent and ineffectual
thing would Power be without Knowledge? what irregular things would it produce?
what untoward Combinations of Effects would there be, if infinite Power were
let loose to act without the Conduct of Knowledge and Understanding? And
consequently we take away his Providence; for without Knowledge there can be no
Counsel, no forecast of Events, no provision for the future, no Government of
the World. And this is not all, for without Knowledge there could be no such
thing as Goodness; for he is not good that does good out of Ignorance, or from
a blind Necessity. There could be no Veracity, nor Justice, nor Mercy in God;
for all these suppose Knowledge. He that speaks Truth must know it; he that is
Just must understand right from wrong; he that shows Mercy, must know who are
miserable, and how they may be relieved; and not to labor in a thing so plain
and casie, take away the Knowledge of God, and you render him incapable of any
Honor from his Creatures; for if he know not what Honor we do him, it is lost
labor to give him any. And that we may see these are the deductions of Natural
Reason, without the advantage of Revelation, we shall find the Heathens, who
were destitute of Divine Revelation, did attribute this Perfection to God.
Tully tells us, that Thales was wont to say, Deos omnia cernere; and we know
the Heathens were wont to swear Diis immortalibus testibus interpositis, which
is an owning of his Omniscience: Quis enim non timeat Deum omnia pervidentem,
and cogitantem, and animadvertentem, curiosum and negotii plenum Deum, de Not.
Deor. l. 1.

2. From Scripture and Divine Revelation. I will not heap up all those
Testimonies of Scripture which might be gathered together upon this Argument; I
will only instance in two or three. Job 36.4. He that is perfect in Knowledge,
is with thee; 37.16. Do thou know the wondrous works of him who is perfect in
Knowledge.

Hither we may refer those Texts which represent God by way of condescension to
our infirmity, as having Eyes and Ears, which signify his Knowledge of what is
done in the World; and those which speak of him as communicating to us all the
Knowledge which we have; he gives Wisdom to the Wise, and Understanding to
them that know Understanding, Dan. 2.21. And those which speak of God, as
knowing the most secret things, the hidden things of darkness, the Hearts and
the Thoughts of Men; and those things which are at the greatest distance, as
future things; and of the greatest uncertainty, as the contingent Acts of free
Creatures; each of these I shall particularly consider; for in proving that God
knows all these, his Knowledge of all other things will be proved with
advantage; for if any thing be out of the reach of the Divine Understanding, it
must in all probability be either those things which are secret and hidden, as
Men's secret Actions, or their Thoughts; or else those things which are to come,
and depend upon no certain cause, as future contingencies; and the proving of
this may be of great use to us, as having a great influence upon Practice; it
tends very much to the advancement of Religion, and the good Government of our
Lives. I begin with the

I. Of these, viz. That God takes very exact and particular notice of all the
Actions of Men, even those that are most secret. And in handling of this, I
shall speak distinctly to these three Things.

1. That God takes knowledge of all our actions; his Eyes are upon the ways of
man, and he sees all his goings, Job 34.21.

2. That he is a curious observer of them; he sees all his goings, he marks
all his steps, takes very exact and particular notice of all that we do.

3. He takes notice of those actions which are most secret and hidden; there is
no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves, Job 34, 22.

1. That God takes notice of all our actions. And that this Notion was planted
in the Mind of Man, and a Beam of the Light which comes with us into the World,
will appear by the general agreement of Heathens in it; I will but produce one
or two Testimonies to this purpose. Tully lays down this Principle, as that
which makes Men regular and orderly, and fit for Society; sit igitur hoc
persuasum civibus, qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se admittat deos
intueri. Socrates, as Xenophon tells us, was wont to say, (...). Arrian in his
Discourse upon Epictetus tells us, it is necessary that every one should be
persuaded of this, (...), that every thing that is done by Men is seen of God.

The Scripture frequently mentions this, Psalm. 139.1. etc. Prove. 5.21. The ways
of Man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. Jer.
32.19. Thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of men, to give every
one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

2. He is a curious Observer, one that takes exact notice of all that we do.
Job says, he sees all our steps; and Solomon, that he pondereth all our
goings; the word is, he weighs them in a balance. So 1 Samuel 2, 3. The Lord is
a God of knowledge, by him actions are weighed. Job 31.4. Does he not see my
ways, and count all my steps? which does not imply the difficulty, but the
Perfection and exactness of God's Knowledge; he kn^ws the quality of our
actions, and all the circumstances of them, all the degrees of Good and Evil
that are in them; whatever may commend an action, or blemish it; whatever may
aggravate a Sin or excuse it. Isa 26.7. Thou most upright do weigh the path
of the just. There Is not a good word that we speak but God hears it, Mal. 3.16.
And the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before
him; and all we do is noted in his Book, Psa. 56.8.

3. He takes notice of those Actions which are most secret and hidden, the good
as well as the bad; when we do our alms in secret, when we enter into our
Closets and shut the doors, our Father sees in secret, Mat. 6. Nor can we
retire our selves to any place, where we can sin so as God shall not see us,
where we can hide our sins from his sight, or our selves from his wrath. Hear
how sensibly a Heathen speaks of this; (...); Arrian in Ep. l. 1. c. 14.

The Scripture is full of Testimonies to this purpose, Psalm. 90.8. Thou have
set our Iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance; those sins which we commit in the Dark are in the Light of the
Divine Knowledge, darkness and light are all one to him; Psalm. 139.11, 12. Jer.
16.17, 23, 24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him?

II. God knows the hearts and thoughts of Men, which implys these two things.

1 st. His perfect Knowledge of them. 2 ly. That this is his peculiar
Prerogative.
1 st. God perfectly knows the hearts of Men, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the
hearts and try the reins; where by heart and reins, which are the most inward
parts of the Body; and lie least open to discovery, are signified the most
secret Thoughts and Motions of the Soul, these God is said to search and try,
not as if it were a work of Labor and Difficulty to the Divine Knowledge to
penetrate the hearts of Men, and to dive into their Thoughts, but to signify
to us the Perfection and Exactness of the Divine Knowledge; as when Men would
know a thing exactly, they search into every part of it, and examine every
thing narrowly; so God is said to search the heart, to signify to us that he
knows the hearts of Men, as thoroughly as we do any thing upon the strictest
Search and most diligent Examination; upon the same account he is said
elsewhere in Scripture to weigh the Spirits of Men, Prove. 16.2. All the ways of
Man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the Spirits; that is, he
has as perfect a Knowledge of the secret Motions and Inclinations of Men's
hearts, as Men have of those things which they weigh in a Balance with the
greatest exactness.

Now that God has this perfect Knowledge of Men's hearts, the Scripture
frequently declares to us; that he knows the hearts of all Men, 1 Kings 8.39.
For thou, even thou know the hearts of all the Children of Men. 1 Chronicles.
28.9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts. How close and reserved soever Men may be, what disguise soever
they may use to hide their purposes from Men, yet God sees them; the things
which are most dark and secret are open to his view, Psalm. 44.21. He knows
the secrets of the hearts, Prove. 15.11. Hell and Destruction are before him,
how much more the hearts of the Children of Men? Whatever pretenses Men may
make, God sees through them, and discovers the very intentions of their hearts.
Psalm. 7.9. The righteous Lord tries the hearts and reins. Heb. 4.13. It is
said there of the Word of God, that it is a discerner of the thoughts and
intentions of the Heart; for all things are naked and open to the Eye of him
with whom we have to do, and there is no Creature that is not manifest in his
sight; nay he knows our thoughts at a distance, what they will be, before they
actually are, Psalm. 139.2. Thou know my thoughts afar off. It Is true indeed
every Man is conscious to his own Thoughts, and privy to the Motions of his own
Mind, when they are present, and when they are past, if he have not forgot
them; but no Man knows what he shall think to morrow, but this God knows, for
he knows us more intimately and thoroughly than we do our selves; God is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20.

And though the Scripture had not revealed this so plainly, yet we had not been
wholly ignorant of it; it is a Principle implanted in us, and born with us, as
being part of that natural Notion which Men have of God; the Reason of our
Minds tells us that God knows our Hearts; and the Fears and Jealousies of our
Minds are an Evidence of it.

(1 st.) The Reason of every Man's mind tells him, that the Supreme Being, whom
we call God, is endowed with all Perfection, and among his other Perfections,
that he excels in Knowledge; and to the Perfection of Knowledge it is required,
that it extend it self to all Objects, and that nothing be exempted from it.
The Knowledge of God in respect of all Objects, is like the Sun, in respect of
this lower World, nothing is hid from the light of it. We have naturally this
Apprehension of God, that he is an immense Being, every where present, that he
intimately penetrates all places and things, and consequently that he is
present to our Spirits, and sees all the motions of our Minds, and discerns the
very secrets of our Hearts; and there can be no such thing as secrecy and
retirement from an Eye that is every where, and a Knowledge that pierces into
all things.

And to convince us that these are the dictates of Natural Reason, without the
help and assistance of Divine Revelation, we shall find that the Heathen, who
had only the advantage of Natural Light, were firmly possessed with this
apprehension, that God knows the hearts of Men. This may be sufficiently
Collected from the frequent sayings of the wiser Heathens to this purpose; that
the best and most acceptable worship of the Deity is that which is inward, that
of the Heart and Mind. To this Sense Tully speaks, Cultus autem deorum est
optimus, idemque castissimus atque sanctissimus plenissimusque pietatis, ut eos
semper pura, integra atque incorrupta mente and voce veneremur, The best and
holiest worship of the Gods is to worship them with a pure and upright and
sincere Mind. To the same purpose is that known saying of the Poet, Compositum
jus fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto,
Haec cedo ut admoveam templis and far litabo;
Do but offer to God a mind inwardly resolved to be just and honest, and the
plainest sacrifice will please him. Now from hence, that they judged the purity
of our Hearts and Thoughts, and an honest disposition of Mind, to be most
acceptable to their Gods, we may certainly conclude, that they did most firmly
believe that God knows the Secrets of Men's Hearts; otherwise there had been no
need for Men to endeavor to recommend themselves this way to the Divine
acceptance.

But we need not argue this by consequence, there are many express passages in
their Writings, which do sufficiently signify their belief of this Principle.
Thales, one of their most ancient Philosophers, being asked, if an unjust Man
could conceal himself from God, he answered, he cannot so much as hide from him
the very thoughts and design of it. Socrates (as Xenophon tells us) was wont to
inculcate this Principle upon his Scholar, that the Gods know all things, what
we say, and what we do, and what we think in silence. To the same purpose
Arrian in his Dissertations upon Epictetus laying down the Principles of a
virtuous life, first of all, says he, we must learn this, that there is a God
who takes care of the World, and that there is nothing hid from him, not only
what we do, but not so much as what we think, and design. So likewise Tully in
his Book of Laws, let every Man be firmly persuaded of this, that the Gods see
what every Man is, and with what Mind and Devotion they serve them: I will add
but one Testimony more, and that is of Seneca in his Epistles, nihil Deo
clausum est, interest animis nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit, we
can keep nothing close from God, for he is present to our Minds, and intimate
to our Thoughts; so that you see this Principle is deeply rooted in the Minds
of Men, and that Men do naturally Reason themselves into it.

(2.) The natural fears of Men are likewise a secret acknowledgement of this;
and I take this to be a great Truth, that a Man's natural Actions, and such as
happen upon Surprise and without Deliberation, are a better argument of the
intimate sense of our Minds, and do more truly discover what lies at the bottom
of our Hearts, and what Notions are natural, to us, than our contrived and
deliberate Discourse. If I see a Man upon the sudden sight of a Serpent recoil
and start back, though he tell me never so often that he is not afraid, yet I am
sufficiently convinced of the contrary, because I see in his Countenance and
Carriage a natural acknowledgment of Fear and Danger: so if Men find that upon
the designing of a secret Wickedness, which never went further than their own
Hearts, their Consciences do sting and lash them, that they have a sense of
Guilt, and feel inward Frights and Horrors, whatever they may say to the
contrary, this is a natural acknowledgment of an invisible Eye that sees them,
and disallows their wicked Designs. If that be true which the Heathen Poet
says, That Scelus intra se tacitum qui cogitat ullum, Facti crimen habet. He
that meditates any secret Wickedness in his Heart, is guilty to himself, as if
he had committed it; this is a plain Confession, that the Man stands in Awe of
something besides Himself, and is jealous that there is one that is Conscious
to what he thinks.

2. That to have a perfect and thorough knowledge of Men's Hearts, is the
peculiar Prerogative of God. This is implied in the Answer to that Question,
Who can know the heart of man? Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, and try
the reins; this is the Prerogative of God, and one of his chief Titles, that he
is (...), a knower of the heart, 1 King. 8.39. Thou, even thou only know the
hearts of all the children of men. Men may make a probable conjecture at the
Thoughts and Designs of others, from their Words and Actions; but God only
knows them. Men are conscious to their own Thoughts and Purposes, the spirit of
a man that is in him, knows the things of a man; but they cannot see into the
Secrets of another Man's Mind; it is God alone that knows the Hearts of all Men.
The Heart of Man is a priviledg'd place, and the secret and inward workings of
it are not subject to the cognizance of any but God alone. The limits of Humane
Knowledge are the outward appearances of Actions, 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord sees
not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord
looks on the heart; our Knowledge is but superficial, and glides upon the
outside and surface of things, but the Divine Knowledge pierces to the very
center of every thing. Now the darkest place, the most inward retirement, the
privatest Closet in the whole World, is the Heart of Man, and this God only is
privy to; Deus author omnium and speculator omnium, a quo nihil secretum esse
potest, tenebris interest, interest and cogitationibus nostris quasi alteris
tenebris, says Min. Foelix, God made all things, and sees all things, and
therefore nothing can be secret from him; he is present in Darkness, and he is
present to the Thoughts of Men, which are as it were another and a thicker
Darkness.

The Devil indeed pretends to this Knowledge; he would take upon him to know
the integrity of Job's Heart better than God himself, and that notwithstanding
the Testimony which God gave of his Integrity, yet if he were but soundly tried
by Affliction, he would renounce God, and curse him to his face: but the event
proved how groundless and malicious this suggestion was. But there is a far
greater difficulty in this matter, from the passages of some Divines concerning
the Devil's immediate access to the Minds of Men, and his Power to cast in
Wicked Thoughts into them; which seems by consequence to grant him some
knowledge of Men's Hearts; for by the same Reason that he can imprint Thoughts
upon Men's Minds, he may see those that are imprinted there.

That the Devil is a very sagacious Spirit, and can make very shrewd
Conjectures at the bent and inclinations of Men's Minds, and the probable
workings of our Thoughts, from a general Knowledge and Observation of our
Tempers and Passions, of our Interests and Designs, and from the general tenor
of our Actions in Public and Private, and from our Prayers and Confessions to
God (if he permit him at any time to be so near Good Men) I think there is no
doubt: but this is far from a Knowledge of our Hearts; all this is but
Conjecture, and such as men may make of one another in a lower degree.

But as to the business of casting in blasphemous and despairing Thoughts into
the Minds of Men, to this I would say these three things.

1. That there are few of these cases which may not more probably be resolved
into the Wickedness and Infidelity of Men's Hearts, or into the Darkness and
Melancholy of our tempers, which are apt to raise and suggest strange Thoughts
to Men, and such as we may be apt to think have no rise from our selves, not
considering what an odd and strange influence the disorder of our bodily
Humors may have upon our Minds, as we see in violent Fevers, and several other
Diseases; and Melancholy, though the workings of it are more still and quiet, is
as truly a Disease as any other; so that I choose rather to ascribe as much of
these to a bodily Distemper as may be, because it is a very uncomfortable
consideration, to think that the Devil has such an immediate Power upon the
Minds of Men.

2. I do not see how by any means it can be granted, without prejudice to this
Prerogative of God, which the Scripture plainly gives him, of being the only
Knower of the Heart, that the Devil can have so immediate an access to our
Minds, as to put wicked Thoughts into them; nor can I think, that when it is
said, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. That Satan provoked David to number the people, and Luke
22.3. That the devil entered into Judas, and Acts 5.3. That Satan had filled the
heart of Ananias to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and Ephesians. 2.2. That the devil is
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience; I say I cannot think
that any or all of these expressions do amount to such an immediate power of
putting wicked Thoughts into Men's Minds, but they only signify that the Devil
has a greater hand in some sins than others, and that a Heart wickedly bent
and inclined give him a great advantage to tempt Men more powerfully, by
presenting the occasions of suck wicked Thoughts and Actions to them; for it is
usual in Scripture Phrase, as to ascribe all good Motions to God's Spirit, so
all evil Thoughts and Actions to the Devil, not that he is the immediate Cause
of them, but because he is always ready to tempt Men to them, and one way or
other to promote them.

3. I see no Reason to grant (as many have done) an immediate Power to the
Devil over the fancies and imaginations of Men, and that he may know the
workings of them, though not the secret thoughts of Men's Minds; for this seems to
me to be in effect to grant him the Knowledge of Men's Hearts, and to give him a
Key to that Closet which God has reserved to himself: for it is a very nice
Distinction which is here made between the Thoughts of Men's Minds, and the
Images of their Fancies; and if these should happen to be but words that
signify the same thing, we shall unawares entrench upon the Prerogative of
God. Therefore because the Scripture is a stranger to these nice and subtle
distinctions between the Imaginations of the Fancy, and the Thoughts of the
Heart, I think it is much safer to assert the Prerogative of God in that
latitude that the Scripture uses the word heart, for all the inward motions of
the Mind, for the Thoughts and Intentions of the Heart, and roundly to affirm
that all the inward motions of our Souls are totally exempt from the immediate
cognizance of any other Spirit but God's alone; and that neither Angel nor
Devil has any further Knowledge of them, than may be collected and inferred in
a way of probable Conjecture from the particular Knowledge of Men's Tempers and
Habits and Designs, and the Course of their Actions. I proceed to the

III. Particular; God's Knowledge of future Events. This God proposes as the
way to discern the true God from Idols, Isaiah 41.21, etc. Produce your Cause,
says the Lord, bring forth your strong Reasons, says the King of Jacob, that
is, let them bring some Argument that may convince us that they are Gods; and
he instanceth in foretelling future Evants, v. 22. Let them show the former
things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of
them; or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. God puts it upon this issue, if
they can foretell future things, then they are Gods; if not, they are vanity,
and a work of naught, and he is an abomination that chooses them, v. 24. By
things to come, I understand such Effects as do not depend upon any necessary
Cause, but upon the Will of Free Agents, and so may be, or may not be; from
whence it is plain, that it is the Prerogative of God, proper and peculiar to
Him, to know future Events. And here I shall consider these two things.

1. That God knows future Events 2. That he only knows them.
1. God knows future Events; which will appear from the dictates of Natural
Light, and from Scripture.

(1.) From the dictates of Natural Light, as it is a Perfection, and that which
among Men is accounted the best part of Wisdom; and unless this did belong to
God, how could he govern the World? The Heathens, except only the Epicureans,
generally granted this, as appears in those wise Counsels, which we frequently
meet with in them to this purpose, that we should not be anxious for the
future, but having done our endeavor, leave the Events of things to God, who
only knows them and disposes them.

Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris. Juv.
And afterward says he, We are importunate with God for Wife and Children:

At illis notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor; and that this was their
Opinion, appears yet more clearly from those apprehensions which they had of
Divination. Tully lays down this for a Principle, Deos posse nobis signa
futurarum reum ostendere; de Legibus, and in his Book de Divin. he tells us,
that there was such a thing as Divination, for it was an old Opinion, jam usque
ab Heroicis ducta temporibus, eaque Pop. Romans and omnium gentium firmata
consensu, and afterward that this Divination was not, sine instinctu afflatuque
divino.

I know they did variously explain this, according to their several Opinions
about Fate and Contingency, and their Apprehensions about the Providence of
God. One Sect of them, the Stoics, held that there was a fatal Chain of Causes
from first to last, and things did necessarily follow one another; and by this
Means they made Foreknowledge easy and explicable, and though in their Disputes
they seem to grant no such thing as Events and Contingencies, yet they are
agreed in the thing, that those things which we call Events, though they would
not call them so, were Fore-known to God. And for this I shall only cite one
Testimony of Seneca, speaking of God's Foreknowledge of the most contingent
things, the Dispositions of Men long before they are Born; he adds, nota est
enim illis operis sui series, omniumque illis rerum per manus suas iturarum
scientia in aperto semper est; nobis ex abdito subit; and quae repentina
putamus, illis provisa veniunt and familiaria; and how peremptory soever this
Sect is in their disputes about Fate, yet when they speak of the (...), and
generally in their Moral Discourses, they seem plainly to me to exempt the will
of Man from this fatal necessity.

And those other Sects of the Philosophers that denied Fate, did generally
grant God's Foreknowledge of contingent things. I grant indeed, that they did
rather make God's Foreknowledge an Arbitrary and Voluntary than a necessary
Perfection, that is, that God, when he pleased to apply himself to it, could
Foreknow all future Events: but their general Opinion was, that as his
Providence did not extend to small and inconsiderable things, so neither his
Foreknowledge. But Tully seems to attribute a very perfect Providence to him,
and a Foreknowledge of the least things, Quis non timeat omnia providentem,
cogitantem, animadvertentem, and omnia ad se pertinere putantem, curiosum and
negotij plenum deum? But I cannot say he is constant to himself: but they all
agree in granting to him this Perfection of knowing all future things, if he
pleased to trouble himself with it; and had they not in this mistaken the
Nature of God, they might easily have apprehended, that it is no trouble nor
weariness to an Infinite Understanding that is always in Act, to know the least
things how many soever they be.

2. From Scripture, which gives us Testimonies and Arguments of it.

(1.) Testimonies Isa. 48.3, etc. Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his works,
from the beginning of the World, (...) from everlasting; which by the way I
cannot but compare with the forecited place of Sen. Nota enim illis operis sui
series, etc.

(2.) By Arguments from Scripture. I will mention but one; the clear and
particular Predictions of future Events long before they happened. Genesis 15.13.
God foretells the Children of Israel's deliverance after 430 Years, which he
punctually accomplished. Exodus 12.40, 41. The Prophet that prophesied against
the Altar at Bethel named the Man that should do it, Josias, 350 Years
beforehand. 1 Kings 13.2. The deliverance of the Children of Israel from the
Babylonish Captivity was foretold 100 Years before to be done particularly by
Cyrus; which is so strange, that the Prophet brings it in with a Preface of
God's Wisdom and Power, Isa. 44.24, etc. Which was afterward precisely
fulfilled, when the 70 Years were expired. How are the Life and Death of the
Messiah, with many particular Circumstances foretold? And did not he foretell
the Destruction of Jerusalem 40 Years before?

But because there may be no contingency in good things, God himself may be
resolved to effect them, or excite Men to do them, when he has foretold them;
you shall find that the worst things have been foretold; the Apostasy of the
Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.16. and their Infidelity in times of the Gospel,
Isa. 53.1, 5, 9, 26. Our Savior foretold the Treachery of Judas, and Peter's
denial of him; now these are so evil, that it were Blasphemy to suppose the
Holy God to have any hand in them; and therefore are foretold by him merely by
virtue of his Foreknowledge, and the infiniteness of his Understanding, which
reaches things at the greatest distance, that are most contingent.

SERMON VI. Vol. VI.
Of the Knowledge of God.
1 SAMUEL II.3. The Lord is a God of Knowledge.


I Have considered this Perfection of God, in some of the greatest and most
difficult instances of it, his Knowledge of the most secret Things, the hearts
of Men, and future Events; against the last of which there are some Objections,
which I come now briefly to consider, and pass on to what remains.

Objection the First; The impossibility of the thing. Certainty of all
Knowledge depends upon the certainty of the Object, therefore there cannot be a
certain and determinate Knowledge of any thing, but what is certainly and
determinately true; but future Events, which may or may not be, have no certain
and determinate Truth, that is, it is not certain either that they will or will
not be, because they have no certain Cause, therefore there can be no
infallible Knowledge concerning them.

Answer, This I confess is the grand Difficulty; I shall not be so solicitous
to take it away, as to give satisfaction to it.

1. I might say with a very fair Probability, that the certainty of Knowledge
does not depend upon the certainty of the Cause, but of the Object, which may
be certain, though the Cause be contingent. Which I prove thus, whatever Event
has actually happened, as because now it is past, it is certainly true that it
was, so because it once was, it was certainly true before it was, that it would
be; as in Peter's denying of Christ. If it be now true that he has denied him,
it was true before, that he would deny him; and it being determinately true,
God saw it as it was; so that here is an Object of a certain Knowledge.

2. Though we could not explain the possibility of God's knowing future
Contingencies, much less the manner how; yet we are sufficiently assured that
God does know them. I will give but one instance for the Proof of this. Nothing
more evident than the Sin of Adam; yet God fore-knew this; how else was Christ
decreed before the Foundation of the World? Christ was a remedy upon the
occasion of sin, now the remedy could not be designed before the sin was
foreseen: and this being certain, cum constat de re, frustra inquiritur de
modo, when we are certain of the thing, it is not necessary to know the manner.
We are satisfied of many things, the manner whereof we do not know; we believe
the union of the Soul and Body, though no Man can explain how a Spirit can be
united to Matter; we believe the continuity of matter, that is, that the parts
of it hang together, of which whosoever says he can give an account, does but
betray his own ignorance. And so in many other things; that Man does not know
himself, nor the measure of his own understanding, nor the nature and obscurity
of things, that will not confess himself posed in many things, that does not
acknowledge that there are many (...), many things the manner whereof is
unimaginable, and of which our best Reason and Understanding can give no
account.

3. It Is very unreasonable to expect we should know all the ways which infinite
Knowledge has of knowing things. We have but finite Faculties and Measures,
which bear no proportion to infinite Powers and Objects. Could we explain the
manner how infinite Knowledge knows things, we should be like God in Knowledge,
our understandings would be infinite like his; and in this case especially it
becomes us to put on the modesty of Creatures, and to remember that we are
finite and limited. Some arrogant Spirits take it for an affront to their
understandings, that any one should expect they should believe any thing, though
they have the highest assurance of it, if they cannot explain the particular
manner of it; they make nothing to deny God's Knowledge of future Events,
unless they may be satisfied of the particular way how he knows them.

I know there are those who undertake to explain the particular manner. Some
say that God sees future Events in speculo voluntatis; others say that the
Eternity of God is actually commensurate to all Duration, as his Immensity to
all Space, and so God does not so properly foresee and foreknow, as see and
know future things by the presentiality and coexistence of all things in
Eternity; for they say that future things are actually present and existing to
God, though not in mensura propria, yet in mensura aliena; the Schoolmen have
much more of this Jargon and canting Language; and I envy no Man the
understanding these Phrases, but to me they seem to signify nothing, but to
have been words invented by idle and conceited Men, which a great many ever
since, lest they should seem to be ignorant, would seem to understand; but I
wonder most, that Men, when they have amused and puzzled themselves and others
with hard Words, should call this explaining things.

The sum of the Answer is this; that when we have done all we can, God's
foreknowledge of future Events may seem contradictious and impossible to us,
much less do I expect ever to be able to give a particular account of the
manner of it: but we have sufficient assurance of the thing, and unless we had
infinite understandings, it were vanity to pretend to explain all the ways of
infinite Knowledge.

Secondly, It is Objected, That if we can admit such a Knowledge in God as
seems contradictious and impossible to our Reason, why may we not allow and
frame such Notions of his Goodness and Justice?

To this I answer, There is a great difference between those Perfections of God
which are imitable, and those which are not. Knowledge of future Events is a
Perfection wherein we are not bound to be like God; and if we are assured of
the thing, that he does know them, it is not necessary that we should know the
manner of it, and dis-intangle it from contradiction and impossibility; but it
is otherwise in God's Goodness and Justice, which are imitable; he that
imitates, endeavors to be like something that he knows, and we must have a
clear Idea and Notion of that which we would bring our selves to the likeness
of; these Perfections of God we are capable of knowing; and therefore the
Knowledge of these Perfections is chiefly recommended to us in Scripture, Jer.
9.24. By these God reveals himself, and declares his Name, and makes himself
known to us, even by those Attributes which declare his Goodness, and Mercy,
and Justice, Exodus 34.6, 7. Psalm. 86.15. Deuteronomy. 32.3, 4, 5. When God would give
a Description of himself to Moses, he promises to cause his goodness to pass
before him. So that it does not follow, that because God's Knowledge of future
Events is to be admitted, notwithstanding the seeming contradiction and
impossibility of it, therefore we are to admit of any Notion of God's Justice
or Goodness that seems contradictious or impossible. The

Third, Objection is made up of several inconveniences that would follow from
God's Knowledge of future Events.

1. It would Prejudice the Liberty of the Creature. For if God have an
infallible Knowledge of what we will do, then we cannot but do what he
infallibly foresees we will do; for otherwise his Knowledge would be fallible.

Answer, God's-Fore-knowledge lays no necessity upon the Event. In every Event,
we may consider the Effect in it self, or with relation to the Cause, and the
manner how it comes to pass; considered in it self, it is future, with relation
to its Causes it is contingent. God sees it as both, and so, as that which till
it is, may be or not be; and when it comes to pass, he sees the Man do it
freely; and so before it be done, it has no necessity; but upon supposition of
foresight; as when it is, it has upon supposition that it is, as Origin
excellently explains it. Foreknowledge is not the cause of the things that are
fore-known; but because the thing is future and shall be, this is the Reason
why it is fore-known; for it does not, because it was known, come to pass; but
because it was to come to pass, therefore it was fore-known; and bare Knowledge
is no more the Cause of any Event, which because it is known must infallibly
be, than my seeing a Man run, is the Cause of his running, which, because I do
see, is infallibly so.

2 ly. If God infallibly fore-knows what Men will do, how can he be serious in
his Exhortations to Repentance, in his Expectation of it, and his grieving for
the Impenitency of Men?

Answer. All these are founded in the liberty of our Actions. God exhorts to
Repentance and expects it, because by his Grace we may do it; he is said to
grieve for our Impenitency, because we may do otherwise, and will not.
Exhortations are not vain in themselves, but very proper to their end, though
through our obstinacy and hardness they may be rendered vain to us and without
effect. If the weight of the Objection lie upon serious, and you ask how God
can exhort Men seriously to that which he fore-sees that they will not do,
those whom he fore-knows will be finally impenitent? I answer, if his
Exhortations were not serious, he could not foresee the final impenitency of
Men. To foresee Men's final impenitency, is to foresee their willful contempt of
Gods Warnings and Exhortations, and Rejection of his Grace; now Men's willful
contempt of his Warnings and Exhortations cannot be foreseen, unless God
foresee that his Exhortations are serious and in good earnest.

Having answered the Objections against God's fore-knowing future Events, I
proceed to show,

II. That God only knows future Events. Isa. 44.6, 7. Thus says the Lord, the
King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am
the last, and besides me there is no God: and who, as I, shall call, and shall
declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient People,
and the things that are coming, and shall come? let them show unto them. Isa.
46.9, 10. Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is none
else. I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying my
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.

The Reason is evident, because the Knowledge of future Events is beyond the
reach of any finite understanding; especially if we grant it to be beyond our
finite understanding, to explain the possibility of such a Knowledge; for to be
sure that is out of the reach of our Knowledge, which we cannot so much as
understand how it is possible it should be known by any Understanding.

But it may here be Objected; Did not the Oracles among the Heathens foretell
several things, which Christians are satisfied came from the Devil? I have no
time at present to examine the business of Heathen Oracles; I could easily show
there was much imposture in them: but grant they were really delivered and
given out by a Spirit; yet the darkness and ambiguity, the affected and
contrived ambiguity, is such as shows that the Devil was conscious to himself
of the uncertainty of his Knowledge in those matters; and those few that came
to pass, and are in any tolerable Sense said to be accomplished, were in such
matters, either wherein prudent Conjecture might go far (and I grant the Devil
to be a sagacious Spirit;) or else in dis-junctive Cases, as when there are but
two ways for a thing to be, it must either be so, or so, in which a bold
guessing may often hit right: but guessing at future things, is far from a
Knowledge of them, which only can clearly be made out by punctual and
particular Predictions of Things, with Circumstances of Time and Person, such
as we find in Scripture in many instances, to the prediction of which, the
greatest sagacity and the utmost guessing could do nothing, such as those
Predictions of which I gave instances out of Scripture.

I have now done with the First general Head, I proposed to be spoken to from
these Words, viz. To prove that this Attribute of Knowledge belongs to God. I
proceed to the,

Second, viz. To consider the Perfection and Prerogative of the Divine
Knowledge, which I shall speak to in these following Particulars.

1. God's Knowledge is Present and Actual, his Eye is always open, and every
thing is in the view of it. The Knowledge of the Creature is more Power than
Act; it is not much that we are capable of knowing, but there is very little
that we do actually know; it is but one thing that we can fix our Thoughts upon
at once, and apply our Minds to; we can remove them to another Object, but then
we must take off our Minds from the former, and quit the actual knowledge of
it: but the knowledge of God is an actual and steady Comprehension of things,
he being every where present, and all eye, nothing can escape his sight, but
all Objects are at once in the view of the Divine Understanding. Heb. 4.13.
Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things
are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

2. God's Knowledge is an intimate and thorough Knowledge, whereby he knows the
very Nature and Essence of things. The Knowledge which we have of things it is
but in part, but outward and superficial; our Knowledge glides upon the
superficies of things, but does not penetrate into the intimate Nature of them,
it seldom reaches further than the skin and outward appearance of things; we
do not know things in their realities, but as they appear and are represented
to us with all their Masks and Disguises: but God knows things as they are. 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart; God knows things throughout, all
that can be known of them. The quick and piercing Eye of God Penetrates into
every thing, the light of the Divine Understanding lays all things open and
naked, Heb. 4.13. In which expression the Apostle alludes to the Sacrifices of
Beasts, which were flead and cleft down the back bone, that the Priest might
look into them, and see whether they were without blemish. To the Eye of our
understandings most Objects are close, and have their Skins upon them: but to
the Eyes of God all things are uncovered and dissected, and he open to his view.

3. God's Knowledge is clear and distinct. Our Understandings in the Knowledge
of things are liable to great confusion; we are often deceived with the near
likeness and resemblance of things, and mistake one thing for another; our
Knowledge is but a twilight, which does not sufficiently separate and
distinguish things from one another, we see things many times together and in a
heap, and do but know them in gross; but there is no confusion in the Divine
Understanding, that is a clear Light which separates and distinguishes things
of the greatest nearness and resemblance; God has a particular Knowledge of
the least things, Luke 12.7. Even the very hairs of your Head are all numbered;
those things which are of the least consideration, and have the greatest
likeness to one another, the very hairs of our Head, are severally and
distinctly known to God.

4. God's Knowledge is certain and infallible. We are subject to doubt and
error in our understanding of things, every thing almost imposes upon our
Understandings, and tinctures our Minds, and makes us look on things otherwise
than they are; our Temper and Complexion, our Education and Prejudice, our
Interest and Advantage, our Humors and Distempers, these all misrepresent
things, and darken our Minds, and seduce our Judgments, and betray us to Error
and Mistake: but the Divine Understanding is a clear, fixed, constant, and
undisturbed Light, a pure Mirror that receives no stain from Affection, or
Interest, or any other thing. Men are many times confident and apt to impose
upon others, as if they were infallible: but this is the Prerogative of God,
the Privilege of the Divine Understanding, that it is secure from all
possibility of Error; it is God only that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. because he
cannot be deceived; the infallibility of God is the Foundation of his veracity.

5. The Knowledge of God is easy and without difficulty. We must dig deep for
Knowledge, take a great deal of pains to know a little; we do not attain the
Knowledge of things without search and study and great intention of Mind; we
strive to comprehend some things, but they are so vast that we cannot; other
things are at such a distance, that our Understanding is too weak to discern
them; other things are so little, and small, and nice, that our Understanding
cannot lay hold of them, we cannot contract our Minds to such a Point as to
fasten upon them: but the Understanding of God being infinite, there is nothing
at a distance from it, nothing too great and vast for it is comprehension, nor
is there any thing so little that it can escape his Knowledge and
animadversion. The great Wisdom of Solomon is compared to the Sand on the Sea
shore; the shore is vast, but the Sands are little (says one) to signify that
the vast Mind of Solomon did comprehend the least things. It Is much more true
of God, his Understanding is a vast comprehension of the least things, as well
as the greatest; and all this God does without difficulty or pain; he knows all
things without study, and his Understanding is in continual exercise without
weariness. How many things are there which we cannot find out without search,
without looking narrowly into, and bending our Minds to understand them? But
all things are obvious to God, and lie open to his view.

He is said indeed in Scripture to search the Heart, and to try the Reins, and
to weigh the Spirits; but these Expressions do not signify the painfulness,
but the perfection of his Knowledge, that he knows those things as perfectly,
as we can do any thing about which we use the greatest diligence and exactness.

6. The Knowledge of God is universal, and extends to all Objects. We know but
a few things, our Ignorance is greater than our Knowledge, maxima pars eorum
quae scimus, est minima pars eorum que nescimus: but the Divine Understanding
is vast and comprehensive, and by an imperious view commands all Objects; he is
greater than our hearts, and knows all things; he knows himself, and the
excellency and perfection of his own Nature, and the secrets of his Will, 1
Cor. 2.11. The Spirit of God searches the deep things of God; he knows all
other things that are not, and all things that are, in all differences of time,
their Powers and Qualities. The Knowledge of God is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. His
understanding is infinite; he knows himself and his own Perfections, and all
the possibilities of things, which are all infinite. Now the Understanding of
God being infinite is incapable of any Addition, or Diminution, or Change. Our
finite Understandings are liable to alterations, they may grow or decline: but
the Knowledge of God is a full constant Light, it is always the same, not liable
to any Eclipse, nor capable of any exaltation or improvement, but remains for
ever the same.

Thirdly, I come now to draw some Inferences from the several parts of this
Discourse.

I. From the Perfection of God's Knowledge.

1. The Perfection of the Divine Knowledge calls for our Veneration. Every
Excellency commands Reverence, and raises our admiration, and none more than
Knowledge, there is nothing that we value our selves or others more by, than
this; the highest Knowledge of Man, the most glorious Understanding, that ever
any one of the Sons of Men were endowed with, is, compared to the Knowledge of
God, but as a Glowworm to the Sun. If we admire these Candles of the Lord,
which shine so imperfectly in the dark; if we reverence a little Knowledge,
compassed about with ignorance; how should we admire the Father of Lights, in
whom is no darkness at all, that Knowledge which has nothing of blemish or
imperfection in it!

2. We may hence learn Humility, and that on this double Account. As we have
all our Knowledge from him; what have we that we have not received? And as our
Knowledge is very imperfect, when compared with the Divine Understanding. We
are blind and ignorant, it is but a few things that we are capable of knowing;
and we know but a few of those things which our Natures are capable of knowing;
and of those things we do know, our Knowledge is very imperfect, it is slight
and superficial, attended with much difficulty and uncertainty in the attaining
of it, and error and confusion in the use of it; the clearest Reason, and the
brightest Understanding of Man has many flaws and defects in it; so that the
more we know of God, and of our selves, the more humble we shall be. It is an
empty Knowledge, and falsely so called, that puffs up; as the empty ears of
Corn are pert and raise up themselves, but those which are big and full, droop
and hang down their Heads; so it is only Ignorance that is proud and lifts Men
up, but true Knowledge makes Men humble.

3. This is matter of Comfort and Encouragement. He knows our wants and
weakness, and will lay no more upon us than we are able to bear, for he
considers that we are but Dust; he knows the rage and malice of our Enemies,
and can when he pleases put a Hook in their Nose, and his Bridle in their Lips,
as he did to Senacherib, 2 Kings 19.28.

1. From God's knowing our secret Actions, I infer

1. If God sees our most secret Actions, this discovers and confutes the secret
Atheism of many. He that commits the most secret sin denies the Omniscience of
God. Thus David describes the Atheism of some in his Days; he has said in his
heart, God has forgot, he hides his face, he will never see it; the Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it; and is not this, in
effect, to deny God's Being? for it is to deny him to be what he is. A Man may
as well deny there is a Sun, as deny that it shines and enlightens the World.

There are some Relics of this even in the best Men, which do at sometimes
discover themselves, Psalm. 73.10, 11. Therefore his People return hither; and
waters of a full cup are wrung out to them. And they say, how does God know? is
there knowledge in the most high? that is, the People of God come to this, when
they are come to an afflicted state, and see the Prosperity of Wicked Men, they
come to this, to question the Providence of God, whether he takes knowledge of
the Affairs of the World. But this Atheism reigns in wicked Men; while they
live in their Sins, they live in the Denial of God's Omniscience; for did Men
really believe that God sees in secret, that his Eye perceives the Darkness,
and lays open and naked all things before it, how durst they Lie, and Steal,
and Swear falsely? Vain Man! why do thou seek Darkness and Retirement? how
art thou alone, if thou believe that God is every where? how can thou
retire from him? how can thou shut him out? If thou believe that he is
Light, what Security is Darkness to thee? if he look upon thee, who is the
greatest and best Person in the World, who is thy Sovereign, thy Judge, thy
Father, and thy Master, and thy best Friend (for we use to reverence Persons
under these Notions and Relations, and to be ashamed to do any thing that is
Vile and Unseemly before them) if he, who is all this, look upon thee, why art
thou not ashamed? why does not thy Blood rise in thy Face? why should not Shame
and Fear work, upon the apprehension of God's seeing us, as if men did behold
us? for this, that God sees thee, is a greater Surprise and Discovery, and
threatens thee with more Danger, than if the whole World stood by thee.

2. Live as those that believe this; be continually under the power of this
Apprehension, That God takes a particular and exact notice of all thy Actions.
The firm Belief of this would have a double influence upon us, it would
encourage us in well-doing, and be a restraint upon us as to sin; sic vivamus
tanquam in conspectu vivamus, Sen. It were well if Men would live as if any
body saw them; but to live as if some Worthy and Excellent Person were always
present with us, and did observe us, this will be a far greater curb upon us.
There are some sins of that Ugliness and Deformity, that a Man would not commit
them in the presence of any one, of a Child or a Fool; and there are some
Persons of such Worth and Reverence, quorum interventu perditi quoque homines
vitia supprimerent. Epicurus had this good Conceit of himself, that he could
advise others so to act as if he stood by, fac omnia tanquam spectet Epicurus;
but Seneca instanceth much better in Cato, or Scipio, or Laelius, Vt sic
tanquam illo spectante vivamus,
and shall not the presence of the Divine Majesty be an eternal restraint upon
us?

This was David's course to keep himself from sin, Psalm. 39.1. I will take heed
to my way, while the wicked is before me; how much more in the presence of God?
I have kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies, for all my ways are before thee,
Psalm. 119.168. And it was wisely advised by Seneca, That we should so live when
we are among Men, as believing God sees us; and when there is none but he sees
us, let us behave our selves before him, as if Men did stare upon us.

III. God's Knowledge of the Heart teaches us,

1. The Folly of Hypocrisy; how vain it is to make a show of that outwardly,
which inwardly and in our Hearts we are not; to put on a Mask of Religion, and
paint our selves beautifully without, when inwardly we are full of rottenness
and uncleanness; to honor God with our lips, when our Hearts are far from him.
If we were to deal with Men, this were not a very wise way, for there is danger
of discovery even from them, therefore the best way for a Man to seem to be any
thing, is really to be what he would appear; but having to deal with God, who
knows our thoughts afar off, to whom all our Disguises are transparent, and all
our little Arts of concealment signify nothing, it is a madness to hide our
Iniquity in our Bosom. With this Argument our Savior convinces the
hypocritical Pharisees, Luke 16.15. Ye are they that justify your selves
before Men; but God knows your Hearts.

2. If God know your Hearts, then endeavor to approve your Hearts to him;
charge your selves with inward Purity and Holiness, because of the pure Eyes
which behold the most intimate and secret motions of your Souls; therefore
cleanse your Hearts from wickedness; how long shall vain thoughts lodge within
you? Fear and Shame from Men lay a great restraint upon our outward Actions;
but how licentious are we many times in our Hearts? what a strange freedom do
we take within our own Breasts? This is an Argument of the secret Atheism that
lies at the bottom of our Hearts. He that allows himself in any wicked Thoughts
and Imaginations, which (out of a regard to Men) he will not put in practice,
this man plainly declares, That he reverenceth Men more than God; that he
either disbelieves a God, or despises him.

Therefore keep your Hearts with all diligence, because they are peculiarly
under God's inspection; and when you are ready to take the liberty of your
Thoughts, because no Eye sees you, ask your selves, does not he that pondereth
the Heart consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does he not know it? as
the wise Man speaks, Prove. 24.12.

And whatever you do in the service of God, do it heartily as to the Lord.
Indeed if we did only worship God to be seen of Men, an external Worship would
be sufficient: but Religion is not intended to please men, but God; he is a
Spirit, and sees our Spirits, therefore we must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth. 1 These. 2.4. Not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our Hearts. David
uses this Argument to his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou, Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all
the imaginations of the thoughts. Whatever liberty we may take to our selves
now, and how careless soever we are of our Thoughts, and the inward frame of
our Hearts; yet the Scripture assures us, that he, who now sees our Hearts,
will one day judge us according to them. Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the
heart, I try the reins, even to give to every Man according to his ways. And
the Apostle speaks of a day coming wherein God will judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, Heb. 4.13. Rev. 2.23.

3. This is matter of encouragement to us in many cases. In our secret
Troubles, Psalm. 142.3. When my Spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou
knew my path. In Cases of difficulty which depend upon the Hearts of other
men, which though we do not know, yet God knows them. So the Apostles, Acts 1.24.
when they did not know whom to choose for an Apostle, they refer it to God, and
they prayed and said, thou Lord which know the hearts of all, show whether
of these two thou have chosen. But especially this is matter of comfort to us,
when we suffer by the Calumnies and Reproaches of Men, when the World charge
us with Crimes of Hypocrisy, and Falseness, and Insincerity, then to be able
to appeal to the searcher of hearts, as to our Innocence and Sincerity, and to
say with the Prophet Jer. O Lord of hosts, that tryest the righteous, and see
the reins and the heart, unto thee have I opened my Cause, Chapter 20.12. and with
St. Peter, God which knows the hearts bare them witness, Acts 15.8.

4. This renders all the deep and profound Policies of Wicked Men a vain thing.
The Lord knows the Thoughts of men that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.11. They are
Vanity, because he knows them, and can defeat them; he can bring their counsels
to naught, and make their devices of none effect. He is conscious to the first
motions of their Hearts; he sees those Cobwebs which they are spining, and can
blow them away with a Breath, he can snare them in their own Policies, and turn
their Counsels into foolishness. Thou that put a Mask upon a wicked Design,
and hidest the Malice and Revenge of thine Heart, under a dissembling
Countenance, God sees thy Design, and has a thousand ways to prevent it. When
the Politicians of the World think they have laid their Design sure, with all
imaginable caution, and that their Counsels cannot miscarry, being out of all
possibility of Humane discovery or prevention, for all this their counsels may
come to naught, and though they have resolved it, yet it may not stand; he that
sits in the heavens laughs at them, the Lord has them in derision. As Wise as
they are, they are guilty of this oversight, that they did not take God into
consideration, by whom they are surprised and discovered. He that sees their
Design can blast it in a moment; he can speak the word, and thy breath shall go
forth, and thou shall return to thy dust; and in that very day thy thoughts
perish, Psalm. 146.4.

5. If God only knows the Hearts of Men, then what art thou, O man! that
judge another's heart? This condemns the Uncharitableness of Men, who take
upon them to judge and censure Men's Hearts, which is to speak evil of the
things which they know not; to meddle with things which do not fall under their
cognizance. What St. James says chapter 4.12. There is one lawgiver, that is able
to save and to destroy; who art thou that judge another? is proportionably
true in this case; there is but one that knows the heart; who art thou then
that judge another Man's heart? Who art thou, O Man! that take upon thee to
sit in judgment upon thy Brother, and to pass Sentence upon his Heart, to
pronounce him a Hypocrite, a wicked Man, and a damned Wretch? Art thou a Man,
and the son of Man, and will thou assume to thy self the Prerogative of God?
Man can only look to the outward appearance; but God sees the heart.

There Is nothing does more palpably discover the Un-christian Spirit of that
new Sect which is of late risen up among us, than their taking upon them to
judge Men's Hearts, and as confidently to censure every Man they meet, as if
they had a window into his Breast: But they are not alone guilty of this; those
who are so ready to call Men Hypocrites, they invade this Prerogative of God.
We may pronounce an action wicked, if it be contrary to the Rule; or a Man
wicked, as to his present state, if the general course of his Life and Actions
be wicked; for our Savior tells us, by their Fruits ye shall know them; this
we may do, provided we be called to it, and be sure it is so: but to call any
Man an Hypocrite, who makes an outward profession of Religion, and whose
external Conversation is unblameable; this is to judge a Man in a matter of
which thou can have no Evidence; this is to ascend into Heaven, and step into
the Throne of God, and to be like the most high; for he, even he only, knows
the hearts of the children of men.

IV. From God's Knowledge of Future Events, we may learn,

1. The Vanity of Astrology, and all other Arts that pretend to foretell future
Events, things that depend on the Will of Free Agents. The vanity of these Arts
has been sufficiently shown by Learned Men, from the Weakness and Uncertainty
of the Principles they rely upon; I shall only for the present take notice,
that it contradicts this Principle of Religon, that God only knows future
events. From prudent Collections and Observations, probable Conjectures may be
made of what will happen in some Cases; but there are no certain
Prospective-Glasses, with which we can see Future Events, but Divine
Revelation; therefore whoeever takes upon him to foretell Future Events without
Divine Revelation, he arrogates to himself that which is the Prerogative of the
Deity; and God delights to chastise the Curiosity, and cross the Predictions of
these vain Pretenders, Isa. 44.24, 25. Thus says the Lord that formed thee, I
am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone,
that spreads abroad the Earth by my self: that frustrateth the tokens of the
Liars, and makes Diviners mad; that turns wisemen backward, and makes
their knowledge foolish. As he also in Scripture threatens those who consult
them, and rely upon them. Those who go to Astrologers, or Wise Men, as they
call them, to know their Fortunes, and enquire of the Events of their Life,
they forsake God, and betake themselves to lying vanities.

2. Refer future Things to God who only knows them, trust him with all Events;
cast your care upon him. When you have used your best Prudence, and Wisdom, and
Diligence for your Supply and Security for the future, leave the rest to God,
for your Heavenly Father knows both your Wants and your Dangers. When we are
oversolicitous about future Things, we take God's proper Work out of his Hands,
and usurp the Government of the World. Why do we take too much upon us? We are
but of yesterday, and know not what will be to morrow.

Mind your present Duty and Work, and leave Events to God. Secret things belong
to the Lord our God; but those things that are revealed, to us and our Children
for ever, to do all the words of his law, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Do your Duty, commit the
rest to God in well-doing.

In this World we are in a mixed condition, which is made up of Good and Evil,
of Happiness and Misery; what is good for us to know, is revealed, that is our
Duty; but in great Wisdom and pity to Mankind, God has concealed and hid the
rest from us. He has hid from us the Good that may happen to us, because the
best things of this World are but shallow and empty, and if we could see them
beforehand, we should prevent our selves in the enjoyment of them, and eat out
the sweetness which is in them by delightful fore-thoughts of them. And he has
concealed future Evils from us, lest we should torment our selves with the
fearful expectation of them, Prudens, futuri temporis exitum, Caliginosa Nocte
premit Deus.
Ridetque si mortalis ultra fas trepidat. What a folly is it to make your
selves miserable with fear of being so; ante miserias miser. Use all wise means
to prevent what you fear, and then be satisfied, and be as happy as you can
'till Misery come; go not forth to meet it, sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof; do not anticipate the Evils of to morrow, and take present possession
of an Evil to come; cast your care upon him who has promised to care for you.

SERMON VII. Vol. VI.
The Wisdom, Glory, and Sovereignty of God.
JUDE 25. To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and
Power, now and ever.


I, AM treating of the Attributes of God; particularly of those which relate to
the Divine Understanding, his Knowledge and Wisdom. The Knowledge of God only
implies his bare Understanding of things, but his Wisdom implies the skill of
ordering and disposing things to the best Ends and Purposes, the skill of
making and governing and administering all things in Number, Weight, and
Measure. The Knowledge of God rather considers things absolutely, and in
themselves: The Wisdom of God considers rather the Respects and Relations of
Things, looks upon things under the Notion of Means, and Ends; accordingly I
described them thus. The Knowledge of God is a Perfect comprehension of the
Nature of all things, with all their Qualities, Powers, and Circumstances. The
Wisdom of God is a perfect Comprehension of the Respects and Relations of
things one to another; of their Harmony and Opposition, their fitness and
unfitness to such and such Ends. I have largely spoken to the First of these; I
come now to the

Second, The Wisdom of God in general; together with his Majesty and
Sovereignty, as they are here joined together. I begin with the

First, That God is the only wise God. In handling of this, I shall show

1. In what sense God may be said to be the only wise God.

2. Prove that this Attribute belongs to God.

1. In what sense God may be said to be the only wise God. For answer to this,
we may take Notice, that there are some Perfections of God that are
incommunicable to the Creatures; as his Independency and Eternity. These God
only possesses, and they are to be attributed to him alone, God only is
independent and eternal: But there are other Perfections which are
communicable, that is, which the Creatures may in some measure and degree
partake of, as Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice, and Power, and
the like; yet these the Scriptures do peculiarly attribute to God, not that
they are altogether incommunicable to the Creature, but that they belong to God
in such a peculiar and Divine manner, as does shut out the Creature from any
claim or Title to them, in that degree and Perfection wherein God possesses
them. I shall give you some instances of this. His goodness, this is reserved
to God alone, Matthew. 19.17. Why call thou me good? there is none good, but
one, that is God: His power and immortality, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Who is the
blessed and only potentate; who only has immortality: His Wisdom, 1 Timothy 1.17.
The only wise God; Romans 16.27. To God only wise be Glory: His Holiness Rev.
15.14. For thou only art Holy. The transcendent degree and singularity of these
Divine Perfections which are communicable, is beyond what we are able to
conceive; so that although the Creatures partake of them, yet in that Degree and
Perfection wherein God possesses them, they are peculiar and proper to the
Deity; so that in this sense, there is none good but God; he only is holy, he
is the only wise; in so inconceiveable a manner does God possess even those
Perfections which in some degree he communicates, and we can only understand
them as he communicates them, and not as he possesses them; so that when we
consider of any of these Divine Perfections, we must not frame Notions of them,
contrary to what they are in the Creature; but we must say that the Goodness
and Wisdom of God are all this which is in the Creature, and much more which I
am not able to comprehend.

This being premised in general, God may be said to be only wise in these two
respects.

1. As being Originally and Independently wise. 2. As being eminently and
transcendently so.
1. God only is originally and independently wise. He derives it from none, and
all derive it from him, Romans 11.33, 34. O the depth of the riches both of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
Counselor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again? For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be
glory for ever, Amen. He challenges any Creature to come forth and say that
they have given Wisdom, or any other Perfection to God; no, all Creatures that
are Partakers of it, derive it from him. Prove. 2.6. For the Lord gives Wisdom.
Eccl. 2.26. God gives to a Man that is good in his sight, wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy. Dan. 2.21. He gives Wisdom to the Wise, and Knowledge to
them that know Understanding.

2. He is eminently and transcendently so. And this follows from the fo^mer;
because God is the Fountain of Wisdom, therefore it is most eminently in him,
Psalm. 94.9, 10. He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the
Eye, shall he not see? he that teaches Man Knowledge, shall not he know? In
like manner we may Reason concerning all other Attributes of God, that if he
communicate them, he is much more eminently possessed of them himself; the
greatest Wisdom of the Creatures is nothing in Opposition to the Wisdom of God,
nothing in Comparison to it.

Nothing in Opposition to it; Job 5.13. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness. Job 9.4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who has
hardened himself against him, and prosper'd. Prove. 21.30. There is no Wisdom,
nor Understanding, nor Counsel, against the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.19. He will destroy
the Wisdom of the Wise; v. 29. and by foolish things confound the wise.

Nothing in Comparison of it. There are a great many that pretend to Wisdom,
but most are destitute of true Wisdom; and those who have it, they have it with
many Imperfections and Disadvantages. Usually those who are destitute of true
Wisdom pretend most to it, Job 11.12. Vain Man would be wise, though he be born
like a wild Asse's colt. The High and the Great of this World pretend to it,
Job 32.9. Great Men are not always Wise. Learned Men they pretend to it; the
heathen Philosophers were great professers of Wisdom, Romans 1.22. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, they were wise to do evil, but to do
good they had no understanding, As the Prophet speaks, Jer. 4.22. The
Politicians of the World they pretend to it; but theirs is rather a Craftiness
than a Wisdom; Men call it Prudence, but they are glad to use many Arts to set
it off, and make it look like Wisdom; by Silence, and Secrecy, and Formality,
and affected Gravity, and Nods, and Gestures. The Scripture calls it the Wisdom
of this World, 1 Cor. 2.6. and a fleshly Wisdom, 2 Cor. 1.12. It Is Wisdom
misapplied, it is the pursuit of a wrong End. The petty Plots and Designs of
this World are far from Wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.20. The Lord knows the thoughts of
the Wise, that they are vain. That cannot be Wisdom, which mistakes its great
End, which minds mean Things, and neglects those which are of greatest
Concernment to them. Job 22.2. He that is Wise is profitable to himself. Prove.
9.12. If thou be Wise, thou shall be Wise for thy self. Tully tells us, Ennius
was wont to say Nequicquam sapere sapientem, qui sibi ipsi prodesse non quiret.
The wise Sages of the World as to the best things are Fools, Matt. 11.25. God
has hid these things from the wise and prudent. There are many that are wise
in their own Conceits, but there is more hope of a Fool than of them, Prove.
26.12. So that the greatest part of that which passes for Wisdom among Men is
quite another thing. Nihil tam valde vulgar quam nihil sapere; we talk much of
Prodigies, maximum portentum vir sapiens, Tul. Those few in the World that are
the Children of true Wisdom, they have it in a very imperfect degree, they are
not usually so wise for their Souls, and for Eternity, as Men of this World,
Luke 16.8. The Children of this World are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light. It is attended with many inconveniences, Eccl. 1.18. in
much wisdom there is much grief; he speaks of the wisdom about natural things.

But we need not instance in the folly of wicked Men, and worldly Men, and in
the imperfect degrees of Wisdom which are to be found in good Men, in Wisdom's
own Children; the Wisdom of God needs not these foils to set it off: the Wisdom
of Man in Innocence, or of the highest Angel in Heaven, bears no proportion to
the un-erring and infinite Wisdom of God. We mortal men many times mistake our
End out of Ignorance, apply unfit and improper Means for accomplishing good
Ends; the Angels in Glory have not a perfect comprehension of the harmony and
agreement of things, of the unfitness and opposition of them one to another:
but the Divine Wisdom propounds to it self the highest and best Ends, and has
a perfect comprehension of the fitness and unfitness of all things one to
another; so that Angels are but foolish Beings to God; Job 4.17. His Angels he
charge with folly. Job, upon a full enquiry after Wisdom, concludes that it
belongs only to God, that he only is perfectly possessed of it, Job 28.12. etc.
But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? in
such an eminent and transcendent Degree it is not to be met with in any of the
Creatures; God only has it, v. 23. God knows the place thereof.

II. I shall prove that this Perfection belongs to God, 1. From the dictates of
Natural Reason, and 2. From Scripture.


1. From the dictates of Natural Reason. I have often told you the Perfections
of God are not to be proved by way of demonstration, because there is no Cause
of them; but by way of conviction, by showing the absurdity and inconvenience
of the contrary.

The Contrary is an Imperfection, and argues many other Imperfections,
therefore Wisdom belongs to God. Among men Folly is looked upon as the greatest
defect; it is accounted a greater Reproach and Disgrace, than Vice and
Wickedness; it is of so ill a Report in the World, that there are not many but
had rather be accounted Knaves than Fools; but in a true Esteem and Value of
things, it is, next to Wickedness, the greatest Imperfection; and, on the
contrary, Wisdom is the highest Perfection next to Holiness and Goodness; it is
usually more cried up in the World than any thing else. Reason tells us, though
the Scripture had not said it, that wisdom excells folly as much as light does
darkness, Eccl. 2.13. The wisdom of a man makes his Face to shine, Eccl. 8.1.
Wisdom is a defense, 7.12. and v. 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise more than
ten mighty men that are in the City.

And the denial of this Perfection to God would argue many other Imperfections;
it would be an universal Blemish to the Divine Nature, and would darken all his
other Perfections. It would weaken the Power of God. How impotent and
ineffectual would Power be without Wisdom! what irregular things would it
produce! what untoward Combinations of Effects would there be, if Infinite
Power should act without the Conduct and Direction of Infinite Wisdom! It would
eclipse the Providence of God, and put out the Eyes that are in the Wheels, as
the Prophet represents God's Providence. There can be no Counsel, no Forecast,
no orderly Government of the World without Wisdom. The Goodness, and Mercy, and
Justice, and Truth of God, could not shine with that luster, were it not for
his Wisdom which does illustrate these with so much advantage.

I need not bring Testimonies from Heathen Writers to confirm this, their Books
are full of Expressions of their admiration of God's wise Government of the
World. I will not trouble you with Quotations of particular Testimonies.
Epicurus indeed denied that God either made or governed the World; but he must
needs acknowledge him to have been a very wise Being, because he made him
happy, which cannot be without Wisdom, though he had taken away all other
evidence of his Wisdom. Aristotle seems to have supposed the World to be a
necessary result and emanation from God: but then the other Sects of
Philosophers did suppose the World to be the free Product of God's Goodness and
Wisdom.

2. From Scripture; Job. 9.4. He is wise in heart; 36.5. He is mighty in
strength and wisdom. Dan. 2.20. Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever,
for wisdom and might are his. Hither we may refer those Texts which attribute
Wisdom of God in a singular and peculiar manner, Romans 16.27. and those which
speak of God as the Fountain of it, who communicates and bestows it upon his
Creatures, Dan. 2.21. James 1.5. and those Texts which speak of the Wisdom of
God in the Creation of the World, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how wonderful are thy
works, in wisdom have thou made them all; Jer. 10.12. who has established the
world by his wisdom, and stretched forth the heavens by his discretion; in the
Providence and Government of the World, Dan. 2.20. Wisdom and strength are his,
and he changes times and seasons, he removes Kings and sets up Kings; and
in many other places; in the redemption of Mankind; therefore Christ is called
the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and the dispensation of the Gospel, the hidden
wisdom of God, and the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 2.10.

If then God be only wise, the Original and only Fountain of it, from hence we
learn,

First, To go to him for it. Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it
of God. There are many conceited Men, that think they are Rich and increased,
and stand in need of nothing. The Apostle does not speak as if there were some
that did not want Wisdom, but because there are some so proud and conceited,
that they think that they lack nothing; those are stark Fools, and God resists
such foolish and proud Men: but if any Man, sensible of his Defect and
Imperfection, comes to God, he gives liberally and upbraids no man. We are
ashamed to learn Wisdom of Men, lest they should contemn and upbraid us with
our Folly; Men are envious and unwilling that others should be as wise as
themselves: but God's goodness makes him willing to impart Wisdom, he gives
liberally, and upbraids no man.

This is the most desirable Accomplishment and Perfection; happy is the man
that gets wisdom; wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; it is
better than those things that are of highest value among men, as Solomon often
makes the Comparison. Now because it comes down from above, we should look up
for it; it is by the Revelation of his Will, and the wise Counsels of his Word,
that we are made wise unto salvation, therefore we should beg of him, that he
would give us the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of himself,
Ephesians. 1.17.

2. If God be only Wise in such an eminent and transcendent Degree, then let us
be humble. There Is no cause of boasting, seeing we have nothing but what we
have received. The lowest instance, the least specimen of Divine Wisdom
out-shines the highest pitch of Humane Wisdom; the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. therefore let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Jer.
9.29. Of all things we should not be proud of Wisdom; the proud man throws down
the Reputation of his Wisdom, by the way that he would raise it. No such
evidence of our Folly, as as a conceit that we are Wise; sapientis animus
nunquam turgescit, nunquam tumet, Cic. To pride our selves in our own Wisdom,
is the way to have our Folly made manifest. God threatens to destroy the wisdom
of the wise man, and to turn their wisdom into foolishness.

3. We should labor to partake of the Wisdom of God, so far as it is
communicable. The greatest Wisdom that we are capable of, is to distinguish
between Good and Evil; to be wise to that which is good, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 16.19. that is, to provide for the future in time, to make provision for
Eternity, to think of our latter end, to fear God and obey him, to be pure and
peaceable, to receive instruction, and to win Souls; these are the Characters
which the Scripture gives of Wisdom. When Job had declared that the excellency
of the Divine Wisdom was not to be attained by men; he tells us what that
Wisdom is, which is proper for us; And unto man he said, the fear of the Lord
that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is understanding. There are many
that are wise to worldly Ends and Purposes, as our Savior tells us, wise to
get Riches, and to ascend to Honors: But this is not the wisdom which we are
to labor after; this is but a short-witted Prudence, to serve a present turn,
without any prospect to the future, without regard to the next World, and the
Eternity which we are to live in; this is to be wise for a moment, and fools
for ever.

4. If God be only Wise, then put your Trust and Confidence in him. Whom should
we trust rather than Infinite Wisdom which manageth and directs Infinite
Goodness and Power? In all Cases of difficulty trust him for direction,
acknowledge him in all thy ways, that he may direct thy steps, commit thy way
unto the Lord, and lean not to thine own understanding. The race is not to the
swift, nor the Battle to the strong, but the Providence of God disposes all
these things. And if we rely upon our own Wisdom, that will prove a broken
reed. And as our own Wisdom is a broken Reed, so the Wisdom of other men, Isa.
31.1, 2. God curses them that go down into Egypt, and trust to their strength
and Wisdom, but look not to the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord; yet
he also is wise, says the Prophet.

5. Let us adore the Wisdom of God, and say with St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.17. To the
only wise God be honor and glory, for ever and ever Amen; and with Daniel,
Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom and might are his.
Veneration is the acknowledgement of an Infinite Excellency and Perfection. We
reverence any extraordinary degree of Wisdom in Men; but the Divine Wisdom
which is Perfect and Infinite, is matter of our Adoration, and Blessing, and
Praise. Thanksgiving respects the Benefits we receive: but we bless God when we
acknowledge any Excellency; for as God's Blessing us is to do us good, so our
Blessing him is to speak good of him; and as all God's Perfections are the
Objects of our Blessing, so more especially his Wisdom is of our Praise; for to
praise God is to take notice of the wise Design and Contrivance of his Goodness
and Mercy toward us.

Before I pass on to the other Particulars contained in these words, I cannot
but take notice that this wise God, here spoken of, is styled our Savior,
which some understand of our Savior Jesus Christ, and bring this place as an
Argument to prove his Divinity; and if that were so, it were all one to my
purpose, which is in the next place to show that Glory, and Majesty, and
Dominion, and Power belong to the Divine Being. But although I would not
willingly part with any place that may fairly be brought for the proof of the
Divinity of Christ, yet seeing there are so many plain Texts in Scripture for
the proof of it, we have the less reason to stretch doubtful places; and that
this is so, will appear to any one who considers that the Title of Savior is
several times in Scripture attributed to God the Father; besides that in a very
Ancient and Authentic Copy, we find the words read somewhat otherwise, and so
as to put this out of all Controversy, (...), etc.

Having premised thus much for the clearing of these words, I shall briefly
consider, first God's Glory and Majesty, and then his Dominion and Sovereignty.

First, God's Glory and Majesty. By Majesty, we may understand the greatness,
or eminent excellency of the Divine Nature, which results from his Perfections,
and whereby the Divine Nature is set and placed infinitely above all other
Beings; I say the eminent excellency of the Divine Nature, which results from
his Perfections, more especially from those great Perfections, his Goodness,
and Wisdom, and Power, and Holiness.

And his Glory is a manifestation of this Excellency, and a just acknowledgment
and due opinion of it. Hence it is, that in Scripture God is said to be
glorious in power, and glorious in holiness, and his Goodness is called his
glory; and here in the Text, Glory and Majesty are ascribed to him upon the
account of his Wisdom and Goodness.

That these belong to God, I shall prove,

1. From the acknowledgment of Natural Light. The Heathens did constantly
ascribe Greatness to God, and that as resulting chiefly from his Goodness, as
appears by their frequent conjunction of these two Attributes, Goodness and
Greatness. Opt. Max. were their most familiar Titles of the Deity; to which I
will add that known place of Seneca, primus deorum cultus est deos credere,
dein reddere illis majestatem suam, reddere bonitatem, sine qua nulla majestas.

2. From Scripture. It were endless to produce all those Texts wherein
Greatness and Glory are ascribed to God. I shall mention two or three. Deuteronomy.
10.17. the Lord is a great God; Psalm. 24.10. he is called the King of glory;
104, 1. he is said to be clothed with majesty and honor. The whole Earth is
full of his glory. Hither belong all those Doxologies in the Old and New
Testament, wherein Greatness and Glory and Majesty are ascribed to God.

From all which we may learn,

1. What it is that makes a Person great and glorious, and what is the way to
Majesty, viz. real worth and excellency, and particularly that kind of
excellency which Creatures are capable of in a very eminent degree, and that is
goodness; this is that which advances a Person, and gives him a pre-eminency
above all others; this casts a luster upon a man, and makes his face to shine.
Aristotle tells us, that Honor is nothing else but the signification of the
esteem which we have of a Person for his goodness; for, says he, to be good,
and to do good, is the highest glory. God's Goodness is his highest Glory; and
there is nothing so glorious in any Creature, as herein to be like God.

2. Let us give God the Glory which is due to his Name; Ascribe ye greatness to
our God, Deuteronomy. 32.3. Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory
and power, Psalm. 29.1. The Glory and Majesty of God calls for our Esteem and
Honor, our Fear and Reverence of him. Thus we should glorify God in our
Spirits, by an inward esteem and reverence of his Majesty. The thoughts of
Earthly Majesty will compose us to reverence: how much more should the
Apprehensions of the Divine Majesty strike an awe upon our Spirits in all our
Addresses to him? his excellency should make us afraid, and keep us from all
saucy boldness and familiarity with him. Reverence is an Acknowledgment of the
distance which is between the Majesty of God and our meanness. And we should
glorify him in our bodies, with outward Worship and Adoration; that is, by all
external significations of reverence and respect; and we should glorify him in
our Lives and Actions. The highest glory a Creature can give to God, is to
endeavor to be like him; satis illos coluit, quisquis imitatus est, Sen.
hereby we manifest and show forth his Excellency to the World, when we
endeavor to be conformed to the Divine Perfections. And in case of sin and
provocation, we are to give glory to God by repentance, which is an
acknowledgment of his Holiness, who hates sin; and of his Justice, which will
punish it; and of the mercy of God, which is ready to pardon it; for it is the
glory of God to pass by a provocation.

3. We should take heed of robbing God of his Glory, by giving it to any
Creature, by ascribing those Titles, or that Worship to any Creature, which is
due to God alone. This is the Reason which is given of the Second Commandment;
I the Lord am a jealous God; God is jealous of his Honor, and will not give
his glory to another, nor his Praise to graven Images, Isa. 42.8. Upon this
account, we find the Apostle reproves the Idolatry of the Heathens, because
thereby they debased the esteem of God, and did show they had unworthy thoughts
of him, Romans 1.21, 23. When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but
became vain in their imaginations. And changed the glory of the incorruptible
God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things. Hereby they denied the glorious Excellency of the
Divine Nature; that is, that he is a Spirit, and so incapable of being
represented by any material or sensible Image.

Secondly, I come now to speak of the Sovereignty and Dominion of God. In which
I shall show,

First. What we are to understand by the Sovereignty and Dominion of God. By
these we mean the full and absolute Right and Title and Authority which God
has to, and over all his Creatures, as his Creatures, and made by him. And
this Right results from the Effects of that Goodness, and Power, and Wisdom
whereby all things are and were made; from whence there does accrue to God a
Sovereign Right and Title to all his Creatures, and a full and absolute
Authority over them; that is such a Right and Authority which does not depend
upon any Superior, nor is subject and accountable to any for any thing that he
does to any of his Creatures. And this is that which is called summum imperium,
because there is no power above it to check or control it, and therefore there
can be none greater than this. And it is absolute, because all the Creatures
have what they have from God, and all depend upon his Goodness, and therefore
they owe all possible Duty and perpetual Subjection so long as they continue in
Being, because it is solely by his Power and Goodness that they continue; and
therefore whatever Right or Title any one can pretend to any Person or Thing,
that God has to all things, in Deo omnes tituli omnia jura concurrunt.

So that Sovereignty and Dominion signifies a full Right and Title and
Propriety in all his Creatures, and an absolute Authority over them, to govern
them and dispose of them, and deal with them in any way he pleases, that is
not contrary to his essential Dignity and Perfection, or repugnant to the
Natural State and Condition of the Creature.

And for our better understanding of this, and the preventing of Mistakes which
Men are apt to fall into about the Sovereignty of God, I will show, I. Wherein
it does not consist. And, II. Wherein it does consist.


I. Wherein it does not consist.

1. Not in a Right to gratify and delight himself in the extreme Misery of
innocent and undeserving Creatures; I say, not in a right; for the right that
God has in his Creatures is founded in the Benefits he has conferred upon
them, and the Obligation they have to him upon that account. Now there is none,
who because he has done a Benefit, can have, by virtue of that, a right to do
a greater Evil than the Good which he has done amounts to; and I think it next
to madness, to doubt whether extreme and Eternal Misery be not a greater Evil,
than simple Being is a Good. I know they call it physical goodness; but I do
not understand how any thing is the better for being called by a hard Name. For
what can there be that is good or desirable in Being, when it only serves to be
a foundation of the greatest and most lasting Misery? and we may safely say,
that the just God will never challenge more than an equitable right. God does
not claim any such sovereignty to himself, as to crush and oppress innocent
Creatures without a cause, and to make them miserable without a provocation.
And because it seems some have been very apt to entertain such groundless
Jealousies and unworthy Thoughts of God, he has given us his Oath to assure us
of the contrary. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of
a sinner, but rather that he should turn and live. So far is he from taking
Pleasure in the misery and ruin of innocent Creatures, that in case of sin and
provocation, he would be much rather pleased, if sinners would, by Repentance,
avoid and escape his Justice, than that they should fall under it. The good God
cannot be glorified or pleased in doing Evil to any, where Justice does not
require it; nothing is further from infinite Goodness than to rejoice in Evil.
We account him a Tyrant and a Monster of Men, and of a devilish temper, that
can do so; and we cannot do a greater Injury to the good God, than to paint him
out after such a horrid and deformed manner.

2. The sovereignty of God does not consist in imposing Laws upon his
Creatures, which are impossible either to be understood or observed by them.
For this would not only be contrary to the dignity of the Divine Nature, but
contradict the nature of a reasonable Creature, which, in reason, cannot be
obliged by any Power to impossibilities.

3. The sovereignty of God does not consist in a liberty to tempt Men to Evil,
or by any inevitable Decree to necessitate them to sin, or effectually to
procure the sins of Men, and to punish them for them. For as this would be
contrary to the Holiness, and Justice, and Goodness of God; so to the nature of
a reasonable Creature, who cannot be guilty or deserve Punishment for what it
cannot help. And men cannot easily have a blacker thought of God, than to
imagine that he has, from all Eternity, carried on a secret Design to
circumvent the greatest part of men into destruction, and underhand to draw Men
into a Plot against Heaven, that by this unworthy practice he may raise a
Revenue of glory to his Justice. There Is no generous and good man, but would
spit in that man's Face that should charge him with such a Design: and if they
who are but very drops of goodness, in comparison of God, the infinite Ocean of
Goodness, would take it for such a Reproach; shall we attribute that to the
best Being in the World, which we would detest and abominate in our selves?

II. Wherein the Sovereignty of God does consist.

1. In a right to dispose of, and deal with his Creatures in any way that does
not contradict the Essential Perfections of God, and the natural Condition of
the Creature.

2. In a right to impose what Laws he pleases upon his Creatures, whether
natural and reasonable; or positive, of Trial of Obedience, provided they
contradict not the Nature of God or of the Creature.

3. In a right to inflict due and deserved Punishment in case of provocation.

4. In a right to afflict any of his Creatures, so the Evil he inflicts be
short of the Benefits he has conferred on them; yea, and farther, in a right
when he pleases to annihilate the Creature, and turn it out of Being, if it
should so seem good to him, though that Creature have not offended him; because
what he gave was his own, and he may without injury take it away again when he
pleases. In these the Sovereignty of God consists, and if there be any thing
else that can be reconciled with the essential Perfections of God.

Secondly, For the Proof and Confirmation of this. This is universally
acknowledged by the Heathens, that God is the Lord and Sovereign of the World,
and of all Creatures. Hence Plato calls him (...); and Tully, omnium rerum
Dominum, Lord of all; and this the Scripture does every where attribute to him,
calling him Lord of all, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; to which we may
refer all those Doxologies, in which Power, and Dominion, and Authority are
ascribed to God. I will only mention that eminent Confession of Nebuchadnezzar
a great King, who, when his Understanding came to him, was forced to
acknowledge that God was the most high, Dan. 4.34, 35. I infer,

First, Negatively, we cannot, from the sovereignty of God, infer a right to do
any thing that is unsuitable to the Perfection of his Nature; and consequently
that we are to rest satisfied with such a Notion of Dominion and Sovereignty in
God, as does not plainly and directly contradict all the Notions that we have
of Justice and Goodness: nay it would be little less than a horrid and dreadful
Blasphemy, to say that God can, out of his Sovereign Will and Pleasure, do any
thing that contradicts the Nature of God, and the essential Perfections of the
Deity; or to imagine that the Pleasure and Will of the Holy, and Just, and Good
God is not always regulated and determined by the essential and indispensable
Laws of Goodness, and Holiness, and Righteousness.

Secondly, Positively; we may infer from the Sovereignty and Dominion of God,

1. That we ought to own and acknowledge God for our Lord and Sovereign, who by
creating us, and giving us all that we have, did create to himself a Right in
us.

2. That we owe to him the utmost possibility of our Love, to love him with all
our hearts, and souls, and strength; because the Souls that we have he gave us;
and that we are in a capacity to love him, is his Gift; and when we render
these to him, we do but give him of his own.

3. We owe to him all imaginable subjection, and observance, and obedience; and
are with all diligence, to the utmost of our endeavors, to conform our selves
to his Will, and to those Laws which he has imposed upon us.

4. In case of Offense and Disobedience, we are without murmuring, to submit to
what he shall inflict upon us, to accept of the punishment of our iniquity, and
patiently to bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against
him, who is our Lord and Sovereign.

SERMON VIII. Vol. VI.
The Wisdom of God, in the Creation of the World.
PSALM 104.24. O Lord; how manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made
them all.


I Am treating of the Attributes and Properties of God, particularly those
which relate to the Divine Understanding, which I told you are his Knowledge
and Wisdom. I have finished the first, the Knowledge of God. The last Day I
spoke concerning the Wisdom of God in general; but there are Three eminent
Arguments, and famous Instances of God's Wisdom, which I have reserved for a
more large and particular handling. The Wisdom of God shines forth in the
Creation of the World, in the Government of it, and in the Redemption of
Mankind by Jesus Christ. Of these Three I shall speak severally.

I begin with the First, the Argument of God's Wisdom, which the Creation does
furnish us withal. In this visible frame of the World which we behold with our
Eyes, which way soever we look, we are encountered with ocular demonstrations of
the Wisdom of God. What the Apostle says of the Power of God is true likewise
of his Wisdom, Romans 1.20. The invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead: so the eternal wisdom of God is understood by the
things which are made. Now the Creation is an Argument of the wisdom of God, as
it is an effect of admirable Counsel and Wisdom. As any curious Work, or rare
Engine does argue the Wit of the Artificer; so the variety, and order, and
regularity, and fitness of the Works of God, argue the infinite wisdom of him
who made them; a Work so beautiful and magnificent, such a stately Pile as
Heaven and Earth is, so curious in the several pieces of it, so harmonious in
all its parts, every part so fitted to the service of the whole, and each part
for the service of another; is not this a plain Argument that there was
infinite wisdom in the contrivance of this Frame?

Now I shall endeavor to prove to you that this Frame of Things which we see
with our Eyes, which we call the World, or the Creation, is contrived after the
best manner, and has upon it evident impressions of Counsel and Wisdom. I
grant the wisdom of God is Infinite, and that many of the Ends and Designs of
his wisdom are unsearchable, and past finding out, both in the Works of
Creation and Providence; and that though a Wise man seek to find out the work of
God from the beginning to the end, he shall not be able to do it; and we shall
never be able to exhaust all the various Wisdom and Contrivance which is in the
Works of God; though the oftener and the nearer we meditate upon them, the more we
shall see to admire in them; the more we study this Book of the Creation, the
more we shall be astonished at the Wisdom of the Author: but this does not
hinder but that we may discover something of the Wisdom of God, though it be
Infinite. As the Effects of Infinite Power may fall under our Senses, so the
Designs of Infinite Wisdom may fall under our Reason and Understanding; and
when things appear to our best Reason, plainly to be ordered for the best, and
the greatest advantages of the World and Mankind, so far as we are able to
judge; and if they had been otherwise, as they might have been a hundred
thousand ways, they would not have been so well; we ought to conclude, that
things are thus, and not otherwise, is the result of Wisdom.

Now the Wisdom of God in the Creation will appear by considering the Works of
God. Those who have studied Nature can discourse these things more exactly and
particularly. It would require perfect skill in Astronomy, to declare the
motions and order of Heavenly Bodies; and in Anatomy, to read Lectures of the
rare contrivance of the Bodies of living Creatures. But this, as it is beyond
my ability, so it would probably be above most of your Capacities; therefore I
shall content my self with some general and more obvious instances of the
Divine Wisdom, which shine forth so clear in his Works, that he that runs may
read it.

1. I shall take a short survey of the several parts of the World.

2. Single out Man the Masterpiece of the visible Creation.

1. If we survey the World, and travel over the several parts of it in our
thoughts, we shall find that all things in it are made with the greatest
exactness, ranged in the most beautiful order, and serve the wisest and best
Ends.

If we look up to Heaven, and take notice only there of that which is most
visible, the Sun; you see how by the wise order and constancy of its course it
makes Day and Night, Winter and Summer. This the Psalmist takes notice of,
Psalm. 19.1, 2. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows
his handy work. Day unto Day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge. It may easily be imagined many ways, how the Sun might have had
another Course in reference to the Earth; but no Man can devise any other that
should not be very much to the prejudice of the World; so that this being the
best, it is an Argument that Wisdom had the ordering and disposing of it.

If we look down to the Earth, we shall see God's ascending and descending; I
mean clear representations of Divine Wisdom in the Treasures that are hid in
the Bowels of it, and those Fruits that grow upon the surface of it. What vast
Heaps, and what variety of useful Materials and Minerals are scattered up and
down in the Earth, as one would think, with a careless Hand, but yet so wisely
dispersed, as is most proper for the Necessities and Uses of several Countries!
Look upon the surface of the Earth, and you shall find it clothed and adorned
with Plants of a various and admirable Frame, and Beauty, and Usefulness. Look
upon the vast Ocean, and there you may see the Wisdom of God in bridling and
restraining that unruly Element, I mean in sinking it below the Earth; whereas
the Water might have been above and covered the Earth, and then the Earth had
been in a great measure useless, and incapable of those Inhabitants which now
possess it.

Look again upon the Earth, and in the Air, and Sea, and you shall find all
these inhabited and furnished with great store of living Creatures of several
kinds, wonderfully made in the frame of their Bodies, endowed with strong
inclination to increase their kinds, and with a natural Affection and Care
toward their Young ones; and every kind of these Creatures armed either with
strength or wit to oppose their Enemy, or swiftness to fly from him, or strong
Holds to secure themselves. But the Creation is a vast Field, in which we may
easily lose our selves. I shall therefore call home our wandering Thoughts; for
we need not go out of our selves for a proof of Divine Wisdom. I shall
therefore,

2. Select the choicest piece of it, Man, who is the top and perfection of this
visible World. What is said of the Elephant, or Behemoth, Job 40.19. in respect
of the vast bigness and strength of his Body, is only absolutely true of Man,
that he is divini opificii caput, the chief of the ways of God, and upon Earth
there is none like him. Man is Mundi utriusque nexus, the bond of both Worlds,
as Scaliger calls him, in whom the World of Bodies, and the World of Spirits do
meet, and unite; for in respect to his Body, he is related to this visible
World, and is of the Earth; but in respect of his Soul, he is allied to Heaven,
and descended from above. We have looked above us, and beneath us, and about
us, upon the several representations of God's Wisdom, and the several parts of
the Creation; but we have not yet considered the best piece of the visible
World, which we may speak of, without flattery of our selves, and to the praise
of our Maker. God, when he had made the World, he made man after his own Image.
When he had finished the other part of the Creation, he was pleased to set up
this Picture of himself in it, as a Memorial of the Workman. Now we shall a
little more particularly consider this piece of God's Workmanship, being it is
better known, and more familiar to us, as it is more excellent than the rest,
and consequently a higher instance of the Divine Wisdom. It is observed by
some, that concerning the parts of the Creation, God speaks the word, let there
be light, and let there be a firmament, and there was so: but when he comes to
make Man, he does, as it were, deliberate, and enter into consultation about
him; And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let
him have dominion. Genesis 1.26; as if Man, above all the rest, were the Effect
and Result of Divine Wisdom, and the Creature of his Counsel.

Man may be considered either in himself, and in respect of the Parts of which
he consists, Soul and Body; or with relation to the Universe, and other parts
of the Creation.

1. Consider him in himself, as compounded of Soul and Body. Consider Man in
his outward and worse part, and you shall find that to be admirable, even to
astonishment; in respect of which, the Psalmist cries out, Psalm. 139.14. I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, and that my soul
knows right well. The frame of our Bodies is so curiously wrought, and every
part of it so full of Miracle, that Galen (who was otherwise backward enough to
the Belief of a God) when he had anatomized Man's Body, and carefully surveyed
the frame of it, viewed the fitness and usefulness of every part of it, and the
many several intentions of every little Vein, and Bone, and Muscle, and the
beauty of the whole; he fell into a pang of Devotion, and wrote a Hymn to his
Creator. And those excellent Books of his, de usu partium, of the usefulness
and convenient contrivance of every part of the Body, are a most exact
demonstration of the Divine Wisdom, which appears in the make of our Body, of
which Books, Gassendus says, the whole work is writ with a kind of Enthusiasm.
The Wisdom of God, in the frame of our Bodies, very much appears by a curious
consideration of the several parts of it; but that requiring a very accurate
skill in Anatomy, I choose rather wholly to forbear it, than by my unskilfulness
to be injurious to the Divine Wisdom.

But this domicilium corporis, this House of our Body, though it be indeed a
curious piece; yet it is nothing to the noble Inhabitant that dwells in it.
This Cabinet, though it be exquisitely wrought, and very rich; yet it comes
infinitely short in value of the Jewel that is hid and laid up in it. How does
the glorious faculty of Reason and Understanding exalt us above the rest of the
Creatures! Nature has not made that particular Provision for Man, which it
has made for other Creatures, because it has provided for him in general, in
giving him a Mind and Reason. Man is not born clothed, nor armed with any
considerable Weapon for defense; but he has Reason and Understanding to
provide these things for himself; and this alone excells all the advantages of
other Creatures; he can keep himself warmer and safer, he can foresee Dangers
and provide against them; he can provide Weapons that are better than Horns,
and Teeth, and Paws, and by the advantage of his Reason, is too hard for all
other Creatures, and can defend himself against their Violence.

If we consider the Mind of Man yet nearer, how many Arguments of Divinity are
there in it! That there should be at once in our Understandings distinct
comprehensions of such variety of Objects; that it should pass in its Thoughts
from Heaven to Earth in a moment, and retain the memory of things past, and
take a prospect of the future, and look forward as far as Eternity! Because we
are familiar to our selves, we cannot be strange and wonderful to our selves:
But the great Miracle of the World is the Mind of Man, and the contrivance of
it an Eminent Instance of God's Wisdom.

2. Consider Man with relation to the Universe, and you shall find the Wisdom
of God does appear, in that all things are made so useful for Man, who was
designed to be the chief Inhabitant of this visible World, the Guest whom God
designed principally to entertain in this House which he built. Not that we are
to think, that God has so made all things for Man, that he has not made them
at all for himself, and possibly for many other uses than we can imagine; for
we much overvalue our selves, if we think them to be only for us; and we
diminish the Wisdom of God in restraining it to one end: but the chief and
principal End of many things is the Use and Service of Man; and in reference to
this End, you shall find that God has made abundant and wise Provision.

More particularly we will consider Man.

1. In his natural capacity, as a part of the World. How many things are there
in the World for the service and pleasure, for the use and delight of Man,
which, if Man were not in the World, would be of little use? Man is by Nature a
contemplative Creature, and God has furnished him with many Objects to exercise
his Understanding upon, which would be so far useless and lost, if Man were
not. Who should observe the Motions of the Stars, and the Courses of those
Heavenly Bodies, and all the Wonders of Nature? Who should pry into the secret
Virtues of Plants, and other natural things, if there were not, in the World, a
Creature endowed with Reason and Understanding? Would the Beasts of the Field
study Astronomy, or turn Chemists, and try Experiments in Nature?

What variety of beautiful Plants and Flowers is there! which can be imagined
to be of little other use but for the Pleasure of Man. And if Man had not been,
they would have lost their grace, and been trod down by the Beasts of the
Field, without pity or observation; they would not have made them into Garlands
and Nose-gays. How many sorts of Fruits are there which grow upon high Trees,
out of the reach of Beasts! and indeed they take no Pleasure in them. What
would all the vast bodies of Trees have served for, if Man had not been to
build with them, and make Dwellings of them? Of what use would all the Mines of
Metal have been, and of Coal, and the Quarries of Stone? Would the Mole have
admired the fine Gold? Would the Beasts of the Forest have built themselves
Palaces, or would they have made Fires in their Dens?

2. Consider Man in his Geographical Capacity, as I may call it, in relation to
his Habitation in this or that Climate, or Country. The Wisdom of God has so
ordered Things, that the Necessities of every Country are supplied one way or
other. Egypt has no Rains; but the River Nilus overflows it, and makes it
fruitful. Under the Line, where there are excessive Heats, every day there are
constant gales and breezes of cool Wind, to fan and refresh the scorched
Inhabitants. The hotter Countries are furnished with Materials for Silk, a light
Clothing; we that are cooler here in England, with materials for Cloth, a
warmer Clothing; Russia and Muscovy, which are extreme Cold, are provided with
warm Furs, and Skins of Beasts.

3. Consider Man in his capacity of Commerce and Intercourse. Man is a sociable
Creature; besides the advantages of Commerce with remoter Nations, for
supplying every Country with those Conveniences and Commodities which each does
peculiarly afford. And here the Wisdom of God does plainly appear in disposing
the Sea into several parts of the World, for the more speedy Commerce and
Intercourse of several Nations. Now if every Country had brought forth all
Commodities; that had been needless and superfluous, because they might have
been had without Commerce; besides that the great encouragement of Intercourse
among Nations, which is so agreeable to humane Nature, would have been taken
away: If every Country had been, as now it is, destitute of many things other
Countries have, and there had been no Sea to give an opportunity of Trafick;
the World had been very defective as to the Use of Man. Now here appears the
Wisdom of God, that the World, and all things in it, are contrived for the best.

Thus I have endeavored to do something toward the displaying of God's Wisdom
in the workmanship of the World; although I am very sensible how much I have been
mastered and oppressed by the greatness and weight of so noble an Argument. For
who can declare the works of God! and who can show forth all his praise!

The Use I shall make of what has been said, shall be in three Particulars.

1. This confutes the Epicureans, who impute the World, and this orderly and
beautiful Frame of Things to Chance* Those things which are the proper Effects
of Counsel, and bear the plain Impressions of Wisdom upon them, ought not to be
attributed to Chance. What a madness is it to grant all things to be as well
made, as if the wisest Agent upon Counsel and Design had contrived them; and
yet to ascribe them to Chance! Now he that denies things to be so wisely
framed, must pick holes in the Creation, and show some fault and irregularity
in the Frame of Things, which no Man ever yet pretended to do. Did ever any
Anatomist pretend to show how the Body of Man might have been better contrived,
and fitter for the Uses of a Reasonable Creature than it is; or any Astronomer
to rectify the Course of the Sun. As for the Extravagant and Blasphemous
Speech of Alphonsus, That if he had stood at God's Elbow when he made the
World, he could have told him how to have made it better; besides his Pride, it
shows nothing but his Ignorance; that he built his Astronomy upon a false
Hypothesis, as is generally believed now by the Learned in that Science; and no
wonder he found fault with the World, when he mistook the Frame of it: But
those who have been most verst in Nature, and have most pried into the secrets
of it, have most admired the workmanship both of the great World, and the less.

But if we must suppose the World to be as well made as Wisdom could contrive
it, which is generally granted; it is a monstrous folly to impute it to Chance.
A man might better say, Archimedes did not make any of his Engines by Skill,
but by Chance; and might more easily maintain that Cardinal Richlieu did not
manage Affairs by any Arts or Policies, but they fell out by mere Chance. What
pitiful shifts is Epicurus put to, when the best Account he can give of the
World, is this; That Matter always was, and the parts of it in motion, and
after a great many Trials, the parts of Matter at length hampered themselves in
this fortunate order wherein they now are; that men, at first, grew out of the
Earth, were nourisht by the Navelstring, and when they were strong enough,
broke loose and weaned themselves; that the Nostrils were made by the Waters
making themselves a passage out of the Body; and the Stomach and Bowels by the
Waters forcing a passage downward; that the Members of the Body were not made
for those Uses for which they serve, but chanced to be so, and the uses
afterward found out. Is it worth the while to advance such senseless Opinions
as these, to deny the Wisdom of God? Is it not much easier, and more reasonable
to say, that the Wisdom of God made all these things, than to trouble our
selves to imagine how all things should happen thus conveniently by Chance? Did
you ever know any great work, in which there was variety of parts, and an
orderly disposition of them required, done by Chance, and without the direction
of Wisdom and Counsel? How long time might a Man take to jumble a set of four
and twenty Letters together, before they would fall out to be an exact Poem;
yea, or make a Book of tolerable Sense, though but in Prose? How long might a Man
sprinkle Oil and Colors upon Canvas, with a careless Hand, before this would
produce the exact Picture of a Man? And is a Man easilier made by Chance, than
his Picture? He that tells me that this great and curious frame of the World
was made by Chance, I could much more believe him, if he should tell me that
Henry the VII's Chapel, in Westminster, was not built by any mortal man, but
the Stones did grow in those forms into which they seem to us to be cut and
graven; that the Stones; and Timber, and Iron, and Brass, and all the other
Materials, came thither by Chance, and upon a day met all happily together, and
put themselves into that delicate order, in which we see them so close
compacted, that it must be a great Chance that parts them again. Now is it not
much easier to imagine how a skilful Workman should raise a Building, than how
Timber, and Stones, and how that variety of Materials which is required to a
great and stately Building, should meet together all of a just bigness, and
exactly fitted, and by chance take their places, and range themselves into that
order. I insist the longer upon this, because I am sensible how much Atheism
has gained in this Age.

2. Let us Admire, and Adore, and Praise the Wisdom of God, who has established
the world by his wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by his understanding;
who has made all things in number, weight, and measure, that is, by exact
wisdom. The wise Works of God are the proper Object of our praise; and this is
a day proper for this Work of Praise and Thanksgiving. Now under the Gospel,
since Christ was clearly revealed, we have new matter of Praise and
Thanksgiving; but as God has given us Christ, so he has given us our Beings.
We are not so to remember our Redeemer, as to forget our Creator. The Goodness,
and Power, and Wisdom of God, which appears in the Creation of the World, ought
still to be matter of Admiration and Praise to Christians. It is a great Fault
and Neglect among Christians, that they are not more taken up with the Works of
God, and the Contemplation of the Wisdom which shines forth in them. We are apt
enough to admire other things, little Toys; but we overlook this vast curious
Engine of the World, and the great Artificer of all things. It was truly said
of one, that most men are so stupid and inconsiderate, as to admire the Works
of a Painter or a Carver, more than the Works of God. There are many that have
bestowed more Eloquence in the Praise of a curious Picture, or an exact
Building, than ever they did upon this noble and exquisite frame of the World,
or any of the works of God. We can admire the wisdom, and design, and skill of
petty Artists, and little Engineers; but here is wisdom in the Beauty and Order
of the Creation. Did we love God, and take pleasure in the Effects of his
Wisdom and Power, we should be more in the Contemplation of them. Psalm. 111.2.
The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein. Let us then say with the Psalmist,; O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all; the Earth is full of thy riches, etc.

More particularly let us, with an humble thankfulness, admire the Wisdom which
has made and disposed all things so fitly for our Use and Service, and with so
merciful a respect to us; The Light and Influence of Heaven; the Beasts and the
Fruits of the Earth. We find the Psalmist often praising God upon this Account,
Psalm. 136.4, 5. etc. The Wisdom which has framed these Bodies of ours. Psalm.
139.14, 15, 16. Which has endowed us with Knowledge and Understanding. Elihu
complains, that Men were apt to overlook these great Blessings of God, Job
35.10, 11, 12. But none says, where is God my maker, who gives Songs in the
night? Who teaches us more than the Beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven? There they cry, but none gives answer, because of
the pride of evil men.

3. Use; Trust the Wisdom of God, which made the World, to govern it, and the
Affairs of it; and the Wisdom which has framed thy Body in so curious and
exquisite a manner, and formed thy Spirit within thee, and has made so many
Creatures, with reference to thy Necessity and Comfort, trust him for thy
future Provision. Mat. 6.25. I say unto you, Take no thought for your lives,
what ye shall eat, etc. Is not the life more than meat? and the body than
raiment? He has given us our Souls, he has breathed into us the breath of
life, and made these Bodies without our care and thought; He has done the
greater, will he not do the less? When thou art ready anxiously and
solicitously to say, what shall I do for the necessaries of Life? Consider
whence thou did receive thy Life, who made this Body of thine; thou may be
assured that the Wisdom which has created these, considered how to supply
them; the Wisdom of God knew that you would want all these, and has
accordingly provided for them, therefore fear not.

SERMON VIII. Vol. VI.
The Wisdom of God, in his Providence. Preached at Kensington.
I PETER V.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.


AMONGST the several Duties, which toward the conclusion of this Epistle the
Apostle exhorts Christians to, this is one, not to be overmuch solicitous and
concerned about what may befall us, but to refer our selves to the providence of
God, which takes care of us. In speaking to this Argument, I shall I. Consider
the nature of the Duty here required, which is to cast our care upon God. II.
The Argument used to persuade us to it; because he cares for us.


I. For the nature of the Duty here required. The word (...) signifies an
anxious care about Events; a care that is accompanied with trouble and disquiet
of Mind about what may befall us; about the good that we hope for, and desire;
or about the Evil which we fear may come upon us. This the Apostle exhorts us
to throw off; and to leave to the Providence of God and his Care, all those
Events which we are apt to be so solicitous and disquieted about. The
Expression seems to be taken out of Psalm. 55.22. cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee.

Now that we may not mistake our Duty in this matter, I shall show what is not
here meant by casting all our care upon God, and then what is meant by it.

The Apostle does not hereby intend to take Men off from a provident care and
diligence, about the concernments of this life; this is not only contrary to
Reason, but to many express Precepts and Passages of Scripture, wherein
Diligence is recommended to us, and the Blessing of God, and the good Success
of our Affairs promised thereto; wherein we are commanded to provide for those
of our Family, which cannot be done without some sort of care; and wherein
Sloathfulness and Negligence are condemned, and threatened with Poverty; so that
this is not to cast our care upon God, to take no care of our selves, to use no
diligence and endeavor for the obtaining of the Good which we desire, and the
prevention of the Evil we fear; this is to tempt the Providence of God, and to
cast that Burden upon him, which he expects we should bear our selves.

But by casting our care upon God, the Apostle intends these two things.

1. That after all prudent Care and Diligence have been used by us, we should
not be farther solicitous, nor trouble our selves about the event of Things,
which, when we have done all we can, will be out of our power. And this
certainly is our Savior's meaning, when he bids us, take no care for the
morrow. When we have done what is fit for us for the present to do, we should
not disquiet and torment our selves about the Issue and Event of Things.

2. Casting our care upon God, implies, that we should refer the issue of
Things to his Providence, which is continually vigilant over us, and knows how
to dispose all things to the best, entirely confiding in his Wisdom and
Goodness, that he will order all things for our good, and in that confidence,
resolving to rest satisfied and contented with the disposals of his Providence,
whatever they be.

You see then the nature of the Duty which the Apostle here exhorts to, viz.
That after all prudent Care and Diligence have been used on our parts, we
should not be disquieted in our Minds about the event of things, but leave them
to God, who has the Care of us and of all our Concernments. Which is the

II. Thing I proposed to speak to, and which I intend chiefly to insist upon,
viz. The Argument which the Apostle here uses to persuade us to this Duty, of
casting all our care upon God; because it is he that cares for us; and this
implies in it these two things.

1. In general, That the Providence of God governs the World, and concerns it
self in the Affairs of Men, and disposes of all Events that happen to us.

2. More particularly, That this Providence is peculiarly concerned for good
Men, and that he takes a special care of them and their Concerns; He cares for
you. The Apostle speaks this to them, not only as Men, but as Christians. And
thus the Psalmist, from whom these words seem to be taken, does apply and limit
this Promise; Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee; he
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.

1. That God takes care of us, implies in general, That the Providence of God
governs the World, and concerns it self in the Affairs of Men, and disposes of
all Events that happen to us. I shall not now enter upon a large Proof of the
Providence of God; that is too large and intricate an Argument for a short
Discourse, and has a great deal of nicety and difficulty in it; and though it be
a fundamental Principle of Religion, and has been almost generally entertained
and believed by Mankind, and that upon very good Reason; yet because the
vindication of many particular appearances of Providence, does in a great
measure depend upon a full view and comprehension of the whole design,
therefore we must necessarily refer our selves, for full satisfaction, as to
several difficulties and Objections, to the other World, when we shall see
God's works, together with the relation of every part to the whole design, and
then many particular Passages, which may now seem odd and crooked, as we look
upon them by themselves, will in Relation to the whole, appear to have a great
deal of Reason and Regularity in them.

Therefore I shall at present only briefly, and in the general, show that it is
very credible, that there is a wise Providence, that governs the World, and
interests it self in the affairs of Men, and disposes of all Events which
happen to us.

And I desire it may be observed in the entrance upon this Argument, that the
handling of this Question concerning Providence, does suppose the Being of God,
and that he made the World, as Principles already known and granted, before we
come to dispute of his Providence; for it would be in vain, to argue about the
Providence of God, with those who question his Being, and whether the World was
made by him: But supposing these two Principles, that God is, and that he made
the World, it is very credible, that he should take care of the Government of
it, and especially of one of the noblest Parts of it, the race of Mankind. For
we cannot believe, that he who employed so much Power and Wisdom, in the
raising of this great and magnificent Pile, and furnishing every part of it
with such variety of Creatures, so exquisitely and so wisely fitted for the use
and service of one another, should so soon as he had perfected it, forsake his
own Workmanship, and take no farther care of it; Especially considering that it
is no trouble and disquiet to him, either to take notice of what is done here
below, or to interpose for the regulating of any Disorders that may happen; for
Infinite Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Power can do this with all imaginable ease,
knows all things, and can do all things, without any disturbance of its own
happiness.

And this has always been the common Apprehension of Mankind, that God knows
all things, and observes every thing that is done in the World, and when he
pleases, interposes in the affairs of it. It Is true indeed the Epicureans did
deny that God either made the World, or governs it; and therefore wise Men
always doubted whether they did indeed believe the Being of God, or not; but
being unwilling to incur the danger of so odious an Opinion, they were content
for fashion sake, to own his Being, provided they might take away the best and
most substantial Arguments for the proof o^ it. The rest of the Philosophers
owned a Providence, at least a general Providence, that took care of great and
more important Matters, but did not descend to a constant and particular care
of every Person, and every little Event belonging to them. Interdum curiosus
singulorum, says Tully; now and then, when he pleases, he takes care of
particular Persons, and their lesser concernments; but many of them thought,
that God did generally neglect the smaller and more inconsiderable affairs of
the World, Dii minora negligunt, neque agello^ singulorum and viticulas
persequuntur, The Gods overlook smaller matters, and do not mind every Man's
little Field and Vine. Such imperfect apprehensions had they of the Providence
of God. And though they would seem hereby to consult the Dignity and ease of the
Deity, by exempting him from the care and trouble of lesser Matters, yet in
truth and reality, they cast a dishonorable reflection upon him, as if it were
a burden to Infinite Knowledge, and Power, and Goodness, to take care of every
thing.

But now Divine Revelation has put this matter out of doubt, by assuring us of
God's particular care of all Persons and Events. Our Savior tells us, that
God's Providence extends to the least and most inconsiderable Creatures, to the
grass of the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, Mat.
6.30. To the fowls of the air, and that to the least of them, even to the
Sparrows, two of which are sold for a Farthing, and yet not one of them falls
to the ground without God, Mat. 10.29. Much more does the Providence of God
extend to Men, which are Creatures far more considerable, and to the very least
thing that belongs to us, to the very hairs of our head, which are all
numbered, the lowest instance that can be thought on.

So that the light of Nature owns a more general Providence; and Divine
Revelation has rectified those imperfect apprehensions which Men had about it,
and has satisfied us, that it extends it self to all particulars, and even to
the least things and most inconsiderable. And this is no ways incredible,
considering the Infinite Perfection of the Divine Nature, in respect of which,
God can with as much and greater ease, take care of every thing, than we can do
of any one thing; and the belief of this is the great foundation of Religion.
Men therefore pray to God for the good they want, and to be freed from the
evils they fear, because they believe that he always regards and hears them.
Men therefore make Conscience of their Duty, because they believe God observes
them, and will reward and punish their good and evil Deeds. So that take away
the Providence of God, and we pull down one of the main Pillars upon which
Religion stands, we rob our selves of one of the greatest Comforts and best
Refuges in the Afflictions and Calamities of this life, and of all our hopes of
happiness in the next.

And though there be many disorders in the World, especially in the Affairs of
Men, the most irregular and intractable Piece of God's Creation; yet this is
far from being a sufficient Objection against the Providence of God, if we
consider, that God made Man a free Creature, and capable of abusing his
Liberty, and intends this present life for a state of trial in order to
another, where Men shall receive the just recompense of their Actions here: And
then if we consider, that many of the evils and disorders, which God permits to
happen, are capable of being overruled by him to a greater good, and are made
many times to serve wise and excellent purposes, and that the Providence of God
does sometimes visibly and remarkably interpose, for the prevention and remedy
of great Disorders and Confusions; I say considering all this, it is no blemish
to the Divine Providence, to permit many of those Irregularities which are in
the World, and suffer the Fates of good and bad Men to be so cross and unequal
in this life. For supposing another life after this, wherein Men shall come to
an Account, and every Man shall receive the just recompense of his Actions,
there will then be a proper Season and full Opportunity, of seting all things
straight, and no Man shall have reason then, either to glory in his wickedness,
or to complain of his sufferings in this World. This is the first, that God's
Providence governs the World, and interests it self in the affairs of Men, and
disposes of all Events that happens to them; and this is a very good Reason,
why we should cast our particular cares upon him, who has undertaken the
Government of the whole.

2. The Providence of God is more peculiarly concerned for good Men, and he
takes a more particular and especial care of them. The Apostle speaks this to
Christians, cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. And this David
limits in a more peculiar manner to good Men; cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he will sustain thee, he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.

The Providence of God many times preserves good Men from those Evils which
happen to others, and by a peculiar and remarkable interposition, rescues them
out of those Calamities which it suffers others to fall into; and God many
times blesses good Men, with remarkable prosperity and success in their
Affairs. To which purpose there are innumerable Declarations and Promises in
the Holy Scriptures, so well known that I shall not trouble you with the
recital of them.

Notwithstanding which, it cannot de denied, that good Men fall into many
Evils, and are harrassed with great Afflictions in this World: but then the
Providence of God usually orders it so, that they are armed with great
Patience to bear them, and find great comfort and support under them, and make
better use and improvement of them than others; so that one way or other they
turn to their advantage. So the Apostle assures us, Romans 8.28. We know that all
things work together for good to them that love God. All the Evils and
Afflictions, which happen to good men, conspire one way or other to the
promoting of their happiness, many times in this World, to be sure they make a
great addition to it in the other. So the same Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.17,
18. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, whilst we look not, etc. And can we say
God's Providence neglects us, when he rewards our temporal Sufferings with
eternal Glory; when through many hardships and tribulations, he at last brings
us to a Kingdom? Was Joseph neglected by God, when, by a great deal of hard
usage, and a long imprisonment, he was raised to the highest dignity in a great
Kingdom? Or rather, was not the Providence of God very remarkable toward him,
in making those Sufferings so many Steps to his Glory, and the occasion of his
Advancement? And is not God's Providence toward good men as kind and as
remarkable, in bringing them to an infinitely better and more glorious Kingdom,
by Tribulations and Sufferings; and making our light Afflictions which are but
for a moment, to work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory?

Thus you see what is employed in God's care of us in general; that he governs
the World, and disposes all Events; and particularly, that he is peculiarly
concerned for good Men, and takes a more especial care of them. Let us now see
of what force this Consideration is, to persuade to the Duty enjoined in the
Text, to cast all our care upon God; that is, after all prudent Care and
Diligence has been used on our part, not to be anxious and solicitous about
the event of things, but to leave that to God. Now this consideration, that God
cares for us, should be an Argument to us, to cast all our care upon him, upon
these two Accounts.

1. Because if God cares for us, our Concernments are in the best and safest
hands. 2. Because all our Anxiety and Solicitude will do us no good.
1. Because if God cares for us, our Concernments are in the best and safest
hands, and where we should desire to have them; infinitely safer, than under
any Care and Conduct of our own. And this ought to be a great satisfaction to
our Minds, and to free us from all disquieting Thoughts; for if God undertakes
the care of us, then are we sure that nothing shall happen to us, but by the
disposal or permission of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. There are many things
indeed, which to us seem Chance and Accident; but in respect of God, they are
Providence and Design; they may appear to happen by chance, or may proceed from
the ill will and malicious intent of second Causes; but they are all wisely
designed; and as they are appointed or permitted by God, they are the result of
the deepest Counsel, and the greatest Goodness. And can we wish that we and our
Concernments should be in better or safer hands, than of Infinite Power and
Wisdom, in conjunction with Infinite Love and Goodness? And if we be careful to
do our Duty, and to demean our selves toward God as we ought, we may rest
assured of his Love and Care of us; and if we do in good earnest believe the
Providence of God, we cannot but think that he has a peculiar regard to those
that love and serve him, and that he will take a peculiar care of their
Concernments, and that he can, and will dispose them better for us, than we
could manage them our selves, if we were left to our selves, and our Affairs
were put into the hands of our own Counsel.

Put the case we had the entire ordering and disposal of our selves, what were
reasonable for us to do in this case? We would surely, according to our best
wisdom and judgment, do the best we could for our selves, and when upon
experience of our own manifold ignorance and weakness, we had found our
weightiest Affairs and Designs frequently to miscarry, for want of foresight,
or power, or skill to obviate and prevent the infinite Hazards and
Disappointments which humane Affairs are liable to, we should then look about
us; and if we knew any Person much wiser, and more powerful than our selves,
who we believed did heartily love us, and wish well to us, we would out of
kindness to our selves, ask his Counsel in our Affairs, and crave his
assistance; and if we could prevail with him to undertake the care of our
Concernments, we would commit them all to his Conduct and Government, in
confidence of his great Wisdom and Good Will to us.

Now God is such an one, he loves us as well as we do our selves, and desires
our Happiness as much, and knows infinitely better than we do, what means are
most conducing to it, and will most effectually secure it. And every Man that
believes thus of God, (as every Man must do, that believes there is a God, for
these are the natural and essential Notions which all Men have of the Deity) I
say, every Man that believes thus of God, the first thing he would do (if he
knew not already that God had voluntarily, and of his own accord, undertaken
the care of him and of his Affairs) would be to apply himself to God, and to
beseech him with all earnestness and importunity, that he would permit him to
refer his Concernments to him, and be pleased to undertake the care of them;
and he would, without any demur or difficulty, give up himself wholly to him,
to guide and govern him, and to dispose of him as to him should seem best.

Now if God have prevented us herein, and without our Desire taken this care
upon himself, we ought to rejoice in it, as the greatest happiness that could
possibly have befallen us; and we should without any farther care and anxiety,
using our own best diligence, and studying to please him, cheerfully leave our
selves in his Hands, with the greatest confidence and security, that he will do
all that for us which is really best; and with a firm persuasion, that that
condition, and those circumstances of Life, which he shall choose for us, will
be no other but the very same which we would choose for our selves, if we were
as wise as he.

And it is so natural for Men to think thus of God, that the very Heathen Poet
had the same Idea of him, and upon that ground, advises us to commit all our
Concernments to him. Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris;
Nam pro jucundis, aptissima quaeque dabunt dii;
Charior est illis homo, quam sibi.
Leave it, says he, to the wiser gods, to consider and determine what is
fittest for thee, and most for thy advantage; and though they do not always give
thee what thou desire, and that which pleases thee best, yet they will give
that which is most fit and convenient for thee; for Man is more dear to the
gods, than he is to himself. Not much different from this, is the Divine
Counsel of Solomon, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and
lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall direct thy paths. It is considerable who it is that gives this Advice;
the wisest of the Sons of men; and yet he advises to trust in God for
direction, and not to lean to our own understandings.

If therefore we be fully persuaded of God's infinitely Wise and Good
Providence, we ought certainly to refer our selves to him, and perfectly to
acquiesce in his disposal, and to rest satisfied in whatever he does, and
whatever condition he assigns to us, we ought to be contented with it: if we be
not, we find fault with his Wisdom, and reproach his Goodness, and wish the
Government of the World in better hands.

So that a firm belief of the Providence of God, as it would take away all
Anxiety concerning future Events, so would it likewise silence all those
Murmurings and Discontents, which are apt to arise in us, when things fall out
cross to our Desires, when Disasters and Disappointments happen to us, and the
Providence of God casts us into Sickness, or Poverty, or Disgrace. This quieted
David, when he was ready to break out into murmuring at the Afflictions and
Calamities which befell him. I held my peace (says he) and spoke not a word,
because thou Lord did it. And this likewise should keep us from fretting and
vexing at Instruments, and second Causes; to consider that the Wise Providence
of God over rules and disposes the Actions of Men, and that no harm can
happen to us without his permission. This Consideration restrained David's
Anger, under that high provocation of Shimei, when he followed him, reproaching
him and cursing him; let him alone, the Lord has said unto him, curse David.
He considered that God's Providence permitted it; and looking upon it as coming
from a higher hand, this calmed his Passion, and made him bear it patiently. If
a Man be walking in the Street, and one fling Water upon him, it is apt to
provoke him beyond all patience; but no man is in a passion for being wet ten
times as much by Rain from Heaven. What Calamity soever befalls us, when we
consider it as coming from Heaven, and ordered and permitted there, this will
still and hush our Passion, and make us with Eli to hold our peace, or only to
say, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

We are indeed liable to many things in this World, which have a great deal of
evil and affliction in them, to Poverty, and Pain, and Reproach, and Restraint,
and the loss of our Friends and near Relations, and these are great
Afflictions, and very cross and distastful to us, and therefore when we are in
Danger of any of these, and apprehend them to be making toward us, we are apt
to be anxious and full of trouble, and when they befall us, we are prone to
censure the Providence of God, and to judge rashly concerning it, as if all
things were not ordered by it for the best: but we should consider, that we are
very ignorant and short sighted Creatures, and see but a litttle way before us,
are not able to penetrate into the Designs of God, and to look to the End of
his Providence. We cannot (as Solomon expresses it) see the work of God from
the beginning to the end; whereas if we saw the whole design of Providence
together, we should strangly admire the beauty and proportion of it, and should
see it to be very wise and good. And that which upon the whole matter, and in
the last issue and result of things, is most for our good, is certainly best,
how grievous soever it may seem for the present. Sickness caused by Physic is
many times more troublesome for the present, than the Disease we take it for;
but every wise Man composeth himself to bear it as well as he can, because it
is in order to his Health: the evils and afflictions of this life are the
Physic, and Means of cure, which the Providence of God is often necessitated
to make use of; and if we did trust our selves in the hands of this great
Physician, we should quietly submit to all the severities of his Providence, in
confidence that they would all work together for our good.

When Children are under the government of Parents, or the discipline of their
Teachers, they are apt to murmur at them, and think it very hard to be denied
so many things which they desire, and to be constrained by severities to a
great many things which are grievous and tedious to them: but the Parent and
the Master know very well, that it is their Ignorance and Inconsiderateness
which makes them to think so, and that when they come to Years, and to
understand themselves better, then they will acknowledge, that all that which
gave them so much discontent, was really for their good, and that it was their
Childishness and Folly, which made them to think otherwise, and that they had
in all probability been undone, had they been indulged in their humor, and
permitted in every thing to have their own will; they had not Wit and
Consideration enough, to trust the Discretion of their Parents and Governors,
and to believe that even those things which were so displeasing to them, would
at last tend to their good.

There is a far greater distance between the Wisdom of God and Men, and we are
infinitely more Ignorant and Childish in respect of God, than our Children are
in respect of us; and being persuaded of this, we ought to reckon, that while
we are in this World, under God's care and discipline, it is necessary for our
good, that we be restrained in many things, which we eagerly desire; and suffer
many things that are grievous to us; and that when we come to Heaven, and are
grown up to be Men, and have put away childish thoughts, and are come to
understand things, as they truly are, and not in a riddle, and darkness, as we
now do; then the Judgment of God will break forth as the light, and the
righteousness of all his dealings as the noon Day, then all the Riddles of
Providence will be clearly expounded to us, and we shall see a plain Reason for
all those Dispensations which we were so much stumbled at, and acknowledge the
great Wisdom and Goodness of them.

You see then what Reason there is to refer our selves to the Providence of
God, and to cast all our care upon him, to trust him with the Administration
and Disposal of all our Concernments, and firmly to believe, that if we love
God, and be careful to please him, every thing in the issue will turn to the
best for us; and therefore we should not anxiously trouble our selves about the
Events of things, but resign up ourselves to the good pleasure of him, who
disposes all things according to the Counsel of his Will, entirely trusting in
his goodness, and in his Fatherly care of us, and affection to us, that he will
order all things for us, for the best, referring the success of all our
Concernments to him, in whose hands are all the ways of the Children of Men,
cheerfully submiting to his determination, and the Declarations of his
Providence in every case.

And this is a proper Expression of our Confidence in God's Wisdom and
Goodness, to refer things to him before the Event, and to say with the
Christians, Acts 21.14. The will of the Lord be done, because this shows that
we are persuaded that God will do better for us, than our own Counsel and
Choice; and to submit to his will after the Event, is likewise a great instance
of our Confidence in him, and that we believe that he has done that which is
best: For when God, by his Providence, declares his Will in any case, we should
look upon it, as the Sentence of a wise and just Judge, in which all Parties
concerned ought to acquiesce, and rest fully satisfied.

And this may well be expected from us Christians, who have much greater
assurance of the Particular Providence of God, than the Heathen had; and yet
some of them, were able to free themselves from all trouble and anxiety, from
murmuring and discontent. Upon this Consideration, Epictetus (as Arrian tells
us) would express himself thus, I had always rather have that which happens;
because I esteem that better which God wills, than that which I should will;
and again, lift up thine Eyes, (says he) with confidence to God, and say,
henceforth, Lord, deal with me as thou please, (...). I am of the same
opinion with thee, just of the same mind that thou art; I refuse nothing that
seems good to thee; lead me where thou will, Cloth me with what Garments thou
please, set me in a public Place, or keep me in a private Condition,
continue me in mine own Country, or banish me from it, bestow Wealth upon me,
or leave me to conflict and struggle with Poverty, which of these thou
please, (...), If Men shall censure this Providence toward me, and say thou
dealest hardly with me, I will apologize for thee, I will undertake and
maintain thy cause, that what thou do is best for me. What could a Christian
say more or better, by way of resignation of himself to the Providence of God?
It almost transports me to read such passages from a Heathen, especially if we
consider in what condition Epictetus was, he had a maimed and deformed Body,
was in the extremity of Poverty, a Slave, and very cruelly and tyranically
used, so that we can hardly imagine a Man in worse and more wretched
Circumstances; and yet he justifies the Providence of God in all this, and not
only submits to his Condition, but is contented with it, and embraces it, and
since God has thought it fittest and best for him, he is of the same mind, and
thinks so too. I confess it does not move me to hear Seneca, who flowed in
wealth, and lived at ease, to talk magnificently, and to slight Poverty and
Pain, as not worthy the Name of Evil and Trouble: but to see this poor Man, in
the lowest Condition and worst Circumstances of Humanity, bear up so bravely,
and with such a cheerfulness and serenity of Mind to entertain his hard
Fortune, and this not out of stupidity, but from a wise sense of the Providence
of God, and a firm persuasion of the wisdom and goodness of all his dealings,
this who can choose but be affected with it, as an admirable temper for a
Christian, much more for a Heathen! To which we may apply that saying of our
Lord, concerning the Heathen Centurion, Verily I say unto you, I have not found
so great faith, no not in Israel; so wise, so equal, so firm a temper of Mind
is seldom to be found, no not amongst Christians. And this is the First
Consideration, That if God cares for us, we and our Concernments are in the
best and safest hands, and therefore we should cast all our care upon God. The

2. is, Because all our Anxiety and Care will do us no good; on the contrary,
it will certainly do us hurt. We may fret and vex our own Spirits, and make
them restless, in the contemplation of the evils and disappointments which we
are afraid of, and may make our lives miserable, in the sad Reflections of our
own Thoughts; but we cannot, by all our Anxiety and Care, control the course
of Things, and alter the Designs of Providence; we cannot by all our vexation
and trouble overruled Events, and make things happen as we would have them. And
this is the Argument our Savior uses to this very purpose, Mat. 6.27. Which
of you, by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature? So that all this
trouble is unreasonable, and to no purpose, because it has no influence upon
the Event, either to promote or hinder it. Things are governed and disposed by
a higher hand, and placed out of our reach; we may deliberate and contrive, and
use our best endeavors, for the effecting of our Designs, but we cannot secure
the Event against a thousand interpositions of Divine Providence, which we can
neither foresee nor hinder; but yet notwithstanding, these our endeavors are
reasonable, because they are the ordinary Means which God has appointed, for
the procuring of good and prevention of Evil, and though they may miscarry, yet
they are all we can do: but after this is done, trouble and anxiety about the
Event is the vainest thing in the World, because it is to no purpose, nor does
at all conduce to what we desire; we disquiet our selves in vain, and we
distrust God's Providence and Care of us, and thereby provoke him to defeat and
disappoint us.

Let us then by these Considerations be persuaded to this Duty, the practice
whereof is of continual and universal use in the whole course of our lives; in
all our affairs and concernments, after we have used our best Endeavors, let
us sit down and be satisfied, and refer the rest to God, whose Providence
governs the World, and takes care of all our Interests, and of the Interest of
his Church and Religion, when they seem to be in greatest Danger.

We cannot but be convinced, that this is very reasonable, to leave the
Management of things to him who made them, and therefore understands best how
to order them. The government of the World is a very curious and complicated
Thing, and not to be tampered with by every unskilful Hand; and therefore as an
unskilful Man, after he has tampered a great while with a Watch, thinking to
bring it into better order, and is at last convinced that he can do no good
upon it, carries it to him that made it, to mend it and put it into order; so
must we do, after all our Care and Anxiety about our own private Concernments,
or the public State of Things, we must give over governing the World, as a
business past our Skill, as a Province too hard, and a Knowledge too wonderful
for us, and leave it to him, who made the World, to Govern it, and take care of
it.

And if we be not thus Affected and Disposed, we do not believe the Providence
of God, whatever profession we make of it; if we did, it would have an
influence upon our Minds, to free us from Anxious Care and Discontent. Were we
firmly persuaded of the Wisdom and Goodness of the Divine Providence, we should
confidently rely upon it, and according to the Apostle's advice here in the
Text, cast all our care upon him, because he cares for us.

SERMON IX. Vol. VI.
The Wisdom of God in the Redemption of Mankind.
1 COR. I.24. -- Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.


I Have in the ordinary course of my Preaching been treating of the Attributes
and Perfections of God, more particularly those which relate to the Divine
Understanding; the Knowledge and Wisdom of God. The first of these I have
finished; and made some progress in the second, the Wisdom of God; which I have
spoken to in general, and have propounded more particularly to consider those
famous Instances and Arguments of the Divine Wisdom, in the Creation of the
World; the Government of it; and the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ. The
two first of these I have spoken to, namely the Wisdom of God, which appears in
the Creation and Government of the World. I come now to the

III. Instance of the Divine Wisdom, the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ;
which I shall, by God's assistance, speak to from these words, Christ, the
wisdom of God.

The Apostle in the beginning of this Epistle, upon occasion of his mentioning
the Divisions and Parties that were among the Corinthians, where one said, I am
of Paul; another, I am of Apollos; asks them, whether Paul was crucified for
them? or whether they were baptized into the name of Paul? To convince them
that they could not pretend this, that they were Baptized into his Name, he
tells them at the 14, and 15 th verses; that he had not so much as baptized any
of them, except two or three; so far was he from having Baptized them into his
own Name; and at the 17 th verse, he says, that his work, his principal work,
was to preach the Gospel, which he had done, not with Humane Eloquence, not in
wisdom of words, but with great plainness and simplicity, lest the Cross of
Christ should be made of none effect; lest, if he should have used any
Artifice, the Gospel should have been less powerful. And indeed his Preaching
was unaffectedly plain, and therefore the Gospel did seem to very many to be a
foolish and ridiculous thing. The Story which they told of Christ Crucified,
was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. The Jews, who
expected another kind of Messiah, that should come in great Pomp and Glory, to
be a mighty Temporal Prince, they were angry at the Story of a crucified
Christ. The Greeks, the Philosophers, who expected some curious Theories,
adorned with Eloquence, and delivered and laid down according to the exact
Rules of Art, they derided this plain and simple Relation of Christ, and of the
Gospel.

But though this Design of the Gospel appeared silly and foolish to rash and
inconsiderate and prejudiced Minds, yet to them that are called, to them that
do believe, both Jews and Gentiles, Christ, the power of God, and the Wisdom of
God; Christ, that is, the way of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, which the
Apostle preached, the wisdom of God, an eminent Instance of it.

So that the redemption of Man by Jesus Christ is a Design of admirable Wisdom.

This I shall endeavor to confirm to you.

I. By general Testimonies of Scripture. And II. By a more particular enquiry
into the nature of this Design, and the Means how it is accomplished.
I. By Testimonies from Scripture. You know I have all along, in my Discourses
of the Attributes of God, used this Method of proving them, from the Dictates
of Natural Light, and the Revelation of Scripture: But now I must forsake my
wonted Method, for here the Light of Nature leaves me. The Wisdom of Creation
is manifest in the things which are made; the heavens declare the glory of
God's Wisdom, and the firmament shows his handiwork. The Works of God do
preach and set forth the Wisdom of the Creator; but the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
do not preach the Gospel. The Wisdom of redemption is Wisdom in a mystery,
hidden wisdom, which none of the Princes, or Philosophers, of this World knew.
The sharpest Wits, and the highest and most raised Understandings amongst the
Heathens, could say nothing of this. Here the Wisdom of the Wise, and the
Understanding of the Prudent is posed, and we may make the Apostles challenge,
v. 20. of this Chapter, Where is the Wise, where is the Disputer of this World?
There is no Natural Light discovers Christ; the Wise men cannot find him out,
unless a star be created on purpose to lead and direct to him. Therefore in
this I shall only depend upon Divine Revelation. 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. the Gospel is
called the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world unto our glory; Which none of the Princes of this
world knew. Ephesians. 1.7, 8. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, wherein he has
abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence. Ephesians. 3.10, 11. The manifold
wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus our Lord. This work of our redemption by Jesus Christ is so various and
admirable, that it is not below the Angels to know and understand it. To the
intent, that unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known
the manifold wisdom of God.

II. By inquiring more particularly into the nature of this Design, and the
Means how it is accomplished. This is Wisdom, to fit Means to Ends; and the more
difficult the End, the greater Wisdom is required to find out suitable and
sufficient Means for the accomplishment, of the End. Now the wisdom of
redemption will appear, if we consider the case of fallen Man; and what fit,
and proper, and suitable Means, the Wisdom of God has devised for our Recovery.

1. Let us consider the Case of fallen Man, which was very sad, both in respect
of the Misery, and the Difficulty of it.

1. In respect of the Misery of it. Man, who was made Holy and Upright by God,
having, by his voluntary Transgression, and wilful Disobedience, fallen from
him, did presently sink into a corrupt and degenerate, into a miserable and
cursed Condition, of which Heaven and Earth, and his own Conscience bore him
Witness. Man, being become a Sinner, is not only deprived of the Image of God,
but is liable to his Justice; here was his Misery.

2. The difficulty of the Case was this, Man could not recover himself and
raise himself out of his own ruin; no Creature was able to do it; so that our
help is only in God; and indeed he is a merciful God, and does not desire our
Ruin, nor delight in our Destruction: But suppose his Mercy never so willing to
save us, will not his Holiness, and Justice, and Truth, check those forward
Inclinations of his Goodness, and hinder all the Designs of his Mercy? Is not
sin contrary to the Holy Nature of God? has not he declared his Infinite
hatred of it? has not he threatened it with heavy and dreadful Punishment? and
said, that the sinner shall die, that he will not acquit the guilty, nor let
sin go unpunished? Should he now, without any satisfaction to his offended
Justice, pardon the Sinner, remit his Punishment, and receive him to favor?
would this be agreeable to his Holiness, and Justice, and Truth? would this
become the Wise Governor of the World, who loves Righteousness and Order; who
hates sin, and is obliged by the essential rectitude of his Nature to
discountenance sin?

So that here is a conflict of the Attributes and Perfections of God. The Mercy
of God pities our Misery, and would recover us, would open Paradise to us; but
there is a flaming Sword that keeps us out; the incensed Justice of God that
must be satisfied; and if he take vengeance of us, we are eternally ruined; if
he spare us, how shall Mercy and Justice meet together? how shall God at once
express his Love to the Sinner, and his hatred to sin? here is the difficulty
of our Case.

II. Let us now enquire what Means the Wisdom of God uses for our recovery.
The Wisdom of God has devised this expedient to accommodate all these
Difficulties, to reconcile the Mercy and Justice of God. The Son of God shall
undertake this work, and satisfy the offended Justice of God, and repair the
ruined Nature of Man. He shall bring God and Man together, make up this Gulf,
and renew the Commerce and Correspondence between God and us, which was broken
off by Sin. The work that God designs is the redemption of Man, that is, his
recovery from a state of Sin and Eternal Death, to a state of Holiness and
Eternal Life. The Son of God is to engage in this Design of our Redemption, to
satisfy the offended Justice of God toward us, so as to purchase our
deliverance from the Wrath to come, and so as to restore us to the Image and
Favor of God, that we may be sanctified, and be made Heirs of Eternal Life.

For opening of this, we will consider, 1. The fitness of the Person designed
for this Work. 2. The fitness of the Means whereby he was to accomplish it.


1. The fitness of the Person designed for this Work; and that was the eternal
Son of God, who in respect of his Infinite Wisdom and Power, the Dignity and
Credit of his Person, his dearness to his Father, and Interest in him, was very
fit to undertake this Work, to mediate a Reconciliation between God and Man.

2. The fitness of the Means whereby he was to accomplish it; and these I shall
refer to two Heads, his Humiliation and Exaltation. All the Parts of these are
very subservient to the Design of our Redemption.

I. The Humiliation of Christ, which consists of three principal Parts; his
Incarnation, his Life, and his Death.

1. His Incarnation, which is set forth in Scripture by several Expressions;
his being made flesh, and dwelling among us, John 1.14. His being made of the
seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. His being made of a woman, Gal.
4.4. The manifestation of God in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. His taking part of
flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. His taking on him the seed of Abraham, and being
made like unto his brethren, Heb. 2.16, 17. His coming in the flesh, 1 John
2.2. All which signifies his taking upon him Humane Nature, and being really a
Man as well as God. The Eternal Son of God, in the fullness of time took our
Nature; that is, assumed a real Soul and Body into Union with the Divine
Nature. Now this Person, who was really both God and man, was admirably fitted
for the Work of our Redemption.

In general, this made him a fit Mediator, an equal and middle Person to
interpose in this Difference, and take up this Quarrel between God and Man.
Being both God and man, he was concerned for both Parties, and interested both
in the Honor of God, and the Happiness of Man, and engaged to be tender of
both; and to procure the one by such ways as might be consistent with the other.

More particularly, his Incarnation did fit him for those two Offices which he
was to perform in his Humiliation, of Prophet and Priest.

1. The Office of Prophet, to teach us both by his Doctrine and his Life.

By his Doctrine. His being in the likeness of Man, this made him more familiar
to us. He was a Prophet raised up from among his Brethren, as Moses speaks, and
he makes this an Argument why we should hear him. Should God speak to us
immediately by himself, we could not hear him and live. God condescends to us,
and complies with the weakness of our Nature, and raises up a Prophet from
among our brethren; We should hear him. And then his being God, did add Credit
and Authority to what he spoke; he could confirm the Doctrine which he taught,
by Miracles. Of his teaching us by his Life, I shall have occasion to speak
presently.

2. For the Office of Priest. He was fit to be our Priest, because he was taken
from among Men, as the Apostle speaks; fit to suffer as being, Man having a
body prepared, as it is Heb. 10.5. and fit to satisfy by his sufferings for
the Sins of all Men, as being God, which put an infinite Dignity and Value upon
them, the sufferings of an infinite Person being equal to the offenses done
against an Infinite God. And thus the Mercy of God is exalted, without the
Diminution of his Justice.

And as his Incarnation did qualify him for suffering, so for compassion, and
fellow-suffering with us, Heb. 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
high priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people; for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able
to succor them that are tempted.

2. His Life was a means admirably fitted to bring Men to Holiness and
Goodness. I might go through all the parts of it, but because I intend to be
very short upon these Heads, I shall only take notice of that Part of his Life,
which was spent in his public Ministry; he went about doing good; the Doctrine
that he Preached was Calculated for the destroying of Sin, and the promoting of
Holiness; the great End and Design of it was to advance Righteousness, and
Goodness, and Humility, and Patience, and Self-denial; to make us mortify our
sensual Desires, and brutish Passions, to contemn and renounce this present
World; and this being the design of it, it was a most proper Engine to demolsh
the Works of the Devil: and to make way for the entertainment of his Doctrine,
the whole frame of his Life, and all the circumstances of it did contribute.
His Life was the practice of his Doctrine, and a clear comment upon it. The
meanness of his Condition in the World, that he had no share of the possessions
of it, were a great advantage to his Doctrine of self-denial and contempt of
the World. The Captain of our Salvation, that he might draw off our Affections
from the World, and show us how little the things of it are to be valued, would
himself have no share in it, Mat. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of
the air have nests; but the son of Man has not where to lay his head. The mean
circumstances of his Condition were very eminently for the advantage of his
Design; for had he not been stripped of all worldly Accommodations, he could not
have been so free from suspicion of a worldly Interest and Design; nay he could
not have been so Considerable; he was really greater for his Meanness. The very
Heathens did account this true Greatness, (as we find in Aristotle) not to
admire the Pleasures, and Greatness, and Pomp of the World. And that his
Meanness might be no Disadvantage to him, those Evidences that he gave of his
Divinity in the wonderful Things that he did, rendered him considerable, and
gained more Reverence and Authority to his Doctrine, then his Meanness could
bring Contempt upon it.

Besides, the manner of his Conversation was a very great Advantage to him; he
was of a very sweet and conversable and obliging Temper; and by this Means he
did gain upon the People, and was acceptable to them; and thus he did apply
himself to them in the most Humane ways, to make way for the Entertainment of
his Doctrins. The Miracles that he wrought did confirm his Doctrine beyond all
Exception, as being a Divine Testimony, and setting the Seal of God to the
truth of it; yet because many were blinded with prejudice, and though they did
see, yet would not see, Christ the Wisdom of God did so order the business of
his Miracles, as to make them Humane ways of wining upon them, for they were
generally such as were beneficial, he healed all manner of Diseases and
Maladies by this Miraculous Power; and so his Miracles did not only tend to
confirm his Doctrine, as they were Miracles, but to make way for entertainment
of it, as they were benefits; this was a sensible demonstration to them that he
intended them good, because he did them good; they would easily believe, that
he who healed their Bodies, would not harm their Souls. This for his Life.

III. His Death, which was the lowest step of his Humiliation, and the
consummation of his sufferings. Now the Death of Christ did eminently
contribute to this Design of our Redemption. The Death of Christ did not only
expiate the guilt of Sin, and pacify Conscience, by making plenary
Satisfaction to the Divine Justice; but did eminently contribute to the killing
of Sin in us, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old Man is crucified with him,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we might not serve
Sin. Romans 8.3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin (that is by being a sacrifice for Sin) condemned sin in the flesh. The
Death of Christ convinces Sin to be a great Evil; and does Condemn it, because
the impartial Justice of God did so severely punish it in his own Son, when he
appeared in the Person of a Sinner; and this is the most powerful Argument to
us to crucify Sin, that it crucified our Savior. That so Innocent and Holy a
Person should suffer so cruel and ignominious a Death for our Sins, should set
us for ever against it, and make us hate it with a perfect hatred.

The circumstances of Christ's sufferings are with admirable Wisdom fitted for
the conquering of Sin and Satan. Sin came by the Woman: the seed of the Woman
suffers for Sin, and by suffering Conquers it. Sin began in the Garden: and
there our Savior began his sufferings for Sin. Sin came by the Tree: and
Christ bears the curse of it in hanging upon the Tree, and crucifies it by his
Cross.

And as he conquered sin, so he overcame Satan by his own Arts. The Devil found
Christ in the likness of a Man, he judged him Mortal, and his great Design was
to procure his Death, and get him into his Grave. Christ permits him to bring
about his Design, he lets him enter into Judas, he lets the Jews crucify, and
put him into his Grave, and roll a great stone upon it: but here his Divine
Wisdom appears, in ruining the Devil by his own Design, and snaring him in the
works of his hands; Heb. 2.14. By death he destroys him, that had the power of
death, that is the Devil.

I know the sufferings of Christ were, by the wise of the World, made the great
Objection against the Wisdom of this dispensation; the Cross of Christ was to
the Greeks foolishness: and yet the wisest of them had determined otherwise in
general, though not in this particular Case. Plato (in the second Book of his
Commonwealth) says, That a Man may be a perfect Pattern of Justice and
Righteousness, and be approved by God and Men, he must be stripped of all the
things of this World, he must be poor and disgraced, and be accounted a wicked
and unjust Man, he must be whipped, and tormented, and crucified as a Malefactor;
which is, as it were, a prophetical Description of our Savior's sufferings.
And Arrian, in his Epict. describing a Man fit to reform the World, whom he
calls the Apostle, the Messenger, the Preacher and Minister of God, says, he
must be without House and Harbor, and worldly Accommodations; must be armed
with such Patience for the greatest sufferings, as if he were a Stone, and
devoid of Sense; he must be a spectacle of Misery and Contempt to the World. So
that by the acknowledgment of these two wise Heathens, there was nothing in the
sufferings of Christ that was unbecoming the Wisdom of God, and improper to the
End and Design of Christ's coming into the World; besides that they served a
further end, which they did not dream of, the satisfying of Divine Justice.

Secondly, His Exaltation. The several parts of which, his Resurrection, and
Ascension, and sitting the right hand of God, were eminently subservient to the
perfecting and carrying on of this Design.

The Resurrection of Christ is the great confirmation of the truth of all that
he delivered, Romans 1.4. Declared to be the son of God with power, (...), by the
Resurrection from the Dead. This great Miracle of his Resurrection from the
Dead did determine the Controversy, and put it out of all Doubt and Question,
that he was the Son of God. And then his Ascension, and sitting at the right
hand of God, this gives us the assurance of a Blessed Immortality, and is a
demonstration of a life to come, and a pledge of everlasting Glory and
Happiness. And can any thing tend more to the encouragement of Obedience, and
to make us Dead to the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this life, than the
assurance of Eternal Life and Happiness.

And then the Consequents of his Exaltation, they do eminently conduce to our
recovery. The sending of the Holy Ghost to lead us into all truth, to sanctify
us, to assist us, and to comfort us under the greatest Troubles and
Afflictions; and the powerful Intercession of Christ in our behalf; and his
return to Judgment; the expectation whereof is the great Argument to Repentance
and Holiness of Life. Acts 17.30, 31. And the times of this ignorance God
winked at, but now commands all Men every where to repent: Because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that
Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in
that he has raised him from the dead. And thus I have endeavored to prove
that the Redemption of Man by Jesus Christ is a Design of admirable Wisdom.

The use I shall make of it, is to convince us of the Uunreasonableness of
unbelief, and the Folly and Madness of Impenitency.

First, The unreasonableness of Unbelief. The Gospel reveals to us the wise
Counsel and Dispensation of God for our Redemption; and those who disbelieve
the Gospel, they reject the counsel of God against themselves, as it is said of
the unbelieving Pharisees and Lawyers, Luke 7.30. The Gospel reveals to us a
design so reasonable and full of Wisdom, that they who can disbelieve it are
desperate Persons, devoted to ruin, 1 Cor. 1.18. The cross of Christ is to them
that perish foolishness. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost; in whom the God of this World has blinded the eyes of them
that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God, should shine unto them. The Gospel carries so much light and
evidence in it, that it cannot be hid from any but such whose Eyes are blinded
by the Devil and their Lusts.

He that will duly weigh and consider Things, and look narrowly into this wise
dispensation of God, shall find nothing to object against it; nay shall
discover in it the greatest motives and inducements to believe. We are apt to
believe any thing that is reasonable, especially if it be for our Advantage;
now this wise dispensation of God is not only reasonable in it self, but
beneficial to us; it does at once highly gratify our Understandings, and
satisfy our Interest; why should we not then believe and entertain it.

I. The design of the Gospel is reasonable, and gratifies our Understandings.
And in this respect the Gospel has incomparable Advantages above any other
Religion. The end of all Religion is to advance Piety and Holiness, and real
Goodness among Men; and the more any Religion advances these, the more
reasonable it is. Now the great Incitements and Arguments to Piety, are the
Excellency and Perfection of the Divine Nature; fear of Punishment, and hopes
of Pardon and Rewards. Now the Gospel represents all these to the greatest
advantage.

1. It represents the Perfections of God to the greatest advantage, especially
those which tend most to the promotion of Piety, and the love of God in us; his
Justice and Mercy.

(1.) His Justice. The Gospel represents it inflexible in its Rights, and
inexorable, and that will not in any case let Sin go unpunished. The
impartiality of the Divine Justice appears in this Dispensation, that when God
pardons the Sinner, yet he will punish Sin so severely in his own Son who was
the Surety. Now what could more tend to discountenance Sin, and convince us of
the great evil of it?

(2.) His Mercy. This Dispensation is a great demonstration of the Mercy, and
Goodness, and Love of God, in sending his Son to die for Sinners, and in saving
us by devoting and sacrificing him, John 3.16. For God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son. Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward
us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. 1 John 4.9, 10. In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Now this representation of God's Mercy and Love
which the Gospel makes, is of great force and efficacy to melt our Hearts into
love to God.

2. The Second Argument to Piety is fear of Punishment. The Gospel has
revealed to us the misery of those who continue in their Sin; it has made
clear and terrible discoveries of those Torments which attend sinners in
another World, and has opened to us the Treasures of God's Wrath; so that now
under the Gospel, hell is naked before us, and destruction has no covering;
and this is one thing which makes the Gospel so powerful an Engine to destroy
sin, Romans 1.16, 18. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation; for therein
is the wrath of God revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men.

3. Hopes of Pardon and Reward. And this, added to the former, renders the
Gospel the most powerful Instrument to take men off from sin, and engage them
to Holiness, that can be imagined. The Means to draw Men from sin, when they
are once awakened with the fear of Vengeance, is hopes of Pardon and Mercy; and
the way to encourage Obedience for the future, is hope of Reward. Now as an
Argument to us to retreat and draw back from sin, the Gospel promises pardon
and indemnity to us; and as an incitement to Holiness, the Gospel opens Heaven
to us, and sets before us everlasting Glory and Happiness, and gives us the
greatest assurance of it.

This is the First, The Design of the Gospel is reasonable, in that it does
eminently and directly serve the ends of Piety and Religion.

II. This Dispensation of God is beneficial to us, and satisfies our Interest;
and this adds to the unreasonableness of our Unbelief, this Design of God being
not only reasonable in it self, but desirable to us, that it should be so;
because of the eminent Advantages that redound to us by it. The Design of the
Gospel is to deliver from the Guilt and Dominion of Sin, and the Tyranny of
Satan; to restore us to the Image and Favor of God; and by making us partakers
of a Divine Nature, to bring us to Eternal Life. And is there any thing of real
Advantage which is not comprehended in this? Is it not desirable to every Man,
that there should be a way whereby our guilty Consciences may be quieted and
appeased; whereby we may be delivered from the fear of Death and Hell? Is it
not desirable to be freed from the slavery of our Lusts, and rescued from the
Tyranny and Power of the great Destroyer of Souls? Is it not desirable to be
like God, and to be assured of his Love and Favor, who is the best Friend, and
the most dangerous Enemy; and to be secured, that when we leave this World, we
shall be unspeakably happy for ever? Now the Gospel conveys these Benefits to
us; and if this be the Case of the Gospel, and there be nothing in this Design
of our Redemption, but what is Wise and Reasonable, and exceedingly for our
Benefit and Advantage; why should any Man be so averse to the Belief of it? Why
should Unbelief be counted a piece of Wit? Is it Wit to set our selves against
Reason, and to oppose our best Interest? It Is Wickedness, and Prejudice, and
inconsiderateness which disbelieves the Gospel. Those who do consider things
welcome this good News, and embrace these glad Tidings. Wisdom is justified of
her Children. To them who are truly sensible of their own Interest, and willing
to accept of reasonable Evidence, this is not only a true saying, but worthy of
all acceptance; that Christ came into the World to save sinners.

Secondly, This does convince Men of the madness and folly of impenitency. Now
the Wisdom of God has contrived such a way of our Recovery, and by the
Declaration of God's Wrath, and displeasure against sin, has given us such
Arguments to Repentance, and by discovering a way of Pardon and Mercy, has
given us such encouragement to Repentance, how great must the Folly of
impenitency be? For consider,

1. That impenitency Directly sets it self against the Wisdom of God. If after
all this we continue in our Sins, we reject the counsel of God against our
selves, we despise the Wisdom of God, and charge that with Folly; and we do it
against our selves, to our own injury and ruin. If we live in our Sins, and
cherish our lusts, we directly oppose the end of our Redemtion, we contradict
the great Design of the Gospel, we contemn the admirable Contrivance of God's
Wisdom, who sent his Son into the World on purpose to destroy Sin; for we
uphold that which he came to destroy, 1 John 3.5. Ye know that he was
manifested to take away our Sins. Now shall we continue in Sin, when we know,
the Son of God was manifested to take away Sin? God cannot but take it very ill
at our hands, when he has laid out the Riches of his Wisdom in this design,
for us to go about to defeat him in it; this is at once to be unthankful to
God, and injurious to our selves; it is such a madness, as if a condemned Man
should despise a Pardon, as if a Prisoner should be fond of his Fetters, and
refuse Deliverance; as if a Man, desperately sick should fight with his
Physician, and put away Health from him. If we do not comply with the wisdom of
God, which has contrived our recovery; we forsake our own mercy, and neglect a
great Salvation; we love death, and hate our own Souls, Prove. 8.14, 15, 16.

2. Consider, we cannot expect the wisdom of God should do more for our
recovery, than has been already done; the wisdom of God will not try any
further means. Mat. 21.37. last of all he sent his Son. If we despise this way,
if we tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant,
whereby we are sanctified, an unholy thing, there will remain no more sacrifice
for sin, Heb. 10.26, 29. What can expiate the guilt of sin, if the Blood of
Christ do not? What shall take us off from sin, what shall sanctify us, if the
blood of the Covenant be ineffectual? We resist our last Remedy, and make void
the best Means the Wisdom of God could devise for our Recovery, if, after the
revelation of the Gospel, we continue in our Sins.

3. If we frustrate this Design of God's Wisdom for our Recovery, our Ruin will
be the more dreadful and certain. Impenitency under the Gospel will increase
our Misery. If Christ had not come, we had had no sin, in comparison of what we
now have; but now our sin remains, and there is no cloak for our sin, (...). We
shall not be able at the day of Judgment to Preface any thing by way of Excuse
or Apology for our Impenitency. What shall we be able to say to the Justice of
God, when that shall condemn us, who rejected his Wisdom, which would have
saved us. We would all be saved, but we would be saved without Repentance; now
the Wisdom of God has not found out any other way to save us from Hell, but by
saving us from our sins. And thou that will not submit to this Method of Divine
Wisdom, take thy Course, and let us see how thou will escape the damnation of
hell. I will conclude all with those dreadful words which the wisdom of God
pronounces against those that despise her, and refuse to hearken to her Voice,
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out
my Hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught my Counsel, and would
none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes. They who will not comply with the Counsel of God for their
Happiness, they shall inherit the Condition which they have chosen to
themselves; they shall eat the fruit of their own ways, and be filled with
their own devices.

SERMON X. Vol. VI.
The Justice of God in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments.
GENESIS XVIII.25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?


IN treating of the Attributes of God, I have considered those which relate to
the Divine Understanding, viz. Knowledge and Wisdom; I come now to consider
those which relate to the Divine Will, viz. these four, the Justice, the Truth,
the Goodness, and the Holiness of God. I begin with the First, namely, the
Justice of God.

At the 17 verse of this chapter, God, by a great and wonderful Condescension
of his goodness, reveals to Abraham his Intention concerning the Destruction of
Sodom; upon this, Abraham v. 23. interceded with God for the saving of the
Righteous Persons, that were there; and to this end, he Pleads with God his
Justice and Righteousness, with which he apprehended it to be in consistent, to
destroy the Righteous with the wicked, which, without a Miracle, could not be
avoided in a general Destruction. Will thou also destroy the Righteous, with
the Wicked? Peradventure there be fifty Righteous within the City, will thou
also destroy, and not spare the place for the fifty Righteous that are therein?
that be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the Righteous with the
Wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the Wicked, that be far from thee,
shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? This Negative Interrogation is
equivalent to a vehement affirmation, shall not the Judge all the Earth do
right? that is, undoubtedly he will. This we may take for a certain and
undoubted Principle, that in the distribution of rewards and punishments the
Judge of the World will do Righteously.

So that the Argument that lies under our Consideration is the Justice of God
in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments, for the clearing of which, we
will consider it,

First, In Hypothesi, in regard to the particular Case, which is here put by
Abraham in the Text.

Secondly, In Thesi, we will consider it in General, in the Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments.

First, We will consider it in Hypothesi, in regard to the particular Case
which is here put by Abraham in the Text, and the rather, because if we look
well into it, there is something of real Difficulty in it, not easy to be
cleared; for Abraham's reasoning, if it be true, does plainly Conclude, that it
would have been unrighteous with God in the destruction of Sodom, not to make a
difference between the Righteous and the Wicked, but to involve them equally in
the same common Destruction. That be far from thee to do after this manner, to
slay the Righteous with the Wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the
Wicked, that be far from thee, shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?
as if he had said, surely the Judge of all the Earth will never do so
unrighteous a Thing.

And yet notwithstanding this, we see it is very usual for the Providence of
God to involve good Men in general Calamities, and to make no visible
difference between the Righteous and the Wicked. Now the difficulty is, how to
reconcile these appearances of Providence with this reasoning of Abraham in the
Text.

And for the doing of this, I see but one possible way, and that is this, that
Abraham does not here speak concerning the Judgments of God which befall Men in
the ordinary Course of his Providence, which many times happen promiscuously,
and involve good and bad Men in the same ruin; and the reason hereof is Plain,
because God in his ordinary Providence does permit the Causes, which produce
these Judgments, to Act according to their own Nature, and they either cannot
or will not make any distinction; for the Calamities which ordinarily happen in
the World are produced by two sorts of Causes either those which we call
Natural, or those which are Voluntary. Natural Causes, such as Wind, and
Thunder, and Storms, and the infection of the Air, and the like, these acting
by a Necessity of Nature, without any Knowledge or Choice, can make no
distinction between the Good and the Bad. And the Voluntary Causes of
Calamities, as Men are, they many times will make no difference between the
Righteous and the Wicked; nay many times they are Maliciously bent against the
Righteous, and the effects of their Malice fall heaviest upon them. Now we say
that things happen in the way of ordinary Providence, when Natural Causes are
permitted to Act according to their Nature, and Voluntary Causes are left to
their Liberty; and therefore in the course of ordinary Providence, it is not to
be expected that such a distinction should be made; it is neither possible, nor
does Justice require it; it is not possible, supposing Natural Causes left to
Act according to their Nature, and Voluntary Causes to be left to their
Liberty; nor does Justice require it, for every Man is so much a Sinner, that
no evil that befalls him in this World, can be said to be unjust in respect of
God.

So that Abraham is not here to be understood, as speaking of such Judgments as
befall Men in the ordinary course of God's Providence, in which, if the Good and
Bad be involved alike, it cannot be expected to be otherwise, nor is there any
injustice in it; but Abraham here speaks of Miraculous and Extraordinary
Judgments, which are immediately inflicted by God for the Punishment of some
crying Sins, and the example of the World, to deter others from the like. And
such was this Judgment, which God intended to bring upon Sodom, and which
Abraham has Relation to in this Discourse of his. In this Case it may be
expected from the Justice of God, that a Difference should be made between the-
Righteous and the Wicked; and that for these Reasons.

1. Because this is a Judgment which God himself executes. It is not an Event
of common Providence, which always follows the Nature of its Cause; but an Act
of God, as a Judge. Now it is essential to a Judge to make a Discrimination
between the Good and the Bad, so as to punish the one, and spare the other; and
this is as necessary to all proper Acts of Judgment in this World, as the
other; there being no other difference between them, but that one is a
Particular Judgment, and the other the General Judgment of the whole World.

2. When God goes out of the way of his ordinary Providence in Punishing, it
may reasonably be expected that he should make a Difference between the Good
and the Bad; for the Reason, why he does not in his common Providence is,
because he will not break and interrupt the established order of things, upon
every little occasion: But when he does go besides the common course of Things
in punishing, the Reason cease, which hindered him before from making a
Difference; and it is reasonable enough to expect, that in the inflicting of a
Miraculous Judgment, a Miraculous Difference should be made. Without making
this difference, the end of these Miraculous Judgments would not be attained,
which is, remarkably to punish the crying Sins of Men, and by that example to
deter others from the like Sins: But if these Judgments should fall
promiscuously upon the Righteous and the Wicked, it would not be evident, that
they were designed for the Punishment of such Sins, when Men did see, that they
fell likewise upon those who were not guilty of those Sins, and consequently
the example could not be so effectual to deter Men from Sin.

Upon all these accounts you see that Abraham's reasoning was very Strong and
well Grounded, as to those Judgments which are Miraculous and Extraordinary,
and immediately inflicted by God, for the Punishment of great and heinous Sins,
which was the Case he was speaking of. And accordingly we find, that in these
Judgments which have been Immediately and Miraculously inflicted by God, he
has always made this difference between the Righteous and the Wicked. In the
Deluge which he brought upon the old World, the Spirit of God gives this Reason
why the Judgment was so universal, because all Flesh had corrupted his way upon
the Earth; and the Reason, why he saved Noah and his Family was, because in
this general corruption of Mankind, he alone was Righteous; thee have I seen
Righteous before me in this Generation. So likewise in that Miraculous Judgment
of Korah and his Company, when God made a new thing, and the Earth opened her
mouth to swallow them up, none perished but he and his accomplices, the rest had
warning given them by God to remove from the tents of those wicked Men. Thus
you see that as to the particular Case in the Text, Abraham's reasoning
concerning the Justice of God is very firm, and concluding. I proceed to the

Second, Thing, which was that, which I principally intended to Discourse upon,
viz. to consider the Justice of God in general, in the distribution of Rewards
and Punishments. And here I cannot but grant, that the best Evidence of this is
yet wanting. We have clear demonstrations of the Power and Wisdom, and Goodness
of God in this vast and admirable frame of Things which we see: but we must
stay till the Day of Judgment for a clear and full Manifestation of the Divine
Justice; for which Reason the Day of Judgment is in Scripture called, the Day
of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. But in the mean time we may
receive sufficient assurance of this, both from Natural Reason, and from Divine
Revelation.

1. From Natural Reason, which tells us, that God loves Righteousness and hates
Iniquity, and consequently that it must be agreeable to his Nature to
countenance and encourage the one, and to discountenance the other; that is, to
give some public Testimony of his liking and Affection to the one, and of his
Hatred and Dislike of the other, which cannot otherwise be done, but by Rewards
and Punishments.

But however the Heathen reasoned about this matter, whatever premises they
laid, they firmly believed the conclusion, that God is Just. Plato lays down
this as a certain and undoubted Principle, that God is in no wise unjust, but
as Righteous, as is possible, and that we cannot resemble God more, than in
this quality and disposition. So likewise Seneca tells us, That the Gods are
neither capable of receiving an injury, nor of doing any thing that is unjust.
Antoninus the great Emperor and Philosopher, speaking doubtfully, whether good
Men are extinguished by Death, or remain afterward, If it be just, says he, you
may be sure it is so: if it be not just, you may certainly conclude the
contrary, for God is just, and being so, he will do nothing that is unjust or
unreasonable. And indeed the Heathen Philosophers looked upon this as the great
sanction of all moral Precepts, that God was the Witness and the Avenger of the
breach and violation of them, Qui secus faxit, deus ipse vindex erit, If any
Man do contrary to them, God himself will punish it; which shows, that there is
a Natural Awe upon the Minds of Men of the Divine Justice, which will overtake
offenders either in this World or the other. But this will more clearly appear
in the

2. Place, from Scripture, or Divine Revelation. And those Texts which I shall
produce to this purpose, may be reduced to these two Heads; either such as
prove the rectitude of the Divine Nature and his Justice in general; or such as
speak more particularly of the Justice and Equity of his Providence in the
distribution of Rewards and Punishments. I begin, first, with those which
declare the rectitude of the Divine Nature, and the Justice of God in general,
and that either by attributing this Perfection to him, or by removing the
contrary, injustice and unrighteousness at the greatest distance from him.

1. Those which attribute this Perfection to God. I shall mention but a few of
many, Psalm. 129.4. The Lord is Righteous. Dan. 9.7. O Lord! Righteousness
belongs unto thee. This good Men have acknowledged, when they have lain under
the hand of God, Ezra. 9.15. O Lord God of Israel, thou art Righteous. And this
the worst of Men have been forced to own, when they have been in extremity, Ex.
9.27. then Pharaoh said, the Lord is Righteous. This has been likewise
acknowledged by those who have layn under the greatest temptation to doubt of
it, Jer. 12.1. Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me
talk with thee of thy judgments, wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
The Prophet, notwithstanding he saw the prosperous Condition of wicked Men, and
the afflicted state of the godly, which seemed hard to be reconcile with the
Justice of God's Providence, yet before he would so much as reason about it, he
lays down this as a certain conclusion, Righteous art thou, O Lord. To this
Head likewise belong all those Texts which speak of Righteousness, as God's
dwelling Place and his Throne, of his Delight in Justice, and of the Duration
and Eternity of it, which I need not particularly recite.

2. There are likewise other Texts, which remove the contrary, viz. injustice
and unrighteousness at the greatest distance from God, as being most contrary
to his Nature and Perfection. Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of truth, and without iniquity.
2 Chronicles. 19.7. There is to iniquity with the Lord our God, nor accepting of
Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Job 8.3. Does God pervert Judgment? or does the
Almighty pervert Justice? which is a vehement negation of the Thing. Job 34.10,
11, 12. Far be it from God, that he should do wickedness, and from the
Almighty, that he should commit iniquity. For the work of a Man shall he render
unto him, and cause every Man to find according to his ways. Yea surely God
will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment. Romans 9.14.
What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

Secondly, There are other Texts which speak more particularly of the Justice
and Righteousness of God in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments. It Is
true indeed, the Justice of God does not constantly appear in this World in the
dispensations of his Providence because this is a time of Patience and
forbearance to Sinners, and of trial and exercise to good Men; but there is a
Day a coming, when all things shall be set straight, and every Man shall
receive the just reward of his Deeds when the Justice of God shall be evident
to all the World, and every Eye shall see it, and shall acknowledge the
Righteous Judgment of God; and this the Scripture most clearly and expressly
declares unto us; and hence it is, that the Day of Judgment is called the Day
of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. The Righteousness of God
does not now so clearly appear, but that there are many Clouds over it; but
there shall be a Day of Revelation, when the Righteousness of God shall be made
manifest to all the World.

The remunerative Justice of God shall then appear in the rewarding the
Righteous; and the punitive Justice of God in punishing the Wicked and Ungodly,
so that a Man shall say, verily there is a reward for the Righteous, verily
there is a God that judges the World.

Now the Righteousness of this vengeance of God, which God will take upon
Sinners, is further set forth to us in Scripture, from the Equity and
Impartiality of it.

I. From the Equity of it,

1. In that the Sins of Men have justly deserved the Punishment, that shall
come upon them, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (...), the
righteous judgment of God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of
Death.

2. In that the Judgment of God shall be proportioned to the Degree and
Heinousness of Men's Sins; so as the lesser or greater Sins shall be punished
with more or less Severity. So our Savior threatens to those who continue
impenitent under the Gospel and the advantages of it, their case shall be more
sad than that of Tire and Sidon, and it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah at the Day of Judgment, than for them. Mat. 11.20, 21. and Luke 12.
47, 48. There you have different Degrees of Punishment threatened,
proportionable to the Aggravations of the Sins, which Men have committed; The
servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he that knew it
not, but did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes;
and so proportionably of all other Aggravations of Sins, for to whom much is
given, of him shall much be required, and unto whom Men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more. So likewise God will vindicate the contempt of the
Gospel more severely, than of the Law, because the confirmation of it is
clearer, and the Salvation offered by it greater. Heb. 2.2, 3, 4. If the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape? etc. And so, Heb.
10.28, 29. He that despised Moses his law died without mercy under two or three
Witnesses, of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worth,
who haht trodden under foot the Son of God? etc.

II. The Righteousness of this Judgment is further set forth to us in Scripture
by the impartiality of it. Hither belong all those Texts, which remove from God
that (...), that respect of Persons, which is so incident to humane Tribunals.
Now respect of Persons is in distribution of Justice, and has regard to some
external qualities or circumstances of the Persons, which do not appertain to
the merit of the cause, and upon Account of those circumstances, to deal
unequally with those, whose Case is equal; as when two Persons, who are equally
guilty of a Crime, are brought to their Trial, and the one is Condemned, and
the other acquitted, upon the Account of Friendship, or Relation, or some other
Interest, because one is Poor and the other Rich, the one has powerful Friends
to intercede for him, the other not, the one brings a Gift or Bribe, the other
not, or upon any other account, besides the pure Merits of the Cause; I say to
deal thus in the distribution of of Justice, is respect of Persons. Otherwise
in matters of mere grace and favor, respect of Persons has no Place,
accordin^ to that common rule of Divines, (...) locum non habet in gratuitis,
sed in debitis. Now this the Scripture every where speaks of, as a thing very
far from God, Deuteronomy. 10.17. The Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords,
a great God, a mighty and a terrible, which regards not Persons, nor takes
rewards. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. There is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect
of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Job 34.18, 19. Is it fit to say to a King,
thou art Wicked? or to Princes, ye are ungodly? how much less to him that
accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the
poor? for they are all the work of his hands. Romans 2.6. Who will render to
every Man according to his deeds: for there is no respect of Persons with God.
Acts 10.34, 35. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, but
in every Nation: he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted
with him. Ephesians. 6.8, 9. The Apostle there presses the duties of Servants to
Masters, from this Consideration, that whatsoever good thing any Man does, the
same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free, and at the 9 th.
v. Ye Masters, do the same thing unto them, forbearing threatening; knowing that
your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of Persons with him. He
makes this likewise an Argument, why Men should not oppress and deal
deceitfully one with another, Col. 3.25. But he that does wrong, shall receive
for the wrong which he has done; and there is no respect of Persons. And in
General, St. Peter urges this Consideration upon all Men to deter them from
Sin in any kind, 1 Pet. 1.17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect
of Persons judges according to every Man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear.

And besides that the Scripture does remove this at the greatest Distance from
God, it gives us also several instances of the impartiality of the Divine
Justice, that it is not to be perverted and turned aside by any of those
extrinsecal Considerations which commonly sway with Men; it is not to be
prevailed with and overcome by Flattery and Entreaties, Mat. 7.21, 22. Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, etc. The
Divine Justice is not to be imposed upon by good Words, and external shows, and
false Professions; so neither by any external Relation to him; For many shall
come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, but the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast
out into utter Darkness.

And however Men may bear up themselves now upon their worldly Greatness and
Power, certainly there is a time a coming, when the greatest Persons in the
World, those who overturn Kingdoms, and lay wast Countries, and oppress and
ruin Millions of Mankind for the gratifying of their own Lusts and Ambition, I
say there is a Day coming, when even these, as much, nay more than others,
shall fear and tremble before the impartial Justice of God. Rev. 6.15. And the
Kings of the earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondman, and every Freeman hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; for the great Day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? The impartial Justice of God
will treat the greatest and the meanest Persons alike, Rev. 20.12. I saw the
dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened, and another
book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the books, according to their works. All
judged according to their Works.

I should next proceed to vindicate the Justice of God in the Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments from those Objections, which seem to impeach it. But
before I enter upon this, it will be convenient to satisfy one question, which
has occasioned great disputes in the World, and that is, how far Justice,
especially as to the Punishment of Offenders is essential to God? And for the
clearing of this matter I shall briefly lay down these Propositions.

First, I take this for a certain and undoubted Truth, that every Perfection is
essential to God, and cannot be imagined to be separated from the Divine
Nature, because this is the Natural Notion which Men have of God, that he is a
Being that has all Perfection.

Secondly, The actual constant exercise of those Divine Perfections, the
effects whereof are without himself, is not essential to God. For instance,
though God be essentially powerful, and good; yet it is not necessary, that he
should always exercise his Power and Goodness; but at such times, and in such a
manner, as seems best to his Wisdom; and this is likewise true of his Wisdom
and Justice, because these are Perfections, the effects whereof are terminated
upon something without himself.

Thirdly, It is essential to God to love Goodness, and hate Sin, wherever he
sees them. It is not necessary there should be a World, or reasonable Creatures
in it: but upon supposition that God makes such Creatures, it is agreeable to
the Divine Nature, to give them good and righteous Laws, to encourage them in
the doing of that which is good, and to discourage them from doing that which
is evil, which cannot be done, but by Rewards and Punishments, and therefore it
is agreeable to the Perfection of the Divine Nature, to reward Goodness, and to
punish Sin.

Fourthly, As for those rewards which the Gospel promises, and the Punishments
which it threatens, there is some difference to be made between the rewarding
and punishing justice of God.

1. As for that abundant reward God is pleased to promise to good Men, the
promise of it is founded in his goodness, and the performance of that promise
in his justice; for it is justice to perform what he promises, though the promise
of so great and abundant a reward was mere goodness.

2. As for the punishing justice of God, about which has been the great
Question, whether that be essential to God or not, it seems very plain, that it
is not necessary that God should inflict those judgments which he threatens,
because he has threatened them; for there is not the like obligation upon
Persons to perform their threatenings, that there is to perform their promises;
because God by his promise becomes a Debtour to those, to whom he makes the
promise; but when he threatens, he is the Creditour, and we are Debtors to his
Justice; and as a Creditor, he may remit the Punishment which he has
threatened: But then if we consider God as loving goodness and hating Sin; if we
look upon him as Governor of the World, and concerned to preserve good Order,
to encourage Holiness and Righteousness, and to discountenance Sin, under this
consideration it is essential to him to punish Sin at such times, and in such
manner and circumstances, as seems best to his Wisdom.

And I am not at all moved by that, which is urged by some learned Men to the
contrary, that if punishing justice were essential to God, then he must punish
the Sinner immediately, so soon as he has offended, and to the utmost of his
Power; because whatever Acts naturally, Acts necessarily, and to the utmost:
for I do not suppose such a justice essential to God as Acts necessarily, but
such a justice, which as to the time, and manner, and circumstances of its
Acting is regulated and determined by his Wisdom; and there is the same Reason
likewise of his goodness.

I come now to the Objections which are taken partly from the dispensations of
God in this World; and partly from the punishments of the other.

First, As to the dispensations of God in this World, there are these two
things Objected against the justice of the Divine Providence.

I. The inequality of God's dealings with good and bad Men in this World.

II. The translation of Punishments, punishing one Man's Sin upon another, as
the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children, of the Prince upon the People. I
begin with the

I. Objection, the inequality of God's dealing with good and bad Men in this
World. In this life things happen promiscuously, there is one event to the
righteous, and to the wicked; if the Wicked suffer and are afflicted, so are
the Righteous; if the Righteous sometimes flourish, so do the Wicked; and is
not this unjust, that those who are so unequal as to their Deserts should be
equally dealt withal? or if there be any inequality, it is usually the wrong
way, the Wicked do many times prosper more in the World, and the Righteous are
frequently more afflicted. This was the great Objection of old against the
Providence of God, which the Heathen Philosophers took so much pains to answer,
nay it did often shake the faith of Holy and Good Men in the old Testament. Job
12.6. The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure,
into whose hand God brings abundantly. and chap. 21.7, 8, 9. he Expostulates
the same matter again; and David says this was a great Stumbling Block to him,
Psalm. 73.2, 3. and the like we find in the Prophets, Jer. 12.1. and Hab. 1.13.
This Objection I have elsewhere considered, I shall now very briefly offer two
or three Things, which I hope will be sufficient to break the force of it.

1. It must be granted, that it is not necessary to justice to show it self
immediately, and to dispense Rewards and Punishments so soon as there are
Objects for them. This is not thought necessary among Men, much more ought we
to leave it to the Wisdom of God to determine the time and circumstances of the
exercising of his Justice; and we are not to conclude that the Providence of
God is unjust, if he do not bestow rewards, and inflict Punishments, just when
we think he should.

2. If God intended this Life for a State of Trial, wherein he would prove the
obedience of Men, and their free inclination to good or evil, it is not
reasonable to expect that he should follow Men with present Rewards and
Punishments; for that would lay too great a force upon Men, so that there would
hardly be any opportunity of trying them; but on the contrary, there is all the
Reason in the World to presume that God should exercise the Graces and Virtues
of good Men with afflictions and sufferings, and suffer bad Men to take their
Course for a while, and walk in their own ways, without continual Checks by
frequent and remarkable Judgments upon them, so often as they offend.

3. If there be another Life after this, wherein Men shall be Judged according
to their works, then this Objection vanishes, for that great Day will set all
things straight, which seem now to be so Crooked and Irregular. The deferring
of Rewards and Punishments to the most convenient Season, is so far from being
a reflection upon the justice of God, that it is highly to the commendation of
it. What Claudian says of Ruffinus, a very bad Man, whose long impunity had
tempted Men to call in question the justice of God, is considerable in this
Case; Abstulit hunc tandem Ruffini poena tumultum,
Absolvitque Deos.


The Punishment which overtook him at last, did quiet those tumultuous
thoughts, and absolved the gods from all blame. When Men look but a little way,
and consider only the present state of Things, they are ready to quarrel at the
Justice of them; but if they would look at the end of Things, and have Patience
to stay till the last, to see the Conclusion and Winding up of things, they
would then acquit God in their thoughts from all those imputations of
injustice, which from the inequality of present dispensations, rash and
inconsiderate Men are apt to charge him withal.

II. Objection, from the translation of Punishments, the punishing of one Man's
Sin upon another, as of the Fathers upon the Children, which God threatens in
the second Commandment, and did in some sort fulfill in Ahab, in bringing the
evil he had threatened him withal, in his Son's Days, 1 Kings 21.19. The
punishing the Sin of one Person upon a People, as that of Achan upon the whole
Congregation, Josh. 22.20. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in
the accursed thing? and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel, and that
man perished not alone in his iniquity. And the Sin of David upon the People, 2 Samuel 24. When seventy thousand Dyed of the Plague, for David's Sin in numbering
the People. Now how is this agreeable to justice? is it not a known Rule, Noxa
caput sequitur, Mischief pursues the Sinner? What can be more reasonable, Quam
ut peccata suos teneant Authors, Than that Men's faults should be charged upon
the Authors, and Punishment fall upon the guilty?

For answer to this.

1. It is not unreasonable that one Man should bear the punishment of another's
Fault, if he be willing and content to bear it, Volenti non fit injuria, There
is no wrong done to those, that are willing to undergo it, though they be
innocent, which was the case of our Blessed Savior suffering for us, the just
for the unjust, as the Scripture expresses it.

2. Where the Person, upon whom the punishment is trasfer'd, is likewise a
sinner, and obnoxious to God, there can be no injustice; because he has
deserved it upon his own account, and God may take what occasion he pleases to
punish them that deserve to be punished.

3. In punishing the iniquity of the Father upon the Children, the guilty
Person, that is, the Father, is punished in the Calamity of his Children, for a
Man's Children are himself Multiplied; and therefore it is very remarkable that
in the second Commandment, God promises to show mercy to thousands of
Generations of them that love him; but he visits the iniquities of the Fathers
upon the Children, but to the third and fourth Generation, that is so far as a
Man may live to see them punished, and suffer in their Punishment.

4. As to the Punishment of the People for the sins of their Princes and
Governors, and one part of a community for another, supposing all of them to be
Sinners, which is the true case, God may lay the punishment where he pleases;
and there is no more injustice then when a Man is whipped on the Back for the
theft which his hand committed, a community being one Body; besides the Prince
is punished in the loss of his People, the glory of a King consisting in the
Multitude of his Subjects.

The Objection with respect to the other World, the punishment of temporal
Evils with Eternal, is elsewhere answered.

The use we should make of this whole Discourse is,

First, If God be Just and Righteous, let us acknowledge it in all his
dispensations, even in those, the Reason whereof is most hidden and obscure.
Neh. 9.33. Speaking of the great afflictions that had befal'n God's own People,
yet this he lays down as a firm Principle, howbeit thou art just in all that is
brought upon us.

Secondly, This is matter of terror to wicked Men. God does now exercise his
milder Attributes toward Sinners, his Mercy, and Patience, and Goodness; but
if we despise these, that terrible Attribute of his Justice will desplay it
self; and this the Scripture describes in a severe manner, the Lord revengeth,
and is jealous; the Lord will take vengeance on his Adversaries, and reserveth
wrath for his Enemies.

Thirdly, This is matter of comfort to good Men, that the Righteous God Governs
the World, and will judge it. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, Psalm.
97.1. And he gives the Reason of it in the next v. Righteousness and judgment
are the habitation of his Throne. Though he be omnipotent, we need not fear; for
his Power is always under the conduct of Eternal Righteousness.

Fourthly, Let us imitate this righteousness, let us endeavor to be righteous
as he is righteous; let us give to God the Love, Reverence, and Obedience which
are due to him; and in all our dealings, what is just and due to Men. This Duty
has an immutable Reason, founded in the Nature of God.

SERMON XII. Vol. VI.
The Truth of God.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.4. -- A God of Truth.


IN speaking to this Attribute, I shall I. Show you what we are to understand
by the Truth of God. II. Endeavor to prove that this Perfection belongs to
God, that he is a God of Truth. III. Answer some Objections that may be made
against it; and then make some Use of it.


I. What we are to understand by the Truth of God. I shall take it as the
Scripture uses it in a large Sense, so as to include not only the veracity of
God; but his Faithfulness. Hence it is that in Scripture Truth and Faithfulness
are so often put together, and frequently put one for another, Isa. 25.1. Thy
counsels of old are faithfulness and truth. Rev. 21.5. These words are true and
faithful. And the Faithfulness of God, in performing his Promises, is
frequently called his Truth. And because the Scripture uses them
promiscuously, we need not be very solicitous to find out distinct Notions of
them; but if you will, they may be distinguished thus; the truth or veracity of
God has place in every Declaration of his Mind; the Faithfulness of God only
in his Promises.

For the First, The veracity or truth of God; this has place in every
Declaration of his Mind, and signifies an exact Correspondence and Conformity
between his Word and his Mind, and consequently between his Word and the truth
and reality of Things. The Correspondence of his Word with his Mind, depends
upon the rectitude of his Will; the conformity of his Word with the reality of
Things, not only upon the rectitude of his Will, but the Perfection of his
Knowledge, and the infallibility of his Understanding; so that when we say God
is true, or speaks Truth, we mean thus, that his Words are a plain Declaration
of his Mind, and a true representation of Things, in opposition to False-hood,
which is speaking otherwise than the thing is; and Hypocrisy, that is,
speaking otherwise than we think. For instance, when God declares any thing to
be so, or not to be so, to have been thus, or not to have been thus, the thing
really is so, and he thinks so; when he expresses his desire of any thing, he
does really desire it; when he commands any thing, or forbids us any thing, it
is really his Mind and Will that we should do what he Commands, and avoid what
he forbids; when he declares and foretells any thing future, it really shall
come to pass, and he really intended it should; if the Declaration be to be
understood absolutely, it shall absolutely come to pass; if the Declaration be
to be understood Conditionally, it shall come to pass, and he intends it shall,
if the Condition be performed.

Secondly, The Faithfulness of God. This only has place in his Promises, in
which there is an Obligation of Justice superadded to his Word; for God by his
Promise does not only declare what he intends, and what shall be; but confers a
right upon them to whom the promise is made, so as that the breach of his
Promise would not only cast an imputation upon his Truth, but upon his Justice.

II. That this Perfection belongs to God. And this I shall endeavor to prove,

First, From the Dictates of Natural Light.

Secondly, From Scripture.

First, From the Dictates of Natural Light. Natural Light tells us, that Truth
and Faithfulness are Perfections, and consequently belong to the Divine Nature;
and that False-hood and a Lie are Imperfections, and to be removed from God.
There is nothing that is amongst Men esteemed a greater contumely and reproach,
than to give a Man the Lie, to call him a Liar, because it is an Argument of so
much baseness, and of a low and mean and servile spirit; the usual Temptation
to it being fear of losing some Advantage, or incurring some danger. Hence was
that saying, that it is the property of a Slave to lie, but of a free Man to
speak truth: Now whatever argues baseness or imperfection, our Reason tells us
is infinitely to be separated from the most Perfect Being. God cannot be
tempted with evil, the Divine Nature being all-sufficient, can have no
temptation to be otherwise than Good and Just, and True and Faithful. Men are
tempted to Lie by advantage, and out of fear: but the Divine Nature has the
security of its fullness and all sufficiency, that it cannot hope for any
increase, nor fear any impairment of its Estate. Men are unfaithful, and break
their Words, either because they are rash and inconsiderate in passing of them,
or forgetful in minding them, or inconstant in keeping of them, or impotent and
unable to perform them: but none of these are incident to God, his infinite
Wisdom, and perfect Knowledge, and clear foresight of all Events, secure him
both from inconsiderateness, and inconstancy, and forgetfulness; and his
infinite Power renders him able to perform what he has spoken, and to make
good his Word. And that these are the Natural Dictates and Suggestions of our
Minds, appears clearly from the reasonings of the Heathen in this matter, who
were destitute of Divine Revelation. Plato de Repub. l. 2. lays down this as a
certain Truth, That lying and Falsehood are imperfections, and odious to God
and Men, (...). And afterward he tells us, That the Divine Nature is free from
all Temptation hereto, either from advantage or fear; (...); and Concludes,
Therefore God is true, and deals plainly with us, both in his Words and
Actions, and is neither changed himself, nor deceives us. Porphyry in the Life
of Pythagoras tells us, That this was one of his Precepts, (...); and
afterward he adds, that Truth is so great a Perfection, that if God would
render himself visible to Men, he would choose Light for his body, and Truth for
his Soul.

Secondly, From Scripture. The Scripture does very frequently attribute this to
God, 2 Samuel 7.28. And now, O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words be
true; Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; Psalm. 31.5.
Into thy hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.
Rev. 3.7. These things says he, that is holy, he that is true. Rev. 6.10. How
long, O Lord, holy and true? 15.3. Just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. 16.7. True and righteous are thy judgments. Hither we may refer those
Texts which speak of the Plenty and Abundance of God's truth, Ex. 34.6.
Abundant in goodness and truth. Psalm. 86.15. Plenteous in mercy and truth; and
those which speak of the Duration and Eternity of it. Psalm. 100.5. And his
truth endures to all generations. 117.2. And the truth of the Lord endures
for ever. 146.6. Who keeps truth for ever.

As the Scripture does attribute this Perfection to God, so it removes the
contrary from him with the greatest abhorrence and detestation, Number. 23.19. God
is not a Man that he should lie, neither the son of Man that he should repent,
has he said, and shall not he do it? has he spoken, and shall he not make it
good? They are Balaam's Words, but God put them into his Mouth. 1 Samuel 15.29.
The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a Man that he
should repent. Romans 3.4. Yea let God be true, and every Man a Liar. Nay the
Scripture goes further, does not only remove lying and false-hood and
inconstancy from God, but speaks of these as things impossible to the Divine
Nature; Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised
before the World began. Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.

And the Scripture does not only in general attribute this Perfection to God,
but does more particularly assure us of his Sincerity and Truth and
Faithfulness. Of his sincerity; that he deals plainly with us, and speaks what
he intends, that his Words are the image of his Thoughts, and a true
representation of his Mind. God is very careful to remove this jealousy out of
the Minds of Men, who are apt to entertain unworthy Thoughts of God, as if
notwithstanding all that he has declared, he had a secret design to ruin Men;
therefore he interposeth his Oath for our greater assurance, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. When God speaks to us, he speaks
his Mind, and has no design to circumvent and possess us with Error and
Delusion; if he offer Life and Happiness, we may believe he is real, and that
if he did not intend to bestow it upon us, or if there were no such thing as a
future Glory, he would not have declared it to us; this was the temper of our
Savior, who was the express image of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. John
14.2. In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you.

And as the Scripture assures us of his Sincerity, so of his Truth and
Faithfulness in the accomplishment of all his Predictions, and performance of
all his Promises. As for the truth of his Predictions, and certain
accomplishment of them, the Scripture frequently uses this Proverbial Speech,
to assure us of the certainty of their accomplishment; Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Mat. 24.35. For the Faithfulness
of God in his Promises, the Scripture makes frequent mention of it, Deuteronomy. 7.9.
Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which
keeps covenant and mercy. Psalm. 89.33, 34. I will not suffer my faithfulness
to fail, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing which is gone out of
my lips. The Scripture does record God's punctual and full performance of his
Promises; particularly of that Promise to Abraham, after four hundred Years to
bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and to give them the Land of Canaan
for an Inheritance. Genesis 15.13. the Punctual accomplishment you have recorded,
Ex. 12.41. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty Years,
even the self same day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out
from the land of Egypt; see likewise Jos. 21.44, 45. and 23.14. 1 Kings 8.56.
And upon this account it is that God is so frequently in Scripture styled the
God that keeps covenant. 1 Kings 8.23. Neh. 1.5.9.32. and in several other
Places. And so likewise of Predictions of evil to come, God is true in
fulfilling his Word. 1 Samuel 15.^9. When the Prophet had threatened Saul to rent
the Kingdom from him, he adds, the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent,
for he is not a Man that he should repent.

III. I come to remove some Objections that may be made against the truth and
faithfulness of God.

First, It is Objected against the sincerity of God and his plain dealing, that
he is sometimes represented in Scripture, as inspiring Prophets with false
Messages. 1 Kings 22.20, etc. Jer. 4.10.20.7. Ezekiel. 14.9.

Ans. As to three of these Texts, it is a known Hebraism to express things in
an imperative and active form, which are to be understood only permissively. So
where the Devils besought Christ, that he would suffer them to enter into the
herd of Swine, he said unto them go, Mat. 8.31. He did not command, but permit
them. And so John 13.27. where our Savior says to Judas, what thou do, do
quickly, we are not to understand, that he commanded him to betray him, though
that seem to be expressed in the form. So likewise here, where an evil spirit
offered himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophet, and God says
go forth and do so; this only signifies a permission not a command. And so Jer.
4.10. where the Prophet complains that God had greatly deceived the People,
saying they should have peace, when the sword reached to the Soul; we are to
understand this no otherwise, but that God permitted the false Prophets to
deceive them, by Prophesying Peace to them, as appears by the History. Ezekiel.
14.9. I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, that is permitted him to be
deceived, and to deceive the People, as a just judgment upon them for their
Infidelity with respect to his true Prophets. This he threatens at the 5 th. v.
I will take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all
estranged from me through their idols; because they have chosen to themselves
false gods, I will suffer them to be deceived with false Prophets; and that
this is the meaning, appears by the threatening added, and I will stretch out my
hand upon him, and I will destroy him from the midst of my people; now God will
not punish that whereof he is the Author.

That Text Jer. 20.7. Thou have deceived me, and I was deceived, signifies no
more, but that he had mistaken the Promise of God to him, who when he gave him
his Commission told him he would be with him, by which he understood that no
evil should come to him, and now he was become a derision, and the people
mocked him; and in his passion and weakness he breaks forth into this
expression, thou have deceived me, and I was deceived; whereas it was his own
mistake of the meaning of God's promise, which was not that he should not meet
with scorn, and opposition, and persecution, but that they should not prevail
against him, as you may see at the latter end of the first Chapter.

Secon^ Objection against the Faithfulness of God as to performance of his
promise. It Is Objected that God did not give the Children of Israel all the
land which he promised to Abraham, as will appear by comparing, Genesis 18.19, 20.
with Josh. 13.1. etc. and Judge. 2.20, 21. Genesis 15.18. God promises to give
Abraham and his seed such a Land, the bounds whereof he describes; Josh. 13.1.
It Is said there, that there remained very much land yet unconquered, which they
had not got the possession of* And Judge. 2.20. it is said that the People having
not performed their part of the Covenant, God would suspend the further
performance of his Promise, and would not drive out any more of the Nations
before them; and it is probable that the Israelites never were possessed of the
promised Land in the full latitude and extent of the Promise.

Ans. This Covenant of God with Abraham, was upon consideration of his past
Faith and Obedience, though it seems the full performance of it did likewise
depend upon the future Obedience of his posterity; in pursuance of this
Covenant, notwithstanding all the murmerings and rebellions of that People, God
did bring them into the promised Land, though they provoked him to destroy them
many a time; because he remembered his covenant with Abraham; when they were
possessed of it, God gave them a title to the rest, and would have assisted them
in the Conquest of it, if they had performed the Condition required on their
part, that is, continued Faithful and Obedient to him, but they did not, and
thereby discharged God from any further performance of his Promise; and God
when he had done this, had fully performed the Covenant he made with Abraham,
so far as concerned his part, as appears by the acknowledgment of Joshua, even
in a time when a great part of the Land was unconquered, Josh. 21.44. and of
Solomon, 1 Kings 8.56. yea and had it not been that God had made this Covenant,
as well upon consideration of Abraham's Faith and Obedience, as upon Condition
of the future Obedience of his Posterity, the Rebellions and Disobedience of
the People in the Wilderness had released God wholly from the Promise, and he
had not been unfaithful if he had destroyed utterly that People, and made a
full end of them, and they had never entered into that Land, because a failure
of the Condition does make the Obligation to cease; and that this Condition was
implied in this Covenant with Abraham, appears by these Texts, Deuteronomy. 7.12,
13.11.22.23.42. and Judge. 2.20. God gives this Reason why he suspended the
complete performance of his Promise, the anger of the Lord was hot against
Israel, and he said, because that this People has transgressed my Covenant
which I commanded their Fathers, and have not harkned to my voice, I also will
not henceforth drive out any of the Nations which Joshua left when he died.

Third Objection, God is not punctual in performing his Threatenings; as when he
threatened Adam, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die; which yet was not accomplished, for he lived many hundred Years after. God
threatened Ahab to bring evil upon him and his family, 1 Kings 21.21. But upon
his Humiliation he is pleased to respite it, v. 29. So God threatened Hezekiah
with Death, but upon his prayer adds fifteen Years to his Life. 2 Kings 20.
Thus Nineveh was threatened, but upon their Repentance, God repented of the
evil, Jon. 3.10. Now how is this deferring and turning away of judgment
consistent with the Truth of God? does not this seem to charge him with
false-hood or levity?

Ans. This may be said in general, that every one that understands the Nature
of God, cannot but be very well assured, that false-hood and levity are very
far from God; and though he could not untie some particular Knots, and answer all
difficulties, yet he ought to rest satisfied in this assurance. I confess this
Objection is troublesome, and requires a distinct Consideration. I will not be
peremptory in nice matters, but I shall, with submission, offer these things in
answer to it.

1. As for the expression of God's repenting, we are to understand it, as many
others in Scripture, after the manner of Men, and spoken by way of
condescension to our Weakness, and accommodated to our Capacities, and not as
casting any imputation of false hood or inconstancy upon God, as if either he
did not intend what he says, or out of levity did alter his Mind. When God is
said to repent, the expression only signifies thus much, that God does not
execute that which seemed to us to have been his purpose, that he is pleased to
do otherwise than his threatenings seemed openly to express, because of some
tacit Condition employed in them; and this does not derogate either from the
truth, or sincerity, or constancy of God in his Word. Not from his truth; for
he speaks what he intends really, if something did nor intervene to prevent the
Judgment threatened, upon which he was resolved, when he threatened, to be taken
off and stop his Judgments: Nor does it derogate from his sincerity and
plainness; for he has told us that his threatenings have such Conditions
implied in them: Nor does it derogate from the constancy and immutability of
God; because God does not mutare consilium sed sententiam, he does not change
his counsel and purpose, but takes off the sentence, which he had past with
reserved Conditions.

2. As to the Instances, that I may give more particular satisfaction to them,
I shall Consider the threatenings of God with this double respect, either with
relation to Law, or with relation to the Event; with relation to a Law, as they
are the sanction of it; or with relation to the Event, as they are Predictions
of something to come.

(1.) Some threatenings have only relation to a Law, as they are the sanction of
it. And thus considered, they differ from Promises; for Promises confer a
Right, omne promissum cadit in debitum; but a threatening does not convey any
Right, nor if forborne can the party complain of Wrong done to him; and
therefore in this Case it can only signify what the offense against the Law
deserves, and what the offender may expect; for the end of threatening is not
Punishment, but the avoiding of it. And this may answer the first Instance. God
gave Adam a Law; and by way of Sanction, not of Prediction of an Event, he
threatened the breach of it with Death: Now God did not execute the Punishment
threatened at the time threatened, but deferred it, and this without any
impeachment of his Justice or Truth, because this threatening was only the
Sanction of the Law.

(2.) We may consider Threatenings with Relation to the Event and as
Predictions; and as to the accomplishment of these, there seems to be a greater
degree of Necessity, because the honor of God's Knowledge, and Power, and
Truth seem to be concerned in them; for if his Word be not fulfilled, it must
either be for want of Knowledge to foresee Events, or Power to bring them to
pass, or Constancy to his Word. Now if we consider Threatenings with respect to
the Event, as they are Predictions of future Judgments, I think all the other
Instances may be satisfied, by laying down this Rule for the understanding of
them, viz. That all Prophetical Threatenings or Predictions of Judgment are to
be understood with this tacit Condition, if there do not intervene the
Humiliation, and Repentance, and Prayer of the Persons against whom the
Judgment is threatened; and if so, God may upon Repentance, without any
impeachment of the honor of his Truth, or Knowledge, or Power, either defer,
or abate, or remit the Punishment. And that the Predictions of Judgments are to
be understood with this Condition, appears clearly from that known Text, Jer.
18.7, 8.

I come now to the last thing I proposed, to make some Use of this Doctrine.

First, If God be a God of Truth, then this gives us assurance that he does not
deceive us, that the Faculties which he has given us are not false, but when
they have clear perceptions of Things, they do not err and mistake. Were it not
for the veracity of God, we might, for any thing we know, be under a constant
Delusion; and no Man could demonstate the contrary, but that this is our make
and temper, and the very frame of our Understandings, to be then most of all
deceived, when we think our selves to be most certain; I say no Man could be
assured of the contrary, but from hence, because veracity and truth is a Divine
Perfection; and therefore God cannot be the Author of Error and Delusion.
Therefore we may be assured, that the frame of our Understandings is not a
Cheat, but that our Faculties are true, and unless it be our own fault, we need
not be deceived in things that are necessary to our Happiness.

Secondly, If God be a God of Truth, then there is Reason why we should believe
and assent to whatever we are satisfied is revealed to us by God. A Divine
Revelation is a sufficient ground for the most firm assent; for this very
thing, that any thing is revealed by God, is the highest Evidence, and ought to
give us the most firm assurance of the truth of it. Hence it is that the Word
of God is called the Word of truth, yea and truth it self, John 17.17. Thy Word
is truth.

Therefore whoever entertains the ^criptures as the Word of God, and is
satisfied of the Divine Authority of them, ought in Reason to believe every
thing contained in them, yea though there be some things of which no reasonable
account can be given, and which our Reason and Understanding cannot give us
particular satisfaction in; yet because we are satisfied that they are revealed
by God who cannot lie, whose Knowledge is infallible, and whose Word is true,
we ought upon this higher and superior Reason to yield a firm assent to the
truth of them: if we do not, we dishonor this Perfection of God, and rob him
of this essential property, his Veracity. 1 John 5.10. He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself: he that believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believeh not the record that God gave of his Son. As on
the other hand, if we do believe what God has revealed, we glorify this
Perfection of his, and set our seal to his Veracity. So it is said of Abraham,
Romans 4.20. That he was strong in faith, giving glory to God. And St. John the
Baptist, speaking concerning our Savior, says, John 3.33. He that has
received his testimony, has set to his seal, that God is true.

Thirdly, If God be a God of truth, and faithful in performing his Promise,
then here is a firm Foundation for our Hope and Trust. If God have made any
Promise, we may securely rely upon it, that it shall be made good; we may hold
fast our hope without wavering, because he is faithful who has promised, Heb.
10.23. Hence it is that the Blessings of God's Covenant are called sure
mercies, Isa. 55.3.

We attribute much to the Word of a faithful Friend, and look upon the Promise
of an honest Man as very good security; but Men may fail us when we rely upon
them: but God is true, though all Men should prove Liars. Men are fickle and
murable; but the Nature of God is fixed, he cannot fail those that trust in him.
When God has made any Promise to us, we may plead it with him, and urge him
with his faithfulness. So we find David did, 2 Samuel 7.25. etc.

Only we should be careful to perform the Condition which is required on our
part, Heb. 4.1. we should take heed lest a Promise being left us, any one
should come short of it, by not performing the Condition; for that does release
and discharge him of the Promise, and he is faithful, though he does not perform
what he promised, because he did not promise but upon Condition; and this seem
to be the meaning of those Words, 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, yet he
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. He said before, that if we perform
the Conditions required, God will bestow the Blessings promised, It is a
faithful saying, for if we be dead with him, we also shall live with him; if we
suffer, we also shall reign with him; but if we deny him, the Curse threatened
will then take place, and he will deny us; and God is not unfaithful in doing
this, he does not deny himself.

Now if we have such assurance, we may trust him with our greatest
Concernments, and venture our Souls with him, Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I
commit my spirit, O Lord God of truth. We should rely upon him, when there are
the greatest improbabilities of the accomplishment of his Promises. Thus did
Abraham, Romans 4.17. etc.

This should also make us patient in hope; if a Promise be not speedily
accomplished, we should not be dejected or disquieted. David challenges himself
upon this account, Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art
thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is
the health of my countenance, and my God. And so likewise in reference to the
Rewards of another World, though at a distance, yet we should, as the Apostle
speaks, wait for the blessed Hope.

Fourthly, The Truth of God is matter of terror to the Wicked. All the
threatenings of temporal Evils may justly be expected, because their Sins
deserve them, and there is no Condition employed in them, upon which thou can
reasonably hope for the avoiding or abating of the Evils threatened, but of
Humiliation and Repentance, and if notwithstanding these threatenings thou
continuest in thy Sins, and blessest thy self, saying, I shall have peace, though
thou walk in the imaginations of thy heart, by this very thing thou provokest
the Justice of God not to spare thee, and make his wrath and his jealousy to
smoke against thee; and if thou continuest impenitent, however he may defer the
execution of temporal Evils, his Truth and Veracity is concerned to inflict
eternal Punishments upon thee; for he has sworn in his wrath that such shall
no enter into his rest.

Fifthly, Let us propound to our selves the truth of God for our pattern and
imitation. Would you be like God? be true and faithful. Truth and faithfulness
are Divine Perfections; but lying and falsehood are the Properties of the
Devil, and the predominant qualities of Hell. The character of the Devil is,
that he abode not in the truth, and there is no truth in him, when he speaks
a lie, it is of his own, for he is a liar and the Father of it. John 8.44.

One of the first and most natural Notions that we have of Religion is, that it
is to imitate God, and to endeavor to be like him, so far as we are capable;
and to contradict any of the Divine Excellencies and Perfections is the highest
Sin, because it is against the clearest Dictates of our Mind, and contrary to
those Principles which are most deeply rooted in our Nature. No Man can be
Cruel and Unmerciful, False and Treacherous, without a very high degree of
guilt, because these Sins are contrary to the chiefest and most essential
Perfections of God. Lying is a Sin that would fly in the Face of an Heathen,
because it directly contradicts those Natural Notions which every Man has of
God and Religion; therefore we find that there is hardly any thing that Men are
more ashamed of than to be taken in a Lie, and it is esteemed the highest
reproach to be charged with it, it argues such a direct contrariety to that
which is the Rule of Perfection, the Nature of God, and consequently so much
imperfection and baseness. He that tells a Lie out of fear is at once bold
toward God, and base toward Men.

Upon these accounts God expresses himself highly offended with those that
practice Lying and False-hood, and to have a detestation of them, Pro. 12.22.
Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord. It renders us unlike to him, Ephesians.
4.24, 25. Put on the new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and
true Holiness (or in the Holiness of truth.) And from hence he infers,
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man truth with his Neighbor: for we
are members one of another. Col. 3.9.10. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye
have put off the old Man with his deeds: And have put on the new Man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him; that is, because
we profess to be conformed to the image of God. More particularly, we should
charge our selves with truth and faithfulness toward God and Men.

1. Toward God, in our Oaths, and Vows, and Covenants. In our Oaths, when we
swear in any Matter, we tell God that what we speak is Truth, and invoke him to
bear Witness to it. To falsify in an Oath is one of the most solemn affronts
that we can put upon the God of Truth.

And so in our Vows, which are a solemn Promise to God, of such things in which
we have no precedent Obligation lying upon us. He that regards truth will
neither be rash in making a Vow, nor careless to perform it. Eccles. 5.4. When
thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in
Fools. Not to perform what we have vowed, is an Argument of Folly; either of
rashness in the making of it, or of inconstancy in not keeping it.

So likewise in all our Covenants with God, to serve him and obey him, and keep
his Commandments, we should strictly charge our selves with performance of
these. There is a Natural Obligation upon us to these Things from the very Law
of our Creation, though we should never solemnly make any such Promise, nor enter
into any such Engagements, because it is a tacit Condition of our Beings; but
the taking of this Covenant solemnly upon us in Baptism, strengthens the
Obligation, and makes our unfaithfulness the greater Sin. All our hopes of
Happiness are founded in the Faithfulness of God; and if thou be false to him,
how can thou expect he should be faithful to thee? It Is true indeed, that he
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself; but if thou have any ingenuity in
thee, this should be an Argument to thee to be faithful to him; I am sure this
can be no Encouragement to thee to be unfaithful; for if thou breakest the
Covenant thou have entered into, and neglegctest the Conditions upon which God
has suspended the performance of his Promise, thou dischargest the Obligation
on his part.

2. Toward Men; we should charge our selves with Truth in all our Words, and
Faithfulness in all our Promises. It becomes us who worship the God of truth,
to speak truth; to use plainness and sincerity in all our Words, to abhor
Falsehood and Dissimulation, and those more refined ways of lying by
equivocation of Words, and secret reservations of our Minds on purpose to
deceive. Those that plead for these, it is a sign they do not understand the
Nature of God, and of Religion, which is to conform our selves to the Divine
Perfections. We meet with many complaints in the old Testament, of the want of
Truth and Faithfulness among Men, Psalm. 12.1.2. Isa. 59.13, 14, 15. Jer. 7.2,
8, 9.2.4, 5, 6. Hos. 4.1. I am afraid there is as much Reason for this
complaint now; for we live in an Age of greater Light, which does reprove and
make manifest this work of Darkness; and methinks there is no sadder sign of
the decay of Christianity, and of the little power and influence that the
Gospel has upon us, than that there is so little regard had by Christians to
these Moral Duties, which because Moral (however Men may slight that Word) are
therefore of Eternal and Indispensable Obligation, having their Foundation in
the Nature of God.

To Conclude all, That Man that can dispense with himself as to Moral Duties,
that makes no Conscience of telling a Lie, or breaking his Word, what Badge
soever he may wear, what Title soever he may call himself by, it is as
impossible that such a Man should be a true Christian, as it is to reconcile
the God of Truth, and the Father of Lies.

SERMON XIII. Vol. VI.
The Holiness of God.
1 PET. I.16. Be ye holy, for I am holy.


IN speaking to this Attribute, I shall

I. Inquire, what we are to understand by the Holiness of God.

II. Endeavor to show, that this Perfection belongs to God.

I. What we are to understand by the Holiness of God. There is some difficulty
in fixing the proper Notion of ^t; for though there be no Property more
frequently attributed to God in Scripture, than this of Holiness, yet there is
none of all God's Attributes, which Divines have spoken more sparingly of than
this.

The general Notion of Holiness is, that it is a separation from a common and
ordinary, to a peculiar and excellent use. And this Notion of Holiness is
applicable either to Things or Persons. To Things; thus the Vessels of the
Tabernacle, and the Vestments of the Priests were said to be holy, because they
were separated from common Use, and appropriated to the peculiar and excellent
use of the service of God. Holiness o^ Persons is twofold, either Relative and
External, which signifies the peculiar Relation of a Person to God; such were
called, (...), Priests, or holy Men: or else Habitual and Inherent; such is the
Holiness of good Men. And it is a separation from moral imperfection, that is
from Sin and Impurity. And this is called (...); and the primary Notion of i^
is Negative, and signifies the absence and remotion of Sin: And this appears i^
those explications which the Scripture gives of it. Thus it is explained by
opposition to Sin and Impurity, 2 Cor 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from a^^
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness; where Holiness is
opposed to all filthiness. Sometimes by the negation of Sin and Defilement: So
we find holy and without blame put together, Ephesians. 1.4. Holy and without
blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. Holy, harmless, and undefiled, Heb. 7.26. It Is true indeed,
this Negative Notion does imply something that is Positive, it does not only
signify the absence of Sin, but a contrariety to it; we cannot conceive the
absence of Sin without the presence of Grace; as take away crookedness from a
Thing, and it immediately becomes straight. When ever we are made Holy, every
Lust and Corruption in us is supplanted by the contrary Grace.

Now this habitual Holiness of Persons, which consists in a separation from
Sin, is a conformity to the Holiness of God; and by this we may come to
understand what Holiness in God is; and it signifies the peculiar eminency of
the Divine Nature, whereby it is separated and removed at an infinite distance
from moral Imperfection, and that which we call Sin; that is, there is no such
thing as Malice, or Envy, or Hatred, or Revenge, or Impatience, or Cruelty, or
Tyranny, or Injustice, or False-hood, or Unfaithfulness in God; or if there be
any other Thing that signifies Sin, and Vice, and moral Imperfection, Holiness
signifies that the Divine Nature is at an infinite distance from all these, and
possessed of the contrary Perfections.

Therefore all those Texts that remove Moral Imperfection from God, and declare
the repugnancy of it to the Divine Nature, do set forth the Holiness of God.
Jam. 1.13. God cannot be tempted with evil. Job 8.3. Does God pervert Judgment,
or does the Almighty pervert Justice? Job. 34.10, 12. Far be it from God that
he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.
Yea surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
judgment. Romans 9.14. Is there then unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Zeph.
3.5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do iniquity. And so
false-hood, and unfaithfulness, and inconstancy, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of truth,
and without iniquity* 1 Samuel 15.29. The strength of Israel will not lie. Tit.
1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has promised* Heb.
6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie.
Therefore you shall find, that Holiness is joined with all the Moral
Perfections of the Divine Nature, or put for them. Hos. 11.9. I am the holy one
in the midst of thee; that is, the merciful one. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Romans 7.12. The
commandment is holy, and just, and good. Rev. 3.7. These things says he that
is holy, he that is true. Rev. 6.10. How long, O Lord, holy and true? Psalm.
105.42. He remembered his holy promise; holy, that is, in respect of the
faithfulness of it. Isa. 55.3. The sure mercies of David; (...), the holy
mercies of David, which will not fail.

So that the Holiness of God is not a particular, but an universal Perfection,
and runs through all the moral Perfections of the Divine Nature, it is the
Beauty of the Divine Nature, and the Perfection of all his other Perfections.
Take away this, and you bring an universal stain and blemish upon the Divine
Nature; without Holiness Power would be Oppression; and Wisdom, Subtilty; and
Sovereignty Tyranny; and Goodness, Malice and Envy; and Justice, Cruelty; and
Mercy, Foolish Pity; and Truth, False-hood: And therefore the Scripture speaks
of this, as God's highest Excellency and Perfection. God is said to be glorious
in Holiness. Ex. 15.11. Holiness is called God's throne. Psalm. 47.8. He sits
upon the throne of his holiness. This is that which makes Heaven, Isa. 63.15.
It is called, The habitation of his holiness, and of his glory; as if this were
the very Nature of God, and the sum of his Perfections. The Knowledge of God is
called the Knowledge of the holy one. Pro. 9.10. To be made partakers of a
Divine Nature, and to be made partakers of God's holiness, are equivalent
Expressions. 2 Pet. 3.4. Heb. 12.10. And because there is no Perfection of God
greater, therefore he is represented as swearing by this, Psalm. 60.6. God has
spoken in his holiness. Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my holiness. The
Angels and glorified Spirits they sum up the Perfections of God in this, Isa.
6.3. And one cried unto another, and said, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. Rev. 4.8. And they rest not day
and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is to come. There is no Attribute of God so often repeated as this; in some
Copies it is nine times.

II. I shall endeavor to prove that this Perfection belongs to God;

First, From the Light of Nature. The Philosophers in all their Discourses of
God agree in this, that whatever sounds like Vice and Imperfection, is to be
separated from the Divine Nature; which is, to acknowledge his Holiness. Plato,
speaking of our likeness to God, says, (...). Dan. 4.9. King Nebuchadnezzar
calls God by this Title, I know that the spirit of the holy Gods is in thee. In
a Word, whatever has been produced to prove any of God's Moral Perfections
proves his Holiness.

Secondly, From Scripture. There is no Title more frequently given to God in
Scripture, and so often ingeminated, as this of his Holiness. He is called
Holiness it self, Isa. 63.15. Where Heaven is called the habitation of his
Holiness, that is, of God. His Name is said to be Holy, Luke 1.49. And holy is
his name. He is called the holy one, Isa. 40.25. The holy one of Israel. Isa.
41.20. The holy one of Jacob. 49.23. He is said to be holy in all his Works and
Promises. Psalm. 105.42. In all his ways and works, Psalm. 145.17. This Title is
given to each of the three Persons in the Blessed Trinity. To God the Father in
innumerable Places: To God the Son, Dan. 9.24. To anoint the most holy. The
Devil cannot deny him this Title, Luke 4.34. I know thee who thou art, the holy
one of God: And the Spirit of God has this Title constantly given it, the holy
Ghost, or the holy Spirit, or the Spirit of Holiness. The Scripture attributes
this Perfection in a peculiar manner to God, 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as
the Lord. Rev. 15.4. For thou only art holy. Holiness is a communicable
Perfection; but no Creature can partake of it in such a manner and degree as
the Divine Nature possesses it. God is eternally Holy, the Fountain of
Holiness: the Creatures are derivatively and by participation Holy. God is
eminently and transcendently so: the Creatures in a finite Degree. God is
immutably so, it is impossible it should be otherwise: but no Creature is out of
an absolute possibility of Sin. In this sense it is said, Job 4.18. That he
puts no trust in his Saints, and his Angels he charge with folly, And
Chap. 15.15. He puts no trust in his Saints, and the Heavens are not pure in
his sight. From all which I shall draw these inferences.

1. If Holiness be a Perfection of the Divine Nature, and a Property of God, if
in the Notion of God, there be included an everlasting separation and distance
from Moral Imperfection, an eternal repugnance to Sin and Iniquity; from hence
we may infer, that there is an intrinsecal good and evil in Things, and the
Reasons and Respects of moral good and evil do not depend upon any mutable, and
inconstant, and arbitrary Principle, but are fixed and immutable, eternal and
indispensable. Therefore they do not seem to me to speak so safely, who make
the Divine Will, precisely and abstractedly considered, the Rule of Moral good
and evil, as if there were nothing good or evil in its own Nature antecedently
to the Will of God, but that all things are therefore good or evil, because God
Wills them to be so; for if this were so, Goodness, and Righteousness, and
Truth, and Faithfulness would not be essential, and necessary, and immutable
Properties of the Divine Nature, but accidental, and arbitrary, and uncertain,
and mutable; which is to suppose that God, if he pleased, might be otherwise
than good, and just, and true. For if these depend merely upon the Will of God,
and be not necessary and essential Properties of the Divine Nature, then the
contrary of these, Malice, and Envy, and Unrighteousness, and False-hood do not
imply any essential repugnancy to the Divine Nature; which is plainly contrary
to what the Scripture tells us, that God cannot be tempted with evil, that it is
impossible he should lie, that he cannot be unrighteous.

If any Man say that God has now declared himself to be Just, and Good, and
Faithful, and now he cannot be otherwise, because he is a God of Truth, and he
changes not, this is to grant the thing; for this supposes the veracity and
immutability of God to be essential and necessary Perfections of the Divine
Nature; and why not justice and goodness as well? I say it supposes veracity
and immutability to be essential Perfections, and not to depend upon the Will
of God, that is, that God cannot Will to be otherwise than true and
unchangeable; for if he could, what assurance can we possibly have, but that
when he declares himself to be good and just, he is or may be otherwise.

But I need not insist upon this, which seems to be so very clear, and to carry
its own Evidence along with it. I will only use this Argument to prove it, and
so leave it. No Being can Will its own Nature and essential Perfections, that
is, choose whether it will be thus or otherwise; for that were to suppose it to
be before it is, and before it has a Being, to deliberate about its own
Nature. Therefore if this be the Nature of God, (which I think no body will
deny) to be good, and just, and true, and necessarily to be what he is; then
goodness, and justice, and truth, do not depend up-the Will of God, but there
are such Things, such Notions antecedently to any Act of the Divine Will. And
this does no ways prejudice the Liberty of God; for this is the highest
Perfection to be necessarily Good, and Just, and True; and a Liberty or
Possibility to be otherwise is impotency and imperfection. For Liberty no where
speaks Perfection, but were the Things and Actions about which it is conversant
are indifferent; in all other things, it is the highest Perfection not to be
free and indifferent, but immutable and fixed, and necessarily bound up by the
eternal Laws of Goodness, and Justice, and Truth, so that it shall not be
possible to swerve from them; and this is the Perfection of the Divine Nature,
which we call his Holiness.

2. If Holiness be the chief Excellency and Perfection of the Divine Nature,
this shows us what account we are to make of Sin, and Wickedness, and Vice. We
may judge of every Privation by the Habit, for they bear an exact Proportion
one to another. Light and Darkness are opposed, as Habit and Privation; if
Light be pleasant and comfortable, then Darkness is dismal and horrid. And so
Holiness and Sin are opposed; if Holiness be the highest Perfection of any
Nature, then Sin is the grand Imperfection and the lowest Debasement of any
Being; because it is the most opposite to that, and at the furthest distance
from that which is the first Excellency and Perfection.

This should rectify our Judgment and Esteem of Things and Persons. We admire
and esteem Riches, and Power, and Greatness; and we scorns and contemn Poverty,
and Weakness, and Meanness; yea Grace and Holiness, if it be in the Company of
these. We are apt to reverence and and value the Great, and the Rich, and the
Mighty of this World, though they be Wicked; and to despise the poor Man's Wisdom
and Holiness; but we make a false Judgment of Things and Persons. There is
nothing that can be a Foundation of respect, that ought to command our
Reverence and esteem, but real Worth and Excellency and Perfection; and
according to the Degrees of this, we ought to bestow our Repect and raise our
Esteem. What St. James says of respect of Persons, I may apply in this Case,
Jam. 2.4. Are ye not then partial in your selves, and become judges of evil
thoughts? We are extremely partial, we make a false Judgment, and Reason ill
concerning Things, when we admire gilded Vices, and Wickedness exalted to high
Places; I mean ungodly rich Men, and ungodly great men; for wicked Men they are
properly ungodly, unlike to God; and when we contemn poor, and mean, and
afflicted Holiness, and Piety. Were but our Eyes open, and our Judgment clear
and unprejudiced, we should see a beauty and resplendency in Goodness: even
when it is under the greatest disadvantage, when it is clothed with Rags, and
sits upon a Dunghill, it would shine through all these Mists, and we should see
a Native Light and Beauty in it, throw the darkness of a poor and low
Condition: And we should see Wickedness to be a most vile and abject thing,
when it appears in all its gallantry and bravery; we should look upon the poor
righteous Man, as more excellent than his Neighbor; and the profane Gallant,
as the offscouring of the Earth. We should value a Man that does justice, and
loves mercy, and speaks the Truth to his Neighbor; we should esteem any one
more upon the Account of any one of these simple Qualities, then we would
another Man, destitute of these, upon the account of a Hundred Titles of
Honor, and Ten Thousand Acres of Land. A Wicked and Unholy Man, he is a vile
Person, who deserves to be contemned; and a holy man he is the right
honorable. Psalm. 15.4. In whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned; but he
honors them that fear the Lord. The vile person is opposed to him that fears
the Lord. He that is bold to affront God, and sin against him, is the base and
ignoble Person. God himself, who is possessed of all Excellency and Perfection,
and therefore knows best how to judge of these, he tells us, how we should
value our selves and others, Jer. 9.23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; let not the rich man
glory in his riches. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise
loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in these things
I delight, says the Lord. To know these Divine Qualities and Perfections,
signifies here, to understand them so as to imitate them. I do not speak this
to bring down the value of any that are advanced in this World, or to lessen
the respect which is due to them; I would have nothing undervalued, but
Wickedness and Vice; and I would have those who have store of worldly
Advantages to recommend them, to add Religion to their Riches, and Holiness to
their Honor, that they may be current for their intrinsic value, rather than
for the Image and Picture of worth which the World has stamped upon them.

3. If Holiness be the Chief Excellency and Perfection of the Divine Nature,
then what an absurd and unreasonable thing is it, to scorn and despise
Holiness, to mock and deride men under this very Title! The World is much
blinded, that they do not see the great Evil of Sin, and the Beauty and
Excellency of Holiness; but that Men should be so infatuated, as to change the
nature of things, and to mistake things of so vast difference, as sin and
Holiness; to call Good evil, and evil Good; that sin, which is the vilest thing
in the World, should be esteemed and cherished, and accounted a piece of
gallantry, and reckoned amongst the excellencies and accomplishments of Humane
Nature; and Holiness, which is so great a Perfection, should be a Name of
hatred and disgrace, to be contemned and persecuted; that that which is the
Glory of Heaven, and the most radiant Perfection of the Divine Nature, should
be matter of scorn and contempt, as the Apostle speaks in another case, Behold!
ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish. Do ye think the Holy and Just God will
put up these Affronts, and Indignities? Ye do not only despise men, but ye
despise God also. You cannot contemn that which God accounts his glory, without
reviling the Divine Nature, and offering despite to God himself. The malice
reaches Heaven, and is levelled against God, whenever ye slight Holiness.

4. If God be a Holy God, and has such a repugnancy in his Nature to sin, then
this is matter of terror to wicked Men. The Holy God cannot but hate sin, and
be an Enemy to wickedness; and the hatred of God is terrible. We dread the
hatred of a great Man, because where hatred is backed with power, the Effects
of it are terrible. But the Hatred of the Almighty and Eternal God, is much
more dreadful, because the Effects of it are greater, and more lasting, than of
the hatred of a weak mortal man. We know the utmost they can do, they can but
kill the body; after that, they have no more that they can do; they cannot hurt
our Souls; they cannot follow us beyond the Grave, and pursue us into another
World: But the Effects of God's Hatred and Displeasure are mighty and lasting,
they extend themselves to all Eternity; for who knows the Power of his Anger?
Who can tell the utmost of what Omnipotent Justice can do to sinners? It is a
dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; because he that lives
for ever, can punish for ever. We are miserable, if God do not love us. Those
words, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, signify great misery, and
express a dreadful Curse: but it is a more positive Expression of misery, for
God to hate us; that signifies Ruin and Destruction to the utmost. Psalm. 5.4,
5. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee. This is a (...), and expresses less than is intended. God is
far from being of an indifferent negative Temper toward sin and wickedness;
therefore the Psalmist adds, thou hate all the workers of iniquity; and then
in the next verse, to show what is the effect of God's Hatred, thou shall
destroy them that speak leasing. Therefore Sinner, fear and tremble at the
thoughts of God's Holiness.

5. Imitate the Holiness of God; this is the Inference here in the Text, be ye
holy; for I am holy. Holiness, in one word, contains all the imitable
Perfections of God; and when it is said, be ye holy, it is as much as if he had
said, be ye Good, and Patient, and Merciful, and True, and Faithful; for I am
so. Therefore Religion is called the knowledge of the holy one, Prove. 9.10. and
Chap. 30.3. And our imitation of God is expressed by our putting on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
Seeing then this is the chief Excellency and Perfection of God, and the sum of
all the Perfections which we are to imitate, and wherein we are to endeavor to
be like God, let us conform our selves to the holy God; endeavor to be
habitually holy, which is our conformity to the Nature of God; and actually
holy, which is our conformity to the Will of God. I will not enlarge upon this,
because I have pressed the imitation of these particular Perfections, Goodness,
Patience, Justice, Truth, and Faithfulness upon other Texts. I shall only
mention two Arguments, to excite and quicken our Desires and Endeavor after
Holiness.

1. Holiness is an imitation of the highest Excellency and Perfection.
Holiness, I told you, signifies a separation from Sin and Vice, and all moral
Imperfection, and consequently, does comprehend and take in all the moral
Perfections of the Divine Nature, the Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience, and
Justice, and Veracity, and Faithfulness of God; now these are the very Beauty
and Glory of the Divine Nature. The first thing that we attribute to God, next
to his Being, is his Goodness, and those other Attributes which have a
necessary connection with it; for his Greatness and Majesty is nothing else but
the Glory which results from his united Perfections, especially from his
Goodness, and those Perfections which are akin to it. Separate from God these
Perfections which Holiness includes in it, and what would be left but an
Omnipotent Evil, an Eternal Being infinitely Knowing, and infinitely able to do
mischief? which is as plain and notorious a Contradiction, and as impossible a
thing as can be-imagin'd; so that if we have any sparks of ambition in us, we
cannot but aspire after Holiness, which is so great an Excellency and
Perfection of God himself. There is a vulgar prejudice against Holiness, as if
it were a poor mean thing, and below a great and generous Spirit; whereas
Holiness is the only true greatness of Mind, the most genuine Nobility, and the
highest gallantry of Spirit; and however it be despised by Men, it is of a
Heavenly Extraction, and Divine Original. Holiness is the first part of the
Character of the wisdom that is from above. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full
of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

2. Holiness is an essential and principal ingredient of Happiness. Holiness is
a state of Peace and Tranquillity, and the very frame and temper of Happiness;
and without it, the Divine Nature, as it would be imperfect, so it would be
miserable. If the Divine Nature were capapable of envy, or malice, or hatred,
or revenge, or impatience, or cruelty, or injustice, or unfaithfulness, it
would be liable to vexation and discontent, than which nothing can be a greater
disturbance of Happiness: so that Holiness is necessary to our Felicity and
Contentment; not only to the happiness of the next life, but to our present
Peace and Contentment. If reasonable Creatures could be happy, as brute Beasts
are in their degree, by enjoying their depraved Appetites, and following the
Dictates of Sense and Fancy, God would not have bound us up to a Law and Rule,
but have left us, as he has done unreasonable Creatures, to satisfy our Lusts
and Appetites, without check and control: but Angels and Men, which are
reasonable Creatures, have the Notions of Good and Evil, of Right and Wrong, of
Comeliness and Filthiness, so woven and twisted into their very Natures, that
they can never be wholly defaced, without the ruin of their Beings; and
therefore it is impossible that such Creatures should be happy otherwise, than
by complying with these Notions, and obeying the natural Dictates and
Suggestions of their Minds; which if they neglect, and go against, they will
naturally feel remorse and Torment in their own Spirits; their Minds will be
uneasy and unquiet, and they will be inwardly grieved and displeased with
themselves for what they have done. So the Apostle tells us, Romans 1. That even
the most degenerate Heathens had Consciences which did accuse or excuse them,
according as they obeyed, or did contrary to the dictates of Natural Light. God
therefore, who knows our frame, has so adapted his Law to us, which is the
rule of holiness, that if we live up to it, we shall avoid the unspeakable
torment of a guilty Conscience; whereas, if we do contrary to it, we shall
always be at discord with our selves, and in a perpetual disquiet of Mind; for
nothing can do contrary to the Law of its Being, that is, to its own Nature,
without displeasure and reluctance, the consequence of which, in Moral Actions,
is Guilt, which is nothing else, but the Trouble and Disquiet which arises in
one's Mind, from consciousness of having done some thing that contradicts the
perfective Principle of his Being, that is something which did not become him,
and which, being what he is, that is a reasonable Creature, he ought not to do.

So that in all reasonable Creatures there is a certain kind of Temper and
Disposition that is necessary and essential to Happiness, and that is Holiness;
which as it is the Perfection, so it is the great Felicity of the Divine
Nature: And on the contrary, this is one chief part of the Misery of those
wicked and accursed Spirits the Devils, and of unholy Men, that they are of a
temper contrary to God, they are Envious, and Malicious, and Wicked, that is,
of such a temper as is naturally a Torment and Disquiet to it self; and here
the foundation of Hell is laid in the evil disposition of our Spirits, and till
that be cured, which can only be done by Holiness, it is as impossible for a
wicked Man to be happy, and contented in himself, as it is for a Sick Man to be
at ease; and the external presence of God, and a local Heaven would signify no
more to make a wicked Man happy and contented, than heaps of Gold, and Consorts
of Music, and a well spread Table, and a rich Bed, would contribute to a Man's
ease in the paroxysms of a Fever, or in a violent fit of the Stone. If a
sensual, or covetous, or ambitious Man were in Heaven, he would be like the
rich Man in Hell, he would be tormented with a continual Thirst, and burnt up
in the Flames of his own ardent Desires, and would not meet with the least drop
of suitable Pleasure and Delight, to quench and allay the Heat; the reason is,
because such a Man has that within him which torments him, and he cannot be at
ease, till that be removed. Sin is the violent and unnatural and uneasy State
of our Soul, every wicked Man's Spirit is out of order, and till the Man be put
into a right Frame by Holiness, he will be perpetually disquieted, and can have
no rest within himself. The Prophet fitly describes the condition of such a
Person, Isa. 57.20, 21. But the wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast forth mire and dirt; there is no peace says my God, to
the wicked. So long as a Man is unholy, so long as filthiness and corruption
abound in his Heart, they will be restlesty working, like Wine which is in a
perpetual motion and agitation, till it have purged it self of its Dregs and
Foulness. Nothing is more turbulent and unquiet than the Spirit of a wicked
Man; it is like the Sea, when it roars and rages through the strengh of
contrary Winds; it is the scene of furious Lusts and wild Passions, which as
they are contrary to Holiness, so they maintain perpetual contests and fewds
among themselves.

All Sin separates us from God, who is the Foundation of our Happiness. Our
limited Nature, and the narrowness of our Beings, will not permit us to be
happy in our selves; it is peculiar to God to be his own Happiness; but Man,
because he is finite, and therefore cannot be self-sufficient, is carried forth
by an innate desire, of Happiness, to seek his Felicity in God. So that there
is in the nature of man a Spring of restless Motion, which with great
impatience forces him out of himself, and tosses him to and fro, till he comes
to rest in something that is self-sufficient. Our Souls, when they are
separated from God, like the unclean Spirit in the Gospel, when it was cast
out, they wander up and down in dry and desert places, seeking rest, but
finding none. Were the whole World calm about a Man, and did it not make the
least attempt upon him, were he free from the fears of Divine Vengeance; yet he
could not be satisfied with himself, there is something within him that would
not let him be at rest, but would tear him from his own Foundation and
Consistency; so that when we are once broken off from God, the sense of inward
want does stimulate and force us to seek our contentment elsewhere. So that
nothing but Holiness, which re-unites us to God, and restores our Souls to
their primitive and original state, can make us happy, and give peace and rest
to our Souls. And this is the constant voice and language of Scripture, and the
tenor of the Bible. Acquaint thy self with God, that thou may be at Peace.
Job 22.21. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart, Psalm. 97.11. The work of righteousness is peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17.

Seeing then Holiness is so high a Perfection, and so great a Happiness, let
these Arguments prevail with us, to aspire after this temper, that as he who
has called us is holy, so we may be holy in all manner of Conversation,
because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Discourses of the Divine Goodness, being more than can be contained in
this Volume, are, together with those of the remaining Attributes, reserved for
the next: But to complete this, here follows a single Sermon upon another
Subject.

SERMON XIV. Vol. VI.
Of doing Good. Being a Spital Sermon, Preached at Christ-Church on
Easter-Tuesday, April 14th. 1691.
GALAT. VI.9, 10. Let us not be weary in well doing, forin due season we shall
reap, if we faint not: As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto
all Men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith.


THE Apostle in these Words recommends unto us a great and comprehensive Duty,
the doing of good; concerning which the Text offers these five particulars to
our Consideration.

I. The Nature of the Duty it self, which is called well doing, v. 9. and doing
good v. 10. II. The extent of this Duty, in respect of it is Object, which is
all Mankind, Let us do good unto all men, especially unto them, who are of the
household of faith. III. The measure of it, as we have opportunity. IV. Our
unwearied perseverance in it; let us not be weary in well doing. V. The
Argument and Encouragement to it, because in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not: Therefore as we have opportunity, let us do good, etc.
I. I will consider the Nature of the Duty it self; of well doing, and doing
good. And this I shall explain to you as briefly as I can, by considering the
extent of the Act of doing Good, and the Excellency of it. And

1. The extent of the Act. It comprehends in it all those ways wherein we may
be beneficial and useful to one another. It reaches not only to the Bodies of
Men, but to their Souls, that Better and more Excellent part of our selves; and
is conversant in all those Ways and Kinds, whereby we may serve the temporal,
or spiritual Good of our Neighbor, and promote either his present, or his
future and eternal Happiness.

To instruct the Ignorant, or reduce those that are in Error; to turn the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, and reclaim those that are engaged in
any evil Course, by good Counsel, and seasonable Admonition, and by prudent and
kind Reproof; to resolve and satisfy the doubting Mind; to confirm the weak;
to heal the brokenhearted, and to comfort the melancholy and troubled Spirits.
These are the noblest Ways of Charity, because they are conversant about the
Souls of Men, and tend to procure and promote their eternal Felicity.

And then to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, release the imprisoned; to
redeem the Captives, and to vindicate those who are injured and oppressed in
their Persons, or Estates, or Reputation; to repair those who are ruined in
their Fortunes; and, in a word, to relieve and comfort those who are in any
kind of Calamity or Distress.

All these are but the several Branches and Instances of this great Duty here
in the Text, of doing good; though it has, in this place, a more particular
respect to the Charitable supply of those, who are in Want and Necessity; and
therefore with a more particular regard to that, I shall Discourse of it at
this time. You see the extent of the Duty. We will in the

2. Place, briefly say something of the Ecellency of it, which will appear, if
we consider, That it is the imitation of the highest Excellency and Perfection.
To do Good, is to be like God, who is Good, and does good; and it is to be like
to him, in that which he esteems his greatest Glory. It is to be like the Son
of God, who, when he was pleased to take our Nature upon him, and live here
below, and to dwell amongst us, went about doing good. And it is to be like the
blessed Angels, the highest Rank and Order of God's Creatures; whose great
Employment it is to be ministering Spirits, for the good of Men. So that for a
Man to be kind, and helpful, and beneficial to others, is to be a good Angel,
and a Savior, and a kind of God too.

It is an Argument of a great, and noble, and generous Mind, to extend our
Thoughts and Cares to the concernments of others, and to employ our interest,
and power, and endeavors for their benefit and advantage: Whereas a low, and
mean, and narrow Spirit, is contracted and shrivel'd up within it self, and
cares only for its own things, without any regard to the good and happiness of
others.

It is the most noble work in the World, because that inclination of Mind,
which prompts us to do good, is the very temper and disposition of Happiness.
Solomon, after all his Experience of worldly greatness and pleasure, at last
pitched upon this, as the great felicity of humane Life, and the only good Use
that is to be made of a prosperous and plentiful Fortune. Eccles. 3.12. I know
(says he, speaking of Riches) that there is no good in them, but for a Man to
rejoice and do good in his life. And certainly the best way to take joy in an
Estate, is to do good with it; and a greater and wiser than Solomon has said
it, even he who is the Power and Wisdom of God has said it, that it is a more
blessed thing to give than to receive.

Consider farther, That this is one of the great and substantial parts of
Religion, and next to the love and honor, which we pay to Almighty God, the
most acceptable Service that we can do to him; it is one Table of the Law, and
next the First and great Commandment, of loving the Lord our God, and very like
to it. And the second is like unto it, (says our Savior) Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; like to it, in the excellency of it; and equal to it, in
the necessary obligation of it. For this Commandment (says St. John, 1 Epist.
Chap. 4. v. 21). we have from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother
also. The First Commandment indeed excels in the dignity of the Object, because
it enjoins the Love of God; but the second seems to have the advantage in the
reality of its Effects: for the Love of God consists in our acknowledgment, and
honor of him; but our righteousness and goodness extends not to him; we can do
him no real Benefit and Advantage: But our love to Men is really Useful and
Beneficial to them; for which reason, God is contented in many cases, that the
external Honor and Worship which he requires of us by his positive Commands,
should give way to that Natural Duty of Love and Mercy which we owe to one
another. I will have mercy (says God in the Prophet Amos) and not sacrifice.

And to show how great a value God puts upon this Duty, he has made it the
very Testimony of our love to himself; and for want of it, has declared that
he will reject all our other Professions and Testimonies of love to him, as
false and insincere. Who so has this worlds good, (says St. John, 1 Epist.
3.17.) and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? And again, Chap. 4.
ver. 20. If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar; for
he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he
has not seen?

You see the Duty here recommended, both in the Extent and in the Excellency of
it; let us do good. I proceed to consider, in the

II. Place, the Extent of this Duty, in respect of its Object, which is all
Mankind, but more especially Christians, those that are of the same Faith and
Religion. Let us do good unto all men, especially unto those that are of the
household of Faith. So that the Object, about which this Duty is conversant, is
very large, and takes in all Mankind; let us do good unto all men. The Jews
confined their Love and Kindness to their own Kindred and Nation; and because
they were prohibited familiarity with Idolatrous Nations, and were enjoined to
maintain a perpetual Enmity with Amalek, and the seven Nations of Canaan, whom
God had cast out before them, and devoted to Ruin; they looked upon themselves
as perfectly discharged from all Obligation of Kindness to the rest of Mankind:
And yet it is certain, that they were expressly enjoined by their Law, to be
kind to Strangers, because they themselves had been Strangers in the Land of
Egypt. But our Savior has restored this Law of Love and Charity to its
Natural and Original extent; and has declared every one that is of the same
nature with our selves to be our Neighbor, and our Brother; and that he is to
be treated by us accordingly, when ever he stands in need of our kindness and
help; and to show that none are out of the compass of our Charity, he has
expressly commanded us to extend it to those, who of all others can least
pretend to it, even our Enemies and Persecutors.

So that if the Question be about the extent of our Charity in general, these
two things are plainly enjoined by the Christian Religion.

1. Negatively, That we should not hate or bear ill will to any man, or do him
any harm or mischief. Love works no Evil to his Neighbor, (says the
Apostle) Romans 13.10. And this negative Charity every Man may exercise toward
all Men, without Exception, and that equally; because it does not signify any
positive Act, but only that we abstain from Enmity and Hatred, from Injury and
Revenge, which it is in every Man's power, by the Grace of God, and the due
care and government of himself, to do.

2. Positively, The Law of Charity requires, that we should bear an universal
good will to all Men, and wish every Man's happiness, and pray for it, as
sincerely as we wish and pray for our own; and if we be sincere in our Wishes,
and Prayers for the good of others, we shall be so in our Endeavors to procure
and promote it.

But the great difficulty is, as to the exercise of our Charity, and the real
Expressions and Effects of it, in doing good to others; which is the Duty here
meant in the Text, and (as I told you before) does more particularly relate to
the Relief of those who are in Want and Necessity. And the reason of the
difficulty is, because no Man can do good to all in this kind, if he would; it
not being possible for any Man to come to the knowledge of every man's
Necessity and Distress; and if he could, no man's Ability can possibly reach to
the supply and the relief of all men's Wants. And indeed this limitation the
Text gives to this Duty; as we have opportunity (says the Apostle) let us do
good unto all men; which either signifies, as occasion is offered, or as we
have Ability of doing, or both; as I shall show afterward.

So that it being impossible to exercise this Charity to all Men that stand in
need of it, it is necessary to make a difference, and to use Prudence and
Discretion in the Choice of the most fit and proper Objects. We do not know the
Wants of all men, and therefore the bounds of our Knowledge do of necessity
limit our Charity within a certain compass; and of those whom we do know, we
can relieve but a small part, for want of Ability; from whence it follows, that
though a man were never so Charitably disposed, yet he must of necessity set some
Rules to himself, for the management of his Charity to the best advantage. What
those Rules are, cannot minutely and nicely be determined; when all is done,
much must be left to every man's prudence and discretion, upon a full view and
consideration of the Case before him, and all the Circumstances of it; but yet
such general Rules may be given, as may serve for the direction of our Practice
in most Cases; and for the rest, every man's prudence, as well as it can, must
determine the matter. And the Rules which I shall give, shall be these.

First, Cases of Extremity ought to take the first place, and do for that time
challenge precedence of all other Considerations. If a Person be in great and
present Distress, and his Necessity so urgent, that if he be not immediately
relieved, he must perish; this is so violent a Case, and calls so loud for
present help, that there is no resisting of it, whatever the Person be; though
a perfect Stranger to us, though most unworthy, though the greatest Enemy we
have in the World, yet the greatness of his Distress does so strongly plead for
him, as to silence all Considerations to the contrary; for after all, he is a
man, and is of the same Nature with our selves, and the consideration of
Humanity ought, for that time, to prevail over all Objections against the Man,
and to prefer him to our Charity, before the nearest Relation and Friend, who
is not in the like Extremity. In other cases, we not only may, but ought to
relieve our Friends, and those that have deserved well of us in the first
place: but if our Enemy be in Extremity, then that Divine Precept takes place,
if thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him to drink.

Secondly, In the next place, I think, that the Obligation of Nature, and the
nearness of Relation, does challenge a Preference; for there is all the Reason
in the World, if other things be equal, that we should consider and supply the
necessity of those, who are of our Blood and Kindred, and Members of our
Family, before the Necessities of Strangers, and those who have no relation to
us. There is a special Duty incumbent upon us, and another Obligation beside
that of Charity, to have a particular Care and Regard for them. In this case
not only Christianity, but Nature ties this Duty upon us, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any
man provide not for his own, especially for his Domestics, for them that are
of his Family, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel; that is,
he does not only offend against the Law of Christianity, but against the very
Dictates of Nature, which prevail even amongst the Infidels. And our Savior
has told us, that when our Parents stand in need of relief, it is more
acceptable to God, to employ our Estates that way, than to devote them to him,
and his immediate service; and that it is a kind of Sacrilege to Consecrate
that to God, whereby our Parents may be profited, and provided for in their
Necessity.

Thirdly, The Obligation of Kindness and Benefits, lays the next claim to our
Charity. If they fall into Want, who have obliged us by their former Kindness
and Charity, both Justice and Charity do challenge from us a particular
consideration of their Case; and proportionably, if we our selves have been
obliged to their Family, or to any that are nearly related to them.

Fourthly, Those who are of the household of faith, and of the same Religion;
and Members of the same Mystical Body, and do partake of the same Holy
Mysteries, the Body and Blood of our Blessed Savior, the strictest Bond of
Love and Charity, These fall under a very particular Consideration in the
exercise of our Charity. And of this the Apostle puts us in Mind, in the last
words of my Text; let us do good unto all Men, especially unto those that are
of the household of faith. God has a special Love and Regard for such; and
those whom God Loves, ought to be very dear to us.

And this, perhaps, was a consideration of the first rank in those times, when
Christians lived among Heathens, and were exposed to continual Wants and
Sufferings; but it signifies much less now, that Christianity is the general
Profession of a Nation, and is too often made use of to very uncharitable
purposes; to confine Men's Bounty and Benefits to their own Sect and Party, as
if they, and none but they, were the household of Faith; A Principle, which I
know not whether it has more of Judaisme or of Popery in it.

Fifthly, After these, the Merit of the Persons, who are the Objects of our
Charity, and all the Circumstances belonging to them, are to be valued and
considered, and we are accordingly to proportion our Charity, and the degrees
of it. I shall instance in some particulars, by which a prudent Man may judge
of the rest.

Those who labor in an honest calling, but yet are oppressed with their charge,
or disabled for a time by Sickness, or some other casualty; these many a time
need as much, and certainly deserve much better than common Beggars; for these
are useful members of the Commonwealth; and we cannot place our Charity
better, than upon those, who do what they can to support themselves.

Those likewise who are fallen from a rich and plentiful Condidion, without any
fault or Prodigality of their own, merely by the Providence of God, or some
general Calamity; these are more especially Objects of our Charity, and liberal
Relief.

And those also, who have been Charitable, and have liberally relieved others,
when they were in Condition to do it; or the Children, or near Relations of
those, who were eminently Charitable and beneficial to Mankind, do deserve a
particular regard in our Charity. Mankind being (as I may say) bound in
Justice, and for the honor of God's Providence, to make good his Promise, to
preserve such from extreme necessity.

And lastly, those, whose visible Wants, and great Age and Infirmities do plead
for more than ordinary Pity, and do, at first sight, convince every one that
sees them, that they do not Beg out of Laziness, but of necessity, and because
they are not able to do any thing toward their own support and subsistence.

There are innumerable Circumstances more, which it would be endless to reckon
up; but these which I have mentioned are some of the chief, and by proportion
to these, we may direct our selves in other Cases.

Sixthly, Those whom we certainly know to be true Objects of Charity, are to be
considered by us, before those who are strangers to us, and whose Condition we
do not know, yea, though in common Charity we do not dis-believe them; because in
Reason and Prudence we are obliged to prefer those, who are certainly known to
us, since we find by experience, that there are many Cheats and counterfit
Beggars, who can tell a fair Story, and carry about Testimonials of their own
making; and likewise because we run the Hazard of misplacing our Charity, when
there are Objects enough besides, where we are sure we shall place it right;
and Charity misplaced, as it is in Truth and Reality no Charity in it is self,
so it is hardly any in us, when we squander it so imprudently as to pass by a
certain and real Object, and give it to those of whom we are not certain, that
they are true Objects of Charity. In this blind way a Man may give all his
Goods to the Poor, as he thinks, and yet do no real Charity. And therefore,
unless we be able to relieve every one that asks, we must of necessity make a
difference, and use our best Prudence in the choice of the most proper Objects
of our Charity.

And yet we ought not to observe this Rule so strictly, as to shut out all whom
we do not know, without exception; because their Case, if it be true, may
sometimes be much more pitiable, and of greater extremity, than the case of
many whom we do know; and then it would be uncharitable to reject such, and to
harden our Hearts so far against them, as utterly to disbelieve them; because
it is no fault of theirs, that we do not know them; no, their Wants may be
real, notwithstanding that; especially when their Extremity seems great, we
ought not to stand upon too rigorous a Proof and Evidence of it, but should
accept of a fair probability.

Seventhly, Those who suffer for the Cause of Religion, and are stripped of all
for the sake of it, ought to have a great Precedence in our Charity to most
other cases. And this of late has been, and still is, the case of many among
us, who have fled hither for Refuge, from the Tyranny and Cruelty of their
Persecutors, and have been by a most extraordinary Charity of the whole Nation,
more than once extended to them, most seasonably relieved; but especially by
the Bounty of this great City, whose Liberality, upon these Occasions, has
been beyond all Example, and even all belief. And I have often thought, that
this very thing, next to the Mercy and Goodness of Almighty God, has had a
particular Influence upon our Preservation and Deliverance from those terrible
Calamities, which were just ready to break in upon us; and were we not so
stupidly insensible of this great Deliverance which God has wrought for us,
and so horribly unthankful to him, and to the happy Instruments of it, might
still be a means to continue the Favor of God to us. And what cause have we to
thank God, who has allotted to us this more blessed, and more merciful part,
to give, and not to receive; to be free from Persecution our selves, that we
might give Refuge and Relief to those that are persecuted!

III. We must consider the Measure of our Charity, (...), which our Translation
renders, as we have Opportunity; others, as we have Ability: So that this
Expression may refer, either to the Occasions of our Charity, or to the Season
of it, or to the Proportion and Degree of it.

1. It may refer to the Occasions of our Charity, as we have Opportunity let us
do good, that is, according as the Occasions of doing good shall present
themselves to us, so often as an Opportunity is offered. And this is an
Argument of a very good and charitable Disposition, gladly to lay hold of the
occasions of doing good; as it were to meet Opportunities when they are a
coming toward us. This forwardness of Mind, in the work of Charity, the
Apostle commends in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 9.2. I know the forwardness of your
minds, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia: And this he requires of
all Christians, Tit. 3.10. That they should be ready to every good work; And 1 Timothy 6.18. That we be ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Some are
very ready to decline these Opportunities, and to get out of the way of them;
and when they thrust themselves upon them, and they cannot avoid them, they do
what they do grudgingly, and not with a willing mind.

2. It may refer to the Season of this Duty, (...), while we have time, (...)
for (...), whilst this Life lasts; so Grotius does understand, and interpret
this Phrase; and then the Apostle does hereby intimate to them, the uncertainty
of their Lives, especially in those times of Persecution. And this
Consideration holds in all times in some degree, that our Lives are short and
uncertain, that it is but a little while that we can serve God in this kind,
namely, while we are in this World, in this Vale of Misery and Wants. In the
next World there will be no occasion, no Opportunity for it; we shall then have
nothing to do, but to reap the Reward of the good we have done in this Life,
and to receive that blessed Sentence from the Mouth of the great Judge of the
World, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
before the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat,
etc. And Euge bone serve! Well done good and faithful Servant! thou have been
faithful in a little, and I will make thee Ruler over much. God will then
declare his Bounty and Goodness to us, and open those inexhaustible Treasures
of Glory and Happiness, which all good Men shall partake of, in proportion to
the good which they have done in this World. Or else,

3. (Which I take to be the most probable meaning of this Phrase) It may refer
to the Degree of this Duty in proportion to our Ability and Estate; as we have
Ability, let us do good unto all Men. And this the Phrase will bear, as Learned
Men have observed; and it is very reasonable to take in this Sense, at least,
as part of the meaning of it, either expressed or implied. For without this we
cannot exercise Charity, though there were never so many Occasions for it; and
then this Precept will be of the same Importance with that of the Son of
Sirach, Ecclus. 35.10. Give unto the most high according as he has enriched
thee; and with that Counsel, Tob. 4.7. Give Alms, (...), according to thy
Substance, and 8. v. If thou have abundance, give Alms accordingly. And this
may be reasonably expected from us; for wherever his Providence gives a Man
an Estate, it is but in Trust for certain Uses and Purposes, among which
Charity and Alms is the chief: And we must be accountable to him, whether we
have disposed it faithfully to the Ends, for which it was committed to us. It
is an easy thing with him to level Men's Estates, and to give every Man a
Competency; but he does on purpose suffer things to be distributed so
unequally, to try and exercise the Virtues of Men in several ways; the Faith
and Patience of the Poor, the Contentedness of those in a middle Condition, the
Charity and Bounty of the Rich. And in truth, Wealth and Riches, that is, an
Estate above what suffices our real Occasions and Necessities, is in no other
sense a Blessing, than as it is an Opportunity put into our Hands, by the
Providence of God, of doing more good; and if we do not faithfully employ it to
this end, it is but a Temptation and a Snare; and the rust of our Silver and
our Gold will be a witness against us; and we do but heap up Treasures together
against the last Day.

But what Proportion our Charity ought to bear to our Estates, I shall not
undertake to determine. The Circumstances of Men have too much variety in them
to admit of any certain Rule; some may do well, and others may do better; every
Man, as God has put into his Heart, and according to his Belief of the
recompense which shall be made at the resurrection of the just. I shall only
say in general, that if there be first a free and willing Mind, that will make
a Man charitable to his Power; For the liberal Man will devise liberal things.
And we cannot propose a better Pattern to our selves in this kind, than the
King and Queen, who are, as they ought to be (but as it very seldom happens)
the most bright and shining Examples of this greatest of all Graces and
Virtues, Charity and Compassion to the poor and persecuted. I proceed to the

IV. Thing considerable in the Text, viz. Our unwearied Perseverance in this
work of doing good, let us not be weary in well-doing. After we have done some
few Acts of Charity, yea though they should be very considerable, we must not sit
down and say we have done enough. There will still be new Objects, new
Occasions, new Opportunities for the exercise of our Charity, springing up and
presenting themselves to us. Let us never think, that we can do enough in the
way of doing good. The best and the happiest Beings are most constant and
unwearied in this work of doing good. The holy Angels of God are continually
employed in ministering for the good of those, who shall be Heirs of Salvation:
And the Son of God, when he appeared in our Nature, and dwelt among us, that he
might be a perfect and familiar Example to us of all Holiness and Virtue, he
went about doing good to the Bodies and to the Souls of Men. How diligent and
unwearied was he in this work! It was his Employment and his Pleasure, his Meat
and Drink, the Joy and the Life of his Life. And God himself, though he is
infinitely and perfectly good in himself, yet he still continues to do good,
and is never weary of this blessed work. It is the Nature, and the Perfection,
and the Felicity of God himself; and how can we be weary of that work, which is
an Imitation of the highest Excellency and Perfection, and the very Essence of
Happiness.

V. And lastly, Here is the Argument and Encouragement to the cheerful
discharge of this Duty, because in due season we shall reap, if we faint not;
therefore as we have opportunity, let us do good unto all Men. In due season we
shall reap, that is, sooner or later, in this World, or in the other, we shall
receive the full reward of our well-doing.

And now I have explained this Duty to you, as plainly and briefly as I could,
the hardest part of my Task is yet behind, to persuade Men to the practice of
it; and to this purpose I shall only insist upon the promise in the Text, be
not weary in well-doing; for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not. We
shall reap the pleasure and satisfaction of it in our own Minds, and all the
other mighty Advantages of it in this World, and the vast and unspeakable
Reward of it in the other.

First, We shall reap the Pleasure and Satisfaction of it in our own Minds; and
there is no sensual Pleasure that is comparable to the delight of Doing good.
This Cato makes his boast of, as the great Comfort and Joy of his old Age,
Conscientia been actae vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio jucundissima.
The remembrance of a well spent Life, and of many Benefits and Kindnesses done
by us to others, is one of the most pleasant things in the World. Sensual
Pleasures soon die and vanish; but that is not the worst of them, they leave a
Sting behind them, and when the Pleasure is gone, nothing remains but Guilt,
and Trouble, and Repentance: whereas the Reflection upon any good we have done,
is a perpetual Spring of Peace and Pleasure to us, and no Trouble and
Bitterness ensues upon it; the Thoughts of it lie even and easy in our Minds,
and so often as it comes to our Remembrance, it ministers fresh Comfort to us.

Secondly, We shall likewise reap other mighty Advantages by it in this World.
It is the way to derive a lasting Blessing upon our Estates. What we give in
Alms and Charity is consecrated to God, and is one of the chiefest and most
acceptable Sacrifices in the Christian Religion; so the Apostle tells us, Heb.
13.16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God
is well pleased. It is like the First Fruits under the Law, which being
dedicated and offered up to God, did derive a Blessing upon their whole Harvest.

And it procures for us also the Blessings and Prayers of those, to whom we
extend our Charity; their Blessing, I say, upon us and ours, and all that we
have; and is it a small thing in our eye, to have (as Job speaks) the Blessing
of them, who are ready to perish, to come upon us? The fervent Prayer of the
poor for us avails much, for God has a special regard to the Prayers of the
destitute, and his Ear is open to their cry.

Few Men have Faith to believe it, but certainly Charity is a great security to
us in the times of Evil, and that not only from the special Promise and
Providence of God, which is engaged to preserve those from want, who are ready
to relieve the Necessity of others, Prove. 11.25. The liberal Soul shall be made
fat; and he that waters shall be watered also himself, and Prove. 28.27. He
that gives to the poor shall not lack; he shall not be afraid in the evil
time, and in the days of Dearth he shall be satisfiyed, says the Psalmist: But
besides the Promise and Providence of God, our Charity and Alms are likewise a
great security to us, from the Nature and Reason of the thing it self.
Whosoever is charitable to others, does wisely bespeak the Charity and Kindness
of others for himself, against the day of necessity; for there is nothing that
makes a Man more, and surer Friends, than our Bounty; this will plead for us,
and stand our Friend in our greatest Troubles and Dangers; For a good Man,
says the Apostle, that is, for one that is ready to oblige others by great
Kindnesses and Benefits, one would even dare to die. It has sometimes happened,
that the Obligation which a man has laid upon others by a cheerful and
seasonable Charity, has in time of Danger and Extremity done him more
kindness, than all his Estate could do for him. Alms, says the Wise Man, has
delivered from Death.

And in times of public Distress, and when we are beset with cruel and
powerful Enemies, who, if God were not on our side, would swallow as up quick,
the public Charity o^ a Nation does many times prove its best Safeguard and
Shield. There is a most remarkable Passage to this purpose, Ecclus. 29.11, 12,
13. Lay up thy Treasure according to the commandment of the most high, and it
shall bring thee more profit, than Gold; shut up thine alms in thy Storehouse,
and it shall deliver thee from all affliction, it shall fight for thee against
thy enemies, more than a mighty Shield and a strong Spear.

And of this I doubt not, but we of this Nation, by the great Mercy and
Goodness of Almighty God, have had happy experience in our late wonderful
Deliverance, under the Conduct and Valor, of one of the best and bravest of
Princes, and to whom by too many among us, the most unworthy and unthankful
Returns have been made, for the unwearied pains he has undergone, and for the
desperate hazards he has exposed himself to for our sakes, that ever were made
to so Great and Generous a Benefactour; so great a Benefactour I say, not only
to these Nations, but to all Europe, in asserting and vindicating their
Liberties against the insolent Tyranny and Pride of one of the greatest
oppressors of Mankind, of whom I may say, as Job does of the Leviathan, Job
41.33, 34. Upon the earth is not his like, he beholds all high things, and is
the King of all the Children of Pride.

And beyond all this, the Blessing of God does descend upon the posterity of
those, who are eminently Charitable, and great Benefactours to Mankind. This
David observes in his time; I have been young (says he) and now am old; yet
have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging Bread; and what he
means by the righteous Man, he explains in the next Words, he is ever merciful
and lends.

I shall only add upon this Head, that the practice of this Virtue will be one
of our best comforts at the hour of Death, and that we shall then look back
upon all the good we have done in our life, with the greatest contentment and
joy imaginable. Xenophon in his Cyrus, which he designed for the perfect Idea
of a good Prince, represents him in the last minutes of his life, addressing
himself to God to this purpose, Thou know that I have been a lover of
Mankind; and now that I am leaving this World, I hope to find that mercy from
thee, which I have showed to others. These Words that excellent heathen
Historian thought fit to come from the mouth of so excellent a Prince, as he
had described him, just as he was leaving the World; by which we may see, what
the Light of Nature thought to be the best comfort of a dying Man. This brings
me to the

Third, and last particular which I mentioned, the vast and unspeakable Reward,
which this grace and virtue of Charity will meet with in the other World. It
will plead for us at the Day of Judgment, and procure for us a most glorious
recompense at the resurrection of the Just, and that proportionable to the
degrees of our Charity; 2 Cor. 9.6. He which sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; and from
this Consideration, the Apostle encourages our Perseverance in Well-doing, let
us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not; that is, we shall certainly meet with the reward of it, if not in this
World, yet in the other.

And now that I have declared this Duty to you, together with the mighty
pleasure, and advantages, and rewards of it, I crave leave to present you with
some of the best Occasions, and Opportunities of the exercise and practice of
it. And for your encouragement hereto, I shall read to you, the present State
of the chief Hospitals belonging to this great City, and of the disposal of
their Charity for the last Year.

And now I have laid before you these great Objects of your Charity, and the
best Arguments I could think of to incline and stir up your Minds to the
exercise of this excellent Grace and Virtue; as there is no time left for it, I
having, I am afraid already tired your Patience, so I hope there is no need to
press this Duty any farther upon you, since you are so willing and forward of
your selves, and so very ready to every good Work. This great City has a
double Honor due to it, of being both the greatest Benefactours in this kind,
and the most faithful Managers, and Disposers of it; and I am now in a place
most proper for the mention of Christ's Hospital, a Protestant Foundation of
that most Pious and Excellent Prince Edward, VI. Which I believe is one of the
best instances of so large and so well managed Charity, this Day in the World.

And now to Conclude all, if any of you know any better employment, than to do
good; any work that will give truer Pleasure to our Minds; that has greater
and better promises made to it, the Promises of the life that now is, and that
which is to come; that we shall reflect upon with more comfort, when we come to
dye; and that through the mercies and merits of our Blessed Savior, will stand
us in more stead at the Day of Judgment; let us mind that work: but if we do
not; let us apply our selves to this business of Charity, with all our might,
and let us not be weary in well-doing, because in due season we shall reap, if
we faint not.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will through Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory,
thanksgiving and praise, both now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS
BOOKS Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
WHarton's Anglia Saora, in 2 Volumes. Fol. D. Cave's Lives of the Primitives
Fathers, in 2 Vol. Fol. Dr. John Lightfoot's Works, in 2 Vol. Fol. Dr. Pet.
Allix's Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the ancient Churches of
Piedmont and Albigences, in 2 Parts. 4 to. Bishop Burnet's Collection of
Tracts, relating both to Church and State, from 1678. to 1694. in 3 Vol. 4 to.
Dr. Wake's 11 Treatises against Popery, in 2 Vol. 4 to. Dr. Tennison (now Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury) his Account of the Conference with Pulton the Jesuit.
4 to. -- His 9 Sermons upon several Occasions. 4 to. A Discourse of the
unreasonableness of Separation on account of the Oaths. 4 to. A Vindication of
the said Discourse. 4 to. A Vindication of his Majesty's Authority to fill the
Sees of the deprived Bishops. 4 to. Dr. William's Discouse of the lawfulness of
worshipping God by the Common Prayer. 4 to. -- His Representation of the absurd
and mischievous Principles of the Muggletonians. 4 to. The secret Consults,
Negotiations, and Intrigues of the Romish Party in Ireland from 1660, to 1689.
4 to. An impartial History of the Wars in Ireland, in two Parts, with Copper
Sculptures. By Mr. Story, present in the same. The new Cambridge Dictionary, in
5 Alphabets. 4 to. England's Wants: Or, some Proposals to the Parliament,
probably beneficial to England. 4 to. Dr. Allix's Reflections on the Holy
Scripture. 8 vo. Coals English and Lattin Dictionary. 8 vo. Tullies Discourse
of the Government of the Thoughts. 8 vo. The Jesuits Memorial for the intended
Reformation of England, found in K. James's Closet. 8 vo. Dr. Wak^'s
Preparation for Death. 8 vo. The History of the Troubles and Trial of
Archbishop Laud; wrote by himself: Published by Hen. Wharton. Fol. Remarks on
Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers, against Bishop Burnet.
Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers, against
Bishop Burnet. Dr. Williams's Vindication of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons
against the Socinians; and of the Bishop of Worcester's Sermon of the Mysteries
of the Christian Religion. To which is annexed, a Letter from the Bishop of
Salisbury to the Author, in Vindication of his Discourse of the Divinity of our
Savior. 4 to.
Books written by Simon Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely.
-- The Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The Sixth Edit. 4 to.
1681. -- Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our Addresses
to it so directed, our Behavior there and afterward, so composed, that we may
not lose the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and
Thanksgivings inserted. To which is annexed, -- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse
concerning Baptism: In which is inserted a Discourse to persuade to a
Confirmation of the Baptismal Vow. 8 vo. -- Jewish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the
present Generation. Wherein is shown both the false and the true way to a
Nations or Persons complete Happiness; from the sickness and recovery of the
Jewish State. To which is added, A Discourse upon Micah 6.8. belonging to the
same matter. 8 vo. -- Divine Arithmetic: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel
Jacomb, Minister of St. Mary-Woolnoth-Church in Lombard Street, London. With an
Account of his Life. 8 vo. -- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho.
Grigg, Rector of St. Andrew-Vndershaft, London. 4 to. -- An Exposition of the
Ten Commandments. 8 vo. -- Heart's Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles.
With a Consolatory Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost
their Friends and Relations. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time
of the late Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12 mo. 1695. -- The Pillar and
Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church falsely claims to be
That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St. Paul, in 1 Timothy
3.15. 4 to. -- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz,
ANTIQUITY. 4 to. -- An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the
Bible to prove the Supremacy of St. Peter and of the Pope, over the whole
Church. In Two Parts. 4 to. -- A private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.
-- A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance. -- A Prayer for Charity,
Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent. -- A Sermon preached upon St.
Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. 4 to. -- A Sermon Preached in St.
James's Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan. 20. 1688. on Isaiah 11.6. --
A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden. -- A Sermon Preached before the Queen in March
1688/9. on Colos. 3.15. -- A Sermon against Murmuring, Preached at
Covent Garden in Lent, 1688/9. on 1 Cor. 10.10. -- A Sermon against Censuring,
Preached at Covent Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 4.10. -- A Fast-Sermon
before the King and Queen, April 16. 1690. on Prove. 14.34. -- A
Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for reducing of Ireland,
and the King's safe Return. On Deuteronomy. 4.9. -- A Fast-Sermon befere the Queen,
April 8. 1692. On Numb. 10.9. -- Easter-Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1696. on
2 Timothy 2.8. -- A Sermon before the Lord, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan. 4.35. -- A
Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Genesis, 4 to. 1695. -- A
Commentary on the Second Book of Moses, called ^xodus, 4 to. 1697. -- A
Commentary on the Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus, 4 to. School. -- A
Commentary on the Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers, 4 to. 1699.
Of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith and Profession of the True Religion,
in several Sermons, by the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. Being the first Volume, Published from the Originals,
by Ralph Barker, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace. The Second Edition. 8 vo. --
Sixteen Sermons preached on several Occasions* By the most Reverend Dr. John
Tillotson, late Ld. Archbishop of Canterbury. Being the second Volume.
Published by Ralph Barker, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace. 8 vo. -- Sixteen
Sermons preached on several Subjects; being the Third Volume, by the same
Author. Published by Dr. Barker. 8 vo. -- Several Discourses, viz. Of the great
Duties of Natural Religion. Instituted Religion not intended to undermine
Natural. Christianity not Destructive, but Perferctive of the Law of Moses. The
Nature and Necessity of Regeneration. The Danger of all known Sin. Knowledge
and Practice necessary in Religion. The Sins of Men not chargeable on God.
Being the fourth Volume, by the same Author, Published by Dr. Barker. 8 vo.
Reflections upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, [ Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet, and
Dr. Tillotson, occasioned by the late Funeral Sermon of the former upon the
latter.] By the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Ld. Bishop of Sarum. 8 vo.
-- His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, on Christmas Day, 1696. 4
to. Gal. 4.4. -- His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, on the Third
Sunday in Lent, being the Seventh of March, 1696. 1. Ephesians. 5.2. -- His Essay
on the Memory of the late Queen. The second Edition. 8 vo. Dr. Williams (now
Ld. Bishop of Chichester) his 8 Sermons at Esquire Boyle's Lecture for the Year
1695. 4 to. [Any of them may be had single, to perfect sets. -- His 1 st, 2 d,
3 d, 4 th Sermons at the same Lecture for the year 1696. 4 to. -- His Sermon
preached at St. Lawrence Jury before the Lord Mayor, etc. on Saturday the 28 th
of September, 1695. at the Election of the Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing.
Joshua 22.31. 4 to. -- His Sermon preached before the honorable House of
Commons, on Wednesday, Dec. 11. 1695. being a solemn day of Fasting and
Humiliation, appointed by his Majesty for imploring the Blessing of Almighty
God upon the Consultations of this present Parliament. 4 to. 1 Samuel 11.30. --
His Sermon upon the Resurrection, preached before Sir Edward Clare Lord Mayor,
etc. on Easter-Monday, April 5. 1697. on Acts 10.40, 41, 42. Reflections upon a
Libel lately Printed, Entitled, [ The Charge of Socinianism against Dr.
Tillotson, Considered, 4 to.] The Church History of Ethiopia; wherein, among
other things, the two great splendid Roman Missions into that Empire are placed
in their true Light; to which are added an Epitome of the Dominican History of
that Church. And an Account of the Practices and Conviction of Maria of the
Annunciation, the famous Nun of Lisbon. Composed by Michael Geddes, D. D.
Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum. 8 vo. Fourteen Sermons preached in
Lambeth Chapel, before the most Reverend Dr. William Sancroft, late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. In the Years 1688, and 1689, by the Learned Henry
Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace; with an Account of the Author's Life. 8
vo. Dr. William Owtram's 20 Sermons. On several Occasions. The 2 d. Edition. 8
vo. Sermons preached on several Occasions. By John Conant D. D. The first and
second Volumes. Published by Dr. Williams, now Ld. Bishop of Chichester. 8 vo.
The Fathers vidicated: Or Animadversions on a late Socinian Book, Entitled, [
The Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr. Bull 's Defense
of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church of England. 8 vo.
A Fifth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses, published by his Chaplain
Dr. Barker, on these following Subjects: viz. Proving Jesus to be the Messiah.
The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion considered. Jesus the Son of God,
proved by his Resurrection. The Danger of Apostasy from Christianity. Christ
the Author, and Obedience the Condition of Salvation. The Possibility and
Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its consistence with Free Grace. The
Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Commission and Promise which he gave to his
Apostles. The Difficulties of a Christian Life considered. The Parable of the
Rich Man and Lazarus. Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light.
8 vo. School. A second Volume of Sermons preached in Lambeth Chapel before
Archb. Sancroft, 1690. By the Learned Mr. Henry Wharton, his Graces Chaplain,
Which with the first Volume lately published, are all that he preached. A New
Account of India and Persia; being Nine Years Travel, began 1672. and finished
1681. Containing Observations made of those Countries: Namely, Of their
Government, Religion, Laws, Customs: Of their Soil, Climates, Seasons, Health,
Diseases. Of their Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, Jewels. Of their Housing,
Clothing, Manufactures, Trades, Commodities. And of the Coins, Weights, and
Measures used in the principal Places of Trade in those Parts. By John Friar M.
D. Cantabrig. and Fellow of the Royal Society. Fol. School. SCRIPTORUM
ECCLESIASTICORUM Historia Literariae facili and perspicua methodo digesta. Pars
Altera. Quaplusquam DC. Scriptores novi, tam Editi quam Manuscripti
recensentur; Prioribus plurima adduntur; breviter aut obscure dicta
illustratur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusvis Soeculi
CONCILIORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium Historica Notitia. Ad
Calcem vero Operia Dissertationes tres, (1) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis
incertae aetatis. (2) De Libris and Officiis Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. (3) De
Eusebii Caesariensis Arianismo adversus Joannem Clericum. Adjecti sunt Indices
utilissimi Scriptorum Alphabetico-Chronoligici. Studio and labor Gulielmi
Cave, S. T. P. Canon. Windesoriensis. Fol. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity.
The Fifth Edition, School. Bp. Wilkins of the Principles and Duties of Natural
Religion. The 3 d Edition. A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotsons's
Discourses. Published by Dr. Barker. Being upon the Divine Attributes and
Perfections. 1699. Mr. Evelyns Gardners Almanac: Directing what he is to do
Monthly througli the Year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in Prime. The Ninth
Edition. 8 vo. 1699. Pharmacopaeiae Collegii Regalis Londini Remedia omnia
succincte descripta: una cum Catalogo simplicium Ordine Alphabetico digestorum:
Quibus annexum est Manuale ad Forum nec non Divax Porographicus. Editio Tertia,
prioribus emendator and auctior. Huic insuper adjiciuntur, Pharmaca nonnulla in
usu hodierno apud Medicos Londinenses. Accessit in calce Prosodia Medica
observatu non indig^a. Cura Ja. Shipton. 1699. 12 mo.
FINIS.

