A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, THE ALDERMEN,
AND Governors of the several Hospitals of the City of LONDON.

At St. Bridget's Church On Easter-Monday, 1700.

By the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

JOHN xv. 22. If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin;
but now have they no Cloak for their Sin. JOHN xv. 23. He that hates me,
hates my Father also. JOHN xv. 24. If I had not done among them the Works
which none other Man did, they had not had Sin; but now have they both seen,
and hated both me, and my Father.
THE Churches Observation of Easter, at this time calls for a Discourse upon
our Lord's Resurrection: Respect to the particular Occasion of the meeting of
this Honorable Assembly, would direct me to the subject of Charity.

I am sorry to add, that the bold and daring attempts, that are at this Day
made upon our Religion in general, necessarily require something to be said
upon so Public an Occasion, in Vindication of it.

I hope I may in some measure Answer all these Obligations, by attempting to
prove the truth of our Religion; as from other Miracles wrought for the
Confirmation of it, so chiefly from our Savior's Resurrection; by which he was
declared to be the Son of God with Power, and by endeavoring in my Application
to persuade you to Evidence to your selves and the World the sincerity of your
Faith in this Religion, by a Practice conformable to the Holy Laws of it, and
particularly to that, which in the Extent wherein it is enjoined us by our
Religion is peculiar to it; that of Charity: There is so close a Connection,
betwixt the Christian Religion and Charity, that he, that asserts the Christian
Religion, is one of the best Advocates for Charity; and he that truly practices
Charity, one of the best Pleaders for the Christian Religion.

In the Verses of my Text, and those immediately preceding, our Lord is arming
his Apostles against two great discouragements they were like to meet with in
the discharge of their Office, viz. A violent Persecution of their Persons, and
a mighty Opposition to their Doctrine.

Of both these he tells them, he had had his share, and considering the
Relation they stood in to him, that they were his Servants, and he their Lord,
they could not think it strange if they should not be better treated than he
had been: These things therefore they ought to expect and prepare for, and for
their support under them he adds, All these things will they do unto you for my
Names sake, all the Persecutions, Reproaches and Despiteful usage, that shall
befall you, will be upon my score, who surely have deserved from you, and am
able abundantly to make up to you, whatever you can suffer upon my account: And
for the Opposition which Wicked Men will make to the Doctrines you are to
Preach, let not that affright you, for I having so plainly proposed it to the
World, as a Doctrine that came from God, and so evidently demonstrated it to be
so, that they cannot Plead ignorance or want of Conviction; their Infidelity
who shall oppose it, will be without excuse, and their rejecting of it,
interpreted by God, to be a Malicious resisting and Contemning of me, and him
too. If I had not come, etc.

What our Lord supposed would be the condition of his Religion, and the
Preachers of it then, is too plainly the case of both at this time.

It Is pretty hard that after near 1700 Years Prescription, the Title of the
Christian Religion to Truth should be called into Question: But so it is,
Arguments are urged for Natural Religion, in Opposition to any Revealed one,
the rise and progress of the Christian in particular, is ascribed to Policy and
Design in some, and to Credulity, and a disposition to hearken to any Impostor
in others: the Holy Author of it is treated with those Insolences and
Blasphemies, which it could not but be as uneasy to you to hear, as to me to
repeat them: To give only one instance, his riding into Jerusalem, is impiously
represented under the light Expression of making his Cavalcade upon his
Asinego. Orac. of Reas. P. 165.


And these horrible Blasphemies, have been not only once impudently Printed and
Published to the World, under the Pompous Titles of Oracles of Reason in the
Life time of the Author; but since the death of that unhappy Man, Reprinted
with other of his Wretched Works, and an Epistle before them, placing the
Author in Heaven, and giving his Works the Characters of sacred Monuments;
Truths of too great importance to be slightly run-over, of too great Beauty not
to hold our Eyes sometime on them. And these by the way are some of the
Excellent fruits of that Liberty of the Press, for which that Author was so
Zealous an Advocate. Just Vindication of Learning, and the Liberty of the Press.


After this Treatment of our Lord, no usage of us his Ministers can be
surprising, if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, what must
they of the Household expect? We cannot wonder at their charging us with
Hypocrisy and Deceit, Self-Interest, and Worldly Designs, and what not.

Nay so far as all these reproaches affect us only, we can, I hope, not only
patiently endure, but even rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame
for the Name of Christ, to bear his reproach, and to fill up what is behind of
his Sufferings: And in Obedience to his Command, and Conformity to his example,
forgive and pray for those that thus Despitefully use us, Father forgive them,
I wish we could add, They know not what they do.

But, so far as these contumelies affect our Master and his Religion, and they
are wounded through us, as most certainly an affront offered to an Ambassador
as such, does not rest in him, but reaches the Prince that gave him his
Character, and as certainly they that are endeavoring to bring a contempt upon
the Priest's Office, and render it useless, are aiming at our Religion; for if
they can destroy the Priesthood (as some speak their intentions pretty plainly)
the Discipline and Ordinances of Christ cannot be administered, and if our
Public Ordinances were once laid aside, 'twould not be possible long to keep
up a Face of Religion; upon these views we may be allowed to be Jealous of the
Honor of our Master and his Institutions, and shall not surely be thought to
carry our Resentments too far, by making that return to their Insolences and
Blasphemies, which the Archangel made to one of old, famous for his Oracles,
the Lord Rebuke them, and by opposing to their impotent attempts to render our
Religion suspected, those irrafragable Arguments for the Truth of it, which
must prevail wherever Reason is permitted to be judge.

So far am I from affronting Reason, Preface to Orac. Reas.
that Sovereign Guide, as it is called, or from infringing its liberty of
directing, even in the choice of a Religion, that I do very freely acknowledge,
that a Religion, which cannot be Reasonably accounted for, is not fit for a
Rational Creature to own, nor worth his keeping.

I speak of a Religion in gross; a Man ought to know upon what grounds he takes
it up before he professes one, and to be able to give better Reasons for it,
than because it is the Religion of the Country wherein he lives, or that
wherein he was educated.

He that embraces a Religion without any, or any good Reason, is likely enough
to part with it upon as easy Terms.

He that owns one merely because it is professed in the Country wherein he lives,
must change one as often as he does the other.

He that Pleads Education, urges an Argument common to all Religions, and since
all cannot be true, an Argument, that may be equally used for all must needs be
Bad.

A Man should therefore well examine the force of those Motives that are
offered to him, to persuade him to be of this or that Religion, and not give
himself (...) to any, but that which is proved to be the true one, by such
Arguments, as agree to that and to no other, and such as will be of weight with
him in all times and places, and sufficient to prevail with a prudent and
considering Man, to adventure so great a stake thereupon, as the Everlasting
condition of his Immortal Soul, and such Arguments for the Christian Religion
has our Savior furnished us with, in the Words of my Text.

If, says he, I had not come and spoke unto them, (i. e.) If I had not come
according to the Ancient Predictions, and appeared publicly in the World as a
Prophet sent by God, and Preached a Doctrine as from him, so Pure and Holy,
that it plainly carried his Image and Superscription upon it, They had not had
Sin, (i. e.) they might have had the Plea of Ignorance, but, now they have no
Cloak for their Sin, i. e. no pretense, no color of an excuse to cover their
incredulity. And,

If I had not done among them the Works which none other Man did, i. e. if I
had not justified my Mission, Authority and Doctrine to be from God, by Working
such Miracles for the proof of them, which no Man could do without a Divine
assistance, their rejecting of me, and my Doctrine might have been more
Pardonable, But now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father's, (i.
e.) they have seen him, his Power in those Works which I have wrought in his
Name, and their rejecting my Doctrine for the confirmation whereof he so
plainly appeared, is a Malicious opposing not of me only, but of the Father
himself.

So that from hence I might take occasion to insist upon two Arguments for the
proof of the Christian Religion; one taken from those internal Marks of
Divinity which appear in it, the Holiness and Purity of what our Savior spoke
or taught, the other from those External evidences which we have of its Truth
in the Miraculous Works, which were wrought for the attestation of it.

But the first of these, though it be an excellent and forcible Argument for
our Religion, with unbyassed, Pious, and well disposed Minds, yet it will
hardly have its due weight with such Adversaries as we have to deal with, nay,
in truth, it is rather, I fear, the true ground of their opposition to it, for
to apply, what one of their great Masters has said of Reason to Religion, if
Religion be against a Man, a Man will be against Religion.

I shall therefore at this time confine my self to the second Argument, which
is taken from those Works, which were wrought for the proof of our Religion,
and particularly that signal one, the raising of the Holy Author of it from the
Dead.

In order to the more regular proceeding; I must state the Question with the
Deist, and lay down some demands so reasonable, that he shall be ashamed to
deny them.

The dispute is not between Natural and Revealed Religion, for both one and the
other are from God, who cannot differ from himself, but the question is between
us, and the Deists, as they call themselves, whether God has left Men as to the
way of Worshipping and Serving him, to the light of Nature only, to those (...),
those common Notices of Good and Evil, which are naturally implanted in their
Hearts, or whether he has made any farther discovery of his Will by the
Ministry of any that he has sent into the World for that end, and particularly
by Jesus Christ.

I assert the latter part of the Question, and to make way for my Argument, lay
down.

First, That God can, if he Pleases, make known or discover a Religion to Men
by an External Revelation.

Natural Religion and Revealed Religion are not so properly opposed, but that
Natural Religion is a Revealed Religion, but it is Revealed by an Internal way
of Proposal, whereas that which we especially mean by Revealed Religion is
discovered by an External way of Proposal: Now they that contend that God has
discovered a Religion by an Internal way of Proposal, cannot deny but that he
may, if he will, discover one by an External way, by raising up and impowering
fit instruments for that Purpose; one of these does no more imply a
Contradiction than the other, nor is more repugnant to any of the Divine
perfections, and God can do whatever implies not a Contradiction.

Secondly, That, if it appear that such Testimony has been given to an External
Revelation, as none but God could give, such Works wrought and appealed to for
the proof of the Truth and Divinity thereof, which could not be effected
without a Divine Assistance; This is an undeniable evidence that God has made
such a Revelation: For if God has put forth his Power to attest that a
Revelation came from him, either what is so attested is true, or God, who is
essential Truth, has given his Testimony and Seal to a lie.

Thirdly, That those who have the clearest and best evidence, that such Divine
Testimony has been given to the Truth, and Divinity of an External Revelation,
that a thing of that Nature is capable of, and such as supposing it true, they
could not have had better, have all the reason that can be to submit to it, and
if they do not, have no Cloak for their Sin, no Plea for their Infidelity, for
they resist the utmost Conviction that can be had.

These things being premised, I will go on in this Method.

1. I will show that those Works which we say were wrought for the proof of the
Christian Religion, especially the resurrection of Christ from the Dead, were
such as could not have been effected by any Power less than Divine.

2. I will prove that we have the best evidence, that such Works were wrought
for that purpose, that the matter is capable of, and such as we could not have
had better, supposing it true.

3. I will enquire what Cloak the Unbeliever has for his Sin, what Plea he can
offer, what excuse he can pretend for his infidelity. And,

4. I shall conclude with some practical Application with regard to the
particular occasion of our meeting

1. The Works, which we say were wrought for the proof of the Christian
Religion, were such as no Person, unassisted with a Divine Power, could have
done: They were, commanding the Winds and Seas, stilling Tempests, casting out
Devils, cleansing Lepers, healing the most inveterate Diseases, restoring the
Deaf to their Hearing, and giving Sight and use of Limbs, to those who were
born Blind and Lame, etc. and all these were done in so many Moments, without
the Application of any, or any competent means for the effecting of them, by a
bare Touch, or but Speaking a Word, and yet the effects were real and lasting,
the Blind, Deaf, and Lame, immediately Seeing, Hearing, Walking, and continuing
so to do.

Now by what Power, less than Divine, could these things have been done?

As for Nature, if these things are within the compass of her Working, not
beyond the Laws prescribed her, but such as might be done by some secret and
unknown Power in her, It Is very strange that she never exerted that Power
before nor since: But I shall only ask how the Author, and first Planters of
the Christian Religion, came to be upon the secret, at that time privy to that
design of hers, of putting herself forth in such an extraordinary manner then,
that they could exactly know the minute when, the object about which, and the
instance wherein she would exercise that Power, which till that time had lain
Dormant in her, and that so certainly, that they could confidently appeal
thereto for the Truth of what they taught, and let the Credit of their Doctrine
depend thereupon? Men that have Curiously enquired into Nature, may from
Observations which they have made upon their own or others Experience, that
such and such things have happened upon such and such Conjunctures, when they
see the like Conjunctures, foretell, that probably the same effects will
follow: But if Men shall certainly foreknow that strange things beyond the
Ordinary course of Nature will happen at such a time, which never happened
before, and of which therefore they could have no Experience to ground an
Observation upon; if the Work it self were not above Nature, yet the
foreknowledge of it must be Supernatural and from God alone. And the Revealing
of things of this kind to a Person, whereby he is enabled to appeal to them for
the truth of what he Teaches, will as effectually bring in God for a Voucher of
his Doctrine, as if the Works themselves had been done by his immediate
Assistance.

But whatever may be pretended of others, some at least of those Works, which
we say were wrought by the Author for the Proof of our Religion, are such as
are confessedly beyond the Power of Nature, or any Created Being.

And those are, his raising of several, and Himself at the last, from the Dead:
Those that deny all Miracles, own that these would be Miracles, if they ever
were or should be done.

These things then being granted to be beyond the reach of any Power less than
Infinite, the Evidence of Fact that they have been done, and that for the
attestation of the truth of the Christian Religion, shall be made out in my
next.

2. Proposition, and that by the best proof a thing of this Nature is capable
of: I say, the best proof it is capable of, for all things are not capable of
Mathematical, or Metaphysical Evidence: Matters of Fact which happened before
our time or in distant places from us, are capable of no other than that which
we call Moral proof; but if they are proved by the best Evidence of that sort,
they are as well proved in their kind, as Propositions in either of those
Sciences which are Demonstrated.

Now as to the Moral Evidence, that the above mentioned F^cts were done for the
proof of the Christian Religion, we have them recorded in a Venerable History,
against which none of those Objections can be Justly made, which can render the
Authority of any History suspected.

For if there be reason to suspect the truth of any History, it must be upon
the account of either the Book or the Author.

If upon the account of the Book, it is either because the Book is in the whole
Spurious, not written by the pretended Author, but the Work of some later
Impostor; or else because it is faulty in part, having been Interpolated or
Corrupted.

If upon the account of the Author, it must be because he had not either
sufficient Opportunity of knowing himself the matters he relates, or honesty
enough to relate truly what he did know: Either he was imposed upon, believing
those things to fall out which did not, or else he had a design to impose upon
others.

But where none of these things can be reasonably suspected, where we have good
grounds to believe a Book to be genuine, entire and pure, and the Author both
knowing and honest, well acquainted himself with what he relates, and without
any design to lead others into Error; in such a case there can be no cause, nor
pretense of a cause, to doubt of the truth of a History.

Now that the Books wherein these Miracles are recorded, the Books of the New
Testament are genuine, we have certain information from the very Men, Clem.
Roman. Ignat. Polycarp.
that knew and conversed with the Writers of them. Those that lived in the time
of the Authors, and conversed with them, had certainly opportunities of knowing
whether the Books were genuine or not, and it mightily concerned them to
enquire nicely, and be well satisfied that they were so; and no doubt they were
upon inquiry so satisfied, when they asserted the truth of them, with the
utmost hazard of what was dearest to them in this World, and ventured likewise
thereupon their Eternal Salvation in the next: We find these Books transmitted
as Authentic to the next Generation, and received as such by them, Justin M.
Ir^n^us, and the Apologists.

Tertull.


nay, the very Originals appealed to, as remaining at the end of the Second Age.

Of the truth of these Books they were so unquestionably satisfied in the next,
that rather than deliver up these Books to their Persecutors, they chose to
give up themselves to the severest Torments and Deaths.

And from thence we have an uninterrupted Tradition of the truth, and genuiness
of them continued down to our times.

And as they are genuine, so that they are pure and uncorrupted, the early
dispersing them into distant places, and translating them into several
Languages, will not suffer any one to doubt: For since in all the Copies and
Translations now Extant, there is such a perfect agreement in the main, that
they hardly differ in any thing of great Moment, how can it be imagined, that
so many Men of different Countries and Tongues, living remotely, and having
little Commerce with each other, should all conspire together to falsify their
Copies, to put such a cheat upon themselves and their Posterity, as to
interpolate those Books, which they believed and asserted to be Divine, and
contain the Words of Eternal Life, and transmit them so corrupted to Ages to
come?

For the Writers of these Books, that they could not but know, whether the
matters which they related were true or false, is certain from the Facts
themselves, which being Matters of Sense, they were very Competent Judges of
them, and which they do not relate as done in Ages past and places remote,
which they do not take upon trust, nor tell upon hearsay, but as done in their
own time and fight.

If therefore they have related that which is false, they must have done it
knowing and designedly.

But that they should feign what they wrote, designing to abuse the World,
cannot be suspected by any that consider, that they were honest and harmless
Men, of unblameable Conversations, that they were mean illiterate Persons,
hardly capable of inventing to coherent a Story: That there was no advantage
they could propose to themselves from it, but contrariwise they exposed
themselves by it to ignominy and contempt, to Poverty and spoiling of their
Goods, to Imprisonment, Tortures and Death.

But let it be supposed, that they had Wickedness and Malice enough to design
to abuse the World, and an interest to serve by so doing, and withal Wit and
Skill enough to contrive such a plausible Fable; yet how could they ever hope
to make it pass upon the World, when they wrote in the very place that was the
Scene of all those strange Works which they reported, and addressed themselves
to the very Men before whom they were done, and that whilst they were fresh in
their Memories, appealing to them for the truth of them?

Certainly if these things were Fictions, to go about to impose them in such a
manner upon Men, must argue those that attempted it to be plainly Distracted
and out of their Wits, either they had too little Sense to invent these
Stories, or too much to hope to make them believe them to whom they related
them: For Men cannot be deceived in Matters concerning which appeal is made to
their Senses: Strange Stories of things pretended to be done in times of Old,
or Foreign Countries, may though false, when confidently reported, pass upon
easy People, but no Credulity can be so great as to be persuaded by any
Confidence, or Impudence rather, that Matters of Face which were not done at
all, were done in ones Presence and Sight.

If then what these Men relate were false, since those to whom they directed
their reports could not but know they were so as well as themselves, sure no
folly ever equaled that of the Relators, except happily that of those that could
believe them: And yet we find many thousands believing these Relations,
reverencing the Authors of them, embracing the Religion they Preached, and for
the proof of which those Miracles were done and related; and for the sake
thereof, forsaking the Gods they had Worshipped, renouncing the Religion they
had been Educated in, sacrificing their Lusts and Vices, and not counting their
Lives dear to them: So that either there were such Miracles wrought as these
Persons related, or this at least must be one, that those relations should
obtain so much Credit in the World.

Having thus asserted the Authority of the History, I beg leave to consider a
little more particularly some of the Facts recorded in it.

In this Book then we meet with a long train of Miracles, Works beyond the
Power of Nature or any Created Being, wrought by a Person, that professes
himself sent by God to Reveal his Mind and Will to the World, to which Miracles
he constantly appeals for the Proof of his Mission and Doctrine. Believe me for
the Works sake, I have greater testimony than that of John, the Works that I do
in my Fathers name bear Witness of me, and if I by the Finger of God cast out
Devils, no doubt the Kingdom of God is come unto you.

But in a more especial manner his Resurrection is asserted as the most
Demonstrative proof of his being sent by God.

To raise the Dead is an uncontroverted Prerogative of the Deity, and certainly
and distinctly to foretell future Contingencies is so too: Now in the Gospel we
read that when the Jews came to Christ, twice desiring a sign of him, that he
would show his Credentials, make some proof of his Commission and Authority, he
tells them once, Destroy this Temple, (speaking of the Temple of his Body) and
in three Days I will raise it up. And another time, no other sign shall be
given but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three Days and Nights
in the Belly of the Whale, so the San of Man shall be three Days and Nights in
the Heart of the Earth.

Now here he lays the Credit and Authority of all that he asserted concerning
himself, or taught them, upon the falling out of a thing future, and that a
thing impossible to Nature or any Created Being; upon his rising from the Dead
the third Day after they should Kill him: And as he foretold, it fell out,
after they that had Crucified him, were satisfied that he was Dead, had laid
him in a New Tomb, and to prevent any attempts to steal away his Body, had
Sealed the Sepulcher, and set a strong Watch to guard it; the third Day the
Sepulcher was found empty, the Linen Cloths that his Body was wrapped in lying
there, but his Body was gone.

Their pretense that after all the precaution they had used, his Disciples came
by Night and stole him away while the Watchmen slept, is too idle, and
Contradictory to need a Confutation. What hopes could the poor scattered
Disciples have to succeed in such an attempt, and what end could they propose
to serve if they should succeed? What motive could prevail with them? Love to
their Dead Master, and a design to get reputation to his Religion could never
do it: For either they had some Expectation that he should rise from the Dead,
grounded upon the Scripture-Type, and Predictions, concerning the Messiah, and
the Applications which Jesus had made of them to himself, or they had no such
Expectations: If they had no such Expectations, if as the Evangelists tell us,
they knew not the Scriptures, that he was to rise from the Dead, if they were
so far from expecting any such thing, that when he was risen, the Words of
those that reported it, seemed to them as idle Tales, and they were not without
great difficulty persuaded to believe it, why then should they attempt to steal
him away, and make the World believe he was Risen?

But if they did expect his rising again, observing what the Scriptures had
foreshewn of the Resurrection of the Messiah, and what he had promised for
himself, as the great proof of his Authority and Religion, that in three Days
he would raise again the Temple of his Body; Then, if after three Days he was
not risen, what should move them to try with so much hazard to themselves, to
make Men believe he was risen? Whereas, if he had failed them in this, they had
all the reason in the World to look upon him as an Impostor, and themselves as
Cheated by him, who had avouched himself to be the Messiah, and yet had not
Answered the Characters given by the Prophets of the Messiah, who had made
himself the Antitype of Jonas, who lay three Days and Nights in the Whale's
Belly, and declared that in conformity to the Type, he would lie three Days and
Nights in the Belly of the Earth, and rise again the third, and yet was so far
from making this good, that after many three days, he still lay Captivated
under the Power of Death: When they were once convinced of this, it had been
surely the greatest madness in the World for them to expose themselves to
Dangers and Miseries, to attest so monstrous a lie, either for the sake of such
a deceiver, or of a Religion which such an Impostor was the Author of.

But I need not insist upon this, for the Sepulcher was not only found empty,
but he frequently appeared and showed himself alive to several the very Day of
his Resurrection, that it might appear, that the Circumstance of time, which he
foretold, was fullfilled; And when his Disciples upon his first appearance
among them, (he showed himself three several times to them when they were
Assembled together) were affrighted, supposing they had seen a Spirit, without
any real Body, he calls for Meat and eats before them, he appeals to their
Senses, bids them Handle him and Feel that he had a true Body consisting of
Flesh and Bone, and to convince them that 'twas the same Body that suffered, he
shows them the Prints of the Nails in his Hands and Feet, and afterward made
Thomas, who it seems was resolved to submit to no less Conviction, to thrust
his hands into the Wound made by the Spear in his Side; and to support the
Testimony which these should give of his Resurrection, and to put it beyond all
Contradiction, he appeared to more than Five hundred at once, and last of all
to St. Paul, who appealed to the greatest part of that Five hundred as then
living, for the proof of this, 1 Cor. 15. So that this matter as it is laid in
these Books, is so attested, that no one former thing in the whole World ever
had that evidence of Fact.

The sum of what I have said is this,

The evidence of these Facts is so strong, that whoever can disbelieve them,
can never believe any thing that happened before his own time or out of his own
sight: The Facts are such, that whoever believes they were done, cannot
disbelieve that Doctrine for the proof of which they were done, without
believing that God who can no more deceive than be deceived, has misled Men
into the belief of a falsehood, in a matter, wherein it is of the greatest
consequence to them not to be mistaken, by the greatest and most irresistible
External Evidence that can be had of the Truth of any thing: And consequently
those to whom these Facts are thus made out, can have no good reason to deny or
suspend their Assents to that Religion, for the confirmation whereof these
Works were wrought. What cloak they have for their Infidelity, what pretenses
they would cover it with, we shall see in the third and next particular. And
here

First, It Is said that the Christian Religion has not been generally Revealed,
and therefore cannot be necessary to future Happiness; because if it were,
those who could not know it, are out of a Possibility of a future State of
Blessedness, which seems Inconsistent with God's Infinite goodness, who
provides for all his Creatures, the means of attaining that Happiness, whereof
their Natures are capable. Orac. of Reas. p. 198, etc.

The force of which objection depends upon a false supposition; they take it
for granted that we teach that those who could not have any knowledge of the
Christian Religion are out of a capacity of being saved: Thus they would have
it believed that we say, because otherwise they have no ground for this
Argument: But for our parts, we deny that our Church teaches any such Doctrine.

We do not determine Peremptorily of the Eternal State of the Heathens: we do
not pretend to Judge those that are without, to their own Master they stand or
fall.

We say indeed Infidelity is a damning Sin, but we mean not a Negative, but a
Privative Infidelity, a want of Faith in a subject capable of it.

We say there is no Salvation but through the Merits of Jesus Christ; but say
not whether or how far God may extend the benefit of those Merits, to such as
live according to the best light they have, and whose unhappiness, and not
fault it is, that they want the light of Revelation.

To be sure they shall not be Judged by, or Condemned for not obeying, the
Revealed Law, which being not made known could not be a Rule to them, but shall
be tried by the Law written in their Hearts: So St. Paul expressly says, Romans
2.14. The Gentiles having not the Law, are a Law to themselves, which show the
Work of the Law written in their Hearts; their Conscience also bearing witness,
and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another, in
the Day when God shall Judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel.

But if we are so Charitable to the Gentiles, why should not we Judge as
favorably of our Modern Deists?

Their cases are widely different. The former never heard of Christ or his
Religion: These have heard of, and yet oppose and revile both. And our Savior
has plainly determined in favor of the former, rather than these, in my Text,
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin; but now they have
no Cloak for their Sin.

Secondly, It may be objected against the Authority of the Scriptures, that
there have several Books gone abroad in the World under the Names of the Sacred
Writers, which are discovered to be Forgerles.

But surely it is no new discovery that there have been such Books, or that they
are Forgeries. The cheats have been long since detected, and the Books rejected
by the Christians. But what can be inferred from hence? Any thing to the
prejudice of the Books which the Christians own? Not in reason: For if another
man should write a Book in the name of a celebrated Author, or under the Title
which his Works bear, and that Book should afterward appear to be Spurious,
'twould be very hard that this should affect the credit of that Author's
genuine Works.

I think the consequence turns the other way; and the Books falsely ascribed to
the Apostles, the counterfeit Gospels and Epistles, prove that there were such
Men as the Apostles, that they were Authors, that there were true Gospels and
Epistles; for if there had never been such Men, if they had not written, if
there had been no true Gospels and Epistles; we should never have heard of
Spurious Works under their Names, there would have been no such counterfeit
Gospels and Epistles.

Thirdly, It may be said farther to the prejudice of our Books, that some of
those which we do now receive, were for some time Questioned by Christians.

But those Questioned Books contained nothing different from what was contained
in those that were never doubted of.

And what can be the just inference from hence; but that Christians were not
easy credulous Persons in these matters, but examined the Books well, and
would be thoroughly convinced of the truth of them before they would receive
them?

But to silence this Cavil, a Person whose Authority I suppose will pass with
our Deists, who was one of the violentest Enemies to Christianity, and Master
of more Wit than his modern Followers, Julian the Apostate Emperor I mean, owns
those Books to be the Writings of the Evangelists, and of the Apostles St.
Peter and St. Paul, which the Christians read under their names. Cyril. Contr.
Julian. p. 327.

Fourthly, It may be objected against the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles,
that the World has been much abused with accounts of false Miracles: Nay, that
Christians, they that pretend to be the only Society of Christians, have
received many Miracles as strange for quality as those of Christ's, and with
equal Faith; some of which they themselves have since owned to be false; and
from hence it may be argued to the prejudice of Christ's Miracles, that if the
Credulity of some later Ages has been thus imposed upon, by cunning and
designing Men, why may not the same or like Artifices have prevailed in the
first Christian times?

But this Objection will be easily answered by observing these differences
between the Miracles of our Savior, and the pretended ones of the Church of
Rome.

The Romish Miracles have either no Witnesses, or such as are made choice of
for their known weakness or partiality; none of them was ever attested by any
Authors of known repute; whereas those of Christ were wrought in the face of
the World, and that a Knowing and Learned World, that resisted the Conviction
to the utmost, but were forced by the Power of it to submit; And of this we
have such assurance that no matter of Fact was ever so attested to succeeding
Ages.

Again, the Romish Miracles were not done as signs to those that believe not,
but to those that already believed; not before Skeptical Infidels or obstinate
Heretics, but before Proselytes already made and prepared for the strong
delusion; that had put out their own Eyes, and renounced their own reason and
senses, and resigned themselves entirely to be governed by those of their
designing Leaders; and such indeed might very easily be imposed upon.

But the case was very different with our Savior's Miracles, where Men came
with their Eyes as wide open as prejudice and interest could make them, to
examine Facts which they would not have had to be true, and yet could not
withstand the Evidence, but were forced to acknowledge the truth of them: and
many of them that came with these prejudices were nevertheless by the
Conviction of these Miracles brought over from a Religion they had sucked in
with their Milk, that was supported by the suffrages of the Wise, and the Power
and Countenance of the Great, to a New Religion, laughed at by the one, and
Persecuted by the other.

This was truly the case of the Christian Religion at its first coming into the
World: it appeared with all the disadvantages imaginable, was proposed by the
meanest and most contemptible Instruments, was opposed and ridiculed by the
Learned of the Age, was threatened and most severely persecuted by the Emperors
and Potentates.

And what Allurements did this Religion offer to draw Men through all these
difficulties to it?

Was there Honor or Reputation to be got by owning it? No alas! Our Savior
told his Disciples, ye shall be hated of all Men for my Name sake: They were
called a Sect, that is every where spoke against: They were counted as the Dung
and offscouring of the World.

Did it propose Riches or Wealth? No, Blessed are the Poor, but woe unto you
Rich; sell what thou have and give alms: and how hardly shall a Rich man enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven?

Did it offer ease and Pleasures? No, In the World ye shall have Tribulation:
ye shall be persecuted and driven from this City to that, brought and accused
before Kings and Governors: And whoever kills you, will think he does God
service, Alas! this Religion laid no other Baits to allure Men to it, if it
were not true, but Persecution, Poverty, Imprisonment and Death.

The conditions of Discipleship proposed by our Lord are, If any Man will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me: He must hate
his dear Relations, his dear Possessions, and his dearer Life too.

Now certainly here was nothing in all this, that could Prepossess Men in
favor of this Religion; or dispose them to be easily wrought upon by the
methods used for its Propagation, without a just enquiry into the truth and
validity of them, that could make men despise all the difficulties that opposed
them, and willingly run through all the dangers that threatened them, into it,
without being fully satisfied that God did really bear witness to it by signs
and wonders and mighty works.

In short, when the Christian Religion first appeared in the World, the
Teachers of it used none of those methods of Policy, Force or Flattery, which
Impostors make use of, to inveigle or affright men into it; rather all things
conspired to discourage and affright them from it: The only Motive was this,
that it was the way now proposed by God, to attain Eternal Life; and the great
Evidences and Demonstrations of this were the Miracles wrought and appealed to
by the Author and first Planters of it, which were openly done in the face of
the Sun, and sight of Men who had liberty to examine them as nicely as they
pleased: And it cannot be doubted by any one that considers their prejudice of
Education in a former Religion more agreeable to Flesh and Blood, the
Severities of this new one, and the Dangers from without which attended the
embracers of it; but that, as these things made them very curious inquirers
into the Truth of it; so that Truth was very apparent, when so many thousands
of all Ages, Sexes and Conditions, ran through Fire and Sword, and Deaths of all
kinds, into this New Religion.

How speedy and vast a Progress it made in the times of the Apostles, their
Acts, and Epistles to the several Church; founded by them, will inform us: and
profane Authors, Tacitus, Suetonius, and the younger Pliny tell us, how
considerable a Figure the Christians made in the World, within less than half a
Century of the Apostles times: But by the end of the next Age they were spread
all over the Roman Empire, as Tertullian in his Apology directed to the Roman
Magistrates tells them. And though this mighty Progress of it Only made the
Enemies thereof complain, that the City of Rome was environed on all sides with
the Enemies of the Gods, that the Christians were spread all over the Empire,
that the Provinces were full of them, and that there were Persons among them of
the greatest Quality and Dignity; yet they ought, as that farther remarks, to
have made this Inference from it, for undoubtedly it is a just one; that a
Religion which, notwithstanding all those disadvantages above mentioned, drew
all the Roman World after it, must needs have something in it Excellent and
Divine.

Fifthly, After all that is said, the Deist still thinks himself very prudent
and cautious; that he is on the safer side; and if he errs, he errs not like a
Fool, but secundum verbum, after enquiry; and if he be sincere in his
principles, he can when dying appeal to God, Te deus bone, quaesivi per omnia.
Orac. of Reas. P. 92.

I suppose it will be allowed me, that they who have the greatest Evidence that
they are in the right, and run the least risque if they should be mistaken, act
upon the most rational and prudent grounds, and are on the safer side. Let us
then join issue here.

The Evidence we have for our Religion is this. We say God himself has given
Testimony to it, and we are sure that his Testimony is true. That God has given
Testimony to it, by Miracles wrought for the confirmation of it, we prove by
the best Evidence a matter of this Nature is capable of; We produce a whole
Cloud of Witnesses, who relate these Facts upon their knowledge, who could have
no interest to serve by prevaricating, who ventured their All upon the truth of
them, who sealed their Testimony with their Blood. And this is conveyed down to
us in such a manner, that if it be false, it is not possible for us to be sure
that any thing, which we did not see is true; and also supported with variety
of Collateral Proofs, Records and Writings of the Enemies as well as Friends of
the Christian Religion; so that to disbelieve them is not Skepticism but
Madness.

Now what proof does or can the Deist urge against us? Why, he must protest
against a matter of Fact, he must suppose all our Scriptures, and all the
Ancient Fathers writings wherein they are quoted, to be Forgeries, and those of
Jews and Heathens who have wrote against them to be so too: Or else that all
these have been corrupted by the unanimous consent of all Christians among whom
they were dispersed over the World; who all agreed to deliver in their Books,
not any denying so to do, or owning or complaining of it; and received them
again so interpolated; and yet still ventured their Salvation upon the truth of
them: Or he must suppose that a great number of honest and undesigning Men
would not only lie for lying sake, but rather than not impose it upon the
World, would dye Martyrs to a lie, and that multitudes of Persons of all
Conditions swallowed these lies, either without Examination, though they were
matters of the highest Importance to them, or else after that upon Examination
they had found them to be so: And yet so obstinately believed them, that they
staked Body and Soul, quitted their Estates, Liberties, Lives, all their
enjoyments in this World, and ventured upon them all their hopes in the next:
So that I think the matter is pretty clear on the Christians side as to point
of Evidence.

As to Danger, if the Christian runs any hazard, it must be, because his
Religion is deficient in something necessary to be believed or practiced in
order to Salvation, or it imposes some things upon his belief or practice
inconsistent with it.

As to the former I do assert that there are no Doctrines in Natural Religion
relating to Faith or Practice, to God, our Neighbor, or our selves, to the
duties we owe to each, or the obligations we lie under to discharge those
duties, but what are more clearly explained, the duties enjoined in a more
extensive meaning, and enforced by more Powerful sanctions in the Christian,
than in the Natural Religion.

As to the other, the Articles of Faith and positive Institutions peculiar to
Christianity, I do affirm, that we are not obliged to believe any thing, that
is unworthy of God, repugnant to any principle of right Reason, or that can
have any ill influence upon our lives: nor are we obliged to do any thing that
tends to the dishonor of God, to the withdrawing of our service from him, or
making us slack in the performance of our duty to him: But contrariwise, the
Doctrines and Institutions of the Christian Religion are all, as I could show,
if I had time, calculated for the uniting of our Souls to God, the exciting of
our fear and reverence, the inflaming of our Love, the stricter tying us to,
and quickening us in our obedience to him. And certainly Doctrines and
Practices not only so innocent, but of so good a tendency, especially when we
have such Grounds to believe them proposed and commanded by God, as a prudent
and considering Man will judge Rational, will, although we could be supposed to
be out in this belief, yet be looked upon as at least very pardonable errors by
our gracious God.

But if the Deist be mistaken, and that Religion which he rejects, and is the
object of his laughter and scorn, should prove True at last, what a miserable
condition must he be in?

I grant a Religion's condemning all those that do not comply with it, is no
sure Argument of the truth of it: but the Truth of it being supposed, it is a
very good proof of the Danger they are in that reject it.

Now the Proposals of the Gospel are set forth as the utmost effects and
struggle of the Divine Compassion, the last tenders of Mercy to Mankind: We are
there told, that for those, who neglect that great Salvation there is no
escape, nothing remains more but a fearful expectation of fiery indignation:
The tenor of it is, he that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned: nay it declares that the Judgment of those who refuse it,
after it has been proposed to them, shall be heavier than if there had never
been any such offer made to them.

And what has the Infidel to Plead, by which he can hope to mitigate his Crime
or his Punishment? Why, only that he had not other or more Evidence for the
truth of the Gospel's Revelations than the matter would bear: that God did not
use such irresistible means for his Conviction, as are not consistent with the
Liberty of a free Agent, and would have made his Faith to have been no Virtue.
And what then can he expect, but that since he would not be convinced by the
great Moral Evidence that was tendered to him of the truth of the Doctrines of
the Gospel, he should feel a sensible and experimental conviction, of the truth
and reality of the Threats of it?

Fourthly, It now only remains that I shut up all with one Word of Practical
application: If he that does not believe the Gospel has no cloak for his
Infidelity, what cloak can we, that do believe it, but not obey it, have for
our disobedience? What does it profit if a Man say he has Faith, and has not
Works, will Faith save him? a dead Faith without any Vital acts flowing from
it? No, our Master has told us, it is to no purpose to call him Lord, Lord, to
give up our names to him and profess our selves his Disciples, unless we do the
things which he commands us. And this command we have very particularly in
charge from him, that he that loves God loves his Brother also. Vain is that
Faith that does not work by love, and false that pretended love to God, that is
not attended with a love to our Brother.

The Christian institution is singular in the injunction of Charity. No other
institution ever understood it in so comprehensive a meaning, both as to the
objects and exercise of it; ever commanded it so strictly, persuaded so
Pathetically, or proposed such glorious rewards to it.

The objects of Christian Charity are as large as all Mankind, not only
Relations and Friends but Strangers and Enemies.

The Exercise of it is to reach as far as our Brethrens wants and our own
Abilities will go, even to the laying down of our lives upon some Occasions for
them.

The Commands that enjoin it are most frequent and emphatical in this Chapter;
verse 12. This is my Commandment, says our Lord, that ye love one another, and
v. 17. These things I command you that ye love one another: and in 13 cap. v.
34. A new commandment give I unto you; and that such as shall be the
distinguishing Badge of your Profession, by which all Men shall know that you
are my Disciples; that you have love one to another.

The Considerations by which this is pressed upon us are most moving: viz. the
Infinite love of Christ to us, who will look upon the kindness we show to our
poor Brethren as done to himself; the near Relation we stand in to one another,
not only as being made of one Flesh, but as having been Baptized into one Body,
and so more strictly allied as being members of the same mystical Body, which
ought to have the same Sympathy and Fellow feeling with one another as the
members of the Body Natural have; The excellency of this Grace, in that it is
preferable to Faith and Hope, the very bond of perfectness, the fulfilling of
the Law, and that it shall cover a multitude of Sins.

Lastly, The Eternal Glories of Heaven are promised to the due performance of
it, St. Matt. 25. where our Savior and Judge describes the procedure of the
last Judgment, as if the only thing he should then come to enquire into were
our Obedience or Disobedience to this Royal Law.

In short, Charity is so Essential to Christianity, that an irrational Man is
not a greater Contradiction than an uncharitable Christian.

The first Christians were so sensible of this, that they would scarce call
ought of the things they possessed their own: They thought their Poor Brethren
had as good a Title to what they could spare, as they themselves had to the
rest of their Estates; and they so ordered matters, that those who had a great
deal, and those who had nothing, were like the Israelites that gathered much or
little Manna, the former had nothing over, and the latter had no lack.

Indeed there never was any Society of Christians that did not think they ought
to distinguish themselves from Persons of any other Denomination by abounding
in this Grace. Even the worst Society, that of Rome, is not deficient in the
exercise of it toward the Bodies of those of their own Communion, though it is to
be feared the merit of that Charity will be over-ballanced by their want of it
toward both the Bodies and Souls of those that differ from them.

But I need not take occasion by the forwardness of Papists, to prove the
sincerity of your Love; since we have in this City so many Noble instances of
Public Charities, since the Reformation, to provoke your Emulation: Some of
which when I reflect upon, methinks I see some faint resemblances, such as Poor
imperfect Creatures can make, of the Lord himself going about doing good.

See him expressing his tenderness to little Children, in that Pious care that
is taken of Poor Orphans in the Hospital that bears his Name.

See him restoring use of Limbs to the Lame, sight to the Blind, healing the
maimed, and curing all manner of Diseases, in that variety of Charitable Cures,
that are performed in the Hospitals of St. Bartholomew and St. Thomas.

See him making a Whip of small Cords, and scourging the transgressors, in
those Just Corrections that are exercised upon the vicious in Bridewel.

See him restoring the Lunaticks to their right Minds, in those excellent
methods that are used with Poor distracted Wretches in Bethlem.

But I shall possess you with a Juster notion of these Great Charities by
reading to you.

The true report, etc.

You see here at once, both noble examples of Charity to excite your imitation,
and very worthy and pressing occasions for the exercise of it.

Will you Pardon me if I mention one other kind of Charity, the bare naming of
which, will I think, be sufficient to recommend it to the encouragement of all
well-disposed Persons; I mean building Workhouses, and providing a stock to
set the Poor to Work?

I mention this with the more assurance because I find it is a way you are
going into, and have already made some progress in it: And were it carried on
with unanimity and resolution to bring it to perfection, and managed (as I am
confident it will be in this City) with Care and Prudence, and a single Eye to
the public good, 'twould certainly turn to a very excellent account.

'Twould not only be a great Charity to the Poor, to their Souls as well as
Bodies, to keep them from Begging and Thieving, and put them in an honest way
of getting their living; but to employ those that are now the burdens and pests
of the Kingdom in Working up our Manufactures, would be a Public Benefaction.

And now my Brethren, since Charity is so Special and Eminent a Duty of that
Religion which our Lord taught and confirmed to us; since all his true
Followers have ever looked upon and practiced it as the distinguishing Character
of their Profession; let us, having such glorious Patterns before our Eyes to
encourage us, and such and so many Opportunities now put into our Hands of
exercising this Grace, make use of these Opportunities, and therein follow
those excellent Patterns. Without this, I am sure, how firmly soever we may
believe our Religion our selves, and however strongly we may argue for it with
others, it is not possible we should offer any thing successfully to the
satisfaction of our Consciences or Conviction of other Men's: As to our selves
if we do believe our Religion, we must believe what it tells us; that all the
greatest Qualifications and Performances without this signify nothing, that
even our Faith is dead and our Hope presumption: And as to others, it is in vain
to think to persuade them to embrace a Religion by any thing we can say, when
they must judge by which what we do, that we our selves despise and believe it
not worth observing.

If we would prevail with others to believe the Truth of our Religion, we must
first convince them that we believe it our selves. But if we can live in the
open neglect of, indeed defiance to its Precepts, especially such an Eminent
one as this, let us talk as long as we will for it, men can never believe we
are in earnest.

If any one Duty be more frequently and forcibly enjoined in our Religion than
another, it is this of Charity; which when it proceeds from a right principle,
and is directed to a right end, is the Glory as well as Duty of a Christian:
but if a man, however otherwise endowed, cannot show out of a good
Coniversation his Works with meekness of Wisdom, that Wisdom, that is full of
Mercy and good Fruits, all his Boasting and Glorying upon other accounts, is
but a lying against the truth.

We live in an Age wherein our Religion is not only undermined by those that
are Working in the Dark, but more publicly assaulted by open and avowed
Enemies. The Weapons wherewith we are to encounter them are not Carnal. That
which is more immediately our Post, who are the Ministers of Christ, is to
Write, Preach, and Argue for holy Religion: that which is Yours in common with
us, is to Live for it. And did we all but live with that strictness of Piety,
and Purity, which it enjoins, and we profess; practicing whatever things are
honest, chaste, lovely, and of good report; above all putting on Charity,
putting on as the elect of God, bowels of mercies and kindness; we might yet
hope to see it flourish in spite of all the Power and Malice of its Enemies.

That which very much contributed to the speedy and wide spreading of the
Christian Religion at first, notwithstanding the mighty opposition that was
made to it, was the Exemplary behavior of the Professors of it, and in
particular that shining Charity which they were so eminent for.

And this will ever be a most certain method to secure and propagate our
Religion, it will procure the Blessing and Protection of God, it will be a
means of convincing men of the reality of our Faith in the rewards of another
Life, when they see us for the sake of them, so willingly part with the good
things of this. It must have a ^^ry Natural tendency to dispose those that
partake of our C^arity to receive impressions from our Exhortations; and it
must give all that hear of it an amiable Idea of our Religion, when they find
that the employment of a Christian is like that of our great Master. Our good
Works so shining forth, with a bright and pure Flame, must induce not only
those that feel the warmth of it, but those also, that see the Light, to join
with us in Glorifying our Father which is in Heaven.

To whom, etc.

FINIS.
SERMONS by the Lord Bishop of Oxford, and Printed for Tho. Bennet.
A Sermon Preached at the Cathedral Church of Worcester, upon a Fast Day.
Published at the request of the Mayor and Aldermen of that City.

A Sermon Preached before the Late Queen at Whitehall. Published by Her
Majesty's Command.

The Unreasonableness and Mischief of Atheism. A Sermon Preached before the
Late Queen at Whitehall. Published by her Majesty's Special Command.

The foolish Abuse and wise Use of Riches. A Sermon Preached at the
Parish Church of Bromesgrove, in Worcestershire. Upon Occasion of a Charity
given to that Place, by Sir Tho. Cooks of Bentley, Knight and Bar.

A Sermon Preached at the Cathedral Church of Worcester, upon a
Thanksgiving-Day. Published at the Request of the Mayor and Aldermen of that
City.

The Spirit of Popery tried whether it be of God. A Sermon Preached before the
King at Whitehall, upon the 5th of November, 1699. Published by His Majesty's
Special Command.


