TO ALL DEAR FRIENDS and BRETHREN In the Everlasting TRUTH and COVENANT OF THE
Almighty Jehovah Blessed for evermore.

WE the Prisoners of the Lord, and for the Testimony of Christ Jesus, do bear
in our remembrance with dearest Salutations of perfect love, all our suffering
Brethren every where, and also the whole Flock of our Fathers tender Love, whom
he has elected and chosen in his own secret Counsel before the world began;
Dearly and well beloved, our very Souls this day, are deeply affected with the
Cause of God, and our persons at this time are engaged in these Bonds, for the
Testimony of the same; and truly, in Soul, Body, and Spirit, are we offered up
to the perpetual loss of all, that the Name of the Lord, and his saving Truth,
may be testified unto, in faithfulness unto all the world; and in the Lord our
hearts are resolved in the confidence of his Spirit, to suffer the greatest of
Afflictions and Persecutions, rather than forfeit or loose, one grain of this
so blessed a Testimony now trusted with us, and for which, we now suffer these
Bonds: And unto faithfulness herein, We find that the Lord our God, daily
increases our strength and boldness, our patience and long suffering, and
doubleth his Spirit of Power and Wisdom upon us, that we may never faint in
Trial; and we labor to be armed in our inward man, with whatsoever may uphold
us, and defend us in this day of our Afflic^ions; even that our faith and
patience, our holiness and meekness, our long suffering, and love to enemies;
and all Heavenly Virtues may be completed in us, and possessed of us, till our
God take Vengeance upon the wrath of our Adversaries, and deliver his (now)
poor despised and oppressed people; for these Virtues are the armor with which
we delight to be clothed; these are our weapons with which we choose to be
defended, and this must be our final Vic^ory, when the faith and patience, the
meekness and long suffering, and heavenly Virtues of Christ Jesus in us, have
exceeded in measure, and superabounded in effect, all the unbelief and
impatiency, the enmity and ungodliness, in all that hate us; Love shall
overcome wrath and envy; Patience shall subdue rigorous Persecutors, and
hateful workers; the very God that dwells with us, shall condemn and confound
the wicked one, with all his might, and power, and malice, and Persecution,
cruel Imposition on tender Consciences, and Oppression and Injustice shall be
no more: And this is that Victory, for which we spiritually War, and these and
no other, are the weapons with which we do contend; and the Cause is God's in
which we are engaged, and for which we suffer this present day.

Brethren, we hope ye are all like-minded with us, and that this same Cause of
God, his Truth and Righteousness is fixed before you, and is your aim and
mark, and that it is alike dear and precious in your eye, and that ye are Armed
with the same Armor of God's heavenly Virtues; It Is the breathings of our life
to the Father, that the whole Church of Christ, and every Member thereof may be
kept faithful, to hold forth the holy Testimony of Jesus, by suffering in this
great day of Trial. The Testimony of which, we have heard and learned, believed
and received, from God the Father into all our hearts, is so precious to us, in
it is evidence of Peace, and Comfort, and Justification, and Salvation, in
Eternal life in our inward man, that we compare no afflictions, nor present
sufferings of our outward man, to the price and virtue thereof. For we can say
in the verity of our Souls, how ever it shall go with our outward man, in
respect of Tribulations, and Persecutions, yet in our inward man, we possess
the Peace, and Comfort, and Salvation of the everlasting God; and to bear forth
the Testimony of this in our age to the world, even of that Love and Life,
Mercy, Justification and Salvation which we have received, we can forgo
Liberty, Life, and all: For this is our duty to which we are called, and the
end for which we were born, to bear witness to the Truth, and for the holding
forth of this witness, we are given up in Soul, Body, and Spirit, to suffer the
loss of all, rather than to loose this Testimony-bearing to the view of the
world.

Wherefore, we beseech and exhort all of you, that have tasted of the loving
kindness of our God, That ye be faithful and valiant this day in the Cause of
God; not fearing the fury of the ungodly, nor the threats of enemies, nor the
terrors of this world, nor seeking to save your own lives; but in the faith and
patience, pressing forward in the race of Righteousness, till Mercy, Peace,
Justice, and true Judgment, run down as a stream, willing to suffer the loss of
all, that Truth and Righteousness may live upon earth, and the worship of the
true God be exalted, and all the contrary overturned, and this is the reward of
all the Saints Afflictions. Be faithful in your Trials, let E^tates, Relations,
Life, and all go, rather than the cause of Truth and Righteousness be
diminished of it is Glory, by the unfaithfulness of any this day. Surely our
hearts are zealous for this matter, and we are pressed in Spirit, to encourage
all the Lords people to put on all holy confidence in this day, and to cast
away all unbelief, doubtings and fears of this world, and to maintain the Truth
of God's worship in the assemblings of his people together, in the strength and
power of the Lord Jesus Christ; even to live in it, and to dye for it, to enjoy
God's pure Worship, and to suffer the loss of all, if called thereunto.

We know you are not ignorant concerning this Cause of God, which we thus
affect, and exhort you to be faithful in; It Is no other than the Testimony of a
pure Conscience toward our Creator, and that every person should follow
Christ, and obey him, and walk in the light and life of his Spirit, which he
has revealed in the heart; and that God should be feared and worshipped in a
clean Conscience, and that the Salvation of God may be testified of; This and
no other is the Cause of God, in which our Souls and Bodies are engaged, we
know no Ca^se upon earth, worth our Afflictions and Sufferings, nor for which
we will contend with any, save for the Salvation of God, and that his Justice
and Mercy, his Truth and Righteousness, his Way and Worship may be Exalted upon
earth, and all the contrary subdued by his mighty Power. This is the very cause
compared, to which our mortality is not to be accounted, even that we may
behold God's Salvation going forth in the Testimony of it to all Nations, and
that Nations and Peoples, may enjoy Justice and Truth, Liberty and Freedom, in
the pure worship of the living God; This is the Cause that must live, [the Lord
has spoken it] though for it we may die; for our All is adventured upon the
same.

But whilst our hearts are pouring forth daily Prayers toward God, and
Exhortations toward you, that you may be faithful to give public Testimony to
the Name, Truth, and Salvation of God; our Souls also desire that you all may
eat and drink of that spiritual food, which will cause your inward man to grow,
and that your own hearts may be kept pure and undefiled in his Presence, and
that the Seed of Life, with the fruits and blessings thereof may fill your own
Souls; that while you are striving by patience and long suffering against your
outward enemies, no inward enemy of evil lusts or affections, strife or
divisions, or any thing of this world may enter into your bosoms to defile you.

Dearly Beloved alwaye^ h^ve a special regard unto your standing as to
Godward, and what increa^e of Life, Love, Peace and Comfort, ye daily receive
in your spiritual; man knowing, that by the inward virtue of the Fathers
presence, the Peace and Joy of God in your inward man daily receive^ from him,
by that must you stand in strength and dominion against all enemies within and
without. Therefore, feel the Seed of God, and it is growth and incre^se in your
own hea^ts, that you may have perfect Peace and Union with God in Spirit, while
ye are hearing public Testimony, by doing or suffering for his Truth and Name.

J. C. And Brethren,
our hearts and Souls reach unto, and dearly Salute you all; for while we
remember the Lord and his goodness unto us, we cannot forget you, no not the
least babe and little one amongst you all, for what are we, or you, or all of
us together, jointly, or apart; but what we are in his life, love and peace,
that endures for ever? whose Mercies, Glory, Riches and Goodness, as so many
sparkling Diamonds and Jems of Value, adorn our Crown and make it Glorious, and
every one does shine with Luster and Beauty in the eyes of all that behold us;
and whilst we are so Adorned, may we not say, our cloathings are white and
fine, such as are in Kings Houses, and our attire no other than what becomes
Princes? and what ever we have been it matters not, except to set forth the
favor and goodness of him, that has so raised us from the dunghill amongst the
Beggars, to sit upon Thrones in Glory with Princes? and to show how the Angel
of Gods presence has saved, and taken us from our begging state, at the Rich
man's ga^e, like so many Lazaruses, bruised and wounded, from head to foot; and
carried us into Abraham's bosom, where we are at Rest, praising our God, and our
King of Riches and Mercy for ever.

Dear Friends, we write unto you all, that you may partake with us of the same
life, glory, rest and peace, and not only drops and sprinklings of the same,
but full measure, heaped up, and running over. For you are our witnesses, that
we, with the rest of our Faithful brethren, have not withheld from you, the
whole Counsel of God revealed to us, and in us, according to the good pleasure
of our Lord and Master; neither have we kept back from declaring to you his
Mind, and the mysteries of his Kingdom, yea, his hidden mysteries; (which have
been hid in God since the world began) and that in season, and out of season,
at all times and places, as he has given us opportunities, and required us so
to do; and that not in words, which man's wisdom teaches, (lest thereby we
should make void the Cross of Christ), but in plainness and simplicity, that
God's Witness in every Conscience might answer us, and we unto every Conscience
might be made manifest in God's fight, as we know we are this day, and we have
our reward, from the Lord of the Harvest that sent us forth; and this adds to
our comfort in this day, that we were faithful unto our God in what he
committed to our charge: And now, what is o^rs, and our Brethrens reward, and
Crown of rejoicing, but this, That you stand faithful in this time of Trial?
for you know we have not been like unto those who have begotten into the airy
Spirit, that so you might be always kept in the uncertainty, ever learning,
but never get ability to learn and perform what you have been taught; for what
we have received from Christ, by virtue of his Resurrection and Assention, is
perfect, and has been Ministered unto you, for the perfecting of you all, with
the rest of the Sanctified ones in Christ Jesus, until you all come to a
perfect man in Christ, even unto the fullness of the measure of the stature of
Christ. For which we pray, and desire of our God and Father for you all.

Let your Meetings be in God's fear and Counsel, as at other times, never
heeding what man can do unto you; but still be you all followers of that which
is good, and then, who can, or shall harm you? Keep in the Love to, and unity
with that of God in all: Let the witness of God in all answer your words and
actions, rendering to none evil for evil, but overcoming the evil with the
good; so shall you be known to be the servants of the Living God, and followers
of the Lamb as dear children. And be terrified in nothing, as from any of the
sons of men, that can befall you; for all your hairs are numbered, and not one
shall fall, without Gods Providence; neither shall the wrath of the wicked be
unbounded; but what ever turns not to his praise, that he will restrain, and
the Day of your Deliverance hastneth: only look not you out, but keep close
unto the Lord, with your eyes only toward him, and not upon, or unto any
temporal, or visible thing; but alone unto the Lord God of Life, and unto the
measure of himself made manifest in your own hearts; for unto That you were
directed at the beginning, and in It is your safety and preservation unto the
end.

J. P.


And Dear Brethren, the Lord God Almighty, who is our alone Salvation, having
laid the thoughts of the Cause of our sufferings near unto the Secrets of his
own Soul, utters his Voice out of Sion, to you his Children, in his City
Jerusalem, saying, S^and up ye babes of my blessings, and you sons and
daughters of my love, Gird, Gird on Strength in this day of my battle; for lo,
My Banner is over you, My Standerd is with you, My Ensign is displaid amongst
you, and My everlasting Power and Omnipotency attends you: And it shall not
fail you, I will not leave you in the day of Adversity, nor forsake you in the
time of Captivity; for I have Chosen you, I have Called you, I have Purchased
you, after the travail of my Soul for you; And Blood, even the everlasting
blood of the Covenant of my life was paid as a Ransom for you; and now you are
no more your Own, but Mine; and I cannot be Hid, nor Separated from you, but as
I am faithful, I will be with you; as you have had me your God in all your
Tribulations and sufferings, wherein I did bear both you, and your Griefs, and
all your Afflictions in the yearning Bowels of my Tenderness; which yet I will
Break, I will Break, I will Break, more infinitely open unto you, which shall
melt, and dissolve you, and make you stream to me, as I am in flameing streams
of love and life toward you; I will reach you in your Holes; Bolts, nor bars
of Brass or Iron, nor walls like Mountains shall shut me from you; but in your
Denns and Dungeons I will come in among you, and walk in the midst of you, and
you shall know that I am the Comforter of your Hearts, and the Rejoycer and
Gladder of your Spirits, in all the times of your needs: And whilst the Yoke is
upon your Necks, and the oppressive Burdens upon your Backs, and I bearing both
you, and your Burdens over the Raging Seas, that are angry at my Voice, and
troubled at the Breathings of my life: I will trouble the Hosts of the
Philistims, their Horses shall fail them, their Chariots shall not stand in any
stead unto them, for I will Break the Wheels and the Axeltrees, and they shall
fall, they shall fall, they shall fall, I the Jehovah of Israel, the mighty God
of little Jacob have spoken it, and it shall surely come to pass, and you shall
be delivered by the Hand of my Power says the Lord. And therefore sing you
Lambs, and Rejoice you my little tender babes in that I have Traveled for you,
and born and brought you forth unto the day of my glory, in the Glory and the
Excellency thereof, to witness my Name of Power, which will scatter all the
chaff that is heaped up as Mountains against you that you, whom I have planted
may prosper as a fruitful Vineyard, That the abundance of the fruits of
blessedness, in the power of my Righteousness, may be brought forth in you, to
your Joy, and mine Honor, even for ever.

Ah Brethren, our very Hearts and Souls are overcome, and ravished, whilst we
consider the endless love, and everlasting riches of the favors and mercies of
our FATHER toward us; and what he has ready in his Hand to deal bountifully
unto us; yet but a little, but a little, and he will give it, and make the
emptiest Vessel as an overrunning River, whose Banks cannot contein the
Streams for fullness. It is his love, his love, even his endless everlasting
Love that over-powers us, which is not conteinable within us, but must run, and
flow, from the Movings of the great Oceans, as the swiftest streams into your
tender bosoms, that you may he refreshed in us, in which the Answer will
return into our Bowels, and our Joy will thereby be augmented, and increased:
And we trust in the pure living sense of all, our hearts shall be always full
of the praise of our God, who in all his blessed works, is worthy of all
Honor, and everlasting Thanksgiving, and Glory, even of us, and all his Saints
and Children for evermore; who, in him, are yours to serve, both Him, and You,
in doing and suffering, whatsoever is his good pleasure concerning us: And in
him, everlasting Blessings and Peace be multiplied to you all. Amen.

E.B. J.C. J.P.

Newgate Prison, the 12th. of the 4th. Month 1662.

The Cogitations of my heart have been many, deep, and ponderous, some Months,
Weeks and Days, concerning his People, which he has raised to bear TESTIMONY
unto his Name, in this the day of his Power: And Intercession has been made
often for them to the Lord, and a patient waiting to know his Mind concerning
them for the time to come, which often I received Satisfaction in, as to my
self; but yet still something I was drawn by the Lord to wait for, that I might
comfort and strengthen his Flock by an assured Testimony. And while I was
waiting out of all Visible things, and quite out of the World, in my Spirit,
and my heart upon nothing but the Living God, the Lord opened the springs of
the great Deep, and overflowed my whole Heart with Life and Love, and my Eyes
were as a Fountain, because of tears of Joy, because of his Heritage: Of whom
he showed me, and spoke unto me, in a full fresh living Power, and a holy full
Testimony; so that my heart was ravished therewith, with Joy unspeakable, and I
was out of the Body with God, in his Heavenly Paradise; Where I saw, and felt
things Unutterable, beyond all demonstration, or speech. At last the Life
closed with my Understanding, and my spirit listened unto him; And the
everlasting God said, Shall I hide any thing from them that seek my face in
Righteousness? Nay, I will manifest it to them that fear me: I will speak, Do
thou listen, and publish it amongst all my People, that they may be Comforted,
and thou Satisfied. And thus said the Living God of Heaven and Earth.

Upon the 28th. of the 3d. Month, 1662.
The Sun shall leave its shining Brightness, and cease to give light to the
World; and the Moon shall be altogether Darkness, and give no light unto the
Night; the Stars shall cease to know their Office, or Place; My Covenant with
Day and Night, Times and Seasons shall sooner come to an end, than the Covenant
I have made with this People (into which they are entered with me) shall End, or
be Broken, and my Word is Unchangeable; yea, though the powers of Darkness, and
Hell combine against them, and the Jaws of Death open its mouth, yet I will
deliver them, and lead them through all; I will Con^ound their Enemies, as I
did in Jacob, and Scatter them, as I did in Israel, in the days of Old; I will
take their Enemies, and I will hurl them hither, and thither from me, even as
stories are hurled out of a Sling; and the memorial of this Nation, which is
holy unto me, shall Never be Rooted out, but shall Live through Ages, as A
cloud of Witnesses in Generations to come. I have brought them to the birth, I
have brought them forth, I have swadled them, and they are Mine; I will nourish
them, and carry them as on Eagles wings; and though Clouds gather against them,
I will make my way Through them, and though darkness gather together on a heap,
and Tempests gender, I will Scatter them as with an East wind, and Nations
shall know they are My Inheritance, and they shall know I am the Living God,
who will plead their Cause withal that Rise up in Opposition against them.

These Words are Holy, Faithful, Eternal, Good, and True. Blessed are they that
Hear and Believe unto the End. And because of them no strength was left in me
for a while; but at last, my Heart was filled with Joy, even as when the Ark of
God was brought from the house of Obed Edom, when David danced before it for
Gladness, and Israel shouted for Joy.

Fran. Howgill.

THE END.

