SERMONS AND DISCOURSES: Some of which Never before Printed.

BY JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Lincoln's Inn, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The Third Volume.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, and W. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXVII.

The Texts of each Sermon.
SERMON I. LUke IX. 55, 56. But he turned and rebuked them, and said, ye know
not what manner of Spirit ye are of; For the Son of Man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. Page 1

SERMON II. John XIII. 34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Page 37

SERMON III. 1 John IV. 1. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into
the World. Page 69

SERMON IV. Hebrews VI. 16. And an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of
all strife. Page 113

SERMON V. Luke XX. 37, 38. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at
the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: For all
live to him. Page 157

SERMON. VI. 2 Cor. V. 6. Wherefore we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord. Page 215

DISCOURSE VII. A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament. On 1
Cor. XI. 26, 27, 28. Page 251

DISCOURSE VIII. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. Page 305

SERMON IX, X. Joshua XXIV. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom you will serve. Page 373, 405

SERMON XI. Jeremiah XIII. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.
Page 441

SERMON XII. Matthew XXIII. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites;
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; and ye neither go in your
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Page 469

IMPRIMATUR.

C. Alston.
November 17. 1685.
A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, November. 5. 1678.
LUKE IX. 55, 56. But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of; For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.


AMONG many other things, which may justly recommend the Christian Religion to
the approbation of mankind, the intrinsic goodness of it is most apt to make
impression upon the Minds of serious and considerate men. The Miracles of it
are the great external evidence and confirmation of its truth and Divinity; but
the morality of its doctrines and precepts, so agreeable to the best reason and
wisest apprehensions of mankind, so admirably fitted for the perfecting of our
natures and the sweetning of the spirits and tempers of men, so friendly to
human Society and every way so well calculated for the peace and order of the
World. These are the things which our Religion glories in as her crown and
excellency. Miracles are apt to awaken and astonish, and by a sensible and
overpowering evidence to bear down the prejudices of Infidelity; but there are
secret charms in goodness which take fast hold of the hearts of men and do
insensibly, but effectually, command our love and esteem.

And surely nothing can be more proper to the occasion of this Day, than a
Discourse upon this Argument; which so directly tends to correct that
unchristian spirit, and mistaken zeal, which has been the cause of all our
troubles and confusions, and had so powerful an influence upon that horrid
Tragedy which was designed, now near upon fourscore years ago, to have been
acted as upon this Day.

And that we may the better understand the reason of our Savior's reproof here
in the Text, it will be requisite to consider the occasion of this hot and
furious zeal which appeared in some of his Disciples. And that was this; Our
Savior was going from Galilee to Jerusalem, and being to pass through a
Village of Samaria he sent messengers before him to prepare entertainment for
him; but the People of that Place would not receive him, because he was going
to Jerusalem: the Reason whereof was, the difference of Religion which then was
between the Jews and the Samaritans. Of which I shall give you this brief
account.

The Samaritans were originally that Colony of the Assyrians, which we find in
the Book of Kings was, upon the Captivity of the Ten Tribes, planted in Samaria
by Salmanassar. They were Heathens, and worshipped their own Idols, till they
were so infested with Lions, that for the redress of this mischief they desired
to be instructed in the worship of the God of Israel, hoping by this means to
appease the anger of the God of the Country; and then they worshipped the God
of Israel together with their own Idols; for so it is said in the History of
the Kings, That they seared the Lord, and served their own Gods.

After the Tribe of Judah were returned from the Captivity of Babylon, and the
Temple of Jerusalem was rebuilt, all the Jews were obliged by a solemn Covenant
to put away their Heathen Wives. It happened that Manasses, a Jewish Priest,
had married the Daughter of Sanballat the Samaritan; and being unwilling to put
away his Wife, Sanballat excited the Samaritans to build a Temple upon Mount
Gerizim near the City of Samaria, in opposition to the Temple at Jerusalem, and
made Manasses his Son-in-law, Priest there.

Upon the building of this new Temple there arose a great feud between the Jews
and Samaritans, which in process of time grew to so violent a hatred that they
would not so much as show common civility to one another. And this was the
reason why the Samaritans would not receive our Savior in his journey, because
they perceived he was going to worship at Jerusalem.

At this uncivil usage of our Savior, two of his Disciples, James and John,
presently take fire, and out of a well-meaning zeal for the honor of their
Master, and of the true God, and of Jerusalem the true place of his worship,
they are immediately for dispatching out of the way these Enemies of God, and
Christ, and the true Religion; these Heretics and Schismatics, for so they
called one another. And to this end they desire our Savior to give them power
to call for fire from Heaven to consume them, as Elias had done in a like case,
and that too not far from Samaria; and it is not improbable that their being so
near the place where Elias had done the like before, might prompt them to this
request.

Our Savior seeing them in this heat notwithstanding all the reasons they
pretended for their passion, and for all they sheltered themselves under the
great Example of Elias, does very calmly but severely reprove this temper of
theirs, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of: for the Son of Man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Grotius observes, that these two excellent Sentences are lest out in a
Manuscript that is in England. I cannot tell what Manuscript he refers to, but
if it were a Copy written out in the height of Popery, no wonder if some
zealous Transcriber offended at this passage, struck it out of the Gospel,
being confident our Savior would not say any thing, that was so directly
contrary to the current Doctrine and practice of those times. But thanks be to
God, this admirable Saying is still preserved, and can never be made use of
upon a fitter occasion.

Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of: That is, Ye own your selves to be
my Disciples, but do you consider what spirit now acts and governs you; Not
that surely which my Doctrine designs to mould and fashion you into, which is
not a furious and persecuting and destructive spirit, but mild and gentle and
saving; tender of the lives and interests of men, even of those who are our
greatest Enemies: You ought to consider, That you are not now under the rough
and sour Dispensation of the Law, but the calm and peaceable Institution of the
Gospel; to which the spirit of Elias, though he was a very good man in his
time, would be altogether unsuitable. God p rmitted it then, under that
imperfect way of Religion, but now under the Gospel it would be intolerable:
For that designs universal love, and peace, and good will: and now no
difference of Religion, no pretense of zeal for God and Christ can warrant and
justify this passionate and fierce, this vindictive and exterminating spirit.

For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. He
says indeed elsewhere, that he was not come to send Peace, but a Sword; which
we are not to understand of the natural tendency of his Religion, but of the
accidental event and effect of it, through the malice and perverseness of men:
But here he speaks of the proper intention and design of his coming: He came
not to kill and destroy, but for the healing of the Nations; for the salvation
and redemption of Mankind, not only from the wrath to come, but from a great
part of the evils and miseries of this life: He came to discountenance all
fierceness and rage and cruelty in men, one toward another; to restrain and
subdue that furious and unpeaceable Spirit, which is so troublesome to the
world, and the cause of so many mischiefs and disorders in it: And to introduce
a Religion which consults not only the eternal Salvation of men's souls, but
their temporal peace and security, their comfort and happiness in this world.

The words thus explained contain this Observation, That a revengeful and cruel
and destructive Spirit, is directly contrary to the design and temper of the
Gospel, and not to be excused upon any pretense of zeal for God and Religion.

In the prosecution of this Argument, I shall confine my Discourse to these
Three heads.

First, To show the opposition of this spirit to the true* Spirit and design of
the Christian Religion.

Secondly, The unjustifiableness of it upon any pretense of zeal for God and
Religion.

Thirdly, to apply this Discourse to the occasion of this Day.

First, I shall show the opposition of this spirit to the true Spirit and
design of the Christian Religion: That it is directly opposite to the main and
fundamental Precepts of the Gospel, and to the great Paterns and Examples of
our Religion, our Blessed Savior and the Primitive Christians.

1. This spirit which our Savior here reproves in his Disciples, is directly
opposite to the main and fundamental Precepts of the Gospel; which command us
to love one another, and to love all men, even our very enemies; and are so far
from permitting us to persecute those who hate us, that they forbid us to hate
those who persecute us: They require us to be merciful as our Father which is
in Heaven is merciful; to be kind and tenderhearted, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven us: And to put on as the elect of God, bowels
of mercy, meekness and long-suffering, and to follow peace with all men, and to
show all meekness to all men; And particulary the Pastors and Governors of the
Church are especially charged to be of this temper, The servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men; apt to teach, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth. To all which Precepts, and many
more that I might reckon up, nothing can be more plainly opposite than inhumane
Cruelties and Persecutions, treacheroos Conspiracies and bloody Massacres, a
barbarous Inquisition, and a holy League to extirpate all that differ from us.
And instead of instructing in meekness those that oppose themselves to convert
men with fire and faggot, and to teach them as Gideon did the men of Succoth
with briars and thorns; and instead of waiting for their repentance, and
endeavoring to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, to put them quick
into his hands, and to dispatch them to Hell as fast as is possible. If the
precepts of Christianity can be contradicted, surely it cannot be done more
grossly and palpably than by such practices.

2. This spirit is likewise directly opposite to the great Paterns and Examples
of our Religion, our Blessed Savior, and the Primitive Christians. It was
prophesied of our Savior that he should be the Prince of peace, and should
make it one of his great businesses upon earth, to make peace in heaven and
earth, to reconcile men to God and to one another, to take up all those feuds
and to extinguish all those animosities that were in the world; to bring to
agreement and a peaceable demeanor one toward another those that were most
distant in their tempers and interests, to make the lamb and the wolf lie down
together, that there might be no more destroying nor devouring in all Goll's
holy mountain; that is, that that cruel and destructive spirit which prevailed
before in the world should then be banished out of all Christian societies.

And in conformity to these predictions, when our Savior was born into the
world the Angels sang that heavenly Anthem, Glory to God in the highest, peace
on earth, and good will among men. And when he appeared in the world his whole
life and carriage was gentle and peaceable, full of meekness and charity. His
great business was to be beneficial to others, to seek and to save that which
was lost; he went about doing good, to the bodies and to the souls of men: his
miracles were not destructive to mankind, but healing and charitable. He could,
if he had pleased, by his miraculous power have confounded his enemies, and
have thundered out death and destruction against the Infidel world, as his
pretended Vicar has since done against Heretics. But intending that his
Religion should be propagated in human ways, and that Men should be drawn to
the profession of it by the bands of love and the cords of a man, by the gentle
and peaceable methods of Reason and persuasion; he gave no example of a furious
zeal and religious rage against those who despised his Doctrine. It was
propounded to men for their great advantage, and they rejected it at their
utmost peril. It seemed good to the Author of this institution to compel no
man to it by temporal punishments. When he went about making proselytes he
offered violence to no man, only said, If any man will be my disciple, If any
man will come after me. And when his disciples were leaving him he does not set
up an Inquisition to torture and punish them for their defection from the
faith, only says, Will ye also go away?

And in imitation of this blessed Pattern the Christian Church continued to
speak and act for several Ages. And this was the language of the holy Fathers,
Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio, the Christian Law does not avenge it
self by the sword. This was then the style of Councils, Nemini ad credendum vim
infer, to offer violence to no man to compel him to the Faith. I proceed in
the

Second place, to show the Vnjustifiableness of this spirit upon any pretense
whatsoever of zeal for God and Religion. No case can be put with Circumstances
of greater advantage and more likely to justify this spirit and temper, than
the case here in the Text. Those against whom the Disciples would have called
for fire from heaven, were Heretics and Schismatics from the true Church;
they had affronted our Savior himself in his own person; the honor of God,
and of that Religion which he had set up in the World, and of Jerusalem which
he had appointed for the place of his worship were all concerned in this case:
so that if ever it were warrantable to put on this fierce and furious zeal,
here was a case that seemed to require it: But even in these circumstances our
Savior thinks fit to rebuke and discountenance this spirit, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of. And he gives such a reason as ought in all
differences of Religion, how wide soever they be, to deter men from this
temper, For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them;
that is, this Spirit is utterly inconsistent with the great design of Christian
Religion, and the end of our Savior's coming into the world.

And now, what has the Church of Rome to plead for her cruelty to men for the
cause of Religion, which the Disciples might not much better have pleaded for
themselves in their case? what has she to say against those who are the
objects of her cruelty and persecution, which would not have held against the
Samaritans? Does she practice these severities out of a zeal for truth, and for
the honor of God, and Christ, and the true Religion? Why, upon these very
accounts it was, that the Disciples would have called for fire from Heaven to
have destroyed the Samaritans. Is the Church of Rome persuaded that those whom
she persecutes are Heretics and Schismatics, and that no punishment can be
too great for such offenders? So the Disciples were persuaded of the
Samaritans; and upon much better grounds: Only the Disciples had some excuse in
their case, which the Church of Rome has not; and that was Ignorance: And this
Apology our Savior makes for them, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of: They had been bred up in the Jewish Religion, which gave some indulgence to
this kind of temper, and they were able to cite a great Example for themselves;
besides, they were then but learners and not thoroughly instructed in the
Christian Doctrine. But in the Church of Rome, whatever the case of particular
persons may be, as to the whole Church and the Governing part of it, this
ignorance is wilful and affected, and therefore inexcusable. For the Christian
Religion, which they profess to embrace, does as plainly teach the contrary as
it does any other matter whatsoever: and it is not more evident in the new
Testament that Christ died for sinners, than that Christians should not kill
one another for the misbelief of any Article of revealed Religion; much less
for the disbelief of such Articles as are invented by men, and imposed as the
Doctrines of Christ.

You have heard what kind of Spirit it is, which our Savior here reproves in
his Disciples. It was a furious and destructive Spirit, contrary to Christian
charity and goodness. But yet this may be said in mitigation of their fault,
that they themselves offered no violence to their enemies: They left it to God,
and no doubt would have been very glad that he would have manifested his
severity upon them, by sending down fire from Heaven to have consumed them.

But there is a much worse Spirit than this in the world, which is not only
contrary to Christianity, but to the common Principles of Natural Religion, and
even to Humanity it self: Which by falsehood and perfidiousness, by secret plots
and conspiracies, or by open sedition and rebellion, by an Inquisition or
Massacre, by deposing and killing Kings, by fire and sword, by the ruin of
their Country, and betraying it into the hands of Foreigners; and in a word, by
dissolving all the bonds of humane Society, and subverting the peace and order
of the World, that is, by all the wicked ways imaginable does incite men to
promote and advance their Religion. As if all the world were made for them, and
there were not only no other Christians, but no other Men besides themselves;
as Babylon of old proudly vaunted, I am, and there is none besides me: And as
if the God, whom the Christians worship, were not the God of order but of
confusion; as if he whom we call the Father of mercies, were delighted with
cruelty, and could not have a more pleasing sacrifice offered to him than a
Massacre, nor put a greater honor upon his Priests than to make them Judges of
an Inquisition, that is, the Inventors and decreers of torments for men more
righteous and innocent than themselves.

Thus to misrepresent God and Religion, is to divest them of all their Majesty
and Glory. For if that of Seneca be true, that sine bonitate nulla majestas,
without Goodness there can be no such thing as Majesty, then to separate
goodness and mercy from God, compassion and charity from Religion, is to make
the two best things in the world, God and Religion, good for nothing.

How much righter apprehensions had the Heathen of the Divine Nature, which
they looked upon as so benign and beneficial to mankind, that (as Tully
admirably says) Dii immortales ad usum hominum fabrefacti pene videantur, The
nature of the immortal Gods may almost seem to be exactly framed for the
benefit and advantage of men. And as for Religion, they always spoke of it as
the great band of humane Society, and the foundation of truth, and fidelity,
and justice among men. But when Religion once comes to supplant moral
Righteousness, and to teach men the absurdest things in the world, to lie for
the truth, and to kill men for God's sake: when it serves to no other purpose,
but to be a bond of conspiracy, to inflame the tempers of men to a greater
fierceness, and to set a keener edge upon their spirits, and to make them ten
times more the children of wrath and Cruelty than they were by nature, then
surely it loses its nature and ceases to be Religion: For let any man say worse
of Atheism and Infidelity, if he can. And, for God's sake, what is Religion
good for, but to reform the manners and dispositions of men, to restrain humane
nature from violence and cruelty, from falsehood and treachery, from Sedition
and Rebellion? Better it were there were no revealed Religion, and that humane
nature were left to the conduct of its own principles and inclinations, which
are much more mild and merciful, much more for the peace and happiness of
humane Society; than to be acted by a Religion that inspires men with so wild a
fury, and prompts them to commit such outrages; and is continually supplanting
Government, and undermining the welfare of mankind; in short, such a Religion
as teaches men to propagate and advance it self by means so evidently contrary
to the very nature and end of all Religion.

And this, if it be well considered, will appear to be a very convincing way of
reasoning, by showing the last result and consequence of such Principles, and
of such a Train of Propositions, to be a most gross and palpable absurdity. For
example, We will at present admit Popery to be the true Religion, and their
Doctrines of extirpating Heretics, of the lawfulness of deposing Kings, and
subverting Government by all the cruel and wicked ways that can be thought of,
to be, as in truth they are, the Doctrines of this Religion: In this Case, I
would not trouble my self to debate particulars; but if in the gross, and upon
the whole matter it be evident that such a Religion as this is as bad or worse
than Infidelity and no Religion, this is conviction enough to a wise man, and
as good as a Demonstration, that this is not the true Religion, and that it
cannot be from God.

How much better Teachers of Religion were the old Heathen Philosophers? In all
whose Books and Writings there is not one Principle to be found of Treachery or
Rebellion; nothing that gives the least countenance to an Association or a
Massacre, to the betraying of ones Native Country, or the cutting of his
Neighbors throat for difference in opinion. I speak it with grief and shame,
because the credit of our common Christianity is somewhat concerned in it, that
Panaetius and Antipater and Diogenes the Stoic, Tully and Plutarch and Seneca
were much honester and more Christian Casuists, than the Jesuits are, or the
generality of the Casuists of any other Order, that I know of, in the Church of
Rome. I come now in the

Third and last place, to make some Application of this Discourse.

1. Let not Religion suffer for those faults and miscarriages which really
proceed from the ignorance of Religion, and from the want of it. That under
color and pretense of Religion, very bad things are done, is no argument that
Religion it self is not good: Because the best things are liable to be
perverted and abused to very ill purposes, nay the corruption of them is
commonly the worst; as, they say, the richest and noblest Wines make the
sharpest Vinegar. If the light that is in you, says our Savior, be darkness,
how great is that darkness?

2. Let us beware of that Church which countenanceth this unchristian spirit
here condemned by our Savior; and which teaches such Doctrines, and warrants
such Practices as are consonant thereto. You all know, without my saying so,
that I mean the Church of Rome; in which are taught such Doctrines as these,
That Heretics, that is, all who differ from them in matters of Faith, are to
be extirpated by fire and sword; which was decreed in the third and fourth
Lateran Councils, where all Christians are strictly charged to endeavor this
to the uttermost of their power, Sicut reputari cupiunt and haberi fideles, as
they desire to be esteemed and accounted Christians. Next their Doctrines of
deposing Kings, and of absolving their subjects from obedience to them; which
were not only universally believed, but practiced by the Popes and Roman Church
for several Ages. Indeed this Doctrine has not been at all times alike frankly
and openly avowed, but it is undoubtedly theirs; and has frequently been put
in execution, though they have not thought it so convenient at all turns to
make profession of it. It is a certain kind of Engine, which is to be screwed
up or let down as occasion serves; and is commonly kept like Goliah's Sword in
the Sanctuary behind the Ephod, but yet so that the High Priest can lend it out
upon an extraordinary occasion.

And for Practices consonant to these Doctrines, I shall go no further than the
horrid and bloody Design of this Day. Such a Mystery of Iniquity, as had been
hid from ages and generations; Such a Masterpiece of Villainy, as eye had not
seen, nor ear heard, nor ever before entered into the heart of man: So
prodigiously Barbarous, both in the substance and circumstances of it, as is
not to be paralleled in all the voluminous Records of Time from the foundation
of the World.

Of late years our Adversaries (for so they have made themselves without any
provocation of ours) have almost had the impudence to deny so plain a matter of
fact; but I wish they have not taken an effectual course by fresh Conspiracies,
of equal or greater horror, to confirm the belief of it with a witness. But I
shall not anticipate what will be more proper for another Day, but confine my
self to the present Occasion.

I will not trouble you with the particular Narrative of this dark Conspiracy,
nor the obscure manner of its discovery, which Bellarmin himself acknowledges
not to have been without a Miracle. Let us thank God that it was so happily
discovered and disappointed, as I hope their present design will be by the same
wonderful and merciful providence of God toward a most unworthy People. And
may the lameness and halting of Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Jesuits,
never depart from that Order, but be a Fate continually attending all their
villainous Plots and Contrivances.

I shall only observe to you, that after the discovery of this Plot the Authors
of it were not convinced of the evil, but sorry for the miscarriage of it. Sir
Everard Digby, whose very original Papers and Letters are now in my hands,
after he was in Prison, and knew he must suffer, calls it the best Cause; and
was extremely troubled to hear it censured by Catholics and Priests, contrary
to his expectation, for a great sin: Let me tell you, says he, what a grief it
is, to hear THAT so much condemned, which I did believe would have been
otherwise thought of by Catholics. And yet he concludes that Letter with these
words: In how full joy should I dye, if I could do any thing for the Cause
which I love more than my life? And in another Letter he says, he could have
said something to have mitigated the odium of this business, as to that Point
of involving those of his own Religion in the common ruin, I dare not (says
he) take that course that I could, to make it appear less odious, for diverse
were to have been brought out of danger, who now would rather hurt them than
otherwise. I do not think there would have been three worth the saving that
should have been lost. And as to the rest, that were to have been swallowed up
in that destruction, he seems not to have the least relenting in his mind about
them. All doubts he seems to have looked upon as temptations, and entreats his
Friends to pray for the pardoning of his not sufficient striving against
temptations since this business was undertook.

Good God! that any thing that is called Religion should so perfectly strip men
of all humanity, and transform the mild and gentle race of mankind into such
Wolves and Tigers, that ever a pretended zeal for Thy glory should instigate
men to dishononr Thee at such a rate! It is believed by many, and not without
cause, that the Pope and his Faction are the Antichrist. I will say no more
than I know in this matter; I am not so sure that it is he that is particularly
designed in Scripture by that Name, as I am of the main Articles of the
Christian Faith: But however that be, I challenge Antichrist himself, whoever
he be, and whenever he comes, to do worse and wickeder things than these.

But I must remember my Text, and take heed of imitating that Spirit which is
there condemned, whilst I am inveighing against it. And in truth it almost
looks uncharitably to speak the truth in these matters, and barely to relate
what these men have not blushed to do. I need not, nay I cannot, aggravate
these things; they are too horrible in themselves, even when they are expressed
in the softest and gentlest words.

I would not be understood to charge every particular person who is, or has
been in the Roman Communion, with the guilt of these or the like practices: But
I must charge their Doctrines and Principles with them; I must charge the Heads
of their Church, and the prevalent teaching and governing part of it, who are,
usually the contrivers and abetters, the executioners and applauders of these
cursed Designs.

I do willingly acknowledge the great Piety and Charity of several persons who
have lived and died in that Communion, as Erasmus, Father Paul, Thuanus, and
many others; who had in truth more, goodness than the Principles of that
Religion do either incline men to, or allow of. And yet he that considers how
universally almost the Papists in Ireland were engaged in that Massacre, which
is still fresh in our memories, will find it very hard to determine how many
degrees of innocence and good nature, or of coldness and indifferency in
Religion, are necessary to overballance the fury of a blind zeal and a
misguided Conscience.

I doubt not but Papists are made like other men. Nature has not geneally
given them such savage and cruel dispositions, but their Religion has made
them so. Whereas true Christianity is not only the best, but the best-natur'd
Institution in the world; and so far as any Church is departed from good
nature, and become cruel and barbarous, so far is it degenerated from
Christianity. I am loath to say it, and yet I am confident it is very true, That
many Papists would have been excellent Persons and very good Men, if their
Religion had not hindered them; if the Doctrines and Principles of their Church
had not perverted and spoiled their natural Dispositions.

I speak not this to exasperate You, worthy Patriots and the great Bulwark of
our Religion, to any unreasonable or unnecessary, much less unchristian
Severities against them: No, let us not do like them; let us never do any thing
for Religion that is contrary to it: But I speak it to awaken your care thus
far, That if their Priests will always be putting these, pernicious Principles
into the minds of the People, effectual Provision may be made, that it may
never be in their Power again to put them in Practice. We have found by
Experience, that ever since the Reformation they have been continually pecking
at the Foundations of our Peace and Religion: When God knows we have been so
far from thirsting after their Blood, that we did not so much as desire their
disquiet but in order to our own necessary safety, and indeed to theirs.

And God be praised for those matchless Instances which we are able to give of
the generous humanity and Christian temper of the English Protestants. After Q.
Marys Death, when the Protestant Religion was restored, Bishop Bonner
notwithstanding all his Cruelties and Butcheries was permitted quietly to live
and dye amongst us. And after the Treason of this Day, nay at this very time
since the discovery of so barbarous a Design, and the highest Provocation in
the World, by the treacherous Murder of one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, a very good Man and a most excellent Magistrate, who had been active in
the discovery of this Plot; I say, after all this, and notwithstanding the
continued and insupportable insolence of their Carriage and Behavior, even
upon this occasion, no Violence, nay not so much as any incivility, that I ever
heard of, has been offered to any of them. I would to God they would but
seriously consider this one difference between our Religion and theirs, and
which of them comes nearest to the Wisdom which is from above, which is
peaceable, and gentle, and full of mercy. And I do heartily pray, and have good
hopes, that upon this occasion God will open their eyes so far, as to convince
a great many among them, that that cannot be the true Religion which inspires
men with such barbarous minds.

I have now done, and if I have been transported upon this Argument somewhat
beyond my usual temper, the Occasion of this Day and our present circumstances
will, I hope, bear me out. I have expressed my self all along with a just
sense, and with no unjust severity, concerning these horrid Principles and
Practices; but yet with great pity and tenderness toward those miserably
seduced Souls, who have been deluded by them, and ensnared in them. And I can
truly say, as the Roman Orator did of himself upon another occasion, Me natura
misericordem, patria severum, crudelem nec patria nec natura esse voluit. My
nature inclines me to be tender and compassionate; a hearty zeal for our
Religion, and concernment for the public welfare of my Country, may perhaps
have made me a little severe; but neither my natural disposition, nor the
temper of the English Nation, nor the Genius of the Protestant, that is the
true Christian Religion, will allow me to be cruel.

For the future, Let us encourage our selves in the Lord our God; and commit
our Cause, and the keeping of our Souls to Him in well doing: And, under God,
let us leave it to the wisdom and care of His Majesty, and His two Houses of
Parliament, to make a lasting Provision for the security of our Peace and
Religion, against all the secret contrivances and open attempts of these sons
of violence. And let us remember those words of David, Psalm. 37.12, 13, 14, 15.
The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him, with his teeth:
The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. The wicked
have drawn out the sword, and bent their how, to cast down the poor and needy,
and to slay such as be of upright conversation: Their sword shall enter into
their own hearty, and their bows shall be broken.

And I hope, considering what God has heretofore done, and has now begun to
do for us, we may take encouragement to our selves against all the Enemies of
our Religion, which are confederated against us, in the words of the Prophet,
Isa. 8. 9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, and give ear, all ye of far Countries: Gird your selves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces: Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught: Speak the word and it shall not
stand. FOR GOD IS WITH US.

And now what remains, but to make our most devout and thankful acknowledgments
to Almighty God, for the invaluable blessing of our Reformed Religion, and for
the miraculous Deliverance of this Day, and for the wonderful Discovery of the
late horrid and barbarous Conspiracy against our Prince, our Peace, and our
Religion.

To Him therefore, our most gracious and merciful God, our Shield, and our
Rock, and our mighty Deliverer: Who has brought us out of the land of Egypt,
and out of the House of bondage; and has set us free from Popish Tyranny and
Superstition, a yoke which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear.

Who has, from time to time, delivered us from the bloody and merciless
designs of wicked and unreasonable men; and has rendered all the plots and
contrivances, the mischievous counsels and devices of these
worse-than-Heathens, of none effect.

Who did as upon this Day, rescue our King and our Princes, our Nobles and the
Heads of our Tribes, the Governors of our Church and the Judges of the Land,
from that fearful Destruction which was ready to have swallowed them up.

Who still brings to light the hidden things of darkness, and has hitherto
preserved our Religion and Civil interests to us, in despite of all the
malicious and restless attempts of our Adversaries.

Unto that great God, who has done so great things for us, and has saved us
by a mighty Salvation: Who has delivered us, and does deliver us, and, we
trust, will still deliver us: be glory and honor, thanksgiving and praise,
from generation to generation. And let all the people say Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED At the First General Meeting of the Gentlemen and others
born within the County of YORK.
To my Honored FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN, Mr. Hugh Frankland, Mr. Leonard
Robinson, Mr. Abrah. Fothergill. Mr. William Fairfax, Mr. Thomas Johnson, Mr.
John Hardesty, Mr. Gervas Wilcockes, Mr. George Pickering, Mr. Edward Duffeild,
Mr. John Topham, Mr. James Longbotham, Mr. Nathan. Holroyd.
Stewards of the Yorkshire Feast.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS Sermon, which was first Preached, and is now Published at your desires, I
dedicate to your Names, to whose prudence and care the direction and management
of this First general Meeting of our Countrymen was committed; Heartily
wishing that it may be some way serviceable to the healing of our unhappy
Differences, and the restoring of Unity and Charity among Christians,
especially those of the Protestant Reformed Religion. I am

Gentlemen, Your affectionate Countryman and humble Servant, Jo. Tillotson.

A SERMON PREACHED At the first general Meeting of the Gentlemen, and others,
in and near London, who were born within the County of York.
JOHN XIII. 34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this shall all
men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.


AS the Christian Religion in general, is the best Philosophy and most perfect
Institution of Life; containing in it the most entire and complete System of
moral Rules and Precepts that was ever yet extant in the World: so it
peculiarly excells in the Doctrine of Love and Charity; earnestly recommending,
strictly enjoining, and vehemently and almost perpetually pressing and
inculcating the excellency and necessity of this best of Graces and Virtues;
and propounding to us for our imitation and encouragement the most lively and
heroical Example of kindness and charity that ever was, in the Life and Death
of the great Founder of our Religion, the author and finisher of our Faith,
Jesus the Son of God.

So that the Gospel, as it has in all other parts of our Duty cleared the
dimness and obscurity of natural light and supplied the imperfections of former
Revelations, so does it most eminently reign and triumph in this great and
blessed virtue of Charity; in which all the Philosophy and Religions that had
been before in the World, whether Jewish or Pagan, were so remarkably defective.

With great reason then does our blessed Savior call this a new Commandment,
and assert it to himself as a thing peculiar to his Doctrine and Religion;
considering how imperfectly it had been taught, and how little it had been
practiced in the World before: A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

I shall reduce my Discourse upon these Words under these six Heads.

First, To inquire in what sense our Savior calls this Commandment of loving
one another a new Commandment.

Secondly, To declare to you the nature of this Commandment, by instancing in
the chief Acts and Properties of Love.

Thirdly, To consider the degrees and measures of our Charity with regard to
the several Objects about which it is exercised.

Fourthly, Our Obligation to this Duty not only from our Saviors Authority,
but likewise from our own Nature, and from the Reasonableness and Excellency of
the thing commanded.

Fifthly, The great Example which is here propounded to our imitation; as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another.

Sixthly and Lastly, The Place and Rank which this Precept holds in the
Christian Religion. Our Savior makes it the proper badge of a Disciple, the
distinctive mark and character of our Profession; By this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

In what sense our Savior calls this Commandment of loving one another a new
Commaudment; Not that it is absolutely and altogether New, but upon some
special accounts. For it is a branch of the ancient and primitive Law of
Nature. Aristotle truly observes that upon grounds of natural kindted and
likeness all men are friends, and kindly disposed toward one another. And it
is a known Precept of the Jewish Religion, to love our Neighbor as our selves.

In some sense then, it is no new Commandment; and so St. John, who was most
likely to understand our Savior's meaning in this particular, (all his
preaching and writing being almost nothing else but an inculcating of this one
Precept) explains this matter, telling us that in several respects it was, and
it was not a new Commandment, 1 John 2.7, 8. Brethren, I write no new
Commandment unto you, but that which ye had from the beginning, that is, from
ancient Times: But then he corrects himself; Again (...), but yet, a new
Commandment I write unto you. So that though it was not absolutely new, yet
upon diverse considerable accounts it was so, and in a peculiar manner proper to
the Evangelical Institution; and is in so express and particular a manner
ascribed to the teaching of the Holy Ghost, which was conferred upon Christians
by the Faith of the Gospel, as if there hardly needed any outward instruction
and exhortation to that purpose, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9 But as touching brotherly love,
ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are (...), divinely
taught and inspired to love one another.

This Commandment then of loving one another is by our Lord and Savior so much
enlarged as to the Object of it, beyond what either the Jews or Heathens did
understand it to be, extending to all mankind, and even to our greatest
enemies; so greatly advanced and heightened as to the Degree of it, even to the
laying down of our lives for one another; so effectually taught, so mightily
encouraged, so very much urged and insisted upon, that it may very well be
called a new Commandment: for though it was not altogether unknown to Mankind
before, yet it was never so taught, so encouraged; never was such an
illustrious Example given of it, never so much weight and stress laid upon it
by any Philosophy or Religion that was before in the world.

Nature of this Commandment, or the Duty required by it. And that will best be
done, by instancing in the chief Acts and Properties of Love and Charity. As,
humanity and kindness in all our carriage and behavior toward one another;
for Love smooths the dispositions of men so that they are not apt to grate upon
one another: Next, to rejoice in the good and happiness of one another, and to
grieve at their evils and sufferings; for Love unites the interests of men so
as to make them affected with what happens to another as if it were in some
sort their own case: Then, to contribute as much as in us lies to the happiness
of one another, by relieving one another wants and redressing their
misfortunes: Again, tenderness of their good name and reputation; a proneness
to interpret all the words and actions of men to the best sense; patience and
forbearance toward one another; and when differences happen, to manage them
with all possible calmness and kindness, and to be ready to forgive and to be
reconciled to one another; to pray one for another; and if occasion be, at
least if the public good of Christianity require it, to be ready to lay down
our lives for our brethren, and to sacrifice our selves for the furtherance of
their Salvation.

Degrees and measures of our Charity, with regard to the various Objects about
which it is exercised.

And as to the negative part of this Duty, it is to be extended equally toward
all. We are not to hate or bear ill will to any man, or to do him any harm or
mischief; Love works no evil to his neighbor. Thus much charity we are to
exercise toward all without any exception, without any difference.

And as to the positive part of this Duty, we should bear an universal
good will to all men, wishing every man's happiness, and praying for it as
heartily as for our own: And if we be sincere herein, we shall be ready upon
all occasions to procure and promote the welfare of all men. But the outward
acts and testimonies of our Charity neither can be actually extended to all,
nor ought to be to all alike. We do not know the wants of all, and therefore
our knowledge of persons, and of their conditions does necessarily limit the
effects of our Charity within a certain compass; and of those we do know, we
can but relieve a small part for want of ability. Whence it becomes necessary,
that we set some rules to our selves for the more discreet ordering of our
Charity; such as these: Cases of extremity ought to take place of all other.
Obligations of Nature, and nearness of Relation, seem to challenge the next
place. Obligations of kindness, and upon the account of benefits received, may
well lay the next claim. And then the Household of Faith is to be peculiarly
considered. And after these, the merit of the persons, and all circumstances
belonging to them, are to be weighed and valued: Those who labor in an honest
calling, but are oppressed with their charge; those who are fallen from a
plentiful condition, especially by misfortune, and the providence of God,
without their own fault; those who have relieved others, and have been
eminently charitable and beneficial to mankind; and lastly, those whose visible
necessities and infirmities of body or mind, whether by age or by accident, do
plead for them: All these do challenge our more especial regard and
consideration.

our Obligations to this Duty, not only from our Savior's Authority, but
likewise from our own Nature, and from the reasonableness and Excellency of the
thing commanded. This is the Commandment of the Son of God, who came down from
Heaven with full Authority to declare the Will of God to us. And this is
peculiarly His Commandment, which he urges upon his Disciples so earnestly,
and so as if he almost required nothing else in comparison of this. Joh. 15.12.
This is my Commandment, that ye love one another: And verse. 17. These things I
command you, that ye love one another. As if this were the end of all his
Precepts, and of his whole Doctrine, to bring us to the practice of this Duty.
And so St. John, the loving and beloved Disciple, speaks of it as the great
Message which the Son of God was to deliver to mankind, 1 John 3.11. This is
the Message which ye have heard from the beginning, that ye should love one
another. And ver. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment.
And chap. 4. v. 21. This Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
love his Brother also.

But besides the Authority of our Savior, we have precedent obligation to it
from our own Nature, and from the Reasonableness and Excellency of the thing it
self. The frame of our Nature disposes us to it, and our inclination to
Society, in which there can be no pleasure, no advantage, without mutual love
and kindness. And Equity also calls for it, for that we our selves wish and
expect kindness from others is conviction enough to us that we owe it to
others. The fulfilling of this Law is the great perfection of our Natures, the
advancement and enlargement of our Souls, the chief ornament and beauty of a
great mind. It makes us like to God, the best and most perfect and happiest
Being, in that which is the prime excellency and happiness and glory of the
Divine Nature.

And the advantages of this temper are unspeakable and innumerable. It freeth
our souls from those unruly and Troublesome and disquieting Passions which are
the great torment of our Spirits; from Anger and Envy, from Malice and Revenge,
from Jealousy and Discontent. It makes our minds calm and cheerful, and puts
our souls into an easy posture, and into good humor, and maintains us in the
possession and enjoyment of our selves: It preserves men from many mischiefs
and inconveniences, to which enmity and ill will do perpetually expose them: It
is apt to make Friends, and to gain Enemies, and to render every condition
either pleasant, or easy, or tolerable to us. So that to love others, is the
truest love to our selves, and does redound to our own unspeakable benefit and
advantage in all respects.

It is a very considerable part of our Duty, and almost equaled by our Savior
with the first and great Commandment of the Law. It is highly acceptable to
God, most beneficial to others, and very comfortable to our selves. It is the
easiest of all Duties, and it makes all others easy; the pleasure of it makes
the pains to signify nothing, and the delightful reflection upon it afterward
is a most ample reward of it. It is a Duty in every man's power to perform, how
strait and indigent soeever his fortune and condition be. The poorest man may
be as charitable as a Prince; he may have as much kindness in his heart, though
his hand cannot be so bountiful and munificent. Our Savior instanceth in the
giving of a cup of cold water, as a Charity that will be highly accepted and
rewarded by God. And one of the most celebrated Charities that ever was, how
small was it for the matter of it, and yet how great in regard of the mind that
gave it? I mean the Widow's two mites, which she cast into the Treasury: One
could hardly give less, and yet none can give more, for she gave all that she
had. All these excellencies and advantages of Love and Charity, which I have
briefly recounted, are so many Arguments, so many obligations to the practice
of this Duty.

the great Instance and Example which is here propounded to our imitation; As I
have loved you, that ye also love one another. The Son of God's becoming man,
his whole Life, his bitter Death and Passion, all that he did and all that he
suffered, was one great and continued proof and evidence of his mighty love to
mankind. The greatest Instance of love among men, and that too but very rare,
is for a Man to lay down his life for another, for his Friend; but the Son of
God died for all mankind, and we were all his enemies. And should we not
cheerfully imitate the Example of that great Love and Charity, the effects
whereof are so comfortable, so beneficial, so happy to every one of us. Had he
not loved us, and died for us, we had certainly perished, we had been miserable
and undone to all eternity.

And to perpetuate this great Example of Charity, and that it might be always
fresh in our memories, the great Sacrament of our Religion was on purpose
instituted for the Commemoration of this great love of the Son of God, in
laying down his life and shedding his precious blood for the wicked and
rebellious Race of mankind. But I have not time to enlarge upon this noble
Argument as it deserves.

last thing to be considered is the place and rank which this Precept and Duty
holds in the Christian Religion. Our blessed Savior here makes it the proper
badg and cognizance of our Profession; By this shall all men know that ye are
my Disciples, if ye love one another. The different Sects among the Jews had
some peculiar Character to distinguish them from one another: The Scholars of
the several great Rabbi's among them had some peculiar Sayings and Opinions,
some Customs and Traditions whereby they were severally known; And so likewise
the Disciples of John the Baptist were particularly remarkable for their great
Austerities. In allusion to these distinctions of Sects and Schools among the
Jews, our Savior fixes upon this mark and character whereby his Disciples
should be known from the Disciples of any other Institution, A mighty love and
affection to one another.

Other Sects were distinguished by little Opinions, or by some external Rites
and Observances in Religion; but our Savior pitcheth upon that which is the
most real and substantial, the most large and extensive, the most useful and
beneficial, the most humane and the most divine quality of which we are capable.

This was his great Commandment to his Disciples, before he left the World:
This was the Legacy he left them, and the effect of his last Prayers for them:
And for this end, among others, he instituted the Sacrament of his blessed Body
and Blood, to be a lively remembrance of his great Charity to mankind, and a
perpetual bond of Love and Union amongst his Followers.

And the Apostles of our Lord and Savior do upon all occasions recommend this
to us, as a principal Duty and Part of our Religion; telling us, That in Christ
Jesus, that is, in the Christian Religion, nothing will avail, no not Faith it
self, unless it be enlivened and inspired by Charity; That Love is the end of
the Commandment, (...), the end of the Evangelical declaration, the first Fruit
of the Spirit, the spring and root of all those Graces and Virtues which
concern our duty toward one another: That it is the sum and abridgement, the
accomplishment and fulfilling of the whole Law: That without this, whatever we
pretend to in Christianity, we are nothing, and our Religion is vain: That this
is the greatest of all Graces and Virtues, greater than Faith and Hope; and of
perpetual use and duration, Charity never fails.

And therefore they exhort us above all things to endeavor after it, as the
Crown of all other Virtues; Above all things have fervent charity among your
selves, says St. Peter: And St. Paul, having enumerated most other Christian
Virtues, exhorts us above all to strive after this, And above all these things
put on charity, which is the bond of perfection. This St. John makes one of the
most certain signs of our love to God, and the want of it an undeniable
argument of the contrary: If a man say I love God, and hates his brother, he
is a liar; for he who loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? This he declares to be one of the best evidences
that we are in a state of Grace and Salvation, Hereby we know that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.

So that well might our blessed Savior choose this for the badge of his
Disciples, and make it the great Precept of the best and most perfect
Institution? Other things might have served better for pomp and ostentation,
and have more gratified the Curiosity, or Enthusiasm, or Superstition of
mankind, but there is no quality in the World which upon a sober and impartial
consideration is of a more solid and intrinsic value.

And in the first Ages of Christianity, the Christians were very eminent for
this Virtue, and particularly noted for it; Nobis notam inurit apud quosdam, it
is a mark and brand set upan us by some, says Tertullian; and he tells us that
it was proverbially said among the Heathen, Behold how these Christians love
one another. Lucian, that great scoffer at all Religion, acknowledges in
behalf of Christians, that this was the great Principle which their Master had
instilled into them: And Julian, the bitterest Enemy that Christianity ever
had, could not forbear to propound to the Heathen for an example the charity of
the Galileans, for so by way of reproach he calls the Christians, who (says he)
gave up themselves to humanity and kindness; which he acknowledges to have
been very much to the advantage and reputation of our Religion: And in the same
Letter to Arsacius, the Heathen High Priest of Galatia, he gives this memorable
Testimony of the Christians, that their Charity was not limited and confined
only to themselves, but extended even to their Enemies; which could not be
said either of the Jews or Heathens: His words are these, It is a shame, that
when the Jews suffer none of theirs to beg, and the impious Galileans relieve
not only their own, but those also of our Religion, that we only should be
defective in so necessary a Duty. By all which it is evident that Love and
Charity is not only the great Precept of our Savior, but was in those first
and best Times the general practice of his Disciples, and acknowledged by the
Heathens as a very peculiar and remarkable quality in them.

The application I shall make of this Discourse shall be threefold.

1. With relation to the Church of Rome. 2. With regard to our selves who
profess the Protestant Reformed Religion. 3. With a more particular respect to
the occasion of this Meeting.
First, With relation to the Church of Rome: Which we cannot choose but think
of, whenever we speak of Charity and loving one another; especially having had
so late a discovery of their affection to us, and so considerable a testimony
of the kindness and charity which they designed toward us: such as may justly
make the ears of all that hear it to tingle, and render Popery execrable and
infamous, a frightful and a hateful thing to the end of the World.

It is now but too visible how grossly this great Commandment of our Savior is
contradicted, not only by the Practices of those in that Communion, from the
Pope down to the meanest Friar; but by the very Doctrines and Principles, by
the Genius and Spirit of that Religion, which is wholly calculated for cruelty
and persecution. Where now is that mark of a Disciple, so much insisted upon by
our Lord and Master, to be found in that Church? And yet what is the Christian
Church but the Society and Community of Christ's Disciples? Surely in all
reason, that which our Lord made the distinctive Mark and Character of his
Disciples, should be the principal mark of a true Church. Bellarmine reckons up
no less than fifteen marks of the rrue Church, all which the Church of Rome
arrogates to her self alone: But he wisely forgot that which is worth all the
rest, and which our Savior insists upon as the chief of all other, A sincere
Love and Charity to all Christians: This he knew would by no means agree to his
own Church.

But for all that, it is very reasonable that Churches as well as particular
Christians should be judged by their Charity. The Church of Rome would engross
all Faith to her self; Faith in its utmost perfection, to the degree and pitch
of Infallibility: And they allow no body in the world, besides themselves, no
though they believe all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, to have one grain
of true Faith; because they do not believe upon the Authority of their Church,
which they pretend to be the only foundation of true Faith. This is a most
arrogant and vain pretense; but admit it were true, yet in the Judgment of St.
Paul, Though they had all Faith, if they have not Charity, they are nothing.

The greatest wonder of all is this, that they who hate and persecute
Christians most, do all this while the most confidently of all others pretend
to be the Disciples of Christ, and will allow none to be so but themselves,
That Church which excommunicates all other Christian Churches in the world, and
if she could, would extirpate them out of the world, will yet needs assume to
her self to be the only Christian Church: As if our Savior had said, Hereby
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye hate, and excommunicate, and
kill one another. What shall he done unto thee, thou false tongue? thou empty
and impudent pretense of Christianity!

With relation to our seves, who profess the Protestant Reformed Religion. How
is this great Precept of our Savior not only shamefully neglected, but
plainly violated by us? And that not only by private hatred and ill will,
quarrels and contentions in our civil conversation and intercourse with one
another; but by most unchristian divisions and animosities in that common
relation wherein we stand to one another, as Brethren, as Christians, as
Protestants.

Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? And are we not in a
more peculiar and eminent manner Brethren, being all the children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ? Are we not all members of the same Body, and partakers
of the same Spirit, and Heirs of the same blessed Hopes of eternal life?

So that being Brethren upon so many accounts, and by so many bonds and
endearments all united to one another, and all traveling toward the same
heavenly Country, why do we fall out by the way, since we are Brethren? Why do
we not as becomes Brethren, dwell together in unity? but are so apt to quarrel
and break out into heats, to crumble into Sects and Parties, to divide and
separate from one another upon every slight and trifling occasion.

Give me leave a little more fully to expostulate this matter, but very calmly
and in the spirit of meekness, and in the name of our dear Lord who loved us
all at such a rate as to die for us, to recommend to you this new Commandment
of his, that ye love one another: Which is almost a new Commandment still, and
hardly the worse for wearing; so seldom it is put on, and so little has it
been practiced among Christians for several Ages.

Consider seriously with your selves; ought not the great matters wherein we
are agreed, our union in the Doctrines of the Christian Religion and in all the
necessary Articles of that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, in the
same Sacraments, and in all the substantial parts of God's worship, and in the
great Duties and Virtues of the Christian life, to be of greater force to unite
us, than difference in doubtful Opinions, and in little Rites and Circumstances
of worship to divide and break us?

Are not the things about which we differ in their nature indifferent, that is,
things about which there ought to be no difference among wise men? Are they not
at a great distance from the life and essence of Religion, and rather good or
bad as they tend to the Peace and Unity of the Church, or are made use of to
Schism and Faction, than either necessary or evil in themselves? And shall
little scruples weigh so far with us, as by breaking the Peace of the Church
about them to endanger our whole Religion? Shall we take one another by the
throat for an hundred pence, when our common Adversary stands ready to clap
upon us an Action of ten thousand talents? Can we in good earnest be contented
that rather than the Surplice should not be thrown out, Popery should come in;
and rather than receive the Sacrament in the humble but indifferent posture of
kneeling, to swallow the Camel of Transubstantiation, and adore the Elements of
Bread and Wine for our God and Savior? and rather than to submit to a Set Form
of Prayer, to have the Service of God performed in an unknown Tongue?

Are we not yet made sensible, at least in this our Day, by so clear a
Demonstration as the Providence of God has lately given us: and had not He
been infinitely merciful to us, might have proved the dearest and most
dangerous Experiment that ever was: I say, are we not yet convinced, what
mighty advantages our Enemies have made of our Divisions, and what a plentiful
harvest they have had among us, during our Differences, and upon occasion of
them; and how near their Religion was to have entered in upon us at once, at
those wide breaches which we had made for it? And will we still take counsel of
our Enemies, and choose to follow that course to which, of all other, they who
hate us and seek our ruin would most certainly advise and direct us? Will we
freely offer them that advantage which they would be contented to purchase at
any rate?

Let us after all our sad experience, at last take Warning to keep a steadfast
eye upon our chief Enemy, and not suffer our selves to be diverted from the
consideration and regard of our greatest danger by the petty provocations of
our Friends; so I choose to call those who dissent from us in lesser matters,
because I would fain have them so, and they ought in all reason to be so: But
however they behave themselves, we ought not much to mind those who only fling
dirt at us, whilst we are sure there are others who fly at our throats, and
strike at our very hearts.

Let us learn this wisdom of our Enemies, who though they have many great
differences among themselves, yet they have made a shift at this time to unite
together to destroy us: And shall not we do as much to save our selves?

-- fas est and ab host doceri. It was a Principle among the ancient Romans, a
brave and a wise People, donare inimicitias Reip. to give up and sacrifice
their private enmities and quarrels to the public good and the safety of the
Commonwealth. And is it not to every considerate man as clear as the Sun at
Noonday, that nothing can maintain and support the Protestant Religion amongst
us, and found our Church upon a Rock, so that when the rain falls, and the
winds blow, and the floods beat upon it, it shall stand firm and unshaken: That
nothing can be a Bulwark of sufficient force to resist all the arts and
attempts of Popery, but an established National Religion, firmly united and
compacted in all the parts of it? Is it not plain to every eye, that little
Sects and separate Congregations can never do it? but will be like a Foundation
of sand to a weighty Building, which whatever show it may make cannot stand
long, because it wants* Union at the Foundation, and for that reason must
necessarily want strength and firmness.

It is not for private persons to undertake in matters of public concernment;
but I think we have no cause to doubt, but the Governors of our Church
(notwithstanding all the advantages of Authority, and we think of reason too on
our side) are Persons of that Piety and Prudence, that for Peace sake, and in
order to a firm Union among Protestants, they would be content, if that would
do it, not to insist upon little things; but to yield them up, whether to the
infirmity, or importunity, or, perhaps in some very few things, to the
plausible exceptions of those who differ from us.

But then surely on the other side, men ought to bring along with them a
peaceable disposition, and a mind ready to comply with the Church in which they
were born and baptized, in all reasonable and lawful things, and desirous upon
any terms that are tolerable to return to the Communion of it: a mind free from
passion and prejudice, from peevish exceptions, and groundless and endless
scruples; not apt to insist upon little cavils and objections, to which the
very best things, and the greatest and clearest Truths in the world are and
always will be liable* And whatever they have been heretofore, to be henceforth
no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness of those who lie in wait
to deceive.

And if we were thus affected on all hands, we might yet be a happy Church and
Nation; if we would govern our selves by these Rules and walk according to
them, peace would be upon us, and mercy, and on the Israel of God.

Thirdly, I shall conclude all with a few words in relation to the occasion of
this present meeting. I have all this while been recommending to you, from the
Authority and Example of our Blessed Savior, and from the nature and reason of
the thing it self, this most exellent Grace and Virtue of Charity, in the most
proper Acts and Instances of it: But besides particular Acts of Charity to be
exercised upon emergent occasions, there are likewise charitable Customs which
are highly commendable, because they are more certain and constant, of a larger
extent, and of a longer continuance: As the Meeting of the Sons of the Clergy,
which is now formed and established into a charitable Corporation: And the
Anniversary Meetings of those of the several Counties of England, who reside,
or happen to be in London; for two of the best and noblest ends that can be,
the maintaining of Friendship, and the promoting of Charity. These, and others
of the like kind, I call charitable customs, which of late years have very much
obtained in this great and famous City. And it cannot but be a great pleasure
and satisfaction to all good men, to see so generous, so humane, so Christian a
disposition to prevail and reign so much amongst us.

The strange overflowing of vice and wickedness in our Land, and the prodigious
increase and impudence of infidelity and impiety, has of late years boaded
very ill to us, and brought terrible Judgments upon this City and Nation, and
seems still to threaten us with more and greater: And the greatest comfort I
have had under these sad apprehensions of Gods displeasure has been this, that
though bad men were perhaps never worse in any Age, yet the good, who I hope
are not a few, were never more truly and substantially good: I do verily
believe there never were, in any Time, greater and more real effects of
Charity; not from a blind superstition, and an ignorant zeal, and a mercenary
and arrogant and presumptuous principle of Merit, but from a sound knowledge,
and a sincere love and obedience to God, or, as the Apostle expresses it, out
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

And who, that loves God and Religion, can choose but take great contentment to
see so general and forward an inclination in People this way? Which has been
very much cherished of late years by this sort of Meetings: and that to very
good purpose and effect, in many charitable contributions disposed in the best
and wisest ways: and which likewise has tended very much to the reconciling of
the minds of men, and the allaying of those fierce heats and animosities which
have been caused by our Civil confusions, and Religious distractions. For there
is nothing many times wanting to take away prejudice, and to extinguish hatred
and ill will, but an opportunity for men to see and understand one another; by
which they will quickly perceive, that they are not such Monsters as they have
been represented one to another at a distance.

We are, I think, one of the last Counties of England that have entered into
this friendly and charitable kind of Society; Let us make amends for our late
setting out by quickening our pace, that so we may overtake and outstrip those
who are gone before us: Let not our Charity partake of the coldness of our
Climate, but let us endeavor that it may be equal to the extent of our
Country; and as we are incomparably the greatest County of England, let it
appear that we are so by the largeness and extent of our Charity.

O Lord, who have taught us that all our doings without Charity are nothing,
send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of
Charity, the very bond of Peace, and of all Virtues: Without which whosover
lives, is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ's
sake.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, April 4th, 1679.
1 JOHN IV. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


THIS caution and counsel was given upon occasion of the false Prophets and
Teachers that were risen up in the beginning of the Christian Church, who
endeavored to seduce men from the true Doctrine of the Gospel delivered by the
Apostles of our Lord and Savior. And these teaching contrary things, could not
both be from God: and therefore St. John calls upon Christians to examine the
Doctrines and Pretenses of those new Teachers, whether they were from God or
not. Believe not every Spirit; that is, not every one that takes upon him to be
inspired and to be a Teacher come from God: But try the Spirits; that is,
examine those that make this pretense, whether it be real or not; and examine
the Doctrines which they bring, because there are many Impostors abroad in the
World.

This is the plain sense of the Words: In which there are contained these four
Propositions.

First, That men may, and often do, falsely pretend to Inspiration. And this is
the reason upon which the Apostle grounds this Exhortation: Because many false
Prophets are gone out into the world, therefore we should try who are true, and
who are false.

Secondly, We are not to believe every one that pretends to be inspired, and to
teach a Divine Doctrine: This follows upon the former; because men may falsely
pretend to Inspiration, therefore we are not to believe every one that makes
this pretense. For any man that has but confidence enough, and conscience
little enough, may pretend to come from God. And if we admit all pretenses of
this kind, we lie at the mercy of every crafty and confident man to be led by
him into what delusions he pleases.

Thirdly, Neither are we to reject all that pretend to come from God. This is
sufficiently implied in the Text; for when the Apostle says believe not every
Spirit, he supposes we are to believe some; and when he says try the Spirits
whether they be of God, he supposes some to be of God, and that those which
are so are to be believed. These three Observations are so plain that I need
only to name them, to make way for the

Fourth, Which I principally designed to insist upon from these Words. And that
is this, That there is some way to discern mere pretenders to Inspiration, from
those who are truly and Divinely inspired: And this is necessarily implied in
the Apostles bidding us to try the Spirits whether they are of God. For it were
in vain to make any trial, if there be no way to discern between pretended and
real Inspirations.

Now the handling of this will give occasion to two very material Enquiries,
and useful to be resolved.

I. How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines: those which
really are from God, and those which only pretend to be so? II. To whom this
judgment of discerning does appertain?
I. How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines and Revelations?
for the clearing of this I shall lay down these following Propositions.

I. That Reason is the faculty whereby Revelations are to be discerned; or to
use the phrase in the text, it is that whereby we are to judge what Spirits are
of God, and what not. For all Revelation from God supposes us to be men, and
to be endued with Reason; and therefore it does not create new Faculties in us,
but propounds new Objects to that Faculty which was in us before. Whatever
Doctrines God reveals to men are propounded to their Understandings, and by
this Faculty we are to examine all Doctrines which pretend to be from God, and
upon on examination to judge whether there be reason to receive them as Divine,
or to reject them as Impostures.

2. All supernatural Revelation supposes the truth of the Principles of
Natural Religion. We must first be assured that there is a God, before we can
know that he has made any Revelation of himself: and we must know that his
Words are true, otherwise there were no sufficient reason to believe the
Revelations which he makes to us: and we must believe his Authority over us,
and that he will reward our obedience to his Laws, and punish our breach of
them; otherwise there would neither be sufficient obligation nor encouragement
to Obedience. These and many other things are supposed to be true, and
naturally known to us, antecedently to all supernatural Revelation; otherwise
the Revelations of God would signify nothing to us, nor be of any force with
us.

3. All Reasonings about Divine Revelations must necessarily be governed by the
Principles of Natural Religion: that is, by those apprehensions which men
naturally have of the Divine perfections, and by the clear Notions of good and
evil which are imprinted upon our Natures. Because we have no other way to
judge what is worthy of God and credible to be revealed by him, and what not,
but by the natural notions which we have of God and of his essential
perfections: which, because we know him to be immutable, we have reason to
believe he will never contradict. And by these Principles likewise, we are to
interpret what God has revealed; and when any doubt arises concerning the
meaning of any divine Revelation (as that of the Holy Scriptures) we are to
govern our selves in the interpretation of it by what is most agreeable to
those natural Notions which we have of God, and we have all the reason in the
World to reject that sense which is contrary thereto. For instance, when God is
represented in Scripture as having a humane shape, eyes, ears and hands, the
Notions which men naturally have of the Divine Nature and Perfections do
sufficiently direct us to interptet these expressions in a sense worthy of God,
and agreeable to his Perfection: And therefore it is reasonable to understand
them as rather spoken to our capacity, and in a Figure, than to be literally
intended. And this will proportionably hold in many other cases.

4. Nothing ought to be received as a Revelation from God which plainly
contradicts the Principles of Natural Religion, or overthrows the certainty of
them. For instance, it were in vain to pretend a Revelation from God, That
there is no God, because this is a contradiction in terms. So likewise to
pretend a command from God, That we are to hate and despise him; because it is
not credible that God should require any thing of Reasonable Creatures so
unsuitable to their Natures, and to their Obligations to him; Besides that such
a Law as this does tacitly involve a contradiction; because upon such a
supposition, to despise God would be to obey him; and yet to obey him is
certainly to honor him. So that in this case to honor God, and to despise
him, would be the same thing, and equal contempts of him. In like manner, it
would be vain to pretend any Revelation from God, That there is no life after
this, nor rewards and punishments in another World: because this is contrary to
those natural apprehensions which have generally possessed mankind, and would
take away the main force and sanction of the divine Laws. The like may be said
concerning any pretended Revelation from God, which evidently contradicts those
natural Notions which men have of good and evil; as, That God should command,
or allow Sedition and Rebellion, Perfidiousness and Perjury; because the
practice of these would be apparently destructive of the peace and happiness of
Mankind, and would naturally bring confusion into the World: But God is not the
God of Confusion, but of Order, which St. Paul appeals to as a Principle
naturally knowu. Upon the same account nothing ought to be entertained as a
Divine Revelation which overthrows the certainty of the Principles of natural
Religion; because that would take away the certainty of Divine Revelation it
self, which supposes the truth of those Principles. For instance, whoever
pretends any Revelation that brings the Providence of God into question, does
by that very thing make such a Revelation questionable. For if God take no care
of the World, have no concernment for humane affairs, why should we believe
that he makes any Revelation of his Will to men? And by this Principle Moses
will have false Prophets to be tried: Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise among you a
Prophet, and gives thee a sign or wonder, and the signor the wonder come to
pass whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods, and let us
serve them; thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet: And he gives
the reason of this, ver. 5. Because he has spoken unto you to turn you away
from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt. Here is a
case wherein a false Prophet is supposed to work a true Miracle to give credit
to his Doctrine, (which in other cases the Scripture makes the sign of a true
Prophet) but yet in this case he is to be rejected as an Impostor: Because the
Doctrine he teaches would draw men off from the worship of the true God who is
naturally known, and had manifested himself to the people of Israel in so
miraculous a manner, by bringing them out of the Land of Egypt. So that a
Miracle is not enough to give credit to a Prophet who teaches any thing
contrary to that natural Notion which men have, That there is but one God, who
only ought to be worshipped.

5. Nothing ought to he received as a Divine Doctrine and Revelation, without
good evidence that it is so: that is, without some Argument sufficient to
satisfy a prudent and considerate man. Now (supposing there be nothing in the
matter of the Revelation that is evidently contrary to the Principles of
Natural Religion, nor to any former Revelation which has already received a
greater and more solemn attestation from God) Miracles are owned by all Mankind
to be a sufficient Testimony to any Person, or Doctrine, that are from God.
This was the Testimony which God gave to Moses to satisfy the people of Israel
that he had sent him; Exed. 4.1, 2. Moses said, They will not believe me, nor
hearken unto my voice; for they will say, The Lord has not appeared unto thee.
Upon this God endues him with a power of Miracles, to be an evidence to them,
That they may believe that the God of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
has appeared unto thee. And all along in the Old Testament, when God sent his
Prophets to make a new Revelation, or upon any strange and extraordinary
message, he always gave credit to them by some Sign or Wonder which they
foretold or wrought. And when he sent his Son into the World, he gave Testimony
to him by innumerable great and unquestionable Miracles, more and grearer than
Moses and all the Prophets had wrought. And there was great reason for this:
because our Savior came not only to publish a new Religion to the World, but
to put an end to that Religion which God had instituted before. And now that
the Gospel has had the confirmation of such Miracles as never were wrought
upon any other occasion, no Evidence inferior to this can in reason control
this Revelation, or give credit to any thing contrary to it And therefore
though the false Prophets and Antichrists, foretold by our Savior, did really
work Miracles, yet they were so inconsiderable in comparison of our Savior's,
that they deserve no credit in opposition to that Revelation which had so clear
a Testimony given to it from Heaven by Miracles, besides all other concurring
Arguments to confirm it.

6. And Lastly, No Argument is sufficient to prove a Doctrine or Revelation to
be from God, which is not clearer and stronger than the Difficulties and
Objections against it: Because all assent is grounded upon Evidence, and the
strongest and clearest evidence always carries it: But where the evidence is
equal on both sides, that can produce nothing but a suspense and doubt in the
mind whether the thing be true or not. If Moses had not confuted Pharaoh's
Magicians by working Miracles which they could not work, they might reasonably
have disputed it with him who had been the true Prophet: But when he did works
plainly above the power of their Magic and the Devil to do, then they
submitted, and acknowledged that there was the Finger of God. So likewise,
though a person work a Miracle (which ordinarily is a good evidence that he is
sent by God) yet if the Doctrine he brings be plainly contrary to those natural
Notions which we have of God, this is a better objection against the truth of
this Doctrine than the other is a proof of it; as is plain in the case which
Moses puts, Deuteronomy. 13. which I mentioned before.

Upon the same account no man can reasonably believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation to be revealed by God: because every man has as great
evidence that Transubstantiation is false, as any man can pretend to have that
God has revealed any such thing. Suppose Transubstantiation to be part of the
Christian Doctrine, it must have the same confirmation with the whole, and that
is Miracles: But of all Doctrines in the world it is peculiarly incapable of
being proved by a Miracle. For if a Miracle were wrought for the proof of it,
the very same assurance which a man has of the truth of the Miracle, he has
of the falsehood of the Doctrine, that is, the clear evidence of his senses for
both. For that there is a Miracle wrought to prove, that what he sees in the
Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ, he has only the evidence of
his senses; and he has the very same evidence to prove, that what he sees in
the Sacrament is not the body of Christ, but bread. So that here arises a new
controversy, whether a man should believe his senses giving testimony against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or bearing testimony to the Miracle which
is wrought to confirm that Doctrine: For there is just the same evidence
against the truth of the Doctrine, which there is for the truth of the Miracle.
So that the Argument for Transubstantiation, and the Objection against it, do
just balance one another; and where the weights in Both Scales are equal, it
is impossible that the one should weigh down the other: and consequently
Transubstantiation is not to be proved by a Miracle; for that would be, to
prove to a man by something that he sees, that he does not see what he sees.

And thus I have endeavored, as briefly and clearly as I could, to give
satisfaction to the first Enquiry I propounded, viz. How we may discern between
true and counterfeit Revelations and Doctrines: I proceed now to the

To whom this judgment of Discerning does appertain. Whether to Christians in
general, or to some particular Person, or Persons, authorized by God to judge
for the rest of mankind, by whose judgment all men are concluded and bound up.
And this is an enquiry of no small Importance; because it is one of the most
fundamental Points in difference between Us and the Church of Rome. And however
in many particular Controversies, as concerning Transubstantiation, the
Communion in one kind, the Service of God in an unknown Tongue; the business of
Indulgences, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, they are not able
to offer any thing that is fit to move a reasonable and considerate man; yet in
this Controversy, concerning the Judge of Controversies, they are not
destitute of some specious appearance of Reason which deserves to be weighed
and considered. Therefore that we may examine this matter to the bottom, I
shall do these three things.

1. Lay down some Cautions and Limitations whereby we may understand how far
the generality of Christians are allowed to judge in matters of Religion. 2. I
shall represent the grounds of this Principle. 3. Endeavor to satisfy the
main Objection of our Adversaries against it: And likewise to show, that there
is no such reason and necessity for an universal infallible Judge as they
pretend.


First Private Persons are only to judge for themselves, and not to impose
their Judgment upon others, as if they had any Authority over them. And this
is reasonable, because if it were otherwise, a Man would deprive others of that
Liberty which he assumes to himself, and which he can claim upon no other
account, but because it belongs to others equally with himself.

Secondly, This liberty of judging is not so to be understood as to take away
the necessity and use of Guides and Teachers in Religion. Nor can this be
denied to be a reasonable limitation; because the knowledge of Revealed
Religion is not a thing born with us, nor ordinarily supernaturally infused
into men; but is to be learned as other things are. And if it be to be learned,
there must be some to teach and instruct others: And they that will learn, must
be modest and humble; and in those things, of which they are no competent
Judges, they must give credit to their Teachers, and trust their skill: For
instance, every unlearned man is to take it upon the credit of those who are
skillful, that the Scriptures are truly and faithfully translated; and for the
understanding of obscure Texts of Scripture, and more difficult points in
Religion, he is to rely upon those, whose proper business and employment it is
to apply themselves to the understanding of these things. For in these cases
every man is not capable of judging himself, and therefore he must necessarily
trust others: And in all other things he ought to be modest; and unless it be
in plain matters, which every man can judge of, he ought rather to distrust
himself than his Teacher.

And this respect may be given to a Teacher without either supposing him to be
infallibe, or making an absolute resignation of my judgment to him. A man may
be a very able Teacher (suppose of the Mathematics) and fit to have the
respect which is due to a Teacher, tho he be not infallible in those Sciences:
and because Infallibility is not necessary to such a Teacher, it is neither
necessary nor convenient that I should absolutely resign up my Judgment to him.
For though I have reason to credit him, within the compass of his Art, in
things which I do not know, I am not therefore bound to believe him in things
plainly contrary to what I and all mankind do certainly know. For example, if
upon pretense of his skill in Arithmetic, which I am learning of him, he
should tell me, That twice two do not make four, but five; though I believed
him to be the best Mathematician in the World, yet I cannot believe him in this
thing: Nor is there reason I should; because I did not come to learn this of
him, but knew as much of that before as he or any man else could tell me. The
case is the same in matters of Religion; in which there are some things so
plain, and lie so level to all capacities, that every man is almost equally
judge of them: As I shall have occasion farther to show by and by.

Thirdly, Neither does this liberty of judging, exempt men from a due
submission and obedience to their Teachers and Governors. Every man is bound to
obey the lawful Commands of his Governors: and, what by public consent and
Authority is determined and established, ought not to be gainsaid by private
Persons, but upon very clear evidence of the falsehood or unlawfulness of it.
And this is every man's duty, for the maintaining of Order, and out of regard to
the Peace and Unity of the Church; which is not to be violated upon every
scruple and frivolous pretense: And when men are perverse and disobedient,
Authority is Judge, and may restrain and punish them.

Fourthly, Nor do I so far extend this Liberty of judging in Religion, as to
think every man fit to dispute the Controversies of Religion. A great part of
people are ignorant, and of so mean capacity as not to be able to judge of the
force of a very good Argument, much less of the issue of a long Dispute; and
such persons ought not to engage in disputes of Religion; but to beg God's
direction, and to rely upon their Teachers; and above all to live up to the
plain dictates of natural Light, and the clear Commands of God's Word, and this
will be their best security. And if the providence of God have placed them
under such Guides as do seduce them into Error, their Ignorance is invincible,
and God will not condemn them for it, so long as they sincerely endeavor to do
the will of God so far as they know it. And this being the case of many,
especially in the Church of Rome, where Ignorance is so industriously
cherished, I have so much charity as to hope well concerning many of them: And
seeing that Church teaches and enjoins the people to worship Images, it is in
some sense charitably done of them not to let them know the second Commandment,
that they may not be guilty of sinning against so plain a Law. Having premised
these Cautions, I proceed in the

the grounds of this Principle of our Religion, viz. That we all^w private
persons to judge for themselves in matters of Religion.

First, Because many things in Religion, especially those which are most
necessary to be believed and practiced, are so plain that every man of ordinary
capacity, after competent instruction in matters of Religion (which is always
to be supposed) can as well judge of them for himself, as any man or company of
men in the world can judge for him. Because in these he has a plain Rule to go
by, Natural Light and clear Revelation of Scripture. And this is no new
Principle of the Protestants, but most expressly owned by the ancient Fathers:
Whatever things are necessary, are plain, says St. Chrysostom. All things are
plainly contained in Scripture which concern faith and a good life, says St
Austin. And nothing can be more reasonable than that those things which are
plain to every man should be left to every man's judgment. For every man can
judge of what is plain; of evident Truth and Falsehood, Virtue and Vice, of
Doctrines and Laws plainly delivered in Scripture, if we believe any thing to
be so, which is next to madness to deny. I will refer it to no man's Judgment
upon earth to determine for me, Whether there be a God or not? Whether Murder
and Perjury be Sins? Whether it be not plain in Scripture, That Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, That he became man, and died for us, and rose again? So that
there is no need of a Judge in these cases. Nor can I possibly believe any man
to be so absolutely infallible, as not to call his infallibility into question,
if he determines any thing contrary to what is plain and evident to all
mankind. For if he should determine that there is no God, or that he is not to
be woshipped, or that he will not punish and reward men, or, which is the case
that Bellarmin puts, that Virtue is Vice, and Vice Virtue; he would hereby take
away the very foundation of Religion; and how can I look upon him any longer as
a Judge in matters of Religion, when there can be no such thing as Religion if
he have judged and determined right?

Secondly, The Scripture plainly allows this liberty to particular and private
Persons to judge for themselves. And for this I need go no farther than my Text,
which bids men try the Spirits whether they be of God. I do not think this is
spoken only to the Pope or a General Council, but to Christians in general; for
to these the Apostle writes. Now if St. John had believed that God had
constituted an infallible Judge in his Church, to whose Sentence and
Determination all Christians are bound to submit, he ought in all reason to
have referred Christians to him for the trial of Spirits, and not have left it
to every man's private judgment to examine and to determine these things. But
it seems St. Paul was likewise of the same mind; and though he was guided by an
infallible Spirit, yet he did not expect that men should blindly submit to his
Doctrine: Nay, so far is he from that, that he commends the Bereans for that
very thing for which I dare say the Church of Rome would have checked them most
severely, namely, for searching the Scriptures to see whether those things
which the Apostles delivered were so or not: This liberty St. Paul allowed; and
though he was inspired by God, yet he treated those whom he taught like men.
And indeed, it were a hard case that a necessity of believing Divine
Revelations, and rejecting Impostures, should be imposed upon Christians; and
yet the liberty of judging, whether a Doctrine be from God or not, should be
taken away from them.

Thirdly, Our Adversaries themselves are forced to grant that which in effect
is as much as we contend for. For though they deny a liberty of judging in
particular points of Religion, yet they are forced to grant men a liberty of
judging upon the whole. When they of the Church of Rome would persuade a Jew,
or a Heathen, to become a Christian; or a Heretic (as they are pleased to call
us) to come over to the Communion of their Church, and offer Arguments to
induce them thereto; they do by this very thing, whether they will or no, make
that man Judge which is the true Church, and the true Religion. Because it
would be ridiculous to persuade a man to turn to their Religion, and to urge
him with Reasons to do so, and yet to deny him the use of his own judgment
whether their Reasons be sufficient to move him to make such a change. Now, as
the Apostle reasons in another case, If men be fit to judge for themselves in
so great and important a matter as the choice of their Religion, why should
they be thought unworthy to judge in lesser matters? They tell us indeed that a
man may use his judgment in the choice of his Religion; but when he has once
chosen, he is then for ever to resign up his judgment to their Church: But what
tolerable reason can any man give, why a man should be fit to judge upon the
whole, and yet unfit to judge upon particular Points? especially if it be
considered, that no man can make a discreet judgment of any Religion, before he
has examined the particular Doctrines of it, and made a judgment concerning
them. Is it credible, that God should give a man judgment in the most
fundamental and important matter of all, viz. To discern the true Religion, and
the true Church, from the false; for no other end, but to enable him to choose
once for all to whom he should resign and inslave his judgment for ever? which
is just as reasonable as if one should say, That God has given a man eyes for
no other end, but to look out once for all, and to pitch upon a discreet person
to lead him about blindfold all the days of his life. I come now to the

To Answer the main Objection of our Adversaries against this Principle; and
likewise to show that there is no such Reason and necessity for an universal
Insallible Judge, as they pretend. Now their great Objection is this, If every
man may judge for himself, there will be nothing but confusion in Religion,
there will be no end of Controversies: so that an universal infallible Judge is
necessary, and without this God had not made sufficient provision for the
assurance of men's Faith, and for the Peace and unity of his Church: Or, as it
is expressed in the Canon Law, aliter Dominus non videretur fuisse discretus,
otherwise our Lord had not seemed to be discreet. How plausible soever this
Objection may appear, I do not despair but if men will lay aside prejudice, and
impartially consider things, to make it abundantly evident, that this ground is
not sufficient to found an Infallible Judge upon. And therefore in answer to
it, I desire these following particulars may be considered.

Firft, That this which they say, rather proves what God should have done
according to their fancy, than what he has really and actually done. My Text
expressly bids Christians to try the Spirits, which to any man's sense does
imply that they may judge of these matters: But the Church of Rome says they
may not; because if this liberty were permitted, God had not ordered things
wisely, and for the best, for the peace and unity of his Church. But, as the
Apostle says in another case, What art thou, O man, that objectest against God?

Secondly, If this reasoning be good, we may as well conclude that there is an
universal infallible Judge set over the whole world in all Temporal matters, to
whose Authority all mankind is bound to submit. Because this is as necessary to
the peace of the World, as the other is to the peace of the Church. And men
surely are every whit as apt to be obstinate and perverse about matters of
Temporal Right, as about matters of Faith. But it is evident in fact and
experience that there is no such universal Judge, appointed by God over the
whole World, to decide all Cases of temporal Right; and for want of him the
World is fain to shift as well as it can. But now a very acute and scholastical
man that would argue that God must needs have done whatever he fancies
convenient for the World should be done, might by the very same way of
Reasoning conclude the necessity of an universal infallible Judge in Civil
matters, as well as in matters of Religion: And their aliter Dominus non
videretur fuisse discretus, otherwise God had not seemed to be discreet, is
every whit as cogent and as civil, in the one Case as the other.

Thirdly, There is no need of such a Judge, to assure men in matters of
Religion; Because men be sufficiently certain without him. I hope it may be
certain and clear enough That there is a God; and That his Providence governs
the World; and That there is another Life after this, though neither Pope nor
Council had ever declared any thing about these matters. And for Revealed
Doctrines, we may be certain enough of all that is necessary, if it be true
which the Fathers tell us, That all things necessary are plainly revealed in
the Holy Scriptures.

Fourthly, An infallible Judge, if there were one, is no certain way to end
Controversies, and to preserve the unity of the Church; unless it were likewise
infallibly certain, That there is such a Judge, and, Who he is. For till men
were sure of both these, there would still be a Controversy, whether there be
an infallible Judge, and who he is. And if it be true which they tell us, That
without an infallible Judge Controversies cannot be ended, then a Controversy
concerning an infallible Judge can never be ended. And there are two
Controversies actually on foot about an infallible Judge; One, Whether there be
an infallible Judge or not? which is a Controversy between Us and the Church
of Rome: and the other, Who this infallible Judge is? which is a Controversy
among themselves, which could never yet be decided: And yet till it be decided,
Infallibility, if they had it, would be of no use to them for the ending of
Controversies.

Fifthly, There is no such absolute need, as is pretended, of determining all
Controversies in Religion. If men would divest themselves of prejudice and
interest, as they ought, in matters of Religion, the necessary things of
Religion are plain enough, and men would generally agree well enough about
them: But if men will suffer themselves to be by assed by these, they would not
hearken to an infallible Judge, if there were one; or they would find out some
way or other to call his Infallibility into question. And as for doubtful and
lesser matters in Religion, charity and mutual forbearance among Christians
would make the Church as peaceable and happy, as perhaps it was ever designed
to be in this World, without absolute unity in Opinion.

Sixthly and Lastly, Whatever may be the inconveniences of men's judging for
themselves in Religion, yet taking this Principle with the Cautions I have
given, I doubt not to make it appear, that the inconveniences are far the least
on that side. The present condition of humane Nature does not admit of any
constitution of things, whether in Religion or Civil matters, which is free
from all kind of exception and inconvenience: That is the best state of things
which is liable to the least and fewest. If men be modest, and humble, and
willing to learn, God has done that which is sufficient for the assurance of
our Faith, and for the peace of his Church, without an infallible Judge: And if
men will not be so, I cannot tell what would be sufficient. I am sure there
were Heresies and Schisms in the Apostles Times, when Those who governed the
Church were certainly guided by an infallible Spirit. God has appointed Guides
and Teachers for us in matters of Religion, and if we will be contented to be
instructed by them in those necessary Articles and Duties of Religion, which
are plainly contained in Scripture; and to be counseled and directed by them
in things that are more doubtful and difficult, I do not see why we might hot
do well enough without any infallible Judge or Guide.

But still it will be said, Who shall judge what things are plain and what
doubtful? The answer to this, in my opinion, is not difficult. For if there be
any thing plain in Religion, every man that has been duly instructed in the
Principles of Religtion can judge of it, or else it is not plain. But there are
some things in Religion so very plain, that no Guide or Judge can in reason
claim that Authority over men, as to oblige them to believe or do the contrary;
no, though he pretend to Infallibility; no, though he were an Apostle, though
he were an Angel from heaven. S. Paul puts the case so high, Gal. 1.8. Though
we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than what you
have received, let him be accursed: which plainly supposes that Christians may
and can judge when Doctrines are contrary to the Gospel. What? not believe an
Apostle, nor an Angel from heaven, if he should teach any thing evidently
contrary to the plain Doctrine of the Gospel? If he should determine Virtue to
be Vice, and Vice to be Virtue? No; not an Apostle, nor an Angel; because such
a Doctrine as this would confound and overturn all things in Religion. And yet
Bellarmin puts this very Case, and says, If the Pope should so determine, we
were bound to believe him, unless we would sin against Conscience.

I will conclude this Discourse by putting a very plain and familiar Case; by
which it will appear what credit and authority is fit to be given to a Guide,
and what not. Suppose I came a Stranger into England, and landing at Dover took
a Guide there to conduct me in my way to York, which I knew before by the Mapp
to lie North of Dover: having committed my self to him, if he lead me for two
or three days together out of any plain Road, and many times over hedge and
ditch, I cannot but think it strange, that in a civil and well inhabited
Country there should be no Highways from one part of it to another: Yet thus
far I submit to him, though not without some regret and impatience. But then if
after this, for two or three days more he lead me directly South, and with my
face full upon the Sun at noon day, and at last bring me back again to Dover
Pere; and still bids me follow him: Then certainly no modesty does oblige a man
not to dispute with his Guide, and to tell him surely that can be no way
because it is Sea. Now though he set never so bold a face upon the matter, and
tell me with all the gravity and authority in the world, That it is not the Sea
but dry Land under the species and appearance of Water; and that whatever my
eyes tell me, having once committed my self to his guidance, I must not trust
my own senses in the case; it being one of the most dangerous sorts of
Infidelity for a man to believe his own eyes rather than his faithful and
infallible Guide: All this moves me not; but I begin to expostulate roundly
with him, and to let him understand that if I must not believe what I see, he
is like to be of no farther use to me; because I shall not be able, at this
rate, to know whether I have a Guide, and whether I follow him or not. In
short, I tell him plainly, that when I took him for my Guide, I did not take
him to tell me the difference between North and South, between a Hedge and a
Highway, between Sea and dry Land; all this I knew before, as well as he or
any man else could tell me; but I took him to conduct and direct me the nearest
way to York: And therefore after all his impertinent talk; after all his
Motives of Credibility to persuade me to believe him, and all his confident
sayings, which he gravely calls Demonstrations, I stand stiffly upon the shore,
and leave my learned and reverend Guide to take his own course, and to dispose
of himself as he pleases; but firmly resolved not to follow him. And is any
man to be blamed that breaks with his Guide upon these Terms?

And this is truly the Case, when a man commits himself to the Guidance of any
Person or Church: If by virtue of this Authority, they will needs persuade me
out of my senses, and not to believe what I see, but what they say; that Virtue
is Vice, and Vice Virtue, it they declare them to be so: And that because they
say they are Infallible, I am to receive all their Dictates for Oracles, tho
never so evidently false and absurd in the Judgment of all Mankind: In this
case there is no way to be rid of these unreasonable People, but to desire of
them, since one kindness deserves another, and all Contradictions are alike
easy to be believed, that they would be pleased to believe that Infidelity is
Faith, and that when I absolutely renounce their Authority, I do yield a most
perfect submission and obedience to it.

Upon the whole matter, all the Revelations of God, as well as the Laws of men,
go upon this presumption, that men are not stark fools; but that they will
consider their Interest and have some regard to the great concernment of their
eternal salvation. And this is as much to secure men from mistake in matters of
Belief, as God has afforded to keep men from sin in matters of Practice. He
has made no effectual and infallible provision that men shall not sin; and yet
it would puzzle any man to give a good Reason, why God should take more care to
secure men against Errors in belief, than against sin and wickedness in their
Lives.

I shall now only draw three or four Inferences from this Discourse which I
have made, and so conclude.

1. That it is every man's Duty who has ability and capacity for it, to
endeavor to understand the grounds of his Religion. For to try Doctrines is to
inquire into the grounds and reasons of them; which the better any man
understands, the more firmly he will be established in the Truth, and be the
more resolute in the day of Trial, and the better able to withstand the Arts
and assaults of cunning Adversaries, and the fierce storms of Persecution. And
on the contrary, that man will soon be moved from his stedfastness who never
examined the Grounds and Reasons of his belief. When it comes to the Trial, he
that has but little to say for his Religion will probably neither do nor
suffer much for it.

2. That all Doctrines are vehemently to be suspected which decline Trial, and
are so loath to be brought into the light; which will hot endure a fair
Examination, but magisterially require an implicit Faith: Whereas Truth is
bold and full of courage, and loves to appear openly; and is so secure and
confident of her own strength as to offer her self to the severest Trial and
Examination. But to deny all liberty of Enquiry and Judgment in matters of
Religion is the greatest injury and disparagement to Truth that can be, and a
tacit acknowledgment that she lies under some disadvantage, and that there is
less to be said for her than for Error.

I have often wondered why the People in the Church of Rome do not suspect
their Teachers and Guides to have some ill design upon them, when they do so
industriously debar them of the means of Knowledge, and are so very loath to
let them understand what it is that we have to say against their Religion. For
can any thing in the world be more suspicious than to persuade men, to put out
their eyes, upon promise that they will help them to a much better and more
faithful Guide? If any Church, any Profession of men, be unwilling their
Doctrines should be exposed to Trial, it is a certain sign they know something
by them that is faulty, and which will not endure the light. This is the
account which our Savior gives us in a like case, It was because men's deeds
were evil that they loved darkness rather than light. For every one that does
evil hates the light; neither comes he to the light lest his deeds should be
reproved: But he that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God.

3. Since Reason and Christianity allow this liberty to private persons to judge
for themselves in matters of Religion, we should use this privilege with much
modesty and humility, with great submission and deference to our Spiritual
Rulers and Guides, whom God has appointed in his Church. And there is very
great need of this Caution, since by experience we find this liberty so much
abused by many to the nourishing of Pride and Self-conceit, of Division and
Faction; and those who are least able to judge, to be frequently the most
forward and confident, the most peremptory and perverse: and instead of
demeaning themselves with the submission of Learners, to assume to themselves
the authority of Judges, even in the most doubtful and disputable matters.

The Tyranny of the Roman Church over the Minds and Consciences of men is not
to be justified upon any account; but nothing puts so plausible a color upon
it, as the ill use that is too frequently made of this natural Privilege of
men's judging for themselves in a matter of so infinite concernment, as that of
their eternal happiness. But then it is to be considered, that the proper
remedy in this Case, is not to deprive men of this Privelege, but to use the
best means to prevent the abuse of it. For though the inconveniences arising
from the ill use of it may be very great, yet the mischief on the other hand is
intolerable. Religion it self is liable to be abused to very bad purposes, and
frequently is so; but it* is not therefore best that there should be no
Religion: And yet this Objection, if it be of any force and be pursued home, is
every whit as strong against Religion it self, as against men's liberty of
judging in matters of Religion. Nay I add farther, that no man can judiciously
embrace the true Religion, unless he be permitted to judge, whether that which
he embraces be the true Religion or not.

4. When upon due Trial and: Examination we are well settled and established in
our Religion, let us hold fast the prosession of our Faith without wavering;
and not be like Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, through, the sleight of men, and the cunning craftiness of those
who lie in wait to deceive. And above all, let us resolve to live according to
the excellent Rules and Precepts of our holy Religion; let us heartily obey
that Doctrine which we profess to believe. We, who enjoy the Protestant
Religion, have all the means and advantages of understanding the Will of God,
free liberty and full scope of enquiring into it, and informing our selves
concerning it: We have all the opportunities we can wish of coming to the
knowledge of our Duty: The Oracles of God lie open to us, and his Law is
continually before our eyes; his word is nigh unto us, in our mouths, and in
our hearts; (that is, we may read it and meditate upon it) that we may do it:
The Key of Knowledge is put into our hands, so that if we do not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, it is we our selves that shut our selves out. And where
there is nothing to hinder us from the knowledge of our Duty, there certainly
nothing can excuse us from the practice of it. For the End of all knowledge is
to direct men in their duty, and effectually to engage them to the performance
of it:The great business of Religion is, to make men truly good, and to teach
them to live well. And if Religion have not this effect, it matters not of what
Church any man lists and enters himself; for most certainly, A bad man can be
saved in none. Though a man know the right way to Heaven never so well, and be
entered into it, yet if he will not walk therein, he shall never come thither:
Nay, it will be an aggravation of this man's unhappiness, that he was lost in
the way to Heaven, and perished in the very road to Salvation. But if we will
in good earnest apply our selves to the practice of Religion, and the obedience
of God's holy Laws, his Grace will never be wanting to us to so good a purpose.

I have not time to recommend Religion to you at large, with all its
advantages. I will comprise what I have to say in a few words, and mind them at
your peril. Let that which is our great concernment be our great care, To know
the Truth and to do it, To fear God and keep his Commandments. Considering the
Reasonableness and the Reward of Piety arid Virtue, nothing can be wiser; and
considering the mighty assistance of God's Grace, which he is ready to afford
to us, and the unspeakable satisfaction and delight which is to be had in the
doing of our duty, nothing can be easier* Nothing will give us that pleasure,
while we live; nothing can minister that true and solid comfort to us, when we
come to die: There is probably no such way for a man to be happy in this World;
to be sure, there is no way but this to escape the intolerable and endless
miseries of another World.

Now God grant that we may all know, and do in this our day, the things that
belong to our peace, for his Mercies sake in Jesus Christ; To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes held at KINGSTON upon THAMES, July 21. 1681.
TO THE Right Worshipful and my honored Friend JOSEPH REEVE, Esquire High Sherif
of the County of SURREY.
SIR,
WHen I had performed the Service which you were pleased to call me to in the
preaching of this Sermon, I had no thoughts of making it more public; And yet
in this also I was the more easily induced to comply with your desire, because
of the suitableness of the Argument to the Age in which we live; wherein as men
have run into the wildest extremities in other things, so particularly in the
matter of Oaths; some making conscience of taking any Oaths at all, and too
many none at all of breaking them.

To convince the great mistake of the one extreme, and to check the growing
evil and mischief of the other, is the chief design of this Discourse. To which
I shall be very glad if by God's blessing it may prove any-wise serviceable. I
am

Sir, Your very faithful and humble Servant, Jo. Tillotson.

The Lawfulness, AND Obligation of OATHS. A SERMON Preached at the Assizes held
at Kingston upon Thames, July 21. 1681.
HEB. VI. 16. And an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife*


THE Necessity of Religion to the support of humane Society in nothing appears
more evidently than in this, That the obligation of an Oath, which is so
necessary for the maintenance of peace and justice among men, depends wholly
upon the sense and belief of a Deity. For no reason can be imagined why any man
that does not believe a God, should make the least conscience of an Oath; which
is nothing else but a solemn appeal to God as a witness of the truth of what we
say. So that whoever promotes Atheism and Infidelity does the most destructive
thing imaginable to human Society, because he takes away the reverence and
obligation of Oaths: And whenever that is generally cast off, human Society
must disband, and all things run into disorder. The just sense whereof made
David cry out to God with so much earnestness, as if the World had been
cracking, and the frame of it ready to break in pieces, Psalm. 12. Help, Lord,
for the righteous man cease, and the faithful fail from among the children of
men: Intimating, That when Faith fails from among men, nothing but a particular
and immediate interposition of the Divine Providence can preserve the World
from falling into confusion. And our Blessed Savior gives this as a sign of
the end of the World, and the approaching dissolution of all things, when faith
and truth shall hardly be found among men, Luke 18.8. When the Son of man
comes, shall he find Faith on the earth? This state of things does loudly call
for his coming to destroy the World, which is even ready to dissolve and fall
in pieces of it self when these bands and pillars of humane Society do break
and fail. And surely never in any age was this sign of the coming of the Son of
man more glaring and terrible than in this degenerate Age wherein we live, when
almost all sorts of men seem to have broke loose from all obligations to faith
and truth.

And therefore I do not know any Argument more proper and useful to be treated
of upon this Occasion than of the Nature and Obligation of an Oath, which is
the utmost security that one man can give to another of the truth of what he
says; the strongest tie of fideility, the surest ground of Judicial
proceedings, and the most firm and sacred bond that can be laid upon all that
are concerned in the administration of public Justice; upon Judge, and Jury,
and Witnesses.

And for this reason I have pitched upon these Words; In which the Apostle
declares to us the great use and necessity of Oaths among men; an Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. He had said before, that for our
greater assurance and comfort God has confirmed his promises to us by an Oath;
condescending herein to deal with us after the manner of men, who when they
would give credit to a doubtful matter confirm what they say by an Oath. And
generally when any doubt or controversy arises between Parties concerning a
matter of fact, one side affirming and the other denying, an end is put to this
contest by an Oath, An Oath for confirmation being to them an end of all
strife: An Oath for confirmation, (...), for the greater assurance and
establishment of a thing: Not that an Oath is always a certain and infallible
decision of things according to truth and right, but that this is the utmost
credit that we can give to any thing, and the last resort of truth and
confidence among men: After this we can go no farther, for if the Religion of
an Oath will not oblige men to speak truth nothing will. This is the utmost
secutity that men can give, and must therefore be the final decision of all
contests; An Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.

Now from this assertion of the Apostle concerning the great use and end of
Oaths among men, I shall take occasion,

1. To consider the nature of an Oath, and the kinds of it. 2. To show the
great use and even necessity of Oaths, in many cases. 3. To vindicate the
lawfulness of them, where they are necessary. 4. To show the sacred obligation
of an Oath. I shall be as brief in these as the just handling of them will
bear.
nature of an Oath, and the kinds of it. An Oath is an invocation of God, or an
appeal to him as a witness of the truth of what we say. So that an Oath is a
sacred thing, as being an act of Religion and an invocation of the Name of God:
And this, whether the Name of God be expressly mentioned in it or not. If a man
only say, I swear, or I take my Oath, that a thing is, or is not, so, or so; or
that I will, or will not, do such a thing: Or if a man answer upon his Oath,
being adjured and required so to do: Or if a man swear by Heaven, or by Earth,
or by any other thing that has relation to God; in all these cases a man does
virtually call God to witness; and in so doing he does by consequence invoke
him as a Judge and an Avenger, in case what he swears be not true: And if this
be expressed, the Oath is a formal Imprecation; but whether it be, or not, a
curse upon our selves is always implied in case of perjury.

There are two sorts of Oaths, Assertory, and Promissory. An assertory Oath is
when a man affirms or denies upon oath a matter of fact, past, or present: When
he swears that a thing was, or is so, or not so. A promissory Oath is a promise
confirmed by an Oath, which always respects something that is future: And if
the promise be made directly and immediately to God, then it is called a Vow;
if to men, an Oath. I proceed to the

use and even necessity of Oaths, in many cases: Which is so great, that humane
Society can very hardly, if at all, subsist long without them. Government would
many times be very insecure, and for the faithful discharge of Offices of great
trust, in which the welfare of the Public is nearly concerned, it is not
possible to find any security equal to that of an Oath; because the obligation
of that reaches to the most secret and hidden practices of men, and takes hold
of them in many cases where the penalty of no humane Law can have any awe or
force upon them: And especially, it is (as the Civil Law expresses it) maximum
expediendarum litium remedium, the best means of ending controversies: And
where men's estates or lives are concerned, no evidence but what is assured by
an Oath will be thought sufficient to decide the matter, so as to give full and
general satisfaction to mankind. For in matters of so great concernment, when
men have all the assurance that can be had, and not till then, they are
contented to sit down and rest satisfied with it. And among all Nations an Oath
has always been thought the only peremptory and satisfactory way of deciding
such controversies.

third thing I proposed was to vindicate the lawfulness of Oaths, where they
are necessary. And it is a very strong inducement to believe the lawfulness of
them, that the unavoidable condition of humane affairs has made them so
necessary. The Apostle takes it for granted that an Oath is not only of great
use in humane affairs, but in many cases of great necessity, to confirm a
doubtful thing, and to put an end to controversies which cannot otherwise be
decided to the satisfaction of the Parties contending; An oath for confirmation
is to them an end of all strife And indeed it is hardly imaginable that God
should not have left that lawful, which is so evidently necessary to the peace
and security of Mankind.

But because there is a Sect, sprung up in our memory, which has called in
question the lawfulness of all Oaths, to the great mischief and disturbance of
humane Society, I shall endeavor to search this matter to the bottom, and to
manifest how unreasonable and groundless this Opinion is. And to this end, I
shall

First, Prove the lawfulness of Oaths from the authority of this Text, and from
the reasons plainly contained, or strongly implied in it.

Secondly, I shall show the weakness and insufficiency of the grounds of the
contrary Opinion; whether from Reason, or from Scripture, which last they
principally rely upon; and if it could be made out from thence would determine
the case.

1. I shall prove the lawfulness of Oaths from the authority of this Text, and
the reasons plainly contained, or strongly implied in it. Because the Apostle
does not only speak of the use of Oaths among men without any manner of censure
and reproof, but as a commendable custom and practice, and in many cases
necessary for the confirmation of doubtful matters, and in order to the final
decision of Controversies and Differences among men. For

First, He speaks of it as the general practice of Mankind, to confirm things
by an oath in order to the ending of differences. And indeed there is nothing
that has more universally obtained in all Ages and Nations of the World: than
which there is not a more certain indication that a thing is agreeable to the
Law of Nature and the best Reason of Mankind. And that this was no degenerate
practice of Mankind, like that of Idolatry, is from hence evident; that when
God separated a People to himself, it was practiced among them, by the holy
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and was afterward not only allowed; but
in many Cases commanded by the Law of Moses; which had it been a thing evil in
it self and forbidden by the Law of Nature, would not have been done.

Secondly. Another undeniable Argument from the Text of the lawfulness of Oaths
is, that God himself, in condescension to the Custom of men who use to confirm
and give credit to what they say by an Oath, is represented by the Apostle as
confirming his promise to us by an Oath, verse 13. When God made the promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by none greater, he swears by himself. For men
verily swear by the greater; and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of
all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: which he
certainly would not have done, had an oath been unlawful in it self. For that
had been to comply with men in an evil practice, and by his own example to give
countenance to it in the highest manner: But though God condescend to represent
himself to us after the manner of men, he never does it in any thing that is in
its own nature evil and sinful.

Thirdly, From the great Usefulness of Oaths in humane affairs, to give credit
and confirmation to our word, and to put an end to Contestations. Now that
which serves to such excellent purposes, and is so convenient for humane
society, and for mutual security and confidence among men, ought not easily to
be presumed unlawful, till it be plainly proved to be so. And if we consider
the nature of an oath, and every thing belonging to it, there is nothing that
has the least appearance of evil in it. There is surely no evil in it, as it
is an act of Religion; nor as it is an Appeal to God as a witness and avenger
in case we swear falsely; nor as it is a confirmation of a doubtful matter; nor
as it puts an end to strife and controversy. And these are all the essential
ingredients of an Oath, and the ends of it; and they are all so good, that they
rather commend it, than give the least color of ground to condemn it. I
proceed in the

Second place, to show the weakness and insufficiency of the grounds of the
contrary opinion; whether from Reason or from Scripture.

First, from Reason. They say the necessity of an Oath is occasioned by the
want of truth and fidelity among men. And that every man ought to demean
himself with that faithfulness and integrity as may give credit and
confirmation to his word; and then Oaths will be needless. This pretense will
be fully answered, if we consider these two things.

1. That in matters of great importance no other obligation, besides that of an
oath, has been thought sufficient amongst the best and wisest of men to assert
their fidelity to one another. Even the best men (to use the words of a great
Author) have not trusted the best men without it. As we see in very remarkable
instances, where Oaths have passed between those who might be thought to have
the greatest confidence in one another: As between Abraham and his old faithful
servant Eliezer, concerning the choice of a Wife for his Son: Between Father
and Son, Jacob and Joseph, concerning the burial of his Father in the Land of
Canaan: Between two of the dearest and most intimate Friends, David and
Jonathan, to assure their friendship to one another; and it had its effect long
after Jonathans death in the saving of Mephibosheth, when reason of State and
the security of his Throne seemed to move David strongly to the contrary; for
it is expressly said, 2 Samuel 21.7. that David spared Mephibosheth, Jonathan's
Son, because of the oath of the Lord that was between them; implying, that had
it not been for his Oath, other considerations might probably have prevailed
with him to have permitted him to have been cut off with the rest of Readiness
Children.

2. This Reason, which is alleged against Oaths among men, is much stronger
against God's confirming his promises to us by an Oath. For he who is truth it
self is surely of all other most to be credited upon his bare word, and his
oath needless to give confirmation to it; and yet he condescends to add his
oath to his word; and therefore that reason is evidently of no force.

Secondly, From Scripture. Our Savior seems altogether to forbid swearing in
any case, Matthew. 5.33, 34. Ye have heard that it has been said to them of old
time, thou shall not forswear thy self: but I say unto you swear not at all;
neither by heaven, etc. But let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay;
for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. And this Law St. James
recites, chap. 5. verse. 12. as that which Christians ought to have a very
particular and principal regard to; above all things my brethren swear not: And
he makes the breach of this Law a damning sin, lest ye fall into condemnation.
But the authority of our Savior alone is sufficient, and therefore I shall
only consider that Text.

And, because here lies the main strength of this opinion of the unlawfulness
of Oaths, it is very fit that this Text be fully considered; and that it be
made very evident, that it was not our Savior's meaning by this prohibition
wholly to forbid the use of Oaths.

But before I enter upon this matter, I will readily grant, that there is
scarce any Error whatsoever that has a more plausible color from Scripture,
than this; which makes the case of those who are seduced into it the more
pityable: But then it ought to be considered, how much this Doctrine of the
unlawfulness of oaths reflects upon the Christian Religion: since it is so
evidently prejudicial both to humane Society in general, and particularly to
those persons that entertain it: neither of which ought rashly to be supposed
and taken for granted, concerning any Law delivered by our Savior: Because
upon these terms it will be very hard for us to vindicate the divine wisdom of
our Savior's Doctrine, and the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. Of
the inconvenience of this Doctrine to humane Society, I have spoken already.
But besides this, it is very prejudicial to them that hold it. It renders them
suspected to Government, and in many cases incapable of the common benefits of
Justice and other privileges of humane Society, and exposes, them to great
penalties as the constitution of all Laws and Governments at present is, and it
is not easy to imagine how they should be otherwise. And which is very
considerable in this matter, it sets those who refuse Oaths upon very unequal
terms with the rest of Mankind, if where the estates and lives of men are
equally concerned, their bare testimonies shall* be admitted without an Oath,
and others shall be obliged to speak upon Oath: Nothing being more certain in
experience, than that many men will lie for their interest when they will not
be perjured, God having planted in the natural Consciences of men a secret
dread of perjury above most other sins. And this inconvenience is so great, as
to render those who refuse oaths in all cases almost intolerable to humane
Society. I speak not this either to bring them into trouble, or to persuade
them to measure truth by their interest: but on the other hand I must needs
say, that it is no Argument either of a wise or good man to take up any
opinion, especially such a one as is greatly to his prejudice, upon slight
grounds. And this very consideration, that it is so much to their
inconvenience, may justly move them to be very careful in the examination of
it.

This being premised, I come now to explain this Prohibition of our Savior;
and to this purpose, I desire these three things may be well considered.

First, That several circumstances of these words of our Savior do manifestly
show that they ought to be interpreted in a limited sense, as only forbidding
swearing in common conversation; needless and heedless oaths (as one expresses
it) and in general all voluntary swearing unless upon some great and weighty
cause, in which the glory of God and the good of the souls of Men is concerned.
For that in such cases a voluntary oath may be lawful, I am induced to believe
from the example of St. Paul, who uses it more than once upon such occasions;
of which I shall hereafter give particular Instances.

And this was the sense of Wise men among the Heathen, that men should not
swear but upon necessity and great occasion. Thus Eusebius, the Philosopher in
Stobaeus, counsels men. Some (says he) advise men to be careful to swear the
truth; but I advise principally* that men do not easily swear at all, that is,
not upon any slight but only upon weighty occasions; To the same purpose
Epictetus, Shun oaths wholly, if it be possible; if not, however as much as
thou can: And so likewise Simplicius in his Comment upon him, We ought wholly
to shun swearing, except upon occasions of great necessity: And Quintilian
among the Romans, In totum jurare, nisi ubi necesse est, gravi viro parum
convenit; To swear at all, except where it is necessary, does not well suit
with a wise man.

And, that this prohibition of our Savior's ought to be understood of oaths in
ordinary conversation, appears from the opposition which our Savior makes,
Swear not at all; but let your communication be yea, yea; That is, in your
ordinary commerce and affairs do not interpose oaths, but say and do. And this
is very much confirmed, in that our Savior does not under this general
Prohibition, instance in such oaths as are expressly by the name of God: The
reason whereof is this; The Jews thought it unlawful in ordinary communication
to swear expressly by the name of God, but lawful to swear by the Creatures, as
by Heaven and Earth, etc. So that our Savior's meaning is as if he had said,
You think you may swear in common conversation provided you do not swear by the
name of God; but I say unto you, let your communication be without oaths of any
kind: you shall not so much as swear by heaven or by earth, because God is
virtually invoked in every oath. And unless we suppose this to be our Savior's
meaning, I do not see what good Reason can be given why our Savior should only
forbid them to swear by the Creatures, and not much rather by the Name of God;
such oaths being surely of all others most to be avoided, as being the most
direct abuse and profanation of the Name of God.

Secondly, It is very considerable to the explaining of this Prohibition, that
there are the like general expressions in other Jewish Authors concerning this
very matter, which yet must of necessity be thus limited. Maimonides, from the
ancient Rabbis, gives this Rule, that it is best not to swear at all. And
Philo uses almost the same words. And Rabbi Jonathan comes very near our
Savior's expression, when he says The just man will not swear at all; not so
much as by the common Names of God, nor by his Attributes, nor by his Works, as
by Heaven, or the Angels, or the Law. Now it is not imaginable, that these
learned Jews should condemn Oaths in all cases, when the Law of Moses did in
many cases expressly require them. And therefore they are to be understood of
voluntary oaths in ordinary conversation. And that the Jews meant this by not
swearing at all, seems to be very plain from a passage in Josephus, who says
that the Sect of the Essenes forbad their Disciples to swear at all; and yet he
tells us at the same time, that they who were admitted into that Sect took an
oath to observe the Laws and Rules of it. So that they who forbad to swear at
all, allowed of Oaths imposed by the Authority of Superiors.

Thirdly, Which will peremptorily decide this matter, this Prohibition of our
Savior's cannot be understood to forbid all Oaths, without a plain
contradiction to the undoubted practice of the primitive Christians, and of the
Apostles, and even of our Lord himself. Origin and Tertullian tells us, that
the Christians refused to swear by the Emperor's Genius; not because it was an
Oath, but because they thought it to be Idolatrous: But the same Tertullian
says, that the Christians were willing to swear per salutem Imperatoris, by the
health and safety of the Emperor. Athanasius, being accused to Constantius,
purged himself by oath, and desired that his Accuser might be put to his Oath
sub attestatione veritatis, by calling the truth to witness; by which form
(says he) we Christians are wont to swear. But which is more than this, St.
Paul, upon weighty occasions, does several times in his Epistles call God to
witness for the truth of what he says; which is the very formality of an Oath.
God is my witness, Romans 1.9. As God is true, our word was not yea and nay, 2
Cor. 1.18. and v. 23. I call God for a record upon my Soul. Before God I lie*
not, Gal, 1.20. God is my record, Philip 1.8. God is my witness, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.
These are all unquestionable oaths; which we cannot imagine St. Paul would have
used, had they been directly contrary to our Savior's Law. And whereas some
defend this upon account of his extraordinary Inspiration, I cannot possibly
see how this mends the matter. For certainly it is very inconvenient to say
that they who were to teach the Precepts of Christ to others, did themselves
break them by Inspiration.

But I go yet farther, and shall urge an example beyond all exception.

Our Savior himself (who surely would not be the first example of breaking his
own Laws) did not refuse to answer upon Oath, being called thereto at his
Trial. So we find Matthew. 26.63. Yhe high Priest said unto him, I abjure thee by
the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God;
that is, he required him to answer this question upon Oath. For among the Jews,
the form of giving an oath to witnesses and others was not by tendering a
formal oath to them, as the custom is among us, but by adjuring them, that is,
requiring them to answer upon oath: As is plain from Levit. 5.1. If a man hear
the voice of swearing, and is a witness whether he has seen or known of such a
thing, if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his Iniquity. If he have heard
the voice if swearing, that is, if being adjured or demanded to answer upon
oath concerning what he has seen or heard, he do not utter the truth, he is
perjured. Now to this adjuration of the high Priest our Savior answered, thou
have said: which words are not an avoiding to answer (as some have thought) but
a direct answer, as if he had said it is as thou say, it is even so, I am
the Son of God. For upon this answer the high Priest said, he has spoken
blasphemy. But to put the matter beyond all doubt St. Mark tells us, Mark
14.61. that he being asked by the high Priest, Art thou the Christ the Son of
the Blessed? He answered, I am. So that unless we will interpret our Savior's
Doctrine contrary to his own practice we cannot understand him to forbid all
Oaths, and consequently they are not unlawful.

I have been the longer upon this, that I might give clear satisfaction in this
matter to those that are willing to receive it.

As for the Ceremonies in use among us in the taking of Oaths, it is no just
Exception against them, that they are not found in Scripture. For this was
always matter of liberty; and several Nations have used several Rites and
Ceremonies in their Oaths. It was the custom of the Grecians, to swear laying
their hands upon the Altar, quod sanctissimum jusjurandum est habitum, (says
A. Gellius) which was looked upon as the most sacred form of Swearing. The
Romans were wont Jovem Lapidem jurare; that is, he that swore by Jupiter held a
flint stone in his hand, and flung it violently from him with these words, Si
sciens fallo ita me Jupiter bonis omnibus ejiciat ut ego hunc Lapidem; If I
knowingly falsify, God so throw me out of all my possessions as I do this stone.

In Scripture there are two Ceremonies mentioned of Swearing. One, of putting
the hand under the Thigh of him to whom the Oath was made. Thus Eliezer swore
to Abraham, Genesis 24. and Joseph to Jacob, Genesis 47. The other was by lifting up
the hand to heaven: Thus Abraham expresses the manner of an Oath, Genesis 14.22.
I have lift up my hand to the most high God. And thus God condescending to the
manner of men, expresses himself, Deuteronomy. 32, 40. If I lift up my hand to
heaven, and swear. In allusion to this custom the Psalmist describes the
perjured person, Psalm. 144.8. Whose mouth speaks vanity; and whose right hand
is a right hand of falsehood. And there is not the least intimation in Scripture
that either of these Ceremonies were prescribed and appointed by God, but
voluntarily instituted and taken up by men. And thus among us the Ceremony of
Swearing is by laying the hand on the holy Gospel, and kissing the Book; which
is both very solemn and significant. And this is the reason why this solemn
kind of Oath is called a corporal Oath, and was anciently so called; because
the sign or ceremony of it is performed by some part of the Body. And this
Solemnity is an aggravation of the Perjury, because it makes it both more
deliberate, and more scandalous.

I shall speak but briefly to the

viz. the sacred obligation of an Oath: because it is a solemn appeal to God as
a witness of the truth or what we say: To God, I say, from whose piercing and
all-seeing eye, from whose perfect and infinite knowledge nothing is or can be
hid: So that there is not a thought in our heart but he sees it, nor a word in
our tongue but he discerns the truth or falsehood of it. Whenever we swear we
appeal to his knowledge, and refer our selves to his just judgment who is the
powerful Patron and Protector of Right, and the Almighty Judge and avenger of
all falsehood and unrighteousness. So that it is not possible for men to lay a
more sacred and solemn obligation upon their Consciences, than by the Religion
of an Oath. Moses very well expresses it, by binding our souls with a bond.
Numb. 30.2. If a man swear an oath, to bind his soul with a bond; intimating
that he that swears lays the strongest obligation upon himself, and puts his
Soul in pawn for the truth of what he says. And this obligation no man can
violate, but at the utmost peril of the judgment and vengeance of God. For
every Oath implies a Curse upon our selves in case of Perjury, as Plutarch
observes. And this was always the sense of Mankind concerning the obligation of
Oaths. Nullum vinculum ad astringendam fidem majores nostri jurejurando arctius
esse voluerunt, says Tully; Our forefathers had no stricter bond whereby to
oblige the faith of men to one another, than that of an Oath. To the same
purpose is that in the Comedian, Aliud si scirem, qui firmare meam apud vos
possem fidem, sanctius quam jusjurandum, id pollicerer tibi. If I knew any
thing more sacred than an Oath, whereby to confirm to you the truth of what I
say, I would make use of it.

I will crave your patience a little longer, whilst by way of inference from
this Discourse, I represent to you the great Sin of Swearing in common
conversation, upon trivial and needless occasions; and the hainousness of the
sin of Perjury.

1. First, The great sin of Swearing, upon trivial and needless occasions, in
common conversation. Because an Oath is a solemn thing and reserved for great
occasions, to give confirmation to our word in some weighty matter, and to put
an end to controversies which cannot otherwise be peremptorily and
satisfactorily decided. And therefore to use Oaths upon light occasions argues
great profaneness and irreverence of Almighty God. So Vlpian the great Roman
Lawyer observes, Nonnullus esse faciles ad jurandum contemptu Religionis, that
men's proneness to swearing comes from acontempt of Religion; than which nothing
disposes men more to Atheism and Infidelity. Besides that it does many times
surprise men unawares into Perjury: And how can it be otherwise, when men use
to interlard all their careless talk with Oaths, but that they must often be
Perjured? And which is worse, it prepares men for deliberate perjury: For with
those who are accustomed to swear upon light occasions, an Oath will go off
with them more roundly about weightier matters. From a common custom of
swearing (says Hierocles) men easily slide into perjury: Therefore (says he)
if thou would not he perjured, do not use to swear. And this perhaps haps is
the meaning of St. James, when he cautions Christians so vehemently against
common swearing, (...) (for so some of the best ancient Copies read it) lest ye
fall into hypocrisy, that is, lest ye lie and be perjured, by using your
selves to rash and inconsiderate swearing.

And men expose themselves to this danger to no purpose; Oaths in common
discourse being so far from confirming a man's word, that with wise men they
much weaken it: For common swearing (if it have any serious meaning at all)
argues in a man a perpetual distrust of his own reputation, and is an
acknowledgement that he thinks his bare word not to be worthy of credit. And it
is so far from adorning and filling a man's discourse that it makes it look
swollen and bloated, and more bold and blustering than becomes persons of gentle
and good breeding. Besides that it is a great incivility, because it highly
offends and grates Upon all sober and considerate persons; who cannot be
presumed with any manner of ease and patience to hear God affronted, and his
great and glorious Name so irreverently to stup one very slight occasion.

And it is no excuse to men that many times they do it ignorantly, and not
observing and knowing what they do. For certainly it is no extenuation of a
fault, that a man has got the habit of it so perfect that he commits it when
he does not think of it: Which consideration should make men oppose the
beginnings of this Vice, lest it grow into a habit very hard to be left. Nemo
novit, nisi qui expertus est, quam sit difficile consuetudinem jurandi
extinguere, says St. Austin; No man knows, but he that has tried, how hard it
is to get rid of this custom of Swearing: But yet it is certain men may do it,
by resolution and great care of themselves: For he that can choose whether he
will speak or not, can choose whether he will swear or not when he speaks. Major
consuetudo majorem intentionem flagitat; The more inveterate a custom is, the
greater care should be used to break our selves of it.

In short, This practice is so contrary to so plain a Precept of our Savior,
and by the breach whereof we incur so great a danger (as St. James assures us)
that it must be a great charity that can find out a way to reconcile a common
custom of swearing with a serious belief of the Christian Religion: Which I
would to God those who are concerned would seriously lay to heart. Especially,
since this Sin of all others has the least of Temptation to it. Profit or
Pleasure there is none in it, nor any thing in men's natural tempers to incite
them to it. For tho some men pour out Oaths so freely as if they came naturally
from them, yet surely no man is born of a swearing constitution.

All that can be pretended for it, is Custom and Fashion: But to show that this
is no excuse, it is very observable that it is particularly in the matter of
Oaths and Perjury that the Holy Ghost gives that caution, Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil.

And lastly, it deserves to be considered, that this sin is so much the greater
because of the frequent returns of it in those that are accustomed to it. So
that although it were but small in it self (as it is not) yet the frequent
practice of this sin would quickly mount it up to a great score.

2. Secondly, To represent the heinousness of the sin of Perjury. But before I
aggravate this Crime, it is fit to let men know how many ways they may be
guilty of it.

1st. When a man asserts upon oath what he knows to be otherwise: Or promises
what he does not intend to perform. In both these cases the very act of
swearing is Perjury. And so likewise when a man promises upon oath to do that
which it is unlawful for him to do because this oath is contrary to a former
obligation.

2dly. When a man is uncertain whether what he swear to, be true. This likewise
is Perjury, in the act; though not of the same degree of guilt with the former,
because it is not so fully and directly against his knowledge and conscience.
For men ought to be certain of the truth of what they assert upon oath, and not
to swear at a venture. And therefore no man ought positively to swear to the
truth of any thing but what he himself has seen or heard: This being the
highest assurance men are capable of in this World. In like manner, he is
guilty of perjury in the same degree, who promises upon oath what he is not
morally and reasonably certain he shall be able to perform.

3dly. They are likewise guilty of Perjury, who do not use great plainness and
simplicity in oaths; but answer aequivocally and doubtfully, or with
reservation of something in their minds, thinking thereby to salve the truth of
what they say. And we all know who they are that make use of these arts, and
maintain them to be lawful; to the infinite scandal of the Christian Religion
and prejudice of humane Society, by doing what in them lies to destroy all
Faith and mutual Confidence among men. For what can be a greater affront to
God, than to use his Name to deceive men? And what can more directly overthrow
the great end and use of oaths, which are for confirmation, and to put an end
to Strife? Whereas by these arts the thing is left in the same uncertainty it
was before, and there is no decision of it. For there is hardly any form of
words can be devised so plain, as not to be liable to Equivocation: To be sure,
a man when he swears may always reserve something in his mind which will quite
alter the sense of whatever he can say or promise upon oath. And this may be
laid down for a certain Rule, That all departure from the simplicity of an oath
is a degree of Perjury, and a man is never a whit the less forsworn because his
perjury is a little finer and more artificial than ordinary. And though men
think by this device to save themselves harmless from the guilt of so great a
Sin, they do really increase it, by adding to their iniquity the impudent folly
of mocking God and deceiving themselves.

And whereas it is pleaded in the favor of mental reservation, that the whole
Proposition, as made up of what is expressed in words and of that which is
reserved in the mind, is true; For instance, if a man being asked upon Oath
whether he be a Priest, shall answer he is not, reserving in his mind that he
is not a Priest of Bacchus, or some such thing, the whole Proposition is true,
and then they say a man may swear to that which is true, without danger of
perjury: This is of no force, because, though the whole proposition be true, it
is deceitful, and contrary to that sincerity which ought to be in an oath: And
the end of an oath is hereby likewise defeated, which is to ascertain the truth
of what we say: But if a man reserve something in his mind which alters the
truth of what he says, the thing is still as doubtful and uncertain as it was
before. Besides, if this be a good reason, a man may swear with reservation in
all cases; because the reason equally extends to all cases; for if the truth of
the proposition, as made up of what is expressed in words and reserved in the
mind, will excuse a man from Perjury, then no man can be perjured that swears
with reservation: But this the Casuists of the Roman Church do not allow, but
only in some particular cases, as before an incompetent Judge, or the like; for
they see well enough that if this were allowed in all cases, it would destroy
all Faith among men. And therefore since the reason extends alike to all cases,
it is plain that it is to be allowed in none.

4thly. He is guilty of Perjury after the act, who having a real intention when
he swears, to perform what he promises, yet afterward neglects to do it: Not
for want of Power (for so long as that continues the obligation cease) but
for want of Will, and due regard to his oath.

Now that Perjury is a most heinous Sin, is evident, because it is contrary to
so plain and great a Law of God; one of the ten Words or Precepts of the Moral
Law, thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; thou shall not
bring or apply the name of God to a falsehood: Or, as Josephus renders it, Thou
shall not adjure God to a false thing: Which our Savior renders yet more
plainly, Matthew. 5.33. Thou shall not forswear thy self. For he seems to refer
to the third Commandment when he says, Ye have heard that it was said to them
of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, as he had done before to the
6th. and 7th. when he says, It was said to them of old time, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not commit adultery. So that the primary, if not the sole
intention of this Law, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, is to forbid the great sin of Perjury. And I do not remember that in
Scripture the phrase of taking God's name in vain is used in any other sense.
And thus it is certainly used, Prove. 30.9. Lest I be poor and steal, and take
the name of the Lord my God in vain: i. e. lest Poverty should tempt me to
steal, and stealth should engage me in Perjury. For among the Jews an oath was
tendered to him that was suspected of theft, as appears from Levit. 6.2. where
it is said, If any one be guilty of theft, and lies concerning it, or swears
falsely; he shall restore all that about which he has sworn falsely. Lest I
steal, and take the name of the Lord my God in vain; that is, be perjured,
being examined upon oath concerning, a thing stolen. And for this reason the
thief and the perjured person are put together, Zech. 5.4. where it is said,
that a curse shall enter into the house of the thief, and of him that swears
falsely by the name of God. From all which it is very probable, that the whole
intention of the 3d. Commandment is to forbid this great sin of Perjury. To
deter men from which, a severe threatening is there added; for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; that is, he will most severely
punish such a one. And it is very observable, that there is no threatening added
to any other Commandment, but to this and the second; Intimating to us that,
next to Idolatry and the worship of a false God, Perjury is one of the greatest
affronts that can be offered to the divine Majesty. This is one of those sins
that cries so loud to Heaven, and quickens the pace of God's judgments, Mal.
3.9. I will come near to you in judgment, and be a swift witness against the
swearer. For this God threatens utter destruction to the man and his house,
Zech. 5.4. speaking of the curse that goes over the face of the whole earth;
God (says he) will bring it forth, and it shall enter into the house of him
that swears falsely by the name of God, and shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. It
shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it. This sin by the
secret judgment of God undermines Estates and Families to the utter mine of
them. And among the Heathen it was always reckoned one of the greatest of
Crimes, and which they did believe God did not only punish upon the guilty
person himself, but upon his family and posterity; and many times upon whole
Nations, as the Prophet also tells us, that because of Oaths the Land mourns.

I need not use many words to aggravate this sin; it is certainly a Crime of
the highest nature. Deliberate Perjury being directly against a man's
knowledge, so that no man can commit it without staring his Conscience in the
face; which is one of the greatest aggravations of any Crime. And it is equally
a sin against both Tables; being the highest affront to God, and of most
injurious consequence to men. It is an horrible abuse of the name of God, an
open contempt of his Judgment, and an insolent defiance of his Vengeance: And
in respect of men, it is not only a wrong to this or that particular person who
suffers by it, but Treason against humane Society; subverting at once the
foundations of public Peace and Justice, and the private security of every
man's life and fortune. It is a defeating of the best and last way that the
wisdom of men could devise for the decision of doubtful matters. Solomon very
fully and elegantly expresses the destructive nature of this sin, Prove. 25.18.
A false witness against his neighbor is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp
arrow: Intimating, that amongst all the instruments of ruin and mischief that
have been devised by mankind, none is of more pernicious consequence to humane
Society than Perjury, and breach of Faith. It is a pestilence that usually
walks in darkness, and a secret stab and blow against which many times there
is no possibility of defense.

And therefore it highly concerns those who upon these and the like occasions
are called upon their Oath, whether as Jurors or Witnesses, to set God before
their eyes, and to have his fear in their hearts whenever they come to take an
oath. And to govern and discharge their consciences in this matter by known and
approved Rules, and by the Resolutions of pious and wise men; and not by tht
loose Reasonings and Resolutions of Pamphlets, sent abroad to serve the turns
of unpeaceable and ill-minded men (whether Atheists, or Papists, or others) on
purpose to debauch the Consciences of men by teaching them to play fast and
loose with oaths. And it is a very sad sign of the decay of Christian Religion
amongst us, to see so many who call themselves Christians, to make so little
conscience of so great a sin, as even the Light of Nature would blush and
tremble at.

I will conclude all with those excellent Sayings of the Son of Sirach
concerning these two sins (I have been speaking of) of Profane Swearing and
Perjury, Eccl. 23.9, 10, etc. Accustom not thy mouth to swearing; neither use
thy self to the naming of the holy One. A man that uses much swearing shall be
filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house. If he
shall offend, his sin shall he upon him; and if he acknowledge not his sin, he
makes a double offense. And if he swear salsly, he shall not be innocent, but
his house shall be full of calamities. And to represent to us the dreadful
nature of this sin of Perjury, There is (says he) a word that is clothed
about with death, meaning a rash and false Oath; There is a word that is
clothed about with death, God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob:
for all such things shall be far from the godly; and they will not wallow in
these sins. From which God preserve all good men, and make them careful to
preserve themselves; as they value the present peace of their own consciences,
and the favor of Almighty God in this world and the other, for his mercies
sake in Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Reverend Mr. THOMAS GOVGE, the 4th of
November. 1681. At St. Anne's Blackfryars; With a brief account of his Life.
TO The Right Worshipful THE PRESIDENT, THE TREASURER, And the rest of the
worthy Governors of the Hospital of Christ-Church in LONDON.
WHEN upon the request of some of the Relations and Friends of the Reverend Mr.
Gouge deceasedy, and, to speak the truth, in compliance with mine own
inclination to do right to the memory of so good a man, and to set so great an
Example in the view of all men, I had determined to make this Discourse
public; I knew not where more sitly to address it than to your selves who are
the living pattern of the same Virtue, and the faithful dispensers and managers
of one of the best and greatest Charities in the world; especially since he had
a particular relation to you, and was pleased for some years last past, without
any other consideration but that of Charity, to employ his constant pains in
Catechizing the poor Children of your Hospital; wisely considering of how great
consequence it was to this City, to have the foundations of Religion well laid
in the tender years of so many persons as were afterward to be planted there
in several Professions; and from a true humility of mind, being ready to stoop
to the meanest office and service, to do good.

I have heard from an intimate friend of his that he would sometimes with great
pleasure say, that he had two Livings which he would not exchange for two of
the greatest in England, meaning Wales and Christ's Hospital; Contrary to
common account, he esteemed every advantage of being useful and serviceable to
God and men a rich Benefice, and those his best Patrons and Benefactors, not
who did him good, but who gave him the opportunity and means of doing it. To
you therefore as his Patrons this Sermon does of right belong, and to you I
humbly dedicate it; heartily beseeching Almighty God, to raise up many by his
example that may serve their generation according to the will of God, as he
did. I am

Your Faithful and humble Servant Jo Tillotson.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mr. THOMAS GOVGE, With a short account of
his Life.
LUKE 20.37, 38. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush,
when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living; For all live to him.


THE occasion of these words of our blessed Savior was an objection which the
Sadduces made against the Resurrection, grounded upon a case which had
sometimes happened among them, of a Woman that had had seven Brethren
successively to her Husbands. Upon which case they put this Question to our
Savior; whose wife of the seven shall this woman be at the Resurrection? That
is, if men live in another world, how shall the controversy between these
seven Brethren be decided? for they all seem to have an equal claim to this
Woman, each of them having had her to his wife.

This captious Question was not easy to be answered by the Pharisees, who
fancied the enjoyments of the next life to be of the same kind with the sensual
pleasures of this world, only greater and more durable. From which Tradition of
the Jews concerning a sensual Paradise, Mahomet seems to have taken the pattern
of his; as he did likewise many other things from the Jewish Traditions. Now
upon this supposition, that in the next life there will be marrying and giving
in marriage, it was a Question not easily satisfied, Whose wife of the seven
this woman should then be?

But our Savior clearly avoids the whole force of it, by showing the different
state of men in this world, and in the other. The children of this world (says
he) marry, and are given in marriage; but they who shall he accounted worthy to
obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are
given in marriage. And he does not barely and magisterially assert this
Doctrine, but gives a plain and substantial Reason for it; because they cannot
die any more. After men have lived a while in this world they are taken away by
death, and therefore marriage is necessary to maintain a succession of mankind;
but in the other world men shall become immortal and live for ever, and then
the reason of marriage will wholly cease: For when men can die no more there
will then be no need of any new supplies of mankind.

Our Savior having thus cleared himself of this Objection by taking away the
ground and foundation of it, he produces an Argument for the proof of the
Resurrection, in the words of my Text; Now that the dead are raised, Moses even
showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, That is, when in one of his Books God is brought
in speaking to him out of the Bush, and calling himself by the title of the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. From whence our Savior
infers the Resurrection, because God is not the God of the dead but of the
living: For all live to him.

My design from these words is, to show the force and strength of this Argument
which our Savior urges for the proof of the Resurrection. In order whereunto
I shall,

First, Consider it as an Argument ad hominem, and show the fitness and force
of it to convince those with whom our Savior disputed.

Secondly. I shall enquire, Whether it be more than an Argument ad hominem? And
if it be, wherein the real and absolute force of it does consist?

And then, I shall apply this Doctrine of the Resurrection to the present
Occasion.

First. We will consider it as an Argument ad hominem, and show the fitness and
force of it to convince those with whom our Savior disputed. And this will
appear if we carefully consider these four things.

1. What our Savior intended directly and immediately to prove by this
Argument. 2. The extraordinary veneration which the Jews in general had for the
Writings of Moses, above any other Books of the Old Testament. 3. The peculiar
notion which the Jews had concerning the use of this Phrase or expression of
God's being any ones God. 4. The great respect which the Jews had for these
three Fathers of their Nation, Abraham, Isaac and Jacoh. For each of these make
our Savior's Argument more forcible against those with whom he disputed.
First. We will consider what our Savior intended directly and immediately to
prove by this Argument. And that was this, That there is another state after
this life, wherein men shall be happy or miserable according as they have lived
in this world. And this does not only suppose the immortality of the Soul, but
forasmuch as the Body is an essential part of man does by consequence infer the
resurrection of the Body; because otherwise the man would not be happy or
misererable in the other world. But I cannot see any sufficient ground to
believe that our Savior intended by this Argument directly and immediately to
prove the resurrection of the Body, but only by consequence, and as it follows
from the admission of a future state wherein men shall be rewarded or punished.
For that Reason of our Savior, that God is not a God of the dead but of the
living, if it did directly prove the resurrection of the Body, it would prove
that the Bodies of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were raised to life again, at or
before that time when God spoke to Moses and called himself the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob: But we do not believe this; and therefore ought not to suppose
that it was the intention of our Savior directly and immediately to prove the
resurrection of the Body, but only (as I said before) a future state. And that
this was all our Savior intended will more plainly appear, if we consider what
that Error of the Sadduces was which our Savior here confutes. And Josephus,
who very well understood the difference of the Sects among the Jews, and gives
a particular account of them, makes not the least mention of any Controversy
between the Pharisees and the Sadduces about the resurrection of the Body. All
that he says, is this: That the Pharisees hold the Immortality of the Soul, and
that there are Rewards and Punishments in another world: But the Sadduces
denied all this, and that there was any other state after this life. And this
is the very same account with that which is given of them in the New Testament,
verse. 27. of this Chapt. The Sadduces who deny that there is any resurrection.
The meaning of which is more fully declared, Act. 23.8. The Sadduces say that
there is no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess
both. That is, the Sadduces denied that there was any other state of men after
this life, and that there was any such thing as an immortal Spirit, either
Angels, or the Souls of men surviving their Bodies. And, as Dr. Hammond has
judiciously observed, this is the true importance of the word (...), viz. a
future or another state; unless in such Texts where the Context does restrain
it to the raising again of the Body, or where some word that denotes the body,
as (...) or (...), is added to it.

Secondly. The force of this Argument against those with whom our Savior
disputed will further appear, if we consider the great veneration which the
Jews in general had for the Writings of Moses above any other Books of the Old
Testament; which they (especially the Sadduces) looked upon only as
Explications and Comments upon the Law of Moses: But they esteemed nothing as a
necessary Article of Faith which had not some foundation in the Writings of
Moses. And this seems to me to be the true Reason why our Savior chose to
confute them out of Moses, rather than any other part of the Old Testament: And
not as many learned men have imagined, because the Sadduces did not receive any
part of the Old Testament but only the five Books of M ses; so that it was in
vain to argue against them out of any other. This I know has been a general
opinion, grounded I think upon the mistake of a passage in Josephus, who says
the Sadduces only received the written Law. But if We carefully consider that
passage, we shall find that Josephus does not there oppose the Law to the other
B^^ks of the Old Testament, which were also written; but to Oral Tradition. For
he says expressly, that the Sadduces only received the written Law, but the
Pharisees, over and besides what was written, received the Oral which they call
Tradition.

I deny not but that in the later Prophets there are more express Texts for the
proof of a future state, than any are to be found in the Books of Moses. As
Daniel 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
s me to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And
indeed it seems very plain that holy men among the Jews, toward the expiration
of the Legal dispensation, had still clearer and more express apprehensions
concerning a future state than are to be met with in the Writings of Moses, or
of any of the Prophets.

The Law given by Moses did suppose the Immortality of the Souls of men, and
the expectation of another life after this, as Principles of Religion in some
degree naturally known; but made no new and express Revelation of these things.
Nor was there any occasion for it, the Law of Moses being a Political Law, not
intended for the Government of mankind, but of one particular Nation; and
therefore was established, as Political Laws are, upon temporal promises and
threatenings; promising temporal prosperity to the observation of its precepts,
and threatening the breach of them with temporal judgments and calamities.

And this I take to be the true reason why arguments fetched from another world
are so obscurely insisted upon under that Dispensation; not but that another
life after this was always supposed, and was undoubtedly the hope and
expectation of good men under the Law, but the clear discovery of it was
reserved for the Times of the Messiah. And therefore as those Times drew on,
and the Son of righteousness was nearer his rising, the shadows of the night
began to be chased away, and men's apprehensions of a future state to clear up;
so that in the time of the Maccabees good men spoke with more confidence and
assurance of these things.

It is likewise to be considered, that the temporal calamities and sufferings
with which the Jews were almost continually harassed from the time of their
Captivity had very much weaned good men from the consideration of temporal
promises, and awakened their minds to the more serious thoughts of another
world. It being natural to men when they are destitute of present comfort, to
support themselves with the expectation of better things for the future, and as
the Apostle to the Hebrews expresses it, chapter 6. v. 18. To fly for refuge to
lay hold upon the hope that is before them, and to employ their reason to
fortify themselves as well as they can in that persuasion.

And this I doubt not was the true occasion of those clearer and riper
apprehensions of good men concerning a future state, in those times of distress
and persecution; it being very agreeable to the wisdom and goodness of the
Divine Providence not to leave his People destitute of sufficient support under
great trials and sufferings: And nothing but the hopes of a better life could
have born up the spirits of men under such cruel tortures. And of this we have
a most remarkable Instance in the History of the seven Brethren in the
Maccabees, who being cruelly tortured and put to death by Antiochus, do most
expressly declare their confident expectation of a resurrection to a better
life. To which History the Apostle certainly refers, Heb. 11.35. when he says,
others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better resurrection: where the word, which we render were tortured, is (...),
which is the very word used in the Maccabees to express the particular kind of
torture used upon them; besides that being offered deliverance they most
resolutely refused to accept of it, with this express declaration that they
hoped for a resurrection to a better life.

But to return to my purpose, not withstanding there might be more clear and
express Texts to this purpose in the ancient Prophets, yet our Savior knowing
how great a regard not only the Sadduces, but all the Jews had to the Authority
of Moses, he thought fit to bring his proof of the resurrection out of his
Writings, as that which was the most likely to convince them.

Thirdly. If we consider further the peculiar Notion which the Jews had
concerning the use of this phrase or expression of God's being any ones God.
And that was this. That God is no where in Scripture said to be any ones God
while he was alive. And therefore they tell us that while Isaac lived, God is
not called the God of Isaac, but the sear of Isaac. As Genesis 31.42. Except the
God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac had been with me; and ver. 53. when Laban
made a Covenant with Jacob, it is said that Laban did swear by the God of
Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the God of their Fathers, but Jacob swore by
the fear of his Father Isaac. I will not warrant this Observation to be good,
because I certainly know it is not true. For God does expressly call himself the
God of Isaac, while Isaac was yet alive, Genesis 28.13. I am the Lord God of
Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac. It is sufficient to my purpose, that
this was a Notion anciently current among the Jews. And therefore our Savior's
Argument from this Expression must be so much the stronger against them: For if
the Souls of men be extinguished by death (as the Sadduces believed) what did
it signify to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to have God called their God after they
were dead? But surely for God to be any ones God does signify some great
benefit and advantage; which yet (according to the notion which the Jews had of
this Phrase) could not respect this life, because, according to them, God is
not said to be any ones God till after he is dead: But it is thus said of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob after their death, and therefore our Savior infers
very strongly against them, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were not extinguished
by death, but do still live somewhere: for God is not the God of the dead, but
of the living. And then he adds by way of further explication, for all live to
him. That is, though those good men who are departed this life, do not still
live to us, here in this world, yet they live to God, and are with him.

Fourthly. If we consider the great respect which the Jews had for those three
Fathers of their Nation, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They had an extraordinary
opinion of them, and esteemed nothing too great to be thought or said of them.
And therefore we find that they looked upon it as a great arrogance for any man
to assume any thing to himself that might seem to set him above Abraham, Isaac
or Jacob. With what indignation did they fly upon our Savior on this account?
Joh. 4.12. Art thou greater than our father Jacob? and chap. 8. ver. 53. Art
thou greater than our father Abraham: whom make thou thy self? Now they who
had so superstitious a veneration for them, would easily believe any thing of
privilege to belong to them: so that our Savior does with great advantage
instance in them, in favor of whom they would be inclined to extend the
meaning of any promise to the utmost, and allow it to signify as much as the
words could possibly bear. So that it is no wonder that the Text tells us that
this Argument put the Sadduces to silence. They durst not attempt a thing so
odious, as to go about to take away any thing of privilege from Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob.

And thus I have, as briefly as the matter would bear, endeavored to show the
fitness and force of this Argument to convince those with whom our Savior
disputed. I come now, in the

Second place, to enquire Whether this be any more than an Argument ad hominem?
And if it be, wherein the real and absolute force of it does consist?

I do not think it necessary to believe that every Argument used by our Savior
or his Apostles, is absolutely and in it self conclusive of the matter in
debate. For an Argument which does not really prove the thing in Question, may
yet be a very good Argument ad hominem; and in some cases more convincing to
him with whom we dispute than that which is a better Argument in it self. Now
it is possible, that our Savior's intention might not be to bring a conclusive
proof of the Resurrection, but only to confute those who would needs be
disputing with him. And to that purpose an Argument ad hominem, which proceeded
upon grounds which they themselves could not deny, might be very proper and
effectual. But although it be not necessary to believe, that this was more than
an Argument ad hominem; yet it is the better to us, if it be absolutely and in
it self conclusive of the thing in Question. And this I hope will sufficiently
appear, if we consider these four things.

1. That for God to be any ones God does signify some very extraordinary
blessing and happiness, to those persons of whom this is said. 2. If we
consider the eminent faith and obedience of the persons to whom this promise is
made. 3. Their condition in this world. 4. The general importance of this
promise, abstracting from the persons particularly specified and named in it,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
First, If we consider, that for God to be any ones God does signify some very
extraordinary blessing and happiness to those persons of whom this is said. It
is a big word for God to declare himself to be any ones God: and the least we
can imagine to be meant by it, is that God will in an extraordinary manner
employ his power and wisdom to do him good: that he will concern himself more
for the happiness of those whose God he declares himself to be, than for others.

Secondly, If we consider the eminent faith and obedience of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. Abraham left his Country in obedience to God, not knowing whither he was
to go. And, which was one of the most unparalled and strange instances of
faith and obedience that can almost be imagined, he was willing to have
sacrificed his only Son at the command of God. Isaac and Jacob were also very
good men, and devout worshippers of the true God, when almost the whole world
was sunk into Idolatry and all manner of impiety. Now what can we imagine, but
that the good God did design some extraordinary reward to such faithful
servants of his? especially if we consider, that he intended this gracious
declaration of his concerning them, for a standing encouragement to all those
who in after Ages should follow the faith and tread in the steps of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob.

Thirdly. If we consider the condition of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in this
world. The Scripture tells us, that they were pilgrims and strangers upon the
earth; had no fixed and settled habitation, but were forced to wander from one
Kingdom and Country to another: that they were exposed to many hazards and
difficulties, to great troubles and afflictions in this world; so that there
was no such peculiar happiness befell them in this life above the common rate
of men, as may seem to fill up the big words of this promise, that God would be
their God. For so far as the Scripture History informs us, and further we
cannot know of this matter, Esau was as prosperous as Jacob; and Jacob had a
great many more troubles and afflictions in this life than Esau had. But suerly
when God calls himself the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, this signifies that
God intended some very peculiar blessing and advantage to them above others:
which seeing they did not enjoy in this world, it is very reasonable to believe
that one time or other this gracious declaration and promise or God was made
good to them.

And therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 11. from this very expression
of God's being said to be the God of Abraham and others, argues that some
extraordinary happiness was reserved for them in another world: and that upon
this very ground I am now speaking of, namely, because the condition of Abraham
and some others, was not such in this world as might seem to answer the fullness
of this promise. All these, says he, died in the faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them a^ar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon the
earth. From whence he reasons very strongly that these good men might
reasonably expect something better than any thing that had befallen them in
this World. For they, says he, that say such things, declare plainly that they
seek a Country; which at the 16. verse he calls a better Country, that is a
heavenly. They that say such things: that is, they who acknowledge themselves
to be strangers and pilgrims in the earth, and yet pretend that God has
promised to be their God, declare plainly that they expect some reward beyond
this life. From all which he concludes, Wherefore God is not ashamed to be
called their God, because he has prepared for them a City: Intimating that if
no happiness had remained for these good men in another world, this promise of
God's being their God, would shamefully have fallen short of what it seemed to
import, viz. some extraordinary reward and blessing worthy of God to bestow;
something more certain and lasting than any of the enjoyments of this world:
which since God has abundantly performed to them in the happiness of another
life, his promise to them was made good to the full, and he needed not be
ashamed to be called their God. But if nothing beyond this life had been
reserved for them, that Saying of old Jacob toward the conclusion of his life,
few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, would have been an
eternal reflection upon the truth and faithfulness of him who had so often
called himself the God of Jacob.

But now, because to all this it may be said, that this Promise seems to have
been made good to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in this world: For was not God the
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, when he took such a particular and
extraoadinary care of them, and protected them from the manifold dangers they
were exposed to, by such a special and immediate providence, suffering no one
to do them harm, but rebuking even Kings for their sakes? Was not he Abraham's
God, when he blessed him so miraculously with a Son in his old age, and with so
considerable an estate to leave to him? Was not that Saying of Jacob a great
acknowledgement of the gracious providence of God toward him, with my staff
passed I over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands? And though it must
needs be a very cutting affliction to him to lose his Son Joseph, as he thought
he had done, yet that was more than recompensed to him in Joseph's strange
advancement in Egypt, whereby God put into his hands the opportunity of saving
his Father and his whole Family alive. And was not God the God of Abraham
Isaac, and Jacob, in making them Fathers of so numerons an offspring, as
afterward became came a great nation: and in giving them a fruitful Land; and
bringing them to the quiet possession of it by such a series of wonderful
Miracles? what need then is there of extending this promise to another world?
does it not seem abundantly made good in those great blessings which God
bestowed upon them whilst they lived, and afterward upon their posterity, in
this world? And does not this agree well enough with the first and most obvious
sense of these words, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that is, I am
he that was their God while they were alive, and am still the God of their
posterity for their sakes? I say, because the three former Considerations are
liable to this Objection, which seems wholly to take off the force of this
Argument; therefore for the full clearing of this matter, I will add one
consideration more.

Fourthly then, we will consider the general importance of this Promise,
abstracting from the particular persons specified and named in it, viz.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and that is, that God will make a wide and plain
difference between good and bad men; he will be so the God of good men as he is
not of the wicked: and some time or other put every good man into a better and
happier condition than any wicked man: so that the general importance of this
promise is finally resolved into the equity and justice of the Divine
Providence.

And unless we suppose another life after this, it will certainly be very hard,
and I think impossible, to reconcile the History of the Old Testament, and the
common appearances of things in this World, with the Justice and Goodness of
God's Providence.

It cannot be denied, but that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and several good men
in the old Testament, had many signal Testimonies of the Divine favor
vouchsafed to them in this world: But we read likewise of several wicked men
that had as large a share of temporal blessings. It is very true that Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob had great estates, and were petty Princes: But Pharaoh was a
mighty Prince in comparison of them; and the Kingdom of Egypt, which probably
was the first and chief seat of Idolatry, was at the same time one of the most
potent and flourishing Kingdoms in the world: and was blessed with a prodigious
plenty, whereby they were furnished with store of corn, when good Jacob and his
Family had like to have perished by famine. It Is true, Joseph, was ad anc'd to
great power in Egypt, and thereby had the opportunity of saving his Fathers
house, by settling them, and feeding them in Egypt: But then it is to be
considered again, that this cost them very dear, and their coming thither was
the occasion of a long and cruel bondage to Jacob's posterity, so that we see
that these good men had no such blessings, but what were common with them to
many others that were wicked: and the blessings which God bestowed upon, them
had great abatements by the intermixture of many and sore afflictions.

It seems then upon the whole matter, to be very plain, that the Providence of
God in this world toward good men are so contrived, that it may sufficiently
appear, to those who wisely consider the works of God, that they are not
neglected by him; and yet that these outward blessings are so promiscuously
dispensed, that no man can certainly be concluded to be a good man from any
happiness he enjoys in this life: And the prosperity of good men is usually on
purpose so shadowed and mixed with afflictions, as may justly raise their hopes
to the expectation of a more perfect happiness and better reward than any they
meet with in this world.

And if so, then the general importance of this Promise, that God will be the
God of good men, must necessarily signify something beyond this world: Because
in this world there is not that clear difference universally made between good
and bad men which the Justice of the Divine Providence does require, and which
seems to be intended in the general sense of this Promise. For if this Promise
(though personally made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) be intended, as the
Scripture tells us it was for a standing encouragement to good men in all Ages,
then it must contain in it this general Truth, that God will some time or other
plentifully reward every good man; that is, he will do something far better for
him than for any wicked man: But if there be no life after this, it is
impossible to reconcile this sense of it with the course of God's Providence,
and with the History of the Bible.

And to make this out fully and at once, I will only produce that single
Instance of Abel and Cain. Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than
Cain, and he had this testimony, that he pleased God; which was in effect to
declare, that God was the God of Abel and not of Cain; so that by virtue of the
general importance of this Promise, it might justly be expected that Abel's
condition should have been much better than Cain's: But if there be no
happiness after this life, Abel's was evidently much worse. For upon this very
account, that he pleased God better, he was killed by Cain, who had offered to
God a slight and contemptuous offering. And Cain lived a long time after, and
grew great, and built Cities. Now supposing there were no other life after
this, this must have been a most horrible Example to all Ages, from the
beginning of the world to the end of it, and have made men for ever afraid to
please God upon such hard terms; when they were sure of no other reward for so
doing, but to be oppressed and slain by the hands of the wicked. So that if
this were really the Case, it would puzzle all the Wit and Reason of mankind to
vindicate the equity and justice of the Divine Providence, and to rescue it out
of the hands of this terrible Objection.

And thus have I as briefly as I could, endeavored to clear to you the force
of this Argument used by our Savior for the Proof of the Resurrection. And
have the longer insisted upon it, because at first appearance it seems to be
but a very obscure and remote Argument: And yet so much the more necessary to
be cleared, because this in all probability was that very Text upon which the
Jews in our Saviors time grounded their belief of a future state, in
opposition to the error of the Sadduces; and which they called by way of
eminency the promise made of God unto the Fathers. As will plainly appear, if
we consider what St. Paul says to this purpose; when he appeals so often to the
Pharisees for his agreement with them in this Article of the Resurrection, and
likewise in the ground of it from the promise made of God unto the fathers.
Act. 24.14, 15 But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets; and have hope toward God, which they
themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead. From
whence it is clear, that they both grounded their hope of the resurrection upon
something written in the Law and the Prophets; and what that was he expresses
more particularly c. 26. v. 6, 7 And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of
the promise made of God unto our Fathers; unto which promise our twelve Tribes,
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. By the promise made of God
unto the Fathers he means some promise made by God to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
for so S. Luke more than once, in his History of the Acts, explains this phrase
of the God of their Fathers, Acts 3.13. The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and
of Jacob, the God of our Fathers; and c. 7. v. 32. I am the God thy Fathers,
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now what was
the great and famous Promise which God made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? was it
not this of being their God? So that it was this very Promise upon which S.
Paul tells us the Jews grounded their hope of a future state, because they
understood it necessarily to signify some blessing and happiness beyond this
life.

And now having, I hope, sufficiently cleared this matter, I shall make some
improvement of this Doctrine of a future state, and that to these three
purposes.

1. To raise our minds above this world and the enjoyments of this present
life. Were but men thorougly convinced of this plain and certain Truth, that
there is a vast difference between Time and Eternity, between a few years and
everlasting Ages: would we but represent to our selves what thoughts and
apprehensions dying persons have of this world; how vain and empty a thing it
appears to them, how like a pageant and a shadow it looks as it passes away
from them: methinks none of those things could be a sufficient temptation to
any man to forget God and his Soul; but, notwithstanding all the delights and
pleasures of sense, we should be strangely intent upon the concernments of
another world, and almost wholly taken up with the thoughts of that vast
Eternity which we are ready to launch into. For what is there in this world,
this waste and howling wilderness, this rude and barbarous Country which we are
but to pass through, which should detain our affections here, and take off our
thoughts from our everlasting habitation; from that better and that heavenly
Country, where we hope to live and be happy for ever?

If we settle our affections upon the enjoyments of this present Life, so as to
be extremely pleased and transported with them, and to say in our hearts, It is
good for us to be here; if we be excessively grieved or discontented for the
want or loss of them, and if we look upon our present state in this world any
otherwise than as a preparation and passage to a better life, it is a sign that
our faith and hope of the happiness of another life is but very weak and faint,
and that we do not heartily and in good earnest believe what we pretend to do
concerning these things. For did we steadfastly believe and were thoroughly
persuaded of what our Religion so plainly declares to us concerning the
unspeakable and endless happiness of good men in another world, our affections
would sit more loose to this world, and our hopes would raise our hearts as
much above these present and sensible things as the heavens are high above the
earth; we should value nothing here below, but as it serves for our present
support and passage, or may be made a means to secure and increase our future
felicity.

2. The consideration of another Life should quicken our preparation for that
blessed state which remains for us in the other world. This Life is a state of
probation and trial. This world is God's school, where immortal spirits clothed
with flesh are trained and bred up for eternity. And then certainly it is not
an indifferent thing and a matter of slight concernment to us, how we live and
demean our selves in this world: whether we indulge our selves in ungodliness
and worldly lusts, or live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world: No; it is a matter of infinite moment, as much as our souls and all
eternity are worth. Let us not deceive our selves; for as we sow so shall we
reap: If we sow to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap corruption; but if we
sow to the spirit, we shall of the spirit reap everlasting life. Light is sown
for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. The righteous has
hopes in his death. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace.

But the ungodly are not so: whoever has lived a wicked and vicious life,
feels strange throws and pangs in his conscience when he comes to be cast: upon
a sick bed. The wicked is like the troubled sea (says the Prophet) when it
cannot rest; full of trouble and confusion, especially in a dying hour. It is
death to such a man to look back upon his life, and a hell to him to think of
eternity. When his guilty and trembling Soul is ready to leave his Body, and
just stepping into the other world, what horror and amazement do then seize
upon him? what a rage does such a man feel in his breast, when he seriously
considers, that he has been so great a fool as for the false and imperfect
pleasure of a few days to make himself miserable for ever?

3. Let the consideration of that unspeakable Reward which God has promised to
good men at the Resurrection, encourage us to obedience and a holy life. We
serve a great Prince who is able to promote us to honor; a most gracious
Master who will not let the least service we do for him pass unrewarded. This
is the Inference which the Apostle makes from this large discourse of the
Doctrine of the Resurrrection, 1 Cor. 15.58. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be
ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as ye know that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Nothing will make
death more welcome to us than a constant course of service and obedience to
God. Sleep, says Solomon, is sweet to the laboring man: so after a great
diligence and industry in working out our own salvation, and (as it is said of
David) serving our generation according to the will of God, how pleasant will
it be to fall asleep? And as an useful and well-spent life will make our death
to be sweet, so our resurrection to be glorious. Whatever acts of Piety we do
to God, or of charity to men; whatever we lay out upon the poor and afflicted
and necessitous, will all be considered by God in the day of recompenses, and
most plentifully rewarded to us.

And surely no consideration ought to be more prevalent to persuade us to
alms-deeds and charity to the poor, than that of a resurrection to another
life. Besides the promises of this life which are made to works of charity, and
there is not any grace or virtue whasoever, which has so many and so great
promises of temporal blessings made to it in Scripture as this grace of
charity; I say, besides the promises of this Life, the great promise of eternal
Life is in Scripture in a more especial manner entailed upon it. Luke 12.33.
Give alms, says our Savior, provide your selves baggs which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not; and c. 9. v. 19. make to your selves
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye shall fail they may
receive you into everlasting habitations. And 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them
that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, etc. that they do
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life; the word (...), which our
Translation renders foundation according to the common use of it, seems in this
place to have a more peculiar notion, and to signify the security that is
given by a pledge, or by an instrument or obligation of contract for the
performance of Covenants. For besides that the phrase of laying up in store, or
treasurng up a foundation, seems to be a very odd jumbling of metaphors; this
very word (...) almost necessarily requires this notion as it is used by the
same Apostle, in his second Epistle to Timothy, chap. 2. ver. 19. where it is
said, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, etc. a seal being
very improper to strengthen a foundation, but very fit to confirm a Covenant.
And then surely it ought to be rendered, the Covenant of God remains firm,
having this seal. And so likewise in the forementioned Text, the sense will be
much more easy and current if we render it thus, treasuring up, or providing
for themselves a good security or pledge against the time to come; I add
pledge, because that anciently was the common way of security for things lent:
besides that the Apostle seems plainly to allude to that passage, Tobit, 4 8,
9. If thou have abundance, give alms accordingly, etc. for thou layest up a
good treasure for thy self against the day of necessity, (...), for thou
treasurest up for thy self a good pledge; to which this of the Apostle exactly
answers, (...), treasuring up, or providing for themselves a good pledge or
security, etc. the sense however is plain, that the charity of Alms is one of
the best ways of securing our future happiness.

And yet further to encourage us to abound in works of charity, the Scripture
tells us that proportionably to the degrees of our charity shall be the degrees
of our reward; upon this consideration the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to
be liberal in their charity, 2 Cor. 9 6. he that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, but he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. So that
whatever we lay out in this kind is to the greatest advantage, and upon the
best security; two considerations which use to be very prevalent with rich men
to lay out their money.

We certainiy do it to the greatest advantage; because God will consider the
very smallest thing that any of us do in this kind. He that shall give so much
as a cup of cold water to a disciple, in the name of a disciple, shall not lose
his reward; these last words, shall not lose his reward, are a (...), and
signify much more than they seem to speak, viz. that he shall have a very
great reward, infinitely beyond the value of what he has done.

And we do it likewise upon the best security; so Solomon assures us, Prove.
19.17. He that has pity upon the poor lends to the Lord, and that which he
has given will he pay him again: and we may be confident of our security where
God is surety; nay, he tells us that in this case he looks upon himself as
principal, and that whatever we do in ways of mercy and charity to the poor he
takes as done to himself. So our Lord has told us, Matt. 25.40. and we shall
hear the same from him again out of his own mouth when he shall appear in his
Majesty to judge the World, Then the King shall answer, and say unto them,
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye havn done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

And on the other side, the Scripture no where passes a more severe doom upon
any sort of persons, than upon those who have no bowels of compassion toward
their brethren in distress. That is a fearful sentence indeed, which the
Apostle pronounces upon such persons, Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgment
without mercy that has showed no mercy. And this our Savior represents to us
in a most solemn manner, in that lively description which he makes of the
Judgment of the great day, Matt. 25.31, etc. When the Son of man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne
of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the
goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Then shall the King say unto them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of the
world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall He
say, also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave
me no meat, etc. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the
righteous into life eternal. And if this be, as most certainly it is, a true
and proper representation of the process of that Day, then the great matter of
enquiry will be, What works of charity and mercy have been done or neglected by
us, and accordingly a Sentence of eternal happiness, or misery, will be passed
upon us: I was hungry, did ye feed me or did ye not? I was naked, did ye clothe
me or did ye not? I was sick and in prison, did ye visit me or did ye not? Not
but that all the good or evil of our lives, in what kind soever, shall then be
brought to account; But that our Savior did choose to instance particularly,
and only in things of this nature, should methinks make a mighty impression
upon us, and be a powerful consideration to oblige us to have a very peculiar
regard to works of mercy and charity, and to make sure to abound in this Grace;
that when we shall appear before the great Judge of the world we may find that
mercy from Him which we have showed to others, and which we shall all
undoubtedly stand in need of in that Day.

And among all our acts of charity, those which are done upon least probability
and foresight of their meeting with any recompense in this world, either by way
of real requital or of fame and reputation, as they are of all other most
acceptable to God, so they will certainly have the most ample reward in another
world. So our Lord has assured us, and accordingly advises us, Luke 14.12,
13, 14. When thou make a feast, invite not the rich, because they will
recompense thee again: but call the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind,
for they cannot recompense thee, but thou shall he recompensed at the
resurrection of the just. If we be Religious for worldly ends, and serve God,
and do good to men, only in contemplation of some temporal advantage, we take
up with present payment, and cut our selves short of our future reward: of
such, says our Lord, Verily I say unto you, they have their reward; they are
their own security, and have taken care to satisfy themselves, and therefore
are to expect, nothing from God. But let us who call our selves Christians do
something for God, for which we have no hopes to be recompensed in this world;
that we may show that we trust God and take his word, and dare venture upon the
security of the next world, and that recompense which shall be made at the
resurrection of the just.

And how great and glorious that shall be, our Savior tells us immediately
before my Text. They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and
the resurrection from the dead, they can die no more, but they are equal to the
Angels, and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

If then we be heirs of such glorious hopes, and believe that he who is the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, will also be our God; let us live as it becomes
the Candidates of heaven, and the children of the resurrection, and such as
verily believe another life after this, and hope one day to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God.

And now that I have represented to you what encouragement there is to
well-doing, and particularly to works of Charity, from the consideration of the
blessed reward we shall certainly meet with at the Resurrection of the juft; I
shall crave your patience a little longer, whilst I propose to you one of the
fairest Examples of this kind which either this or perhaps any other Age could
easily present us withal: I mean our deceased Brother to whom we are now
paying our last solemn respects, the Reverend Mr. THOMAS GOVGE; the worthy Son
of a reverend and learned Divine of this City, Dr. Williaw Gouge, who was
Minister of this Parish of Black Friars six and forty years; he died in 1653.
and still lives in the memory of many here present.

I must confess, that I am no friend to Funeral Panegyricks, where there is
nothing of extraordinary worth and merit in the party commended to give
occasion and foundation for them: In such cases, as praises are not due to the
dead, so they may be of ill consequence to the living: not only by bringing
those of our Profession that make a practice of it, under the suspicion of
officious and mercenary flattery, but likewise by encouraging men to hope that
they also may be well spoken of, and even Sainted when they are dead, though
they should have done little or no good in their life: But yet on the other
hand, to commend those excellent Persons the virtues of whose lives have been
bright and exemplary, is not only a piece of justice due to the dead, but an
act of great charity to the living, setting a pattern of well-doing before our
eyes, very apt and powerful to incite and encourage us to go and do likewise.

Upon both these Considerations, first to do right to the memory of so good a
man, and then in hopes that the example may prove fruitful and have a
considerable effect upon others to beget the like goodness and charity in them,
I shall endeavor, in as narrow a compass as may be, to give you the just
character of this truly pious and charitable Man, and by setting his life in a
true light to recommend with all the advantage I can so excellent a pattern to
your imitation.

He was born at Bow near Stratford in the County of Middlesex the 19th. day of
September 1605. He was bred at Eaton School, and from thence chosen to King's
College in Cambridge being about 20 years of Age, in the year 1626. After he
had finished the course of his studies, and taken his Degrees, he lest the
University and his Fellowship, being presented to the Living of Colsden near
Croyden in Surrey, where he continued about 2 or 3 years; and from thence was
removed to S. Sepulchers in London, in the year 1638. and the year after
thinking fit to change his condition matched into a very worthy and ancient
Family, marrying one of the Daughters of Sir Robert Darcy.

Being thus settled in this large and populous Parish, he did with great
solicitude and pains discharge all the parts of a vigilant and faithful
Minister, for about the space of 24 years. For besides his constant and weekly
labor of preaching, lie was very diligent and charitable in visiting the sick,
and ministering not only spiritual counsel and comfort to them, but likewise
liberal relief to the wants and necessities of those that were poor and
destitute of means to help themselves in that condition. He did also every
morning throughout the year Catechize in the Church, especially the poorer sort
who were generally most ignorant; and to encourage them to come thither to be
instructed by him he did once a week distribute money among them, not upon a
certain day, but changing it on purpose as he thought good, that he might
thereby oblige them to be constantly present; These were chiefly the more aged
poor, who being past labor had leisure enough to attend upon this exercise. As
for the other sort of poor who were able to work for their living, he set them
at work upon his own charge, buying Flax and Hemp for them to spin, and what
they spun he took off their hands paying them for their work, and then got it
wrought into Cloth, and sold it as he could, chiefly among his friends, himself
bearing the whole loss. And this was a very wise and well chosen way of
charity, and in the good effect of it a much greater charity than if he had
given these very persons freely and for nothing so much as they earned by their
work; because by this means he took many off from begging, and thereby rescued
them at once from two of the most dangerous temptations of this world, Idleness
and Poverty; and by degrees reclaimed them to a virtuous and industrious course
of life, which enabled them afterward to live without being beholden to the
charity of others.

And this course so happily devised and begun by Mr. Gouge in his own Parish,
was I think that which gave the first hint to that worthy and useful Citizen
Mr. Thomas Firmin of a much larger design, which has been prosecuted by him
for some years with that vigor and good success in this City, that many
hundeds of poor Children, and others who lived idle before, unprofitable both
to themselves and the public, are continually maintained at work and taught to
earn their own livelihood much in the same way: He being, by the generous
assistance and charity of many worthy and well-dispos'd Persons of all ranks,
enabled to bear the unavoidable loss and charge of so vast an undertaking; and
by his own forward inclination to charity, and his unwearied diligence and
activity, extraordinarily fitted to sustain and go through the incredible pains
of it.

But to return to our deceased Friend; concerning whom I must content my self
to pass over many things worthy to be remembered of him, and to speak only of
those Virtues of his which were more eminent and remarkable.

Of his Piety toward God, which is the necessary foundation of all other
Graces and Virtues, I shall only say this, That it was great and exemplary, but
yet very still and quiet, without stir and noise, and much more in substance
and reality, Than in show and ostentation; and did not consist in censuring and
finding fault with others, but in the due care and government of his own life
and actions, and in exercising himself continually to have a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men; in which he was such a proficient, that even
after a long acquaintance and familiar conversation with him, it was not easy
to observe any thing that might deserve blame.

He particularly excelled in the more peculiar virtues of conversation, in
modesty, humility, meekness, cheerfulness, and in kindness and charity toward
all men.

So great was his modesty, that it never appeared either by word or action,
that he put any value upon himself. This I have often observed in him, that the
Charities which were procured chiefly by his application and industry, when he
had occasion to give an account of them, he would rather impute to any one who
had but the least hand and part in the obtaining of them, than assume any thing
of it to himself. Another instance of his modesty was, that when he had quitted
his Living of S. Sepulchers upon some dissatisfaction about the terms of
conformity, he willingly forbore preaching, saying there was no need of him
here in London where there were so many worthy Ministers, and that he thought
he might do as much or more good in another way which could give no offense.
Only in the later years of his life, being better satisfied in some things he
had doubted of before, He had License from some of the Bishops to preach in
Wales in his progress; which he was the more willing to do, because in some
places he saw great need of it, and he thought he might do it with greater
advantage among the poor People, who were the more likely to regard his
instructions, being recommended by his great charity so well known to them, and
of which they had so long had the experience and benefit. But where there was
no such need, he was very well contented to hear others persuade men to
goodness and to practice it himself.

He was clothed with humility, and had in a most eminent degree that ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit, which S. Peter says, is in the sight of God of so
great price: So that there was not the least appearance either of Pride or
Passion in any of his words or actions. He was not only free from anger and
bitterness, but from all affected gravity and moroseness. His conversation was
affable and pleasant; he had a wonderful serenity of mind and evenness of
temper, visible in his very countenance; he was hardly ever merry, but never
melancholy and sad; and for any thing I could descern, after a long and
intimate acquaintance with him, he was upon all occasions and accidents
perpetually the same; always cheerful, and always kind; of a disposition ready
to embrace and oblige all men; allowing others to differ from him, even in
opinions that were very dear to him; and provided men did but fear God and work
righteousness, he loved them heartily, how distant soever from him in judgment
about things less necessary; In all which he is very worthy to be a pattern to
men of all Persuasions whatsoever.

But that Virtue which of all other shone brightest in him, and was his most
proper and peculiar character, was his cheerful and unwearied diligence in acts
of pious Charity. In this he left far behind him all that ever I knew, and, as
I said before, had a singular sagacity and prudence in devising the most
effectual ways of doing good, and in managing and disposing his charity to the
best purposes, and to the greatest extent; always, if it were possible, making
it to serve some end of Piety and Religion; as the instruction of poor children
in the principles of Religion, and furnishing grown persons that were ignora n
with the Bible and other good Books; strictly obliging those to whom he gave
them to a diligent reading of them, and when he had opportunity exacting of
them an account how they had profited by them.

In his occasional alms to the poor, in which he was very free and bountiful,
the relief he gave them was always mingled with good counsel, and as great a
tenderness and compassion for their souls as bodies; which very often attained
the good effect it was likely to have, the one making way for the other with so
much advantage, and men being very apt to follow the good advice of those, who
give them in hand so sensible a pledge and testimony of their good will to them.

This kind of charity must needs be very expensive to him, but he had a
plentiful estate settled upon him and left him by his Father, and he laid it
out as liberally in the most prudent and effectual ways of charity he could
think of, and upon such persons as, all circumstances considered, he judged to
be the fittest and most proper objects of it.

For about nine or ten years last past he did, as is well known to many here
present, almost wholly apply his charity to Wales, because there he judged was
most occasion for it: And because this was a very great work, he did not only
lay out upon it whatever he could spare out of his own estate, but employed his
whole time and pains to excite and engage the charity of others for his
assistance in it.

And in this he had two excellent designs. One, to have poor children brought
up to read and write, and to be carefully instructed in the principles of
Religion: The other, to furnish persons of grown age, the poor especially, with
the necessary helps and means of knowledge, as the Bible, and other Books of
piety and devotion, in their own Language; to which end he procured the
Church-Catechism, the Practice of Piety, and that best of Books the Whole Duty
of Man, besides several other pious and useful Treatises, some of them to be
translated into the Welsh Tongue, and great numbers of all them to be printed,
and sent down to the chief Towns in Wales, to be sold at easy rates to those
that were able to buy them, and to be freely given to those that were not.

And in both these designs, through the blessing of God upon his unwearied
endeavors, he found very great success. For by the large and bountiful
contributions which chiefly by his industry and prudent application were
obtained from charitable Persons of all Ranks and conditions, from the Nobility
and Gentry of Wales and the neighboring Counties, and several of that Quality
in and about London; from diverse of the Right Reverend Bishops, and of the
Clergy; and from that perpetual fountain of charity the City of London, led on
and encouraged by the most bountiful example of the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor and the Court of Aldermen; to all which he constantly added two Thirds of
his own estate, which as I have been credibly informed was two hundred pounds a
year: I say, by all these together there were every year eight hundred,
sometimes a thousand poor children educated as I said before; and by this
example several of the most considerable Towns of Wales were excited to bring
up at their own charge the like number of poor children, in the like manner,
and under his inspection and care.

He likewise gave very great numbers of the Books above mentioned, both in the
Welsh and English Tongues, to the poorer sort, so many as were unable to buy
them and willing to read them. But which was the greatest work of all, and
amounted indeed to a mighty charge, he procured a new and very fair impression
of the Bible and Liturgy of the Church of England in the Welsh Tongue (the
former Impression being spent, and hardly twenty of them to be had in all
London) to the number of eight thousand; one thousand whereof were freely given
to the poor, and the rest sent to the principal Cities and Towns in Wales to be
sold to the rich at very reasonable and low rates, viz. at four shillings a
piece well bound and clasped; which was much cheaper than any English Bible was
ever sold that was of so fair a print and paper: A work of that charge, that it
was not likely to have been done any other way; And for which this Age, and
perhaps the next, will have great cause to thank God oh his behalf.

In these Good works he employed all his time and care and pains, and his whole
heart was in them; so that he was very little affected with any thing else; and
seldom either minded or knew any thing of the strange occurrences of this
troublesome and busy Age, such as I think are hardly to be paralleled in any
other: Or if he did mind them, he scarce ever spoke any thing about them. For
this was the business he laid to heart, and knowing it to be so much and so
certainly the Will of his heavenly Father, it was his meat and drink to be
doing of it: and the good success he had in it was a continual feast to him,
and gave him a perpetual serenity both of mind and countenance. His great love
and zeal for this work made all the pains and difficulties of it seem nothing
to him: He would rise early and sit up late, and continued the same diligence
and industry to the last, though he was in the threescore and seventeenth year
of his Age. And that he might manage the distribution of this great charity
with his own hands, and see the good effect of it with his own eyes, he always
once, but usually twice a year, at his own charge traveled over a great part
of Wales, none of the best Countries to travel in: But for the love of God and
men he endured all that, together with the extremity of heat and cold (which in
their several seasons are both very great there) not only with patience but
with pleasure. So that all things considered there have not, since the
primitive times of Christianity, been many among the sons of men to whom that
glorious character of the Son of God might be better applied, that he went
about doing good. And Wales may as worthily boast of this truly Apostolical man
as of their famous St. David; who was also very probably a good man, as those
times of ignorance and superstition went. But his goodness is so disguised by
their fabulous Legends and stories which give us the account of him, that it is
not easy to discover it. Indeed ridiculous miracles in abundance are reported
of him: as, that upon occasion of a great number of people reforming from all
parts to hear him preach, for the greater advantage of his being heard, a
mountain all on a sudden rose up miraculously under his feet, and his voice was
extended to that degree that he might be distinctly heard for two or three
miles round about. Such fantastical miracles as these make up a great part of
his History. And admitting all these to be true (which a wise man would be loath
to do) our departed Friend had that which is much greater and more excellent
than all these, a fervent charity to God and men; which is more than to speak
(as they would make us believe S. David did) with the Tongue of men and Angels,
more than to raise or remove mountains.

And now methinks it is pity so good a design so happily prosecuted should fall
and die with this good man. And it is now under deliberation, if possible,
still to continue and carry it on, and a very worthy and charitable person
pitched upon for that purpose, who is willing to undertake that part which he
that is gone performed so well: But this will depend upon the continuance of
the former Charities and the concurrence of those worthy and well-disposed
persons in Wales to contribute their part as formerly; which I persuade my self
they will cheerfully do.

I will add but one thing more concerning our deceased Brother, that though he
meddled not at all in our present heats and differences as a Party, having much
better things to mind; yet as a looker on he did very sadly lament them, and
for several of the last years of his life he continued in the Communion of our
Church, and, as he himself told me, thought himself obliged in conscience so to
do.

He died in the 77th year of his age, October. 29th, 1681. It so pleased God that
his death was very sudden; and so sudden, that in all probability he himself
hardly perceived it when it happened, for he died in his sleep; so that we may
say of him as it is said of David, after be had served his generation according
to the will of God he fell asleep.

I confess that a sudden death is generally undesirable, and therefore with
reason we pray against it; because so very few are sufficiently prepared for
it: But to him the constant employment of whose life was the best preparation
for death that was possible, no death could be sudden; nay, it was rather a
favor and blessing to him, because by how much the more sudden so much the
more easy: As if God had designed to begin the reward of the great pains of
his life in an easy death. And indeed it was rather a translation than a
death; and, saving that his body was left behind, what was said of Enoch may
not unfitly be applied to this pious and good man with respect to the
suddenness of his change; he walked with God, and was not, for God took him.

And God grant that we who survive, may all of us sincerely endeavor to tread
in the steps of his exemplary piety and charity; of his labor of love, his
unwearied diligence and patient continuance in doing good, that we may meet
with that encouraging commendation which he has already received from the
mouth of our Lord. Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
always that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom be
glory for ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Reverend BENJAMIN WHICHCOT, D. D. May
24th, 1683.
2 COR. V. 6. Wherefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the body we are absent from the Lord.


THese Words contain one of the chief grounds of encouragement which the
Christian Religion gives us against the fear of death. For our clearer
understanding of them it will be requisite to consider the Context, looking
back as far as the beginning of the Chapter; where the Apostle pursues the
argument of the foregoing Chapter; which was to comfort and encourage
Christians under their afflictions and sufferings from this consideration, that
these did but prepare the way for a greater and more glorious reward; Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. And suppose the worst, that these sufferings should
extend to death, there is comfort for us likewise in this case, ver. 1. of this
Chapter, For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, etc. If our earthly house of this
tabernacle; he calls our body an earthly earthly house, and that we may not
look upon it as a certain abode and fixed habitation, he does by way of
correction of himself add, that it is but a tabernacle or tent which must
shortly be taken down: And when it is, we shall have a building of God, a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. This is a description of our
heavenly habitation, in opposition to our earthly house or tabern (...). It is
a building of God, not like those houses or tabernacles which men build, and
which are liable to decay and dissolution, to be taken down or to fall down of
themselves, for such are those houses of clay which we dwell in whose
foundations are in the dust, but an habitation prepared by God himself, a house
not made with hands; that which is the immediate work of God being in Scripture
opposed to that which is made with hands and effected by humane concurrence and
by natural means: And being the immediate work of God, as it is excellent, so
it is lasting and durable, which no earthly thing is; eternal in the heavens,
that is eternal and heavenly.

For in this we groan earnestly; that is, while we are in this body we groan by
reason of the pressures and afflictions of it. Desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven: If so be that being clothed we shall not be
found naked. Desiring to be clothed upon; that is, we could wish not to put off
these bodies, not to be stripped of them by death, but to be of the number of
those who at the coming of our Lord without the putting off these bodies shall
be changed and clothed upon with their house which is from heaven, and without
dying be invested with those spiritual and glorious and heavenly bodies which
men shall have at the Resurrection.

This I doubt not is the Apostle's meaning in these Words; in which he speaks
according to a common opinion among the Disciples grounded (as St. John tells
us) upon a mistake of our Savior's words concerning him, If I will that he
tarry till I come: upon which St. John tells us that there went a Saying among
the brethren that that disciple should not die; that is, that he should live
till Christ's coming to Judgment, and then be changed; and consequently that
Christ would come to Judgment before the end of that Age. Suitable to this
common opinion among Christians the Apostle here says, in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, if
so be that being clothed we shall no be found naked. It has puzzled
Interpreters what to make of this passage, and well it might; for whatever be
meant by being clothed, how can they that are clothed be found naked? But I
think it is very clear that our Translatours have not attained the true sense
of this passage, (...), which is most naturally rendered thus, if so be we shall
be found clothed, and not naked: That is, if the coming of Christ shall find us
in the body and not divested of it; if at Christ's coming to Judgment we shall
be found alive, and not dead. And then the sense of the whole is very clear and
current: we are desirous to be clothed upon with our house from heaven (that
is, with our spiritual and immortal bodies) if so be it shall so happen that at
the coming of Christ we shall be found alive in these bodies, and not stripped
of them before by death. And then it follows, For we burdened (that is, with
the afflictions and pressures of this life) not that we would be unclothed
(that is, not that we desire by death to be divested of these bodies) but
clothed upon (that is, if God see it good we had rather be found alive, and
changed, and without putting off these bodies have immortality as it were
superinduced) that so mortality might be swallowed up of life. The plain sense
is, that he rather desires (if it may be) to be of the number of those who
shall be found alive at the coming of Christ, and have this mortal and
corruptible body while they are clothed with it changed into a spiritual and
incorruptible body, without the pain and terror of dying: of which immediate
translation into heaven without the painful divorce of soul and body by death,
Enoch and Elias were examples in the old Testament.

It follows, ver. 5. Now he that has wrought for us the self same thing is
God: That is, it is he who has fitted and prepared us for this Glorious
change: who also has given us the earnest of the Spirit. The Spirit is
frequently in Scripture called the witness and seal and earnest of our future
happiness and blessed resurrection or change of these vile and earthly bodies
into spiritual and heavenly bodies. For as the resurrection of Christ from the
dead by the power of the holy Ghost is the great proof and evidence of
immortality; so the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelling
in us is the pledge and earnest of our Resurrection to an immortal life.

From all which the Apostle concludes in the words of the Text, Therefore we
are always confident, that is, we are always of good courage against the fear
of death, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body we are absent from the
Lord, (...), which may better be rendered whilst we converse or sojourn in the
body, than whilst we are at home; Because the design of the Apostle is to show
that the body is not our house but our tabernacle; and that whilst we are in
the body we are not at home, but pilgrims and strangers. And this notion the
Heathens had of our present life and condition in this world. Ex vita discedo
(faith Tully) tanquam ex hospitio non tanquam ex domo; commorandi enim natura
diversorium nobis, non habitandi locum dedit. We go out of this life as it were
from an Inn, and not from our home; nature having designed it to us as a place
to sojourn but not to dwell in.

We are absent from the Lord; that is, we are detained from the blessed sight
and enjoyment of God, and kept out of the possession of that happiness which
makes Heaven.

So that the Apostle makes an immediate opposition between our continuance in
the body, and our blissfull enjoyment of God; and lays it down for a certain
truth, that whilst we remain in the body we are detained from our happiness,
and that so soon as ever we leave the body we shall be admitted into it,
knowing that whilst we converse in the body we are absent from the Lord. And
ver 8. we are willing rather to be absent from the body and present with the
Lord; intimating that so soon as we quit these bodies we shall be admitted to
the blessed sight and enjoyment of God.

My design from this Text is to draw some useful Corollaries or Conclusions
from this Assertion of the Apostle, That whilst we are in these bodies we are
detained from our happiness; and that so soon as ever we depart out of them we
shall be admitted to the possession and enjoyment of it. And they are these,

1. This Assertion shows us the vanity and falsehood of that Opinion, or rather
dream, concerning the sleep of the Soul from the time of death till the general
Resurrection. This is chiefly grounded upon that frequent Metaphor in Scripture
by which death is resembled to sleep, and those that are dead are said to be
fallen asleep. But this Metaphor is no where in Scripture, that I know of,
applied to the soul but to the body resting in the grave in order to its being
awakened and raised up at the Resurrection. And thus it is frequently used with
express reference to the body, Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust
of the earth shall awake. Matthew. 27.52. And the graves were opened, and many
bodies of saints which slept arose. Acts 13.36. David after he had served his
own generation by the will of God fell on sleep, and was laid to his fathers
and saw corruption; which surely can no otherwise be understood than of his
body. 1 Cor. 15.21. Now is Christ risen from the dead and become the
first fruits of them that slept: that is, the resurrection of his body is the
earnest and assurance that ours also shall be raised. And ver. 51. We shall not
all sleep, but shall all be changed; where the Apostle certainly speaks both of
the death and change of these corruptible bodies. 1 Thessal. 4.14. If we
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus
shall God bring with him; That is, the bodies of those that died in the Lord
shall be raised, and accompany him at his coming. So that it is the body which
is said in Scripture to sleep, and not the soul. For that is utterly
inconsistent with the Apostles Assertion here in the Text, that while we are in
the body we are absent from the Lord, and that so soon as we depart out of the
body we shall be present with the Lord. For surely to be with the Lord must
signify a state of happiness, which sleep is not, but only of inactivity:
Besides, that the Apostle's Argument would be very flat, and it would be but a
cold encouragement against the fear of death, that so soon as we are dead we
shall fall asleep and become insensible. But the Apostle uses it as an
Argument why we should be willing to dye as soon as God pleases, and the
sooner the better, because so soon as we quit these bodies we shall be present
with the Lord, that is, admitted to the blissful sight and enjoyment of him;
and while we abide in the body we are detained from our happiness: But if our
souls shall sleep as well as our bodies till the general Resurrection, it is
all one whether we continue in the body or not, as to any happiness we shall
enjoy in the mean time; which is directly contrary to the main scope of the
Apostle's Argument.

2. This Assertion of the Apostle's does perfectly conclude against the feigned
Purgatory of the Church of Rome; which supposes the far greater number of true
and faithful Christians, of those who dye in the Lord and have obtained eternal
redemption by him from hell not to pass immediately into a state of happiness,
but to be detained in the suburbs of Hell in extremity of torment (equal to
that of hell for degree, though not for duration) till their fouls be purged,
and the guilt of temporal punifhments, which they are liable to, be some way or
other paid off and discharged. They suppose indeed some very few holy persons
(especially those who suffer Martyrdom) to be so perfect at their departure out
of the body as to pass immediately into Heaven, because they need no purgation:
But most Christians they suppose to dye so imperfect that they stand in need of
being purged; and according to the degree of their imperfection are to be
detained a shorter or a longer time in Purgatory.

But now, besides that there is no Text in Scripture from whence any such state
can probably be concluded (as is acknowledged by many learned men of the Church
of Rome) and even that Text which they have most insisted upon (they shall be
saved, yet so as by fire) is given up by them as insufficient to conclue the
thing. Estius is very glad to get off it, by saying there is nothing in it
against Purgatory: Why? no body pretends that, but we might reasonably expect
that there should be something for it in a Text which has been so often
produced and urged by them for the proof of it. I say, besides that there is
nothing in Scripture for Purgatory, there are a great many things against it,
and utterly inconsistent with it. In the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus,
which was designed to represent to us the different stares of good and bad men
in another world, there is not the least intimation of Purgatory, but that good
men pass immediately into a state of happiness, and bad men into a place of
torment. And St. John, Rev. 14.13. pronounces all that dye in the Lord happy,
because they rest from their labors; which they cannot be said to do who are
in a state of great anguish and torment, as those are supposed to be who are in
Purgatory.

But above all, this Reasoning of Saint Paul is utterly inconsistent with any
imagination of such a state. For he encourages all Christians in general
against the fear of death from the consideration of that happy state they
should immediately pass into, by being admitted into the presence of God; which
surely is not Purgatory. We are of good courage (says he) and willing rather to
be absent from the body: And great reason we should be so, if so soon as we
leave the body we are present with the Lord. But no man sure would be glad to
leave the body to go into a place of exquisite and extreme torment, which they
tell us is the case of most Christians when they dye. And what can be more
unreasonable, than to make the Apostle to use an argument to comfort all
Christians against the sear of death which concerns but very few in comparison?
So that if the Apostle's reasoning be good, that while we are in this life we
are detained from our happiness, and so soon as we depart this life we pass
immediately into it, and therefore death is desirable to all good men: I say,
if this reasoning be good, it is very clear that Saint Paul knew nothing of the
Doctrine now taught in the Church of Rome concerning Purgatory; because that is
utterly inconsistent with what he expressly asserts in this Chapter; and quite
takes away the force of his whole Argument.

3. To encourage us against the fear of death. And this is the Conclusion which
the Apostle makes from this consideration. Therefore (says he) we are of good
courage, knowing that whilst we converse in the body we are absent from the
Lord. There is in us a natural love of life, and a natural horror and dread of
death; so that our spirits are apt to shrink at the thoughts of the approach of
it. But this fear may very much be mitigated and even overruled by Reason and
the considerations of Religion. For death is not so dreadful in it self, as
with regard to the consequences of it: And those will be as we are, comfortable
and happy to the good, but dismal and miserable to the wicked. So that the only
true antidote against the fear of death is the hopes of a better life; and the
only firm ground of these hopes is the mercy of God in Jefus Christ, upon our
due preparation for another world by repentance and a holy life. For the sting
of death is sin; and when that is taken away the terror and bitterness of
death is past: And then death is so far from being dreadful, that in reason it
is extremely desirable; because it lets us into a better state, such as only
deserves the name of life. Hi vivunt qui ex corporum vinculis tanquam e carcere
evolaverunt: vestra vero quae dicitur vita, mors est. They truly live (could a
Heathen say) who have made their escape out of this prison of the body; but
that which men commonly call life is rather death than life. To live indeed, is
to be well, and to be happy; and that we shall never be till we are got beyond
the grave.

4. This Consideration should comfort us under the loss and death of Friends,
which certainly is one of the greatest grievances and troubles of humane life.
For if they be fit for God, and go to him when they dye, they are infinitely
happier than it was possible for them to have been in this world: and the
trouble of their absence from us is fully balanced by their being present with
the Lord. For why should we lament the end of that life which we are assured is
the beginning of immortality? One reason of our trouble for the loss of friends
is because we loved them: But it is no sign of our love to them to grudge and
repine at their happiness. But we hoped to have enjoyed them longer: Be it so;
yet why should we be troubled that they are happy sooner than we expected? but
they are parted from us, and the thought of this is grievous: But yet the
consideration of their being parted for a while is not near so sad, as the
hopes of a happy meeting again, never to be parted any more, is comfortable and
joyful. So that the greater our love to them was, the less should be our grief
for them, when we consider that they are happy, and that they are safe; past
all storms, all the troubles and temptations of this life, and out of the reach
of all harm and danger for ever. But though the Reason of our duty in this case
be very plain, yet the practice of it is very difficult; and when all is said,
natural affection will have its course: And even after our Judgment is
satisfied, it will require some time to still and quiet our Passions.

5. This Consideration should wean us from the love of life; and make us not
only contented but willing and glad to leave this world, whenever it shall
please God to call us out of it. This Inference the Apostle makes, ver. 8. We
are confident, I say, and willing rather to he absent from the body, and
present with the Lord. Though there were no state of immortality after this
life, yet methinks we should not desire to live always in this world. Habet
natura (says Tully) ut aliarum rerum, sic vivendi modum: As nature has set
bounds and measures to other things, so likewise to life; of which men should
know when they have enough, and not covet so much of it till they be tired and
cloyed with it. If there were no other inconvenience in long life, this is a
great one, that in a long course of time we unavoidably see a great many things
which we would not; our own misfortunes and the calamities of others; public
confusions and distractions; the loss of Friends and Relations; or which is
worse, their misery; or which is worst of all, their miscarriage: Especially, a
very infirm and tedious old age is very undesirable: For who would desire to
live long uneasy to himself, and troublesome to others? It is time for us to
be willing to dye, when we cannot live with the good will even of our friends:
when those who ought to love us best think much that we live so long, and can
hardly forbear to give us broad signs that they are weary of our company. In
such a case a man would almost be contented to dye out of civility; and not
choose to make any long stay where he sees that his company is not acceptable.
If we think we can be welcome to a better place, and to a more delightful
society, why should we desire to thrust our selves any longer upon an
ill-natured world, upon those who have much ado to refrain from telling us
that our room is better than our company?

Some indeed have a very happy and vigorous old age, and the taper of life
burns clear in them to the last: Their understandings are good, their memories
and senses tolerable, their humor pleasant and their conversation acceptable,
and their Relations kind and respectful to them. But this is a rare felicity,
and which seldom happens but to those who have lived wisely and virtuously,
and by a religious and regular course of life have preserved some of their best
spirits to the last, and have not by vice and extravagance drawn off life to
the dregs, and left nothing to be enjoyed but infirmities and ill humors,
guilt and repentance: But on the contrary have prudently laid up some
considerable comforts and supports for themselves against this gloomy day;
having stored their minds with wisdom and knowledge, and taken care to secure to
themselves the comfortable reflections of an useful and well-spent life, and the
favor and loving kindness of God which is better than life it self. But
generally the extremities of old age are very peevish and querulous, and a
declining and falling back to the weak and helpless condition of Infancy and
Childhood. And yet less care is commonly taken to please aged persons, and less
kindness showed to them (unless it be in expectation of receiving greater from
them) than to Children: because these are cherished in hopes, the others in
despair of their growing better. So that if God see it good it is not desirable
to live to try nature, and the kindness and good will of our Relations to the
utmost.

Nay there is reason enough why we should be well contented to dye in any Age
of our life. If we are young, we have tasted the best of it: If in our middle
Age, we have not only enjoyed all that is desirable of life, but almost all
that is tolerable: If we are old, we are come to the dregs of it, and do but
see the same things over and over again, and continually with less pleasure.

Especially if we consider the happiness from which we are all this while
detained. This life is but our Infancy and childhood in comparison of the manly
pleasures and employments of the other state. And why should we desire to be
always children; and to linger here below to play the fools yet a little
longer? In this sense that high expression of the Poet is true.

-- Dii celant homines, ut vivere durent,
Quam sit dulce mori --
The Gods conceal from men the sweetness of dying, to make them patient and
contented to live.

This life is wholly in order to the other. Do but make sure to live well, and
there is no need of living long. To the purpose of preparation for another
world, the best life is the longest. Some live a great pace, and by continual
diligence and industry in serving God and doing good, do really dispatch more
of the business of life in a few years, than others do in a whole Age; who go
such a santring pace toward Heaven, as if they were in no haste to get
thither. But if we were always prepared we should rejoice at the prospect of
our end; as those who have been long tossed at Sea are overjoyed at the sight of
Land.

I have now done with my Text, but have another Subject to speak of; that
excellent Man in whose Place I now stand; whom we all knew, and whom all that
knew him well did highly esteem and reverence. He was born in Shropshire of a
worthy and ancient Family, the 11th of March, 1609. was the sixth Son of his
Father: and being bred up to learning and very capable of it, was sent to the
University of Cambridge, and planted there in Emanuel College, where he was
chosen Fellow, and was an excellent Tutour and Instructour of Youth, and bred
up many persons of great Quality, and others, who afterward proved useful and
eminent; as many perhaps as any Tutour of that Time.

About the age of four or five and thirty he was made Provost of King's
College; where he was a most vigilant and prudent Governor, a great encourager
of Learning and good Order, and by his careful and wise management of the
Estate of the College brought it into a very flourishing Condition, and left it
so.

It cannot be denied (nor am I much concerned to dissemble it) that here he
possessed another Man's place, who by the iniquity of the Times was wrongfully
ejected; I mean Dr. Collins the famous and learned Divinity-Professor of that
University. During whose life (and he lived many years after) by the free
consent of the College there were two shares out of the common Dividend
allotted to the Prevost, one whereof was constantly paid to Dr. Collins, as if
he had been still Prevost. To this Dr. Whichcot did not only give his consent
(without which the thing could not have been done) but was very forward for the
doing of it, though hereby he did not only considerably lessen his own profit,
but likewise incurr no small censure and hazard, as the Times then were. And
lest this had not been kindness enough to that worthy Person whose Place he
possessed, in his last Will he left to his Son, Sir John Collins, a Legacy of
one hundred pounds.

And as he was not wanting either in respect or real kindness to the rightful
Owner, so neither did he stoop to do any thing unworthy to obtain that Place;
for he never took the Covenant: And not only so, but by the particular
friendship and interest which he had in some of the chief of the Visitours he
prevailed to have the greatest part of the Fellows of that College exempted
from that Imposition; and preserved them in their Places by that means. And to
the Fellows that were ejected by the Visitours, he likewise freely consented
that their full Dividend for that year should be paid them, even after they
were ejected. Among these was the Reverend and ingenious Dr. Charles Mason;
upon whom after he was ejected, the College did confer a good Living which then
fell in their gift, with the consent of the Prevost, who, knowing him to be a
worthy man, was contented to run the hazard of the displeasure of those Times.

So that I hope none will be hard upon him, that he was contented upon such
terms to be in a capacity to do good in bad Times.

For, besides his care of the College, he had a very great and good influence
upon the University in general. Every Lord's day in the Afternoon, for almost
twenty years together, he preached in Trinity Church, where he had a great
number not only of the young Scholars, but of those of greater standing and
best repute for Learning in the University his constant and attentive Auditors:
And in those wild and unsettled Times contributed more to the forming of the
Students of that University to a sober sense of Religion than any man in that
Age.

After he left Cambridge he came to London, and was chosen Minister of
Black-Friars, where he continued till the dreadful Fire: And then retired
himself to a Donative he had at Milton near Cambridge: where he Preached
constantly; and relieved the poor, and had their children taught to read at his
own charge; and made up differences among the neighbors. Here he stayed till,
by the promotion of the Reverend Dr. Wilkins, his Predecessor in this Place,
to the Bishopric of Chester, he was by his interest and recommendation
presented to this Church. But during the building of it, upon the invitation of
the Court of Aldermen, in the Mayoralty of Sir William Turner, he preached
before that Honorable Auditory at Guild Hall Chapel every Sunday in the
afternoon with great acceptance and approbation, for about the space of seven
years.

When his Church was built, he bestowed his pains here twice a week, where he
had the general love and respect of his Parish; and a very considerable and
judicious Auditory, though not very numerous by reason of the weakness of his
voice in his declining age.

It pleased God to bless him, as with a plentiful Estate, so with a charitable
Mind: which yet was not so well known to many, because in the disposal of his
charity he very much affected secrecy. He frequently bestowed his alms (as I am
informed by those who best knew) on poor housekeepers disabled by age or
sickness to support themselves, thinking those to be the most proper objects of
it. He was rather frugal in expense upon himself, that so he might have
wherewithal to relieve the necessities of others.

And he was not only charitable in his life, but in a very bountiful manner at
his death; bequeathing in pious and charitable Legacies to the value of a
thousand pounds. To the Library of the University of Cambridge fifty pounds:
and of King's College one hundred pounds: and of Emanuel College twenty pounds:
To which College he had been a considerable benefactour before; having founded
there several Scholarships to the value of a thousand pounds, out of a Charity
with the disposal whereof he was entrusted, and which not without great
difficulty and pains he at last recovered.

To the Poor of the several Places where his Estate lay, and where he had been
Minister he gave above one hundred pounds.

Among those who had been his Servants, or were so at his death, he disposed in
Annuities and Legacies in money to the value of above three hundred pounds.

To other charitable uses and among the poorer of his Relations, above three
hundred pounds.

To every one of his Tenants he left a Legacy according to the proportion of
the Estate they held, by way of remembrance of him: And to one of them that was
gone much behind he remitted in his Will seventy pounds. And as became his
great goodness, he was ever a remarkably kind Landlord, forgiving his Tenants,
and always making abatements to them for hard years or any other accidental
losses that happened to them.

I must not omit the wise provision he made in his Will to prevent Lawsuits
among the Legatees, by appointing two or three persons of greatest prudence and
Authority among his Relations final Arbitrators of all differences that should
arise.

Having given this account of his last Will, I come cow to the sad part of all:
sad, I mean, to us, but happiest to him. A little before Easter last he went
down to Cambridge: where, upon taking a great Cold, he fell into a distemper
which in a few days put a period to his life. He died in the house of his
ancient and most learned Friend, Dr Cudworth, Master of Christ's College.
During his sickness he had a constant calmness and serenity of mind: and under
all his bodily weakness possessed his soul in great patience. After the Prayers
for the Visitation of the Sick. (which he said were excellent Prayers) had been
used, he was put in mind of receiving the Sacrament; to which he answered, that
he most readily embraced the proposal: And after he had received it, said to
Dr. Cudworth, I heartily thank you for this most Christian office: I thank you
for putting me in mind of receiving this Sacrament: adding this pious
ejaculation, The Lord fulfill all his declarations and promises, and pardon all
my weaknesses and imperfections. He disclaimed all merit in himself; and
declared that whatever he was, he was through the grace and goodness of God in
Jesus Christ. He expressed likewise great dislike of the Principles of
Separation; and said he was the more desirous to receive the Sacrament that he
might declare his full Communion with the Church of Christ all the world over.
He disclaimed Popery, and, as things of near affinity with it, or rather parts
of it, all superstition, and usurpation upon the consiciences of men.

He thanked God, that he had no pain in his body, nor disquiet in his mind.

Toward his last he seemed rather unwilling to be detained any longer in this
state; not for any pains he felt in himself, but for the trouble he gave his
friends: saying to one of them who had with great care attended him all along
in his sickness, My dear friend, thou have taken a great deal of pains to
uphold a crazy body, but it will not do: I pray thee give me no more Cordials;
for why should thou keep me any longer out of that happy state to which I am
going. I thank God I hope in his mercy, that it shall be well with me.

And herein God was pleased particularly to answer those devout and wellweighed
petitions of his which he frequently used in his Prayer before Sermon, which I
shall set down in his own words, and I doubt not those that were his constant
hearers do well remember them; And superadd this, O Lord, to all the grace and
favor which thou have shown us all along in life, not to remove us hence but
with all advantage for Eternity, when we shall be in a due preparation of mind,
in a holy constitution of soul, in a perfect renunciation of the guise of this
mad and sinful world, when we shall be entirely resigned up to thee, when we
shall have clear acts of faith in God by Jesus Christ, high and reverential
thoughts of thee in our minds, enlarged and inflamed affections toward thee,
etc. And whenever we shall come to leave this world, which will be when thou
shall appoint (for the issues of life and death are in thy hands) afford us
such a mighty power and presence of thy good Spirit that we may have solid
consolation in believing, and avoid all consternation of mind, all doubtfulness
and uncertainty concerning our everlasting condition, and at length depart in
the faith of God's Elect, etc. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
for the end of that man is peace.

Thus you have the short History of the life and death of this eminent Person;
whose just Character cannot be given in few words, and time will not allow me
to use many. To be able to describe him aright it were necessary one should be
like him; for which reason I must content my self with a very imperfect draught
of him.

I shall not insist upon his exemplary piety and devotion toward God, of which
his whole life was one continued Testimony. Nor will I praise his profound
Learning, for which he was justy had in so great reputation. The moral
improvements of his mind, a Godlike temper and disposition (as he was wont to
call it) he chiefly valued and aspired after; that universal charity and
goodness, which he did continually preach and practice.

His Conversation was exceeding kind and assable, grave and winning, prudent
and profitable. He was slow to declare his judgment, and modest in delivering
it. Never passionate, never peremptory: so far from imposing upon others, that
he was rather apt to yield. And though he had a most profound and well-poized
judgment, yet was he of all men I ever knew the most patient to hear others
differ from him, and the most easy to be convinced when good Reason was
offered; and, which is seldom seen, more apt to be favorable to another man's
Reason than his own.

Studious and inquisitive men commonly at such an age (at forty or fifty at the
utmost) have fixed and settled their Judgments in most Points, and as it were
made their last understanding; supposing they have thought, or read, or heard
what can be said on all sides of things; and after that, they grow positive and
impatient of contradiction, thinking it a disparagement to them to alter their
judgment: But our deceased Friend was so wise, as to be willing to learn to the
last; knowing that no man can grow wiser without some change of his mind,
without gaining some knowledge which he had not, or correcting some error
which he had before.

He had attained so perfect a mastery of his Passions, that for the latter and
greatest part of his life he was hardly ever seen to be transported with Anger:
and as he was extremely careful not to provoke any man, so not to be provoked
by any; using to say, if I provoke a man he is the worse for my company, and if
I suffer my self to be provoked by him I shall be the worse for his.

He very seldom reproved any person in company otherwise than by silence, or
some sign of uneasiness, or some very soft and gentle word; which yet from the
respect men generally bore to him did often prove effectual: For he understood
humane nature very well, and how to apply himself to it in the most easy and
effectual ways.

He was a great encourager and kind directour of young Divines: and one of the
most candid hearers of Sermons, I think, that ever was: So that though all men
did mightily reverence his Judgment, yet no man had reason to fear his Censure.
He never spoke well of himself, nor ill of others: making good that saying of
Pansa in Tully, neminem alterius, qui suae consideret virtuti, invidere; that
no man is apt to envy the worth and virtues of another, that has any of his
own to trust to.

In a word, he had all those virtues, and in a high degree, which an excellent
temper, great consideration, long care and watchfulness over himself, together
with the assistance of God's grace (which he continually implored, and mightily
relied upon) are apt to produce. Particularly he excelled in the virtues of
Conversation, humanity, and gentleness, and humility, a prudent and peaceable
and reconciling temper. And God knows we could very ill at this time have
spared such a Man; and have lost from among us as it were so much balm for the
healing of the Nation, which is now so miserably rent and torn by those wounds
which we madly give our selves. But since God has thought good to deprive us
of him, let his virtues live in our memory, and his example in our lives. Let
us endeavor to be what he was, and we shall one day be what he now is, of
blessed memory on Earth, and happy for ever in Heaven.

And now methinks the consideration of the Argument I have been upon, and of
that great Example that is before us, should raise our minds above this world
and six them upon the glory and happiness of the other. Let us then begin
heaven here, in the frame and temper of our minds, in our heavenly affections
and conversation; in a due preparation for, and in carnest desires and
breathings after that blessed state which we firmly believe and assuredly hope
to be one day possessed of: when we shall be removed out of this sink of sin
and sorrows into the Regions of bliss and immortality: where we shall meet all
those worthy and excellent persons who are gone before us, and whose
conversation was so delightful to us in this world; and will be much more so
to us in the other, when the spirits of just men shall be made perfect, and
shall be quit of all those infirmities which did attend and lessen them in this
mortal state: when we shall meet again with our dear Brother, and all those
good men whom we knew in this world, and with the Saints and excellent persons
of all Ages to enjoy their blessed friendship and society for ever, in the
presence of the blessed God where is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
are pleasures for evermore.

In a firm persuasion of this happy state let us every one of us say with
David, and with the same ardency of affection that he did, As the Heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God: My soul thirsts
for God, for the living God; O when shall I come and appear before God? That so
the life which we now live in this world may be a patient continuance in well
doing in a joyful expectation of the blessed hope and the glorious appearance
of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; To whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be all honor and glory, now and for ever.

Now the God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make us perfect in every good work to do his will; working in us always that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom be glory for
ever. Amen.

A PERSUASIVE TO Frequent Communion.
1 COR. XI. 26, 27, 28. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
do show the Lord's death till he come.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup.


MY design in this Argument is, from consideration of the Nature of this
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and of the perpetual Use of it to the end of
the world, to awaken men to a sense of their duty, and the great obligation
which lies upon them to the more frequent receiving of it. And there is the
greater need to make men sensible of their duty in this particular, because in
this last Age by the unwary discourses of some concerning the nature of this
Sacrament and the danger of receiving it unworthily, such doubts and fears have
been raised in the minds of men as utterly do deter many, and in a great
measure to discourage almost the generality of Christians from the use of it;
to the great prejudice and danger of men's souls, and the visible abatement of
Piety by the gross neglect of so excellent a means of our growth and
improvement in it; and to the mighty Scandal of our Religion, by the general
disuse and contempt of so plain and solemn an Institution of our blessed Lord
and Savior.

Therefore I shall take occasion as briefly and clearly as I can to treat of
these four Points.

First, Of the Perpetuity of this Institution; this the Apostle signifies when
he says, that by eating this Bread, 1 Cor. 11 26.
and drinking this Cup, we do show the Lord's Death till he come.

Secondly, Of the Obligation that lies upon all Christians to a frequent
observance of this Institution; this is signified in that expression of the
Apostle, as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup: which expression
considered and compared together with the practice of the Primitive Church,
does imply an Obligation upon Christians to the frequent receiving of this
Sacrament.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to satisfy the Objections and Scruples which have
been raised in the minds of men, and particularly of many devout and sincere
Christians, to their great discouragement from their receiving this Sacrament,
at least so frequently as they ought: which Objections are chiefly grounded
upon what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.27.
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: and does eat and drink
damnation to himself. Ver. 29.


Fourthly, What Preparation of our selves is necessary in order to our worthy
receiving of this Sacrament: which will give me occasion to explain the
Apostle's meaning in those Words, Ver. 28.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.

Perpetuity of this Institution, employed in those Words. For as often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord s Death till he come;
or the Words may be read imperatively and by way of Precept, show ye forth the
Lord's Death till he come. In the three verses immediately before, the Apostle
particularly declares the Institution of this Sacrament, with the manner and
circumstances of it, as he had received it not only by the hands of the
Apostles, but, as the Words seem rather to intimate, by immediate Revelation
from our Lord himself, ver. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I
also delivered unto you: that the Lord Jesus in the same night that he was
betrayed took Bread, and when he had given Thanks he brake it, and said, take,
eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, this Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood: this do as often as ye shall drink it in
remembrance of me. So that the Institution is in these Words, this do in
remembrance of me. In which words our Lord commands his Disciples after his
Death to repeat these occasions of taking and breaking and eating the Bread,
and of drinking of the Cup, by way of solemn Commemoration of him. Now whether
this was to be done by them once only, or oftener; and whether by the Disciples
only, during their lives, or by all Christians afterward in all successive
Ages of the Church, is not so certain merely from the force of these Words, do
this in remembrance of me: but what the Apostle adds puts the matter out of all
doubt, that the Institution of this Sacrament was intended not only for the
Apostles, and for that Age, but for all Christians, and for all Ages of the
Christian Church; For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death till he come: that is, until the time of his second
coming, which will be at the end of the World. So that this Sacrament was
designed to be a standing Commemoration of the Death and Passion of our Lord
till he should come to Judgment; and consequently the Obligation that lies upon
Christians to the observation of it is perpetual, and shall never cease to the
end of the World.

So that it is a vain conceit and mere dream of the Enthusiasts concerning the
seculum Spiritus Sancti, the Age and dispenstion of the Holy Ghost, when, as
they suppose, all humane Teaching shall cease, and all external Ordinances and
Institutions in Religion shall vanish, and there shall be no farther use of
them. Whereas it is very plain from the New Testament that Prayer, and outward
Teaching, and the Use of the two Sacraments, were intended to continue among
Christians in all Ages. As for Prayer, (besides our natural Obligation to this
duty, if there were no revealed Religion) we are by our Savior particularly
exhorted to watch and pray, with regard to the day of Judgment, and in
consideration of the uncertainty of the time when it shall be: And therefore
this will always be a Duty incumbent upon Christians till the day of Judgment,
because it is prescribed as one of the best ways of Preparation for it. That
outward Teaching likewise and Baptism were intended to be perpetual is no less
plain, because Christ has expressly promised to be with the Teachers of his
Church in the use of these Ordinances to the end of the World, Matthew. 28.19,
20. Go and disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: and lo I am with you always to the end of
the World. Not only to the end of that particular Age, but to the end of the
Gospel Age, and the consummation of all Ages, as the phrase clearly imports.
And it is as plain, from this Text, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was
intended for a perpetual Institution in the Christian Church, till the second
coming of Christ, viz. his coming to judgment: Because St. Paul tells us, that
by these Sacramental Signs the Death of Christ is to be represented and
commemorated till he comes. Do this in remembrance of me: For as often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come.

And if this be the End and Use of this Sacrament, to be a solemn remembrance,
of the Death and Sufferings of our Lord during his absence from us, that is,
till his coming to Judgment, then this Sacrament will never be out of date till
the second coming of our Lord. The consideration whereof should mightily
strengthen and encourage our Faith in the hope of Eternal Life so often as we
partake of this Sacrament: since our Lord has left it to us as a memorial of
himself till he come to translate his Church into Heaven, and as a sure pledge
that he will come again at the end of the World and invest us in that Glory
which he is now gone before to prepare for us. So that as often as we approach
the Table of the Lord, we should comfort our selves with the thoughts of that
blessed time when we shall eat and drink with him in his Kingdom, and shall be
admitted to the great Feast of the Lamb, and to eternal Communion with God the
Judge of all, and with our blessed and glorified Redeemer, and the holy Angels,
and the Spirits of just men made perfect.

And the same consideration should likewise make us afraid to receive this
Sacrament unworthily, without due Preparation for it, and without worthy
effects of it upon our Hearts and Lives. Because of that dreadful Sentence of
condemnation which at the second coming of our Lord shall be past upon those,
who by the profanation of this solemn Institution trample under foot the son of
God, and contemn the blood of the Covenant; that Covenant of Grace and Mercy
which God has ratified with Mankind by the Blood of his Son. The Apostle tells
us that he that eats and drinks unworthily is guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord, and eats and drinks damnation to himself. This indeed is
spoken of temporal Judgment (as I shall show in the latter part of this
Discourse,) but the Apostle likewise supposes, that if these temporal
Judgments had not their effect to bring men to Repentence, but they still
persisted in the Profanation of this holy Sacrament, they should at last be
condemned with the World. For as he that partaketh worthily of this Sacrament
confirms his interest in the promises of the Gospel, and his Title to eternal
Life; so he that receives this Sacrament unworthily, that is without due
Reverence, and without fruits meet for it; nay, on the contrary, continues to
live in sin whilst he commemorates the Death of Christ, who gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, this man aggravates and seals his
own Damnation, because he is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, not only
by the contempt of it, but by renewing in some sort the cause of his
sufferings, and as it were crucifying to himself afresh the Lord of life and
glory, and putting him to an open shame. And when the great Judge of the world
shall appear and pass final Sentence upon men, such obstinate and impenitent
wretches as could not be wrought upon by the remembrance of the dearest love of
their dying Lord, nor be engaged to leave their sins by all the ties and
obligations of this holy Sacrament, shall have their portion with Pilate and
Judas, with the chief Priests and Soldiers, who were the betrayers and
murderers of the Lord of life and glory; and shall be dealt withal as those
who are in some sort guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Which severe
threatening ought not to discourage men from the Sacrament, but to deter all
those from their sins who think of engaging themselves to God by so solemn and
holy a Covenant. It is by no means a sufficient Reason to make men to fly from
the Sacrament, but certainly one of the most powerful Arguments in the world
to make men forsake their sins; as I shall show more fully under the third head
of this Discourse.

Obligation that lies upon all Christians to the frequent observance and
practice of this Institution. For though it be not necessarily employed in these
Words, as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup; yet if we compare these
Words of the Apostle with the usage and practice of Christians at that Time,
which was to communicate in this holy Sacrament so often as they solemnly met
together to worship God, they plainly suppose and recommend to us the frequent
use of this Sacrament, or rather imply an obligation upon Christians to embrace
all opportunities of receiving it. For the sense and meaning of any Law or
Institution is best understood by the general practice which follows
immediately upon it.

And to convince men of their obligation hereunto, and to engage them to a
suitable practice, I shall now endeavor with all the plainness and force of
persuasion I can: And so much the more, because the neglect of it among
Christians is grown so general, and a great many persons from a superstitious
awe and reverence of this Sacrament are by degrees fallen into a profane
neglect and contempt of it.

I shall briefly mention a threefold Obligation lying upon all Christians to
frequent Communion in this holy Sacrament; each of them sufficient of it self,
but all of them together of the greatest force imaginable to engage us hereunto.

1. We are obliged in point of indispensable duty, and in obedience to a plain
precept and most solemn institution of our blessed Savior that great Lawgiver,
who is able to save and to destroy, as St. James calls him: He has bid us do
this: And S. Paul who declares nothing in this matter but what he tells us he
received from the Lord, admonishes us to do it often. Now for any man that
professes himself a Christian to live in the open and continued contempt or
neglect of a plain Law and Institution of Christ is utterly inconsistent with
such a profession. To such our Lord may say as he did to the Jews, Why call ye
me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? How far the Ignorance of
this Institution, or the mistakes which men have been led into about it, may
extenuate this neglect is another consideration. But after we know our Lord's
will in this particular and have the Law plainly laid before us, there is no
cloak for our sin. For nothing can excuse the wilful neglect of a plain
Institution from a downright contempt of our Savior's Authority.

2. We are likewise obliged hereunto in point of Interest. The benefits which
we expect to be derived and assured to us by this Sacrament are all the
blessings of the new Covenant, the forgiveness of our sins, the grace and
assistance of God's holy Spirit to enable us to perform the conditions of this
Covenant required on our part; and the comforts of God's holy Spirit to
encourage us in well-doing, and to support us under sufferings; and the
glorious reward of eternal life. So that in neglecting this Sacrament we
neglect our own interest and happiness, we forsake our own mercies, and judge
our selves unworthy of all the blessings of the Gospel, and deprive our selves
of one of the best means and advantages of confirming and conveying these
blessings to us. So that if we had not a due sense of our duty, the
consideration of our own interest should oblige us not to neglect so excellent
and so effectual a means of promoting our own comfort and happiness.

3. We are likewise particularly obliged in point of gratitude to the careful
observance of this Institution. This was the particular thing our Lord gave in
charge when he was going to lay down his life for us, do this in remembrance
of me. Men use religiously to observe the charge of a dying friend, and, unless
it be very difficult and unreasonable, to do what he desires: But this is the
charge of our best friend (nay of the greatest friend and benefactour of all
mankind) when he was preparing himself to dye in our stead and to offer up
himself a sacrifice for us; to undergo the most grievous pains and sufferings
for our sakes, and to yield up himself to the worst of temporal deaths that he
might deliver us from the bitter pains of eternal death. And can we deny him
any thing he asks of us who was going to do all this for us? Can we deny him
this? so little grievous and burdensome in it self, so infinitely beneficial
to us? Had such a friend, and in such circumstances, bid us do some great
thing would we not have done it? how much more when he has only, said, do
this in remembrance of me; when he has only commended to us one of the most
natural and delightful Actions, as a fit representation and memorial of his
wonderful love to us, and of his cruel sufferings for our sakes; when he has
only enjoined us, in a thankful commemoration of his goodness, to meet at his
Table and to remember what he has done for us; to look upon him whom we have
pierced, and to resolve to grieve and wound him no more? Can we without the
most horrible ingratitude neglect this dying charge of our Sovereign and our
Savior, the great friend and lover of souls? A command so reasonable, so
easy, so full of blessings and benefits to the faithful observers of it!

One would think it were no difficult matter to convince men of their duty in
this particular, and of the necessity of observing so plain an Institution of
our Lord; that it were no hard thing to persuade men to their interest, and to
be willing to partake of those great and manifold blessings which all
Christians believe to be promised and made good to the frequent and worthy
Receivers of this Sacrament. Where then lies the difficulty? what should be the
cause of all this backwardness which we see in men to so plain, so necessary,
and so beneficial a duty? The truth is, men have been greatly discouraged from
this Sacrament by the unwary pressing and inculcating of two great truths; the
danger of the unworthy receiving of this holy Sacrament, and the necessity of a
due preparation for it. Which brings me to the

Third Particular I proposed, which was to endeavor to satisfy the Objections
and Scruples which have been raised in the minds of men, and particularly of
many devout and sincere Christians, to their great discouragement from the
receiving of this Sacrament, at least so frequently as they ought. And these
Objections, I told you, are chiefly grounded upon what the Apostle says at the
27th. verse. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again ver.
29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself. Upon the mistake and misapplication of these Texts have been grounded
two Objections, of great force to discourage men from this Sacrament, which I
shall endeavor with all the tenderness and clearness I can to remove. First,
That the danger of unworthy receiving being so very great, it seems the safest
way not to receive at all. Secondly, That so much preparation and worthiness
being required in order to our worthy Receiving, the more timorous sort of
devout Christians can never think themselves duly enough qualified for so
sacred an Action.

Obj. 1.
1. That the danger of unworthy receiving being so very great it seems the
safest way wholly to refrain from this Sacrament and not to receive it at all.
But this Objection is evidently of no force if there be (as most certainly
there is) as great or a greater danger on the other hand, viz. in the neglect
of this Duty: And so though the danger of unworthy receiving be avoided by not
receiving, yet the danger of neglecting and contemning a plain Institution of
Christ is not thereby avoided. Surely they in the Parable that refused to come
to the marriage feast of the King's Son and made light of that gracious
invitation were at least as faulty as he who came without a wedding garment.
And we find in the conclusion of the Parable, that as he was severely punished
for his disrespect, so they were destroyed for their disobedience. Nay of the
two it is the greater sign of contempt wholly to neglect the Sacrament, than to
partake of it without some due qualification. The greatest indisposition that
can be for this holy Sacrament is ones being a bad man, and he may be as bad,
and is more likely to continue so, who wilfully neglects this Sacrament, than
he that comes to it with any degree of reverence and preparation, though much
less than he ought: And surely it is very hard sor men to come to so solemn an
Ordinance without some kind of religious awe upon their spirits, and without
some good thoughts and resolutions, at least for the present. If a man that
lives in any known wickedness of life do before he receive the Sacrament set
himself seriously to be humbled for his sins, and to repent of them, and to beg
God's grace and assistance against them; and after the receiving of it, does
continue for some time in these good resolutions, though after a while he may
possibly relapse into the same sins again; this is some kind of restraint to a
wicked life; and these good moods and sits of repentance and reformation are
much better than a constant and uninterrupted course of sin: even this
righteousness, which is but as the morning cloud and the early dew which so
soon passes away, is better than none.

And indeed scarce any man can think of coming to the Sacrament, but he will by
this consideration be excited to some good purposes, and put upon some sort of
endeavor to amend and reform his life: and though he be very much under the
bondage and power of evil habits, if he do with any competent degree of
sincerity (and it is his own fault if he do not) make use of this excellent
means and instrument for the mortifying and subduing of his lusts and for the
obtaining of God's grace and assistence, it may please God by the use of these
means so to abate the force and power of his lusts, and to imprint such
considerations upon his mind in the receiving of this holy Sacrament and
preparing himself for it, that he may at last break off his wicked course and
become a good man.

But, on the other hand, as to those who neglect this Sacrament, there is
hardly any thing left to restrain them from the greatest enormities of life;
and to give a check to them in their evil course: nothing but the penalty of
humane Laws, which men may avoid and yet be wicked enough. Heretofore men used
to be restrained from great and scandalous vices by shame and fear of disgrace,
and would astain from many sins out of regard to their honor and reputation
among men: But men have hardened their faces in this degenerate Age, and those
gentle restraints of modesty which governed and kept men in order heretofore
signify nothing now adays. Blushing is out of fashion, and shame is ceased
from among the Children of men.

But the Sacrament did always use to lay some kind of restraint upon the worst
of mer: and if it did not wholly reform them, it would at least have some good
effect upon them for a time: If it did not make men good, yet it would make
them resolve to be so, and leave some good thoughts and impressions upon their
minds.

So that I doubt not but it has been a thing of very bad consequence, to
discourage men so much from the Sacrament, as the way has been of late years:
And that many men who were under some kind of check before, since they have
been driven away from the Sacrament have quite let loose the reins, and
prostituted themselves to all manner of impiety and vice. And among the many
ill effects of our past confusions; this is none of the least, That in many
Congregations of this Kingdom Christians were generally difused and deterred
from the Sacrament, upon a pretense that they were unfit for it; and being so,
they must necessarily incur the danger of unworthy receiving; and therefore
they had better wholly to abstain from it. By which it came to pass that in
very many Places this great and solemn Institution of the Christian Religion
was almost quite forgotten, as if it had been no part of it; and the
remembrance of Christ's death even lost among Christians: So that many
Congregations in England might justly have taken up the complaint of the Woman
at our Savior's Sepulcher, they have taken away our Lord, and we know not
where they have laid him.

But surely men did not well consider what they did, nor what the consequences
of it would be, when they did so earnestly dissuade men from the Sacrament.
It Is true indeed the danger of unworthy receiving is great; but the proper
inference and conclusion from hence is not that men should upon this
consideration be deterred from the Sacrament, but that they should be
affrighted from their sins, and from that wicked course of life which is an
habitual indisposition and unworthiness. St. Paul indeed (as I observed before)
truly represents, and very much aggravates the danger of the unworthy receiving
of this Sacrament; but he did not deter the Corinthians from it, because they
had sometimes come to it without due reverence, but exhorts them to amend what
had been amiss and to come better prepared and disposed for the future. And
therefore after that terrible declaration in the Text, Whosoever shall eat this
bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord, he does not add, therefore let Christians take heed of
coming to the Sacrament, but, let them come prepared and with due reverence,
not as to a common meal, but to a solemn participation of the body and blood of
Christ; but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and
drink of that cup.

For, if this be a good reason to abstain from the Sacrament, for fear of
performing so sacred an action in an undue manner, it were best for a bad man
to lay aside all Religion and to give over the exercise of all the duties of
piety, of prayer, of reading and hearing the Word of God; because there is a
proportionable danger in the unworthy and unprofitable use of any of these. The
prayer of the wicked (that is, of one that resolves to continue so) is an
abomination to the Lord. And our Savior gives us the same caution concerning
hearing the Word of God; take heed how you hear. And St. Paul tells us, that
those who are not reformed by the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is the savor of
death, that is deadly and damnable; to such persons.

But now will any man from hence argue, that it is best for a wicked man not to
pray, nor to hear or read the Word of God, lest by so doing he should endanger
and aggravate his condemmation? And yet there is as much reason from this
consideration to persuade men to give over praying and attending to God's Word,
as to lay aside the use of the Sacrament. And it is every whit as true that he
that prays unworthily and hears the Word of God unworthily, that is, without
fruit and benefit, is guilty of a great contempt of God and of our blessed
Savior; and by his indevout prayers and unfruitful hearing of God's Word does
further and aggravate his own damnation: I say, this is every whit as true, as
that he that eats and drinks the Sacrament unworthily is guilty of a high
contempt of Christ, and eats and drinks his own Judgment; so that the danger of
the unworthy performing this so sacred an action is no otherwise a reason to
any man to abstain from the Sacrament, than it is an Argument to him to cast
off all Religion. He that unworthily uses or performs any part of Religion is
in an evil and dangerous condition; but he that casts off all Religion plungeth
himself into a most desperate state, and does certainly damn himself to avoid
the danger of damnation: Because he that casts off all Religion throws off all
the means whereby he should be reclaimed and brought into a better state. I
cannot more fitly illustrate this matter than by this plain Similitude: He that
eats and drinks intemperately endangers his health and his life, but he that to
avoid this danger will not eat at all, I need not tell you what will certainly
become of him in a very short space.

There are some conscientious persons who abstain from the Sacrament upon an
apprehension that the sins which they shall commit afterward are unpardonable.
But this is a great mistake; our Savior having so plainly declared that all
manner of sin mall be forgiven men except the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost;
such as was that of the Pharisees, who as our Savior tells us blasphemed the
Holy Ghost in ascribing those great miracles which they saw him work, and which
he really wrought by the Spirit of God, to the power of the Devil. Indeed to
sin deliberately after so solemn an engagement to the contrary is a great
aggravation of sin, but not such as to make it unpardonable. But the neglect of
the Sacrament is not the way to prevent these sins; but, on the contrary, the
constant receiving of it with the best preparation we can is one of the most
effectual means to prevent sin for the future, and to obtain the assistence of
God's grace to that end: And if we fall into sin afterward, we may be renewed
by repentance; for we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins; and as such, is in a very
lively and affecting manner exhibited to us in this blessed Sacrament of his
body broken, and his blood shed for the remission of our sins. Can we think
that the primitive Christians, who so frequently received this holy Sacrament,
did never after the receiving of it fall into any deliberate sin? undoubtedly
many of them did; but far be it from us to think that such sins were
unpardonable, and that so many good men should because of their careful and
conscientious observance of our Lord's Institution unavoidably fall into
condemnation.

To draw to a conclusion of this matter: such groundless fears and jealousies
as these may be a sign of a good meaning, but they are certainly a sign of an
injudicious mind. For if we stand upon these Scruples, no man perhaps was ever
so worthily prepared to draw near to God in any duty of Religion, but there was
still some defect or other in the disposition of his mind, and the degree of
his preparation. But if we prepare our selves as well as we can, this is all
God expects. And for our fears of falling into sin afterward, there is this
plain answer to be given to it; that the danger of falling into sin is not
prevented by neglecting the Sacrament, but encrcased: because a powerful and
probable means of preserving men from sin is neglected. And why should not
every sincere Christian, by the receiving of this Sacrament and renewing his
Covenant with God, rather hope to be confirmed in goodness, and to receive
farther assistences of God's grace and holy Spirit to strengthen him against
sin, and to enable him to subdue it; than trouble himself with fears which are
either without ground, or if they are not, are no sufficient reason to keep any
man from the Sacrament? We cannot surely entertain so unworthy a thought of God
and our blessed Savior, as to imagine that he did institute the Sacrament not
for the furtherance of our Salvation, but as a snare, and an occasion of our
ruin and damnation. This were to pervert the gracious design of God, and to
turn the cup of Salvation into a cup of deadly poison to the souls of men.

All then that can reasonably be inferred from the danger of unworthy receiving
is, that upon this consideration men should be quickened to come to the
Sacrament with a due preparation of mind, and so much the more to fortify
their resolutions of living sutably to that holy Covenant which they solemnly
renew every time they receive this holy Sacrament. This consideration ought to
convince us of the absolute necessity of a good life, but not to deter us from
the use of any means which may contribute to make us good. Therefore (as a
learned Divine says very well) this Sacrament can be neglected by none but
those that do not understand it, but those who are unwilling to be tied to
their duty and are afraid of being engaged to use their best diligence to keep
the commandments of Christ: And such persons have no reason to fear being in a
worse condition, since they are already in so bad a state. And thus much may
suffice for answer to the first Objection concerning the great danger of
unworthy receiving this holy Sacrament. I proceed to the

2. Second Objection, Obj. 2.
which was this; That so much preparation and worthiness being required to our
worthy receiving, the more timorus sort of Christians can never think
themselves duly enough qualified for so sacred an Action.

For a full Answer to this Objection, I shall endeavor briefly to clear these
three things. First, That every degree of Imperfection in our preparation for
this Sacrament is not a sufficient reason for men to refrain from it. Secondly,
That a total want of a due preparation, not only in the degree but in the main
and substance of it, though it render us unfit at present to receive this
Sacrament, yet it does by no means excuse our neglect of it. Thirdly, That the
proper Inference and conclusion from the total want of a due preparation is not
to cast off all thoughts of receiving the Sacrament, but immediately to set
upon the work of preparation that so we may be fit to receive it. And if I can
clearly make out these three things, I hope this Objection is fully answered.

1. That every degree of imperfection in our preparation for this Sacrament is
not a sufficient reason for men to abstain from it: For then no man should ever
receive it. For who is every way worthy, and in all degrees and respects duly
qualified to approach the presence of God in any of the duties of his Worship
and Service? Who can wash his hands in innocence, that so he may be perfectly
fit to approach God's Altar? There is not man on earth that lives and sins not.
The Graces of the best men are imperfect; and every imperfection in grace and
goodness is an imperfection in the disposition and preparation of out minds for
this holy Sacrament: But if we do heartily repent of our sins, and sincerely
resolve to obey and perform the terms of the Gospel, and of that Covenant which
we entered into by Baptism, and are going solemnly to renew and confirm by our
receiving of this Sacrament, we are at least in some degree and in the main
qualified to partake of this holy Sacrament; and the way for us to be more fit
is to receive this Sacrament frequently, that by this spiritual food of God's
appointing, by this living bread which comes down from heaven our souls may be
nourished in goodness, and new strength and virtue may be continually derived
to us for the purifying of our hearts and enabling us to run the ways of God's
commandments with more constancy and delight. For the way to grow in grace and
to be strengthened with all might in the inner man, and to abound in all the
fruits of righteousness which by Christ Jesus are to the praise and glory of
God, is with care and conscience to use those means which God has appointed
for this end: And if we will neglect the use of these means it is to no purpose
for us to pray to God for his grace and assistence. We may tire our selves with
our devotions and fill heaven with vain complaints, and yet by all this
importunity obtain nothing at God's hand: Like lazy beggars that are always
complaining and always asking, but will not work, will do nothing to help
themselves and better their condition, and therefore are never like to move the
pity and compassion of others. If we expect God's grace and assistence, we must
work out our own Salvation in the careful use of all those means which God
has appointed to that end. That excellent degree of goodness which men would
have to fit them for the Sacrament, is not to be had but by the use of it. And
therefore it is a preposterous thing for men to insist upon having the end
before they will use the means that may further them in the obtaining of it.

2. The total want of a due preparation, not only in the degree but in the main
and substance of if, though it render us unfit at present to receive this
Sacrament, yet does it by no means excuse our neglect of it. One fault may draw
on another, but can never excuse it. It is our great fault that we are wholly
unprepared, and no man can claim any benefit by his fault, or plead it in
excuse or extenuation of this neglect. A total want of preparation and an
absolute unworthiness is Impenitency in an evil course, a resolution to
continue a bad man, not to quit his lusts and to break off that wicked course
he has lived in: But is this any excuse for the neglect of our duty that we
will not fit our selves for the doing of it with benefit and advantage to our
selves? A father commands his son to ask him blessing every day, and is ready
to give it him; but so long as he is undutifull to him in his other actions,
and lives in open disobedience, forbids him to come in his sight. He excuses
himself from asking his father blessing, because he is undutifull in other
things, and resolves to continue so. This is just the case of neglecting the
duty God requires, and the blessings he offers to us in the Sacrament, because
we have made our selves incapable of so performing the one as to receive the
other; and are resolved to continue so. We will not do our duty in other
things, and then plead that we are unfit and unworthy to do it in this
particular of the Sacrament.

3. The proper Inference and conclusion from a total want of due preparation
for the Sacrament is not to cast off all thoughts of receiving it, but
immediately to set about the work of preparation, that so we may be fit to
receive it. For if this be true, that they who are absolutely unprepared ought
not to receive the Sacrament, nor can do it with any benefit; nay by doing it
in such a manner render their condition much worse, this is a most forcible
argument to repentance and amendment of life: There is nothing reasonable in
this case but immediately to resolve upon a better course, that so we may be
meet partakers of those holy Mysteries, and may no longer provoke God's wrath
against us by the wilful neglect of so great and necessary a duty of the
Christian Religion. And we do wilfully neglect it, so long as we do wilfully
refuse to fit and qualify our selves for the due and worthy performance of it.
Let us view the thing in a like case; A Pardon is graciously offered to a
Rebel, he declines to accept it, and modestly excuses himself because he is
not worthy of it. And why is he not worthy? because he resolves to be a Rebel,
and then his pardon will do him no good, but be an aggravation of his crime.
Very true: and it will be no less an aggravation that he refuses it for such a
reason, and under a pretense of modesty does the most imprudent thing in the
world. This is just the case; and in this case there is but one thing
reasonable to be done, and that is, for a man to make himself capable of the
benefit as soon as he can, and thankfully to accept of it: but to excuse
himself from accepting of the benefit offered, because he is not worthy of it,
nor fit for it, nor ever intends to be so, is as if a man should desire to be
excused from being happy because he is resolved to play the fool and to be
miserable. So that whether our want of preparation be total, or only to some
degree, it is every way unreasonable: If it be in the degree only, it ought not
to hinder us from receiving the Sacrament; If it be total, it ought to put us
immediately upon removing the impediment, by making such preparation as is
necessary to the due and worthy receiving of it. And this brings me to the

Fourth and last thing I proposed, viz. What preparation of our selves is
necessary in order to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament. Which I told you
would give me occasion to explain the Apostle's meaning in the last part of the
Text, But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink
of that cup. I think it very clear from the occasion and circumstances of the
Apostle's discourse concerning the Sacrament that he does not intend the
examination of our state, whether we be Christians or not, and sincerely
resolved to continue so; and consequently that he does not here speak of our
habitual preparation by the resolution of a good life. This he takes for
granted, that they were Christians and resolved to continue and persevere in
their Christian profession: But he speaks of their actual fitness and
worthiness at that time when they came to receive the Lord's Supper. And for
the clearing of this matter, we must consider what it was that gave occasion to
this discourse. At the 20th verse of this Chapter he sharply reproves their
irreverent and unsuitable carriage at the Lord's Supper. They came to it very
disorderly, one before another. It was the custom of Christians to meet at
their Feast of Charity, in which they did communicate with great sobriety and
temperance; and when that was ended they celebrated the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. Now among the Corinthians this order was broken: The rich met and
excluded the poor from this common Feast. And after an irregular feast (one
before another eating his own supper as he came) they went to the Sacrament in
great disorder; one was hungry having eaten nothing at all, others were drunk,
having eaten intemperately; and the poor were despised and neglected. This the
Apostle condemns as a great profanation of that solemn Institution of the
Sacrament; at the participation whereof they behaved themselves with as little
reverence as if they had been met at a common supper or feast. And this he
calls not discerning the Lord's body, making no difference in their behavior
between the Sacrament, and a common meal: which irreverent and contemptuous
carriage of theirs he calls eating and drinking unworthily: for which he
pronounces them guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, which were
represented and commemorated in their eating of that bread and drinking of that
cup. By which irreverent and contemptuous usage of the body and blood of our
Lord, he tells them that they did incur the Judgment of God; which he calls
eating and drinking their own judgment. For that the word (...), which our
Translatours render damnation, does not here signify eternal condemnation, but
a temporal judgment and chastisement in order to the prevention of eternal
condemnation, is evident from what follows; He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself: And then he says, For this
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep: That is, for this
irreverence of theirs God had sent among them several diseases, of which many
had dyed. And then he adds, For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. If we would judge our selves; whether this be meant of the public
Censures of the Church, or our private censuring of our selves in order to our
future amendment and reformation, is not certain. If of the latter, which I
think most probable, then judging here is much the same with examining our
selves, ver. 28. And then the Apostle's meaning is, that if we would censure
and examine our selves, so as to be more careful for the future, we should
escape the judgment of God in these temporal punishments. But when we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. But when we are judged; that is, when by neglecting thus to judge our
selves we provoke God to judge us; we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world; that is, he inflicts these temporal judgments
upon us to prevent our eternal condemnation. Which plainly shows, that the
judgment here spoken of is not eternal condemnation. And then he concludes,
Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together to eat tarry for one another. And
if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
judgment: where the Apostle plainly shows both what was the crime of unworthy
receiving, and the punishment of it. Their crime was, their irreverent and
disorderly participation of the Sacrament; and their punishment was, those
temporal judgments which God inflicted upon them for this their contempt of the
Sacrament.

Now this being, I think, very plain; we are proportionably to understand the
precept of examination of our selves before we eat of that bread and drink of
that cup. But let a man examine himself; that is, consider well with himself
what a sacred Action he is going about, and what behavior becomes him when he
is celebrating this Sacrament instituted by our Lord in memorial of his body
and blood, that is, of his death and passion: And if heretofore he have been
guilty of any disorder and irreverence (such as the Apostle here taxes them
withal) let him censure and judge himself for it, be sensible of and sorry for
his fault, and be careful to avoid it for the future; and having thus examined
himself, let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup. This, I think, is the
plain sense of the Apostle's Discourse; and that if we attend to the scope and
circumstances of it, it cannot well have any other meaning.

But some will say, Is this all the preparation that is required to our worthy
receiving of the Sacrament, that we take care not to come drunk to it, nor to
be guilty of any irreverence and disorder in the celebration of it? I answer in
short, this was the particular unworthiness with which the Apostle taxes the
Corinthians; and which he warns them to amend, as they desire to escape the
judgments of God, such as they had already felt for this irreverent carriage of
theirs, so unsuitable to the holy Sacrament: He finds no other fault with them
at present in this matter, though any other fort of irreverence will
proportionably expose men to the like punishment. He says nothing here of their
habitual preparation, by the sincere purpofe and resolution of a good life
answerable to the rules of the Christian Religion: This we may suppose he took
for granted. However, it concerns the Sacrament no more than it does Prayer or
any other religious duty. Not but that it is very true that none but those who
do heartily embrace the Christian Religion and are sincerely resolved to frame
their lives according to the holy rules and precepts of it, are fit to
communicate in this solemn acknowledgment and profession of it. So that it is a
practice very much to be countenanced and encouraged, because it is of great
use, for Christians by way of preparation for the Sacrament to examine
themselves in a larger sense than in all probability the Apostle here intended:
I mean, to examine our past lives and the actions of them in order to a sincere
repentance of all our errors and miscarriages, and to fix us in the steady
purpose and resolution of a better life: particularly, when we expect to have
the forgiveness of our sins sealed to us, we should lay aside all enmity and
thoughts of revenge, and heartily forgive those that have offended us, and put
in practice that universal love and charity which is represented to us by this
holy Communion. And to this purpose we are earnestly exhorted in the public
Office of the Communion by way of due preparation and disposition for it, to
repent us truly of our sins past, to amend our lives, and to be in perfect
charity with all men, that so we may be meet partakers of those holy mysteries.

And because this work of examining our selves concerning our state and
condition, and of exercising repentance toward God and charity toward men is
incumbent upon us as we are Christians, and can never be put in practice more
seasonably and with greater advantage than when we are meditating of this
Sacrament, therefore besides our habitual preparation by repentance and the
constant endeavors of a holy life, it is a very pious and commendable custom
in Christians before their coming to the Sacrament to set apart some particular
time for this work of examination. But how much time every person should allot
to this purpose, is matter of prudence; and as it need not, so neither indeed
can it be precisely determined. Some have greater reason to spend more time
upon this work, than others; I mean those whose accounts are heavier, because
they have long run upon the score and neglected themselves: And some also have
more leisure and freedom for it, by reason of their casie condition and
circumstances in the world; and therefore are obliged to allow a greater
portion of Time for the exercises of piety and devotion. In general, no man
ought to do a work of so great moment and concernment slightly and
perfunctorily. And in this, as in all other actions, the end is principally to
be regarded. Now the end of examining our selves is to understand our slate and
condition, and to reform whatever we find amiss in our selves. And provided
this end be obtained, the circumstances of the means are less considerable:
whether more or less time be allowed to this work it matters not so much, as to
make sure that the work be thoroughly done.

And I do on purpose speak thus cautiously in this matter, because some pious
persons do perhaps err on the stricter hand, and are a little superstitious on
that side; insomuch that unless they can gain so much time to set apart for a
solemn preparation, they will refrain from the Sacrament at that time; though
otherwise they be habitually prepared. This I doubt not proceeds from a pious
mind; but as the Apostle says in another case about the Sacrament, shall I
praise them in this? I praise them not. For, provided there be no wilful
neglect of due preparation, it is much better to come so prepared as we can,
nay I think it is our duty so to do, rather than to abstain upon this
punctilio. For when all is done, the best preparation for the Sacrament is the
general care and endeavor of a good life: And he that is thus prepared may
receive at any time when opportunity is offered, though he had no particular
foresight of that opportunity. And I think in that case such a one shall do
much better to receive than to refrain; because he is habitually prepared for
the Sacrament, though he had no time to make such actual preparation as he
desired. And if this were not allowable how could Ministers communicate with
sick persons at all times, or persuade others to do it many times upon very
short and sudden warning?

And indeed we cannot imagine that the primitive Christians, who received the
Sacrament so frequently that for ought appears to the contrary they judged it
as essential and necessary a part of their public worship as any other part of
it whatsoever, even as their Hymns and Prayers, and reading and interpreting
the Word of God: I say, we cannot well conceive how they who celebrated it so
constantly, could allot any more time for a solemn preparation for it, than
they did for any other part of divine worship: And consequently, that the
Apostle when he bids the Corinthians examine themselves could mean no more than
that confidering the nature and ends of this Institution they should come to it
with great reverence; and reflecting upon their former miscarriages in this
matter, should be careful upon this admonition to avoid them for the future
and to amend what had been amiss: which to do, requires rather resolution and
care than any long time of preparation.

I speak this, that devout persons may not be entangled in an apprehension of a
greater necessity than really there is of a long and solemn preparation every
time they receive the Sacrament. The great necessity that lies upon men is to
live as becomes Christians, and then they can never be absolutely unprepared.
Nay, I think this to be a very good preparation; and I see not why men should
not be very well satisfied with it, unless they intend to make the same use of
the Sacrament that many of the Papists do of Confession and Absolution, which
is to quit with God once or twice a year, that so they may begin to sin again
upon a new score.

But because the Examination of our selves is a thing so very useful, and the
time which men are wont to set apart for their preparation for the Sacrament is
so advantageous an opportunity for the practice of it; therefore I cannot but
very much commend those who take this occasion to search and try their ways,
and to call themselves to a more solemn account of their actions. Because this
ought to be done sometime, and I know no fitter time for it than this. And
perhaps some would never find time to recollect themselves and to take the
condition of their souls into serious consideration, were it not upon this
solemn occasion.

The sum of what I have said is this, that supposing a person to be habitually
prepared by a religious disposition of mind and the general course of a good
life, this more solemn actual preparation is not always necessary: And it is
better when there is an opportunity to receive without it, than not to receive
at all. But the greater our actual preparation is, the better. For no man can
examine himself too often, and understand the state of his soul too well, and
exercise repentance, and renew the resolutions of a good life too frequently.
And there is perhaps no fitter opportunity for the doing of all this, than when
we approach the Lord's table, there to commemorate his death, and to renew our
Covenant with him to live as becomes the Gospel.

All the Reflection I shall now make upon this Discourse, shall be from the
consideration of what has been said earnestly to excite all that profess and
call themselves Christians to a due preparation of themselves for this holy
Sacrament, and a frequent participation of it according to the intention of our
Lord and Savior in the institution of it, and the undoubted practice of
Christians in the primitive and best times, when men had more devotion and
fewer scruples about their duty.

If we do in good earnest believe that this Sacrament was instituted by our
Lord in remembrance of his dying love, we cannot but have a very high value and
esteem for it upon that account. Methinks so often as we read in the
institution of it those words of our dear Lord, do this in remembrance of me,
and consider what he who said them did for us, this dying charge of our best
friend should stick with us and make a strong impression upon our minds:
Especially if we add to these, those other words of his, not long before his
death, Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friend; ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. It is a wonderful
love which he has expressed to us, and worthy to be had in perpetual
remembrance. And all that he expects from us, by way of thankful
acknowledgment, is to celebrate the remembrance of it by the frequent
participation of this blessed Sacrament. And shall this charge, laid upon us by
him who laid down his life for us, lay no obligation upon us to the solemn
remembrance of that unparalled kindness which is the fountain of so many
blessings and benefits to us? It is a sign we have no great sense of the
benefit when we are so unmindfull of our benefactour as to forget him days
without number. The Obligation he has laid upon us is so vastly great, not
only beyond all requital but beyond all expression, that if he had commanded us
some very grievous thing we ought with all the readiness and cheerfulness in
the world to have done it; how much more when he has imposed upon us so easy
a commandment, a thing of no burden but of immence benefit? when he has only
said to us, Eat O friends, and drink O beloved? when he only invites us to his
table, to the best and most delicious Feast that we can partake of on this side
heaven?

If we seriously believe the great blessings which are there exhibited to us
and ready to be conferred upon us, we should be so far from neglecting them,
that we should heartily thank God for every opportunity he offers to us of
being made partakers of such benefits. When such a price is put into our hands,
shall we want hearts to make use of it? Methinks we should long with David (who
saw but the shadow of these blessings) to be satisfied with the good things of
God's house, and to draw near his altar; and should cry out with him, O when
shall I come and appear before thee! My soul longs, yea even faints for the
courts of the Lord, and my flesh cries out for the living God. And if we had a
just esteem of things, we should account it the greatest infelicity and
judgment in the world to be debarred of this privilege, which yet we do
deliberately and frequently deprive our selves of.

We exclaim against the Church of Rome with great impatience, and with a very
just indignation, for robbing the People of half of this blessed Sacrament, and
taking from them the cup of blessing, the cup of salvation; and yet we can
patiently endure for some months, nay years, to exclude our selves wholly from
it. If no such great benefits and blessings belong to it, why do we complain of
them for hindering us of any part of it? But if there do, why do we by our own
neglect deprive our selves of the whole?

In vain do we bemoan the decay of our graces and our slow progress and
improvement in Christianity, whilst we wilfully despise the best means of our
growth in goodness. Well do we deserve that God should send leanness into our
souls, and make them to consume and pine away in perpetual doubting and
trouble, if, when God himself does spread so bountiful a Table for us and set
before us the bread of life, we will not come and feed upon it with joy and
thankfulness.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
Concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, one of the two great positive
Institutions of the Christian Religion, there are two main Points of difference
between Us and the Church of Rome. One, about the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; in which they think, but are not certain, that they have
the Scripture and the words of our Savior on their side: The other, about the
administration of this Sacrament to the People in both kinds? in which we are
sure that we have the Scripture and our Savior's Institution on our side; and
that so plainly that our Adversaries themselves do not deny it.

Of the first of these I shall now treat, and endeavor to show against the
Church of Rome, That in this Sacrament, there is no substantial change made of
the Elements of Bread and Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ; that
Body which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross; for so
they explain that hard word Transubstantiation.

Before I engage in this Argument, I cannot but observe what an unreasonable
task we are put upon, by the bold confidence of our Adversaries, to dispute a
matter of Sense; which is one of those things about which Aristotle has long
since pronounced there ought to be no dispute.

It might well seem strange if any man should write a Book, to prove that an
Egg is not an Elephant, and that a Musket-bullet is not a Pike: It is every
whit as hard a case, to put to maintain by a long Discourse, that what we see
and handle and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not the Body of a man; and what
we see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood: And if this evidence may
not pass for sufficient without any farther proof, I do not see why any man,
that has confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what all the
World sees it is; or affirm any thing to be what all the World sees it is not;
and this without all possibility of being farther confuted. So that the
business of Transubstantiation is not a controversy of Scripture against
Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the
plain meaning of Scripture, and all the Sense and Reason of Mankind.

It is a most Self-evident Falsehood; and there is no Doctrine or Proposition in
the World that is of it self more evidently true, than Transubstantiation is
evidently false: And yet if it were possible to be true, it would be the most
ill-natured and pernicious truth in the World, because it would suffer nothing
else to be true; it is like the Roman Catholic Church, which will needs be the
whole Christian Church, and will allow no other Society of Christians to be any
part of it: So Transubstantiation, if it be true at all, it is all truth, and
nothing else is true; for it cannot be true unless our Senses, and the Senses
of all mankind be deceived about their proper objects; and if this he true and
certain, then nothing else can be so; for if we be not certain of what we see,
we can be certain of nothing.

And yet notwithstanding all this, there are a Company of men in the World so
abandoned and given up by God to the efficacy of delusion as in good earnest to
believe this gross and palpable Error, and to impose the belief of it upon the
Christian World under no less penalties than of temporal death and eternal
damnation. And therefore to undeceive, if possible, these deluded Souls, it
will be necessary to examine the pretended grounds of so false a Doctrine, and
to lay open the monstrous absurdity of it.

And in the handling of this Argument, I shall proceed in this plain method.

I. I shall consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine.

II. I shall produce our Objections against it. And if I can show that there is
no tolerable ground for it, and that there are invincible Objections against
it, then every man is not only in reason excused from believing this Doctrine,
but has great cause to believe the contrary.

Rome for this Doctrine. Which must be one or more of these five. Either 1st.
The Authority of Scripture. Or 2ly. The perpetual belief of this Doctrine in
the Christian Church, as an evidence that they always understood and
interpreted our Savior's words, This is my body, in this sense. Or 3ly. The
Authority of the present Church to make and declare new Articles of Faith. Or
4ly. The absolute necessity of such a change as this in the Sacrament to the
comfort and benefit of those who receive this Sacrament. Or 5ly. To magnify
the power of the Priest in being able to work so great a Miracle.

1st. They pretend for this Doctrine the Authority of Scripture in those words
of our Savior, This is my body. Now to show the insufficiency of this
pretense, I shall endeavor to make good these two things.

1. That there is no necessity of understanding those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation. 2. That, there is a great deal of reason, nay
that it is very absurd and unreasonable, to understand them otherwise.
First, That there is no necessity to understand those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation. If there be any, it must be from one of these
two reasons. Either because there are no figurative expressions in Scripture,
which I think no man ever yet said: or else, because a Sacrament admits of no
figures; which would be very absurd for any man to say, since it is of the very
nature of a Sacrament to represent and exhibit some invisible grace and benefit
by an outward sign and figure: And especially since it cannot be denied, but
that in the institution of this very Sacrament our Savior uses figurative
expressions, and several words which cannot be taken strictly and literally.
When he gave the Cup he said, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which
is shed for you and for many for the remission of Sins. Where first, the Cup is
put for the Wine contained in the Cup; or else if the words be literally taken,
so as to signify a substantial change, it is not of the Wine, but of the Cup;
and that, not into the blood of Christ but into the new Testament or new
Covenant in his blood. Besides, that his blood is said then to be shied, and
his body to be broken, which was not till his Passion, which followed the
institution and first celebration of this Sacrament.

But that there is no necessity to understand our Savior's words in the sense
of Transubstantiation, I will take the plain concession of a great number of
the most learned Writers of the Church of Rome in this Controversy. de Euch.
l. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmine, in 3. dis. 49. Qu. 75. Sect. 2.
Suarez and in 3. part disp. 180. Qu. 75. art. 2. c. 15.
Vasquez do acknowledge Scotus the great Schoolman to have said that this
Doctrine cannot be evidently proved from Scripture: And Bellarmine grants this
not to be improbable; and Suarez and Vasquez acknowledge in Sent. l. 4. did.
11. Qu. 1. n. 15.
Durandus to have said as much. in 4. Sent. Q 5. and Quodl. 4. Q. 3.
Ocham, another famous Schoolman, says expressly, that the Doctrine which holds
the substance of the Bread and Wine to remain after consecration is neither
repugnant to Reason nor to Scripture. in 4. Sent. Q. 6. art. 2.
Petrus ab Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray says plainly, that the Doctrine of the
Substance of Bread and Wine remaining after Consecration is more easy and free
from absurdity, more rational, and no ways repugnant to the authority of
Scripture; nay more, that for the other Doctrine, viz. of Transubstantiation,
there is no evidence in Scripture. in canon. Miss. Lect. 40.
Gabriel Biel, another great Schoolman and Divine of their Church, freely
declares, that as to any thing expressed in the Canon of the Scriptures, a wan
may believe that the substance of Bread and Wine does remain after
Consecration: and therefore he resolves the belief of Transubstantiation into
some other Revelation, besides Scripture, which he supposes the Church had
about it. Cardinal in Aquin. 3. part. Qu. 75. art. 1.
Cajetan confesses that the Gospel does no where express that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ; that we have this from the authority of the
Church: nay, he goes farther, that there is nothing in the Gospel which
enforces any man to understand these words of Christ, this is my body, in a
proper and not in a metaphorical sense; but the Church having understood them
in a proper sense they are to be so explained; Which words in the Roman Edition
of Cajetan are expunged by order of Pope Aegid. Conink de Sacram Q. 75. art. 1.
n. 13.
Pius V. Cardinal de Sacram. l. 2. c. 3.
Contarenus, and Loc. Theolog. l. 3. c. 3.
Melchior Canus one of the best and most judicious Writers that Church ever
had, reckon this Doctrine among those which are not so expressly found in
Scripture. I will add but one more, of great authority in the Church, and a
reputed Martyr, contra captiv. Babylon. c. 10. n. 2.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester who ingenuously confesses that in the words of the
Institution there is not one word from whence the true presence of the flesh
and blood of Christ in our Mass can be proved: So that we need not much contend
that this Doctrine has no certain foundation in Scripture, when this is so
fully and frankly acknowledged by our Adversaries themselves.

Secondly, If there be no necessity of understanding our Savior's words in the
sense of Transubstantiation, I am sure there is a great deal of reason to
understand them otherwise. Whether we consider the like expressions in
Scripture; as where our Savior says he is the door, and the true Vine (which
the Church of Rome would mightily have triumphed in, had it been said, this is
my true body.) And so likewise where the Church is said to be Christ's body;
and the Rock which followed the Israelites to be Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. They
drank of that Rock which followed them, and that rock was Christ: All which and
innumerable more like expressions in Scripture every man understands in a
figurative, and not in a strictly literal and absurd sense. And it is very well
known, that in the Hebrew Language things are commonly said to be that which
they do signify and represent; and there is not in that Language a more proper
and usual way of expressing a thing to signify so and so, than to say that it
is so and so. Thus Joseph expounding Pharaoh's dream to him, Genesis 41.26. Says,
the seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears of corn are seven
years, that is, they signified or represented seven years of plenty; and so
Pharaoh understood him, and so would any man of sense understand the like
expressions; nor do I believe that any sensible man, who had never heard of
Transubstantiation being grounded upon these words of our Savior, this is my
body, would upon reading the institution of the Sacrament in the Gospel ever
have imagined any such thing to be meant by our Savior in those words; but
would have understood his meaning to have been this Bread signifies my Body,
this Cup signifies my Blood; and this which you see me now do, do ye hereafter
for a Memorial of me: But surely it would never have entered into any man's
mind to have thought that our Savior did literally hold himself in his hand,
and give away himself from himself with his own hands.

Or whether we compare these words of our Savior with the ancient Form of the
Passover used by the Jews from Ezra's time, as Dialog. cum Tryp. p. 297. Edit.
Paris. 1639.
Justin Martyr tells us, (...), this Passover is our Savior and our refuge:
not that they believed the Paschal Lamb to be substantially changed either into
God their Savior who delivered them out of the Land of Egypt, or into the
Messiah the Savior whom they expected and who was signified by it: But this
Lamb which they did eat did represent to them and put them in mind of that
Salvation which God wrought for their Fathers in Egypt, when by the slaying of
a Lamb and sprinkling the blood of it upon their doors their firstborn were
passed over and spared; and did likewise foreshew the Salvation of the Messiah,
the Lamb of God that was to take away the Sins of the world.

And nothing is more common in all Languages than to give the name of the thing
signified to the Sign. As the delivery of a Deed or Writing under hand and Seal
is called a conveyance or making over of such an Estate, and it is really so;
not the delivery of mere wax and parchment, but the conveyance of a real
Estate; as truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the very
material houses and lands themselves could be and were actually delivered into
my hands: In like manner the names of the things themselves made over to us in
the new Covenant of the Gospel between God and man, are given to the Signs or
Seals of that Covenant. By Baptism Christians are said to be made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4. And by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we are said
to communicate or to be made partakers of the Body of Christ which was broken,
and of his Blood which was shed for us, that is, of the real benefits of his
death and passion. And thus St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? But still it is bread, and he still calls it so, v. 17. For we being
many are one bread and one body; for we are partakers of that one bread. The
Church of Rome might, if they pleased, as well argue from hence that all
Christians are substantially changed first into Bread, and then into the
natural Body of Christ by their participation of the Sacrament, because they
are said thereby to be one bread and one body. And the same Apostle in the next
Chapter, after he had spoken of the consecration of the Elements still calls
them the Bread and the Cup, in three verses together, As often as ye eat this
bread and drink this cup, v. 26. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this
cup of the Lord unworthily, v. 27. But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread and drink of that cup, v. 28. And our Savior himself
when he had said, this is my blood of the new Testament, immediately adds,
Matthew. 26.29.
but I say unto you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the Vine,
until I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, that is, not till after
his resurrection, which was the first step of his exaltation into the Kingdom
given him by his Father, when the Scripture tells us he did eat and drink with
his Disciples. But that which I observe from our Savior's words, is, that
after the consecration of the Cup and the delivering of it to his Disciples to
drink of it, he tells them that he would thenceforth drink no more of that
fruit of the Vine, which he had now drank with them, till after his
Resurrection. From whence it is plain that it was the fruit of the Vine, real
wine, which our Savior drank of and communicated to his Disciples in the
Sacrament.

Besides, if we consider that he celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion,
it is impossible these words should be understood literally of the natural body
and blood of Christ; because it was his body broken and his blood shed which he
gave to his Disciples, which if we understand literally of his natural body
broken and his blood shed, then these words, this is my body which is broken,
and this is my blood which is shed, could not be true, because his Body was
then whole and unbroken, and his blood not then shed; nor could it be a
propitiatory Sacrifice (as they affirm this Sacrament to be) unless they will
say that propitiation was made before Christ suffered: And it is likewise
impossible that the Disciples should understand these words literally, because
they not only plainly saw that what he gave them was Bread and Wine, but they
saw likewise as plainly that it was not his Body which was given, but his Body
which gave that which was given; not his body broken and his blood shed,
because they saw him alive at that very time and beheld his body whole and
unpierc'd; and therefore they could not understand these words literally: If
they did, can we imagine that the Disciples, who upon all other occasions were
so full of questions and objections, should make no difficulty of this matter?
nor so much as ask our Savior, how can these things be? that they should not
tell him, we see this to be Bread and that to be Wine, and we see thy Body to
be distinct from both; we see thy Body not broken, and thy Blood not shed.

From all which it must needs be very evident, to any man that will impartially
consider things, how little reason there is to understand those words of our
Savior, this is my body, and this is my blood, in the sense of
Transubstantiation; nay on the contrary, that there is very great reason and an
evident necessity to understand them otherwise. I proceed to show,

2ly. That this Doctrine is not grounded upon the perpetual belief of the
Christian Church, which the Church of Rome vainly pretends as an evidence that
the Church did always understand and interpret our Savior's words in this
sense.

To manifest the groundlesness of this pretense, I shall, 1. show by plain
testimony of the Fathers in several Ages, that this Doctrine was not the belief
of the ancient Christian Church. 2. I shall show the time and occasion of its
coming in, and by what degrees it grew up and was established in the Roman
Church. 3. I shall answer their great pretended Demonstration that this always
was and must have been the constant belief of the Christian Church.

1. I shall show by plain Testimonies of the Fathers in several Ages, for above
five hundred years after Christ, that this Doctrine was not the belief of the
ancient Christian Church. I deny not but that the Fathers do, and that with
great reason, very much magnify the wonderful mystery and efficacy of this
Sacrament, and frequently speak of a great Supernatural change made by the
divine benediction; which we also readily acknowledge. They say indeed, that
the Elements of Bread and Wine do by the divine blessing become to us the Body
and Blood of Christ: But they likewise say that the names of the things
signified are given to the Signs; that the Bread and Wine do still remain in
their proper nature and substance, and that they are turned into the substance
of our Bodies; that the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is not his natural
Body, but the sign and figure of it; not that Body which was crucified, nor
that Blood which was shed upon the Cross; and that it is impious to understand
the eating of the flesh of the Son of man and drinking his blood literally: all
which are directly opposite to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation and utterly
inconsistent with it. I will select but some sew Testimonies of many which I
might bring to this purpose.

I begin with Justin Martyr, who says expressly, that Apol. 2 p. 98 Edit. Paris.
1636.
our Blood and Flesh are nourished by the conversion of that food which we
receive in the Eucharist: But that cannot be the natural body and blood of
Christ, for no man will say that that is converted into the nourishment of our
bodies.

The Second is Lib. 4. c. 34.
Irenaeus, who speaking of this Sacrament says, that the bread which is from
the earth receiving the divine invocation is now no longer common bread, but
the Eucharist (or Sacrament) consisting of two things, the one earthly, the
other heavenly. He says it is no longer common bread, but after invocation or
consecration it becomes the Sacrament, that is, bread sanctified, consisting of
two things an earthly and a heavenly; the earthly thing is bread, and the
heavenly is the divine blessing which by the invocation or consecration is
added to it. And Lib. 5. c. 2.
elsewhere he has this passage, when therefore the cup that is mixed (that is,
of Wine and Water) and the bread that is broken receives the word of God, it
becomes the Eucharist of the blood and body of Christ, of which the substance
of our flesh is increased and consists: but if that which we receive in the
Sacrament do nourish our bodies, it must be bread and wine, and not the natural
body and blood of Christ. There is another remarkable Testimony of Irenaeus,
which though it be not now extant in those works of his which remain, yet has
been preserved by Comment. in 1 Pet. c. 3.
Oecumenius, and it is this; when (says he) the Greeks had taken some Servants,
of the Christian Catechumeni (that is, such as had not been admitted to the
Sacrament) and afterward urged them by violence to tell them some of the
secrets of the Christians, these Servants having nothing to say that might
gratisy those who offered violence to them, except only that they had heard
from their Masters that the divine Communion was the blood and body of Christ,
they thinking that it was really blood and flesh, declared as much to those
that questioned them. The Greeks taking this as if it were really done by the
Christians, discovered it to others of the Greeks; who hereupon put Sanctus and
Blandina to the torture to make them confess it. To whom Blandina boldly
answered, How would they endure to do this, who by way of exercise (or
abstinence) do not eat that flesh which may lawfully he eaten? By which it
appears that this which they would have charged upon Christians, as if they had
literally eaten the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, was a false
accusation which these Martyrs denied, saying they were so far from that that
they for their part did not eat any flesh at all.

The next is Tertullian, who proves against Marcion the Heretic that the Body
of our Savior was not a mere phantasm and appearance, but a real Body, because
the Sacrament is a figure and image of his Body; and if there be an image of
his body he must have a real body, otherwise the Sacrament would be an image of
an image. His words are these, Adverss Marcionem. l. 4. p. 571. Edit. Rigal^.
Paris. 1634.
the bread which our Savior took and distributed to his Disciples he made his
own body, saying this is my body, that is, the image or figure of my body. But
it could not have been the figure of his body, if there had not been a true and
real body. And arguing against the Scepticks who denied the certainty of sense
he uses this Argument: That if we question our senses we may doubt whether our
Blessed Savior were not deceived in what he heard, and saw, and touched. Lib.
de Anima, p. 319.
He might (says he) be deceived in the voice from heaven in the smell of the
ointment with which he was anointed against his burial, and in the taste of the
wine which he consecrated in remembrance of his blood. So that it seems we are
to trust our senses, even in the matter of the Sacrament: and if that be true,
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is certainly false.

Origin in his Edit. Huetii.
Comment on Matthew. 15. speaking of the Sacrament has this passage, That food
which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught, which none
surely will say of the Body of Christ. And afterward he adds by way of
explication, it is not the matter of the bread, but the word which is spoken
over it, which profits him that worthily eats the Lord; and this (he says)
he had spoken concerning the typical and Symbolical body. So that the matter of
bread remains in the Sacrament, and this Origin calls the typical and
Symbolical body of Christ; and it is not the natural body of Christ which is
there eaten, for the food eaten in the Sacrament, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught. This Testimony
is so very plain in the Cause that Sextus Senensis suspects this place of
Origin was depraved by the Heretics. Cardinal Perron is contented to allow it
to be Origen's, but rejects his testimony because he was accused of Heresy by
some of the Fathers, and says he talks like a Heretic in this place. So that
with much ado this testimony is yielded to us. The same Father in his Cap. 10.
Homilies upon Leviticus speaks thus, There is also in the New Testament a
letter which kills him who does not Spiritually understand those things which
are said; for if we take according to the Letter that which is said, EXCEPT YE
EAT MY FLESH AND DRINK MY BLOOD, this Letter kills. And this also is a killing
Testimony, and not to be answered but in Cardinal Perron's way, by saying he
talks like a Heretic.

St. Cyprian has a whole Epistle Ep. 63.
to Cecilius, against those who gave the Communion in Water only without Wine
mingled with it; and his main argument against them is this, that the blood of
Christ with which we are redeemed and quickened cannot seem to be in the Cup
when there is no Wine in the Cup by which the Blood of Christ is represented:
and afterward he says, that contrary to the Evangelical and Apostolical
Doctrine water was in some places offered (or given) in the Lord's Cup, which
(says he) alone cannot express (or represent) the blood of Christ. And lastly
he tells us, that by water the people is understood, by Wine the blood of
Christ is shown (or represented) but when in the Cup water is mingled with Wine
the people is united to Christ. So that according to this Argument Wine in the
Sacramental Cup is no otherwise changed into the Blood of Christ than the Water
mixed with it is changed into the People, which are said to be united to Christ.

I omit many others, and pass to St. Austin in the fourth Age after Christ. And
I the rather insist upon his Testimony, because of his eminent esteem and
authority in the Latin Church; and he also calls the Elements of the Sacrament
the figure and sign of Christ's body and blood. In his Book against Adimantus
the Manichee we have this expression, Aug. Tom. 6. p. 187. Edit. Basil. 1569.
our Lord did not doubt to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his
Body. And in his explication of the third Psalm, speaking of Judas whom our
Lord admitted to his last Supper, in which (says he) Enarrat. in Psalm. Tom. 8.
p. 16.
he commended and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his Body; Language
which would now be censured for Heresy in the Church of Rome. Indeed he was
never accused of Heresy, as Cardinal Perron says Origin was, but he talks as
like one as Origin himself. And in his Comment on the 98 Psalm speaking of the
offense which the Disciples took at that saying of our Savior, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, etc. he brings in our Savior
speaking thus to them, Id. Tom. 9. p. 1105.
ye must understand Spiritually, what I have said unto you; ye are not to eat
this body which ye see, and to drink that blood which shall be shed by those
that shall crucify me. I have commended a certain Sacrament to you, which
being Spiritually understood will give you life. What more opposite to the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, than that the Disciples were not to eat that
Body of Christ which they saw, nor to drink that blood which was shed upon the
Cross, but that all this was to be understood spiritually and according to the
nature of a Sacrament? For that body he tells us is not here but in heaven, in
his Comment upon these words, me ye have not always. Id Tract. 50. in Johan.
He speaks (says he) of the presence of his body: ye shall have me according to
my providence, according to Majesty and invisible grace: but according to the
flesh which the word assumed, according to that which was born of the Virgin
Mary, ye shall not have me: therefore because he conversed with his Disciples
forty days, he is ascended up into heaven, and is not here.

In his 23d. Epistle; Id Tom. 2. p. 93.
if the Sacrament (says he) had not some resemblance of those things whereof
they are Sacraments, they would not be Sacraments at all: but from this
resemblance they take for the most part the names of the things which they
represent. Therefore as the Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some manner
or sense Christ's body, and the Sacrament of his blood is the blood of Christ;
So the Sacrament of faith (meaning Baptism) is faith. Upon which words of St.
Austin there is this remarkable Gloss in their own Canon Law; De Consecr. did.
2. Hoc. est.
the heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ is called
the body of Christ; but improperly: whence it is said, that after a manner, but
not according to the truth of the thing but the Mystery of the thing signified;
So that the meaning is, it is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifies
the body of Christ: And if this be St. Austin's meaning, I am sure no
Protestant can speak more plainly against Transubstantiation. And in the
ancient Canon of the Mass, before it was changed in compliance with this new
Doctrine, it is expressly called a Sacrament, a Sign, an Image and a Figure of
Christ's body. To which I will add that remarkable passage of St. Austin cited
by De consecrat. did. 2. Sect. Vtrum.
Gratian, that as we receive the similitude of his death in Baptism, so we may
also receive the likeness of his flesh and blood; that so neither may truth be
wanting in the Sacrament, nor Pagans have occasion to make us ridiculous for
drinking the blood of one that was slain.

I will mention but one Testimony more of this Father, but so clear a one as it
is impossible any man in his wits that had believed Transubstantiation could
have uttered. It is in his Treatise Lib. 3. Tom. 3. p. 53.
de Doctrina Christiana; where laying down several Rules for the right
understanding of Scripture, he gives this for one. If (says he) the speech be a
precept forbidding some heinous wickedness or crime, or commanding us to do
good, it is not figurative; but if it seem to command any heinous wickedness or
crime, or to forbid that which is profitable and beneficial to others, it is
figurative. For example, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: This seems to command a heinous wickedness
and crime, therefore it is a figure; commanding us to communicate of the
passion of our Lord, and with delight and advantage to lay up in our memory
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. So that, according to St.
Austin's best skill in interpreting Scripture, the literal eating of the flesh
of Christ and drinking his blood would have been a great impiety; and therefore
the expression is to be understood figuratively: not as Cardinal Perron would
have it, only in opposition to the eating of his flesh and blood in the gross
appearance of flesh and blood, but to the real eating of his natural body and
blood under any appearance whatsoever: For St. Austin does not say, this is a
Figurative speech wherein we are commanded really to feed upon the natural body
and blood of Christ under the species of bread and wine, as the Cardinal would
understand him; for then the speech would be literal and not figurative: But he
says, this is a figurative speech wherein we are commanded Spiritually to feed
upon the remembrance of his Passion.

To these I will add but three or four Testimonies more in the two following
Ages.

The first shall be of Theodoret, who speaking of that. Genesis 49.11.
Prophecy of Jacob concerning our Savior, he washed his garments in Wine and
his clothes in the blood of grapes, has these words, Dialog. 1.
as we call the mystical fruit of the Vine (that is, the Wine in the Sacrament)
after consecration the blood of the Lord, so he (viz. Jacob) calls the blood of
the true Vine (viz. of Christ) the blood of the grape: but the blood of Christ
is not liberally and properly but only figuratively the blood of the grape, in
the same sense as he is said to be the true Vine; and therefore the Wine in the
Sacrament after consecration is in like manner not literally and properly but
figuratively the blood of Christ. And he explains this afterward, saying, that
our Savior changed the names, and gave to his Body the name of the Symbol or
Sign, and to the Symbol or Sign the name of his Body; thus when he had called
himself the Vine, he called the Symbol or Sign his blood; so that in the same
sense that he called himself the Vine, he called the Wine, which is the Symbol
of his his blood, his blood: For, says he, he would have those who partake of
the divine mysteries not to attend to the nature of the things which are seen,
but by the change of names to believe the change which is made by grace; for he
who called that which by nature is body wheat and bread, and again likewise
called himself the Vine, he honored the Symbols with the name of his body and
blood: not changing nature but adding grace to nature. Where you see he syas
expressly, that when he called the Symbols or Elements of the Sacrament, viz.
Bread and Wine his Body and Blood, he made no change in the nature of the
things, only added grace to nature, that is, by the Divine grace and blessing
he raised them to a Spiritual and Supernatural virtue and efficacy.

The Second is of the same Theodoret in his second Dialogue between a
Catholic, under the name of Orthodoxus, and an Heretic under the name of
Eranistes; who maintaining that the Humanity of Christ was changed into the
substance of the Divinity (which was the Heresy of Eutychees) he illustrates
the matter by this Similitude, As, says he, the Symbols of the Lord's body and
blood are one thing before the invocation of the Priest, but after the
invocation are changed and become another thing; So the body of our Lord after
his ascension is changed into the divine substance. But what says the
Catholic Orthodoxus to this? why, he talks just like one of Cardinal Perron's
Heretics, Thou art, says he, caught in thy own net: because the mystical
Symbols after consecration do not pass out of their own nature; for they remain
in their former substance, figure and appearance and may be seen and handled
even as before. He does not only deny the outward figure and appearance of the
Symbols to be changed, but the nature and substance of them, even in the proper
and strictest sense of the word substance; and it was necessary so to do,
otherwise he had not given a pertinent answer to the similitude urged against
him.

The next is one of their own Popes, Gelasius, who brings the same Instance
against the Eutychians; Biblioth. Patr. Tom.
surely, says he, the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of our
Lord are a divine thing, so that by them we are made partakers of a divine
nature, and yet it cease not to be the substance or nature of Bread and Wine;
and certainly the image and resemblance of Christ's body and blood are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries, that is, in the Sacrament. To make
this Instance of any force against the Eutychians, who held that the body of
Christ upon his ascension ceased and was changed into the substance of his
Divinity, it was necessary to deny that there was any substantial change in the
Sacrament of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. So that here
is an infallible authority, one of their own Popes expressly against
Transubsantiation.

The last Testimony I shall produce is of Facundus an African Bishop, who lived
in the 6th Century. Upon occasion of justifying an expression of one who had
said that Christ also received the adoption of Sons, he reasons thus. Facund.
p. 144. edit. Paris. 1676.
Christ vouchsafed to receive the Sacrament of adoption both when he was
circumcised and baptized: And the Sacrament of Adoption may be called adoption,
as the Sacrament of bis body and blood, which is in the consecrated bread and
cup, is by us called his body and blood: not that the bread, says he, is
properly his body and the cup his blood, but because they contain in them the
mysteries of his body and blood; hence also our Lord himself called the blessed
bread and cup which he gave to his Disciples his body and blood. Can any man
after this believe; that it was then, and had ever been, the universal and
received Doctrine of the Christian Church, that the bread and wine in the
Sacrament are substantially changed into the proper and natural body and blood
of Christ?

By these plain Testimonies which I have produced, and I might have brought a
great many more to the same purpose, it is I think evident beyond all denial
that Transubstantiation has not been the perpetual belief of the Christian
Church. And this likewise is acknowledged by many great and learned men of the
Roman Church. In Sent. l. 4. Did. 11. Q 3.
Scotus acknowledges, that this Doctrine was not always thought necessary to
be believed, but that the necessity of believing it was consequent to that
Declaration of the Church made in the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent
the III. And In Sent. l. 4. did. 11. q. 1. n. 15.
Durandus freely discovers his inclination to have believed the contrary, if
the Church had not by that determination obliged men to believe it. de Euchar.
l. 1. p. 146.
Tonstal Bishop of Durham also yields that before the Lateran Council men were
at liberty as to the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament. And In 1
Epist. ad Corinth. c. 7. citante etiam Salmerone, Tom. 9. Tract. 16. p. 108.
Erasmus, who lived and died in the communion of the Roman Church, and than
whom no man was better read in the ancient Fathers, does confess that it was
late before the Church defined Transubstantiation unknown to the Ancients both
name and thing. And De Haeres. l. 8.
Alphonsus a Castro says plainly, that concerning the Transubstantiation of the
bread into the body of Christ, there is seldom any mention in the ancient
Writers. And who can imagine that these learned men would have granted the
ancient Church and Fathers to have been so much Strangers to this Doctrine, had
they thought it to have been the perpetual belief of the Church? I shall now in
the

Second place, give an account of the particular time and occasion of the
coming in of this Doctrine, and by what steps and degrees it grew up and was
advanced into an Article of Faith in the Romish Church. The Doctrine of the
corporal presence of Christ was first started upon occasion of the Dispute
about the Worship of Images, in opposition whereto the Synod of Constantinople
about the year DCCL did argue thus, That our Lord having left us no other image
of himself but the Sacrament, in which the substance of bread is the image of
his body, we ought to make no other image of our Lord. In answer to this
Argument the second Council of Nice, in the year DCCLXXXVII did declare, that
the Sacrament after Consecration is not the image and antitype of Christ's body
and blood, but is properly his body and blood. So that the corporal presence of
the body of Christ in the Sacrament was first brought in to support the stupid
Worship of Images: And indeed it could never have come in upon a more proper
occasion, not have been applied to a fitter purpose.

And here I cannot but take notice how well this agrees with De Eucharist. l.
1. c. 1.
Bellarmine's Observation, that none of the Ancients who wrote of Heresies,
has put this error (viz of denying Transubstantiation) in his Caralogue; nor
did any of the Ancients dispute against this error for the first 600 years.
Which is very true, because there could be no occasion then to dispute against
those who demed Transubstantiation; since, as I have shown, this Doctrine was
not in being unless among the Eutychian Heretics, for the first 600 years and
more. But Ibid.
Bellarmine goes on and tells us, that the first who called in question the
truth of the body of the Lord in the Eucharist were the ICONOMACHI (the
opposers of Images) after the year DCC in the Council of Constantinople; for
these said there was one image of Christ instituted by Christ himself, viz. the
bread and wine in the Eucharist, which represents the body and blood of Christ:
Wherefore from that time the Greek Writers often admonish us that the Eucharist
is not the figure or image of the body of the Lord, but his true body, as
appears from the VII. Synod; which agrees most exactly with the account which I
have given of the first rise of this Doctrine, which began with the corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament and afterward proceeded to
Transubstantiation.

And as this was the first occasion of introducing this Doctrine among the
Greeks, so in the Latin or Roman Church Paschasius Radbertus, first a Monk, and
afterward Abbot of Corbey, was the first broacher of it in the year DCCCXVIII.

And for this, besides the Evidence of History, we have the acknowledgment of
two very Eminent Persons in the Church of Rome, Bellarmine and Sirmondus, who
do in effect confess that this Paschasius was the first who wrote to purpose
upon this Argument. De Scriptor. Eccles.
Bellarmine in these words, This Author was the first who has seriously and
copiously written concerning the truth of Christ's body and blood in the
Eucharist: And In vita Paschasii.
Sirmondus in these, he so first explained the genuine sense of the Catholic
Church, that he opened the way to the rest who afterward in great numbers
wrote upon the same Argument: But though Sirmondus is pleased to say that he
only first explained the sense of the Catholic Church in this Point, yet it
is very plain from the Records of that Age which are left to us, that this was
the first time that this Doctrine was broached in the Latin Church; and it met
with great opposition in that Age, as I shall have occasion hereafter to show.
For Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Mentz about the year DCCCXLVII reciting the
very words of Paschasius wherein he had delivered this Doctrine, has this
remarkable passage concerning the novelty of it; Epist. ad Heribaldum. c. 33.
Some, says he, of late, not having a right opinion concerning the Sacrament of
the body and blood of our Lord, have said that this is the body and blood of
our Lord which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which our Lord suffered upon
the Cross and rose from the dead: which error, says he, we have opposed with
all our might. From whence it is plain, by the Testimony of one of the greatest
and most learned Bishops of that Age, and of eminent reputation for Piety, that
what is now the very Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the Sacrament,
was then esteemed an Error broached by some particular Persons, but was far
from being the generally received Doctrine of that Age. Can any one think it
possible, that so eminent a Person in the Church both for piety and learning,
could have condemned this Doctrine as an Error and a Novelty, had it been the
general Doctrine of the Christian Church, not only in that but in all former
Ages; and no censure passed upon him for that which is now the great burning
Article, in the Church of Rome and esteemed by them one of the greatest and
most pernicious Heresies?

Afterward in the year MLIX, when Berengarius in France and Germany had raised
a fresh opposition against this Doctrine, he was compelled to recant it by Pope
Nicholas and the Council at Rome, in these words, Gratian. de consecrat.
distinct. 2. Lanfranc. de corp. and sing. Domini. c. 5. Guitmund. de Sacram. l.
1. Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19.
that the bread and wine which are set upon the Altar, after the consecration
are not only the Sacrament, but the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and are sensibly, not only in the Sacrament but in truth, handled and
broken by the hands of the Priest, and ground or bruised by the teeth of the
faithful. But it seems the Pope and his Council were not then skillful enough
to express themselves rightly in this matter; for the Gloss upon the Canon Law
says expressly, Gloss. Decret. de consecrat. did. 2. in cap. Ego Berengarius.
that unless we understand these words of BERENGARIVS (that is in truth of the
Pope and his Council) in a sound sense, we shall fall into a greater Heresy
than that of BERENGARIVS; for we do not make parts of the body of Christ. The
meaning of which Gloss I cannot imagine, unless it be this, that the Body of
Christ, though it be in truth broken, yet it is not broken into parts (for we
do not make parts of the bods of Christ,) but into wholes: Now this new way of
breaking a Body, not into parts but into wholes (which in good earnest) is the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome) though to them that are able to believe
Transubstantiation it may for any thing I know appear to be sound sense, yet to
us that cannot believe so it appears to be solid nonsense.

About XX years after, in the year MLXXIX Pope Gregory the VIIth. began to be
sensible of this absurdity; and therefore in another Council at Rome made
Berengarius to recant in another Form, viz. Waldens. Tom. 2. c. 13.
that the bread and wine which are placed upon the Altar, are substantially
changed into the true and proper and quickening flesh and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and after consecration are the true body of Christ, which was
born of the Virgin, and which being offered for the Salvation of the World did
hang upon the Cross, and sits on the right hand of the Father.

So that from the first starting of this Doctrine in the second Council of Nice
in the year DCCLXXXVII, till the Council under Pope Gregory the VIIth. in the
year MLXXIX, it was almost three hundred years that this Doctrine was
contested, and before this misshapen Monster of Transubstantiation could be
licked into that Form in which it is now settled and established in the Church
of Rome. Here then is a plain account of the first rise of this Doctrine, and
of the several steps whereby it was advanced by the Church of Rome into an
Article of Faith. I come now in the

Third place, to answer the great pretended Demonstration of the impossibility
that this Doctrine, if it had been new, should ever have come in, in any Age,
and been received in the Church; and consequently it must of necessity have
been the perpetual belief of the Church in all Ages: For if it had not always
been the Doctrine of the Church, whenever it had attempted first to come in
there would have been a great stir and bustle about it, and the whole Christian
World would have rose up in opposition to it. But we can show no such time when
first it came in, and when any such opposition was made to it, and therefore it
was always the Doctrine of the Church. This Demonstration Monsieur Arnauld, a
very learned Man in France, pretends to be unanswerable; whether it be so or
not, I shall briefly examine. And

First, we do assign a punctual and very likely time of the first rise of this
Doctrine, about the beginning of the ninth Age; though it did not take firm
root nor was fully settled and established till toward the end of the eleventh.
And this was the most likely time of all other, from the beginning of
Christianity, for so gross an Error to appear; it being, by the confession and
consent of their own Historians, the most dark and dismal time that ever
happened to the Christian Church, both for Ignorance, and Superstition, and
Vice. It came in together with Idolatry, and was made use of to support it: A
fit prop and companion for it. And indeed what tares might not the Enemy have
sown in so dark and long a Night; when so considerable a part of the Christian
World was lulled asleep in profound Ignorance and Superstition? And this agrees
very well with the account which our Savior himself gives in the Parable of
the Tares, of the springing up of Errors and Corruptions in the Field of the
Church. Matthew. 13.24.
While the men slept the Enemy did his work in the Night; so that when they
were awake they wondered how and whence the tares came; but being sure they
were there, and that they were not sown at first, they concluded the Enemy had
done it.

Secondly, I have shown likewise that there was considerable opposition made to
this Error at its first coming in. The general Ignorance and gross
Superstition of that Age rendered the generality of people more quiet and
secure, and disposed them to receive any thing that came under a pretense of
mystery in Religion and of greater reverence and devotion to the Sacrament, and
that seemed any way to countenance the worship of Images, for which at that
time they were zealously concerned. But notwithstanding the security and
passive temper of the People, the men most eminent for piety and learning in
that Time made great resistance against it. I have already named Rabanus Arch
Bishop of Mentz, who opposed it as an Error lately sprung up and which had
then gained but upon some few persons. To whom I may add Heribaldus Bishop of
Auxerres in France, Io. Scotus, Erigena, and Ratramnus commonly known by the
name of Bertram, who at the same time were employed by the Emperor Charles the
Bald to oppose this growing Error, and wrote, learnedly against it. And these
were the eminent men for learning in that time. And because Monsieur Arnauld
will not be satisfied unless there were some stir and bustle about it, Bertram
in his Preface to his Book tells us, that they who according to their several
opinions talked differently about the mystery of Christ's body and blood were
divided by no small Schism.

Thirdly, Though for a more clear and satisfactory answer to this pretended
Demonstration I have been contented to untie this knot, yet I could without all
these pains have cut it. For suppose this Doctrine had silently come in and
without opposition, so that we could not assign the particular time and
occasion of its first Rise; yet if it be evident from the Records of former
Ages, for above D. years together, that this was not the ancient belief of the
Church; and plain also, that this Doctrine was afterward received in the Roman
Church, though we could not tell how and when it came in, yet it would be the
wildest and most extravagant thing in the world to set up a pretended
Demonstration of Reason against plain Experience and matter of Fact. This is
just Zenoe's Demonstration of the impossibility of motion against Diogenes
walking before his Eyes. For this is to undertake to prove that impossible to
have been, which most certainly was. Just thus the Servants in the Parable
might have demonstrated that the tares were wheat, because they were sure none
but good seed was sown at first, and no man could give any account of the
punctual time when any tares were sown, or by whom; and if an Enemy had come to
do it, he must needs have met with great resistance and opposition; but no such
resistance was made, and therefore there could be no tares in the field, but
that which they called tares was certainly good wheat. At the same rate a man
might demonstrate that our King, his Majesty of great Britain, is not returned
into England, nor restored to his Crown; because there being so great and
powerful an Army possessed of his Lands, and therefore obliged by interest to
keep him out, it was impossible he should ever come in without a great deal of
fighting and bloodshed: but there was no such thing, therefore he is not
returned and restored to his Crown. And by the like kind of Demonstration one
might prove that the Turk did not invade Christendom last year, and besiege
Vienna; because if he had, the most Christian King, who had the greatest Army
in Christendom in a readiness, would certainly have employed it against him;
but Monsieur Arnauld certainly knows no such thing was done: And therefore
according to his way of Demonstration, the matter of fact, so commonly reported
and believed, concerning the Turks Invasion of Christendom and besieging Vienna
last year, was a perfect mistake. But a man may demonstrate till his head and
heart ache, before he shall ever be able to prove that which certainly is, or
was, never to have been. For of all sorts of impossibles nothing is more
evidently so, than to make that which has been not to have been. All the
reason in the world is too weak to cope with so tough and obstinate a
difficulty. And I have often wondered how a man of Monsieur Arnauld's great wit
and sharp Judgment could prevail with himself to engage in so bad and baffled a
Cause; or could think to defend it with so wooden a Dagger as his Demonstration
of Reason against certain Experience and matter of Fact: A thing if it be
possible, of equal absurdity with what he pretends to demonstrate,
Transubstantiation it self. I proceed to the

Third pretended Ground of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and that is,
The Infallible Authority of the present Church to make and declare new Articles
of Faith. And this in truth is the ground into which the most of the learned
men of their Church did heretofore, and many do still resolve their belief of
this Doctrine: And, as I have already shown, do plainly say that they see no
sufficient reason, either from Scripture or Tradition, for the belief of it:
And that they should have believed the contrary had not the determination of
the Church obliged them otherwise.

But if this Doctrine be obtruded upon the world merely by virtue of the
Authority of the Roman Church, and the Declaration of the Council under Pope
Gregory the VIIth. or of the Lateran Council under Innocent the III. then it is
a plain Innovation in the Christian Doctrine, and a new Article of Faith
imposed upon the Christian world. And if any Church has this power, the
Christian Faith may be enlarged and changed as often as men please; and that
which is no part of our Savior's Doctrine, nay, any thing though never so
absurd and unreasonable, may become an Article of Faith obliging all Christians
to the belief of it, whenever the Church of Rome shall think fit to stamp her
Authority upon it: which would make Christianity a most uncertain and endless
thing.

The Fourth pretended ground of this Doctrine is, the necessity of such a
change as this in the Sacrament to the comfort and benefit of those who receive
it. But there is no color for this, if the thing be rightly considered:
Because the comfort and benefit of the Sacrament depends upon the blessing
annexed to the Institution. And as Water in Baptism, without any substantial
change made in that Element, may by the Divine blessing accompanying the
Institution be effectual to the washing away of Sin, and Spiritual
Regeneration; So there can no reason in the world be given why the Elements of
Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper may not, by the same Divide blessing
accompanying this Institution, make the worthy receivers partakers of all the
Spiritual comfort and benefit designed to us thereby without any substantial
change made in those Elements, since our Lord has told us, that verily the
flesh profits nothing. So that if we could do so odd and strange a thing as
to eat the very natural flesh and drink the blood of our Lord, I do not see of
what greater advantage it would be to us than what we may have by partaking of
the Symbols of his body and blood as he has appointed in remembrance of him.
For the Spiritual efficacy of the Sacrament does not depend upon the nature of
the thing received, supposing we receive what our Lord appointed, and receive
it with a right preparation and disposition of mind, but upon the supernatural
blessing that goes along with it, and makes it effectual to those spiritual
ends for which it was appointed.

The Fifth and last pretended ground of this Doctrine is, to magnify the power
of the Priest in being able to work so great a Miracle. And this with great
pride and pomp is often urged by them as a transcendent instance of the Divine
wisdom, to find out so admirable a way to raise the power and reverence of the
Priest; that he should be able every day, and as often as he pleases, by
repeating a few words to work so miraculous a change, and (as they love most
absurdly and blasphemously to speak) to make God himself.

But this is to pretend to a power above that of God himself, for he did not,
nor cannot make himself, nor do any thing that implies a contradiction, as
Transubstantiation evidently does in their pretending to make God. For to make
that which already is, and to make that now which always was, is not only vain
and trifling if it could be done, but impossible because it implies a
contradiction.

And what if after all Transubstantiation, if it were possible and actually
wrought by the Priest, would yet be no Miracle? For there are two things
necessary to a Miracle that there be a supernatural effect wrought, and that
this effect be evident to sense. So that though a supernatural effect be
wrought, yet if it be not evident to sense it is to all the ends and purposes
of a Miracle as if it were not; and can be no testimony or proof of any thing,
because it self stands in need of another Miracle to give testimony to it and
to prove that it was wrought. And neither in Scripture, nor in profane
Authors, nor in common use of speech, is any thing called a Miracle but what
falls under the notice of our senses: A Miracle being nothing else but a
supernatural effect evident to sense, the great end and design whereof is to be
a sensible proof and conviction to us of something that we do not see.

And for want of this Condition, Transubstantiation, if it were true, would be
no Miracle. It would indeed be very supernatural, but for all that it would not
be a Sign or Miracle: For a Sign or Miracle is always a thing sensible,
otherwise it could be no Sign. Now that such a change as is pretended in
Transubstantiation should really be wrought, and yet there should be no sign
and appearance of it, is a thing very wonderful, but, not to sense; for our
senses perceive no change, the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament to all our
senses remaining just as they were before: And that a thing should remain to
all appearance just as it was, has nothing at all of wonder in it: we wonder
indeed when we see a strange thing done, but no man wonders when he sees
nothing done. So that Transubstantiation, if they will needs have it a Miracle,
is such a Miracle as any man may work that has but the confidence to face men
down that he works it, and the fortune to be believed: And though the Church of
Rome may magnify their Priests upon account of this Miracle, which they say
they can work every day and every hour, yet I cannot understand the reason of
it; for when this great work (as they call it) is done, there is nothing more
appears to be done than if there were no Miracle: Now such a Miracle as to all
appearance is no Miracle I see no reason why a Protestant Minister, as well as
a Popish Priest, may not work as often as he pleases; or if he can but have the
patience to let it alone, it will work it self. For surely nothing in the world
is easier than to let a thing be as it is, and by speaking a few words over it
to make it just what it was before. Every man, every day, may work ten thousand
such Miracles.

And thus I have dispathc'd the First part of my Discourse, which was to
consider the pretended grounds and Reasons of the Church of Rome for this
Doctrine, and to show the weakness and insufficiency of them. I come in the

SECOND place, to produce our Objections against it. Which will be of so much
the greater force, because I have already shown this Doctrine to be destitute
of all Divine warrant and authority, and of any other sort of Ground sufficient
in reason to justify it. So that I do not now object against a Doctrine which
has a fair probability of Divine Revelation on its side, for that would weigh
down all objections, which did not plainly overthrow the probability and credit
of its Divine Revelation: But I object against a Doctrine by the mere will and
Tyranny of men imposed upon the belief of Christians, without any evidence of
Scripture, and against all the evidence of Reason and Sense.

The Objection I shall reduce to these two Heads. First, The infinite scandal
of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And Secondly, The monstrous and
insupportable absurdity of it.

First, The infinite scandal of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And
that upon these four accounts. 1. Of the stupidity of this Doctrine. 2. The
real barbarousness of this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion upon supposition
of the truth of this Doctrine. 3. Of the cruel and bloody consequences of it.
4. Of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of, if this
Doctrine be not true.

1. Upon account of the stupidity of this Doctrine. I remember that Tully, who
was a man of very good sense, instanceth in the conceit of eating God as the
extremity of madness, and so stupid an apprehension as he thought no man was
ever guilty of. De Not. Deorum. l. 3.
When we call, says he, the fruits of the earth Ceres, and wine Bacchus, we use
but the common language; but do you think any man so mad as to believe that
which he eats to be God? It seems he could not believe that so extravagant a
folly had ever entered into the mind of man. It is a very severe saying of
Averroes the Arabian Philosopher (who lived after this Doctrine was entertained
among Christians) and ought to make the Church or Rome blush, Dionys. Carthus.
in 4. did. 10. art. 1.
if she can; I have traveled, says he, over the world, and have found diverse
Sects; but so sottish a Sect or Law I never found, as is the Sect of the
Christians; because with their own teeth they devour their God whom they
worship. It was great stupidity in the People of Israel to say, Come let us
make us Gods; but it was civilly said of them, Let us make us Gods that may go
before us, in comparison of the Church of Rome, who say, Let us make a God that
we may eat him. So that upon the whole matter I cannot but wonder that they
should choose thus to expose Faith to the contempt of all that are endued with
Reason. And to speak the plain truth, the Christian Religion was never so
horribly exposed to the scorn of Atheists and Infidels, as it has been by this
most absurd and senseless Doctrine. But thus it was foretold that 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
the Man of Sin should come with Power and Signs and Lying Miracles, and with
all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, with all the Legerdemain and juggling
tricks of falsehood and imposture; amongst which this of Transubstantiation,
which they call a Miracle, and we a Cheat, is one of the chief: And in all
probability those common juggling words of hocus pocus, are nothing else but a
corruption of hoc est corpus, by way of ridiculous imitation of the Priests of
the Church of Rome in their trick of Transubstantiation. Into such contempt by
this foolish Doctrine and pretended Miracle of theirs have they brought the
most sacred and venerable Mystery of our Religion.

2. It is very scandalous likewise upon account of the real barbarousness of
this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion, upon supposition of the truth of this
Doctrine. Literally to eat the flesh of the Son of man and to drink his blood,
St. Austin, as I have showed before, declares to be a great Impiety. And the
impiety and barbarousness of the thing is not in truth extenuated, but only
the appearance of it, by its being done under the Species of Bread and Wine:
For the thing they acknowledge is really done, and they believe that they
verily eat and drink the natural flesh and blood of Christ. And what can any
man do more unworthily toward his Friend? How can he possibly use him more
barbarously, than to feast upon his living flesh and blood? It is one of the
greatest wonders in the world, that it should ever enter into the minds of men
to put upon our Savior's words, so easily capable of a more convenient sense,
and so necessarily requiring it, a meaning so plainly contrary to Reason, and
Sense, and even to Humanity it self. Had the ancient Christians owned any such
Doctrine, we should have heard of it from the Adversaries of our Religion in
every page of their Writings; and they would have desired no greater advantage
against the Christians than to have been able to hit them in the teeth with
their feasting upon the natural flesh and Blood of their Lord, and their God,
and their best Friend. What endless triumphs would they have made upon this
Subject? And with what confidence would they have set the cruelty used by
Christians in their Sacrament, against their God Saturn's eating his own
Children, and all the cruel and bloody Rites of their Idolatry? But that no
such thing was then objected by the Heathens to the Christians, is to a wise
man instead of a thousand Demonstrations that no such Doctrine was then
believed.

3. It is scandalous also upon account of the cruel and bloody consequences of
this Doctrine; so contrary to the plain Laws of Christianity, and to one great
end and design of this Sacrament, which is to unite Christians in the most
perfect love and charity to one another: Whereas this Doctrine has been the
occasion of the most barbarous and bloody Tragedies that ever were acted in the
World. For this has been in the Church of Rome the great burning Article: and
as absurd and unreasonable as it is, more Christians have been murdered for
the denial of it than perhaps for all the other Articles of their Religion. And
I think it may generally pass for a true observation that all Sects are
commonly most hot and furious for those things for which there is least Reason;
for what men want of Reason for their opinions, they usually supply and make up
in Rage. And it was no more than needed to use this severity upon this
occasion; for nothing but the cruel fear of death could in probability have
driven so great a part of mankind into the acknowledgment of so unreasonable
and senseless a Doctrine.

O blessed Savior! I thou best Friend and greatest lover of mankind, who can
imagine thou did ever intend that men should kill one another for not being
able to believe contrary to their senses; for being unwilling to think, that
thou should make one of the most horrid and barbarous things that can be
imagined a main Duty and principal Mystery of thy Religion; for not flattering
the pride and presumption of the Priest who says he can make God, and for not
complying with the folly and stupidity of the People who are made to believe
that they can eat him?

4. Upon account of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of
if this Doctrine be not true, and such a change as they pretend be not made in
the Sacrament; for if it be not, then they worship a Creature instead of the
Creator God blessed for ever. But such a change I have shown to be impossible;
or if it could be, yet they can never be certain that it is, and consequently
are always in danger of Idolatry: and that they can never be certain that such
a change is made, is evident; because, according to the express determination
of the Council of Trent, that depends upon the mind and intention of the
Priest, which cannot certainly be known but by Revelation, which is not
pretended in this case. And if they be mistaken about this change, through the
knavery or crossness of the Priest who will not make God but when he thinks
fit, they must not think to excuse themselves from Idolatry because they
intended to worship God and not a Creature; for so the Persians might be
excused from Idolatry in worshipping the Sun, because they intend to worship
God and not a Creature; and so indeed we may excuse all the Idolatry that ever
was in the world, which is nothing else but a mistake of the Deity, and upon
that mistake a worshipping of something as God which is not God.

II. Besides the infinite scandal of this Doctrine upon the accounts I have
mentioned, the monstrous absurdities of it make it insupportable to any
Religion. I am very well assured of the grounds of Religion in general, and of
the Christian Religion in particular; and yet I cannot see that the foundations
of any revealed Religion, are strong enough to bear the weight of so many and
so great absurdities as this Doctrine of Transubstantiation would load it
withal. And to make this evident, I shall not insist upon those gross
contradictions, of the same Body being in so many several places at once; of
our Savior's giving away himself with his own hands to every one of his
Disciples, and yet still keeping himself to himself; and a thousand more of the
like nature: but to show the absurdity of this Doctrine I shall only ask these
few Questions.

1. Whether any man have, or ever had greater evidence of the truth of any
Divine Revelation than any man has of the falsehood of Transubstantiation?
Infidelity were hardly possible to men, if all men had the same evidence for
the Christian Religion which they have against Transubstantiation, that is, the
clear and irresistible evidence of sense. He that can once be brought to
contradict or deny his senses, is at an end of certainty; for what can a man be
certain of if he be not certain of what he sees? In some circumstances our
senses may deceive us, but no Faculty deceives us so little and so seldom: And
when our senses do deceive us, even that error is not to be corrected without
the help of our senses.

2. Supposing this Doctrine had been delivered in Scripture in the very same
words that it is decreed in the Council of Trent, by what clearer evidence or
stronger Argument could any man prove to me that such words were in the Bible
than I can prove to him that bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still? He could but appeal to my eyes to prove such words to be in the
Bible, and with the same reason and justice might I appeal to several of his
senses to prove to him that the bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still.

3. Whether it be reasonable to imagine that God should make that a part of the
Christian Religion which shakes the main external evidence and confirmation of
the whole? I mean the Miracles which were wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles, the assurance whereof did at first depend upon the certainty of
sense. For if the senses of those who say they saw them were deceived, then
there might be no Miracles wrought; and consequently it may justly be doubted
whether that kind of confirmation which God has given to the Christian
Religion would be strong enough to prove it, supposing Transubstantiation to be
a part of it: Because every man has as great evidence that Transubstantiation
is false, as he has that the Christian Religion is true. Suppose then
Transubstantiation to be part of the Christian Doctrine, it must have the same
confirmation with the whole, and that is Miracles: But of all Doctrines in the
world it is peculiarly incapable of being proved by a Miracle. For if a Miracle
were wrought for the proof of it, the very same assurance which any man has of
the truth of the Miracle he has of the falsehood of the Doctrine, that is, the
clear evidence of his Senses. For that there is a Miracle wrought to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ, there is
only the evidence of sense; and there is the very same evidence to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not the body of Christ but bread. So that here
would arise a new Controversy, whether a man should rather believe his Senses
giving testimony against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or bearing witness
to a Miracle wrought to confirm that Doctrine; there being the very same
evidence against the truth of the Doctrine, which there is for the truth of the
Miracle: And then the Argument for Transubstantiation and the Objection against
it would just balance one another; and consequently Transubstantiation is not
to be proved by a Miracle, because that would be, to prove to a man by some
thing that he sees, that he does not see what he sees. And if there were no
other evidence that Transubstantiation is no part of the Christian Doctrine,
this would be sufficient, that what proves the one does as much overthrow the
other; and that Miracles which are certainly the best and highest external
proof of Christianity are the worst proof in the world of Transubstantiation,
unless a man can renounce his senses at the same time that he relies upon them.
For a man cannot believe a Miracle without relying upon sense, nor
Transubstantiation without renouncing it. So that never were any two things so
ill coupled together as the Doctrine of Christianity and that of
Transubstantiation, because they draw several ways, and are ready to strangle
one another: For the main evidence of the Christian Doctrine, which is
Miracles, is resolved into the certainty of sense, but this evidence is clear
and point blank against Transubstantiation.

4. And Lastly, I would ask what we are to think of the Argument which our
Savior used to convince his Disciples after his Resurrection that his Body was
really risen, and that they were not deluded by a Ghost or Apparition? Is it a
necessary and conclusive Argument or not? Luke 24.38, 39.
And he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your
hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; for a Spirit has
not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. But now if we suppose with the Church
of Rome the Doctrine of Transubstantiation to be true, and that he had
instructed his Disciples in it just before his death, strange thoughts might
justly have risen in their hearts, and they might have said to him; Lord, it is
but a few days ago since thou did teach us not to believe our senses, but
directly contrary to what we saw, viz. that the bread which thou gave us in
the Sacrament, though we saw it and handled it and tasted it to be bread, yet
was not bread, but thine own natural body; and now thou appealed to our senses
to prove that this is thy body which we now see. If seeing and handling be an
unquestionable evidence that things are what they appear to our senses, then we
were deceived before in the Sacrament; and if they be not, then we are not sure
now that this is thy body which we now see and handle, but it may be perhaps
bread under the appearance of flesh and bones; just as in the Sacrament, that
which we saw and handled and tasted to be bread was thy flesh and bones under
the form and appearance of bread. Now upon this supposition it would have been
a hard matter to have quieted the thoughts of the Disciples: For if the
Argument which our Savior used did certainly prove to them that what they saw
and handled was his body, his very natural flesh and bones, because they saw
and handled them, (which it were impious to deny) it would as strongly prove
that what they saw and received before in the Sacrament was not the natural
body and blood of Christ, but real bread and wine: And consequently, that
according to our Savior's arguing after his Resurrection they had no reason to
believe Transubstantiation before. For that very Argument by which our Savior
proves the reality of his body after his Resurrection does as strongly prove
the reality of bread and wine after Consecration. But our Savior's Argument
was most: infallibly good and true, and therefore the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is undoubtedly false.

Upon the whole matter I shall only say this, that some other Points between
us and the Church of Rome are managed with some kind of wit and subtilty, but
this of Transubstantiation is carried out by mere dint of impudence and facing
down of Mankind.

And of this the more discerning persons of that Church are of late grown so
sensible that they would now be glad to be rid of this odious and ridiculous
Doctrine. But the Council of Trent has rivetted it so fast into their
Religion, and made it so necessary and essential a Point of their belief, that
they cannot now part with it if they would; it is like a Millstone hung about
the neck of Popery which will sink it at the last.

And though some of their greatest Wits, as Cardinal Perron, and of late
Monsieur Arnauld, have undertaken the defense of it in great Volumes; yet it is
an absurdity of that monstrous and massy weight, that no humane authority or
wit are able to support it: It will make the very Pillars of St. Peter's crack,
and requires more Volumes to make it good than would fill the Vatican.

And now I would apply my self to the poor deluded People of that Church, if
they were either permitted by their Priests, or durst venture without their
leave, to look into their Religion and to examine the Doctrines of it.
Consider, and show your selves men. Do not suffer your selves any longer to be
led blindfold, and by an implicit Faith in your Priests, into the belief of
nonsense and contradiction. Think it enough and too much to let them rook you
of your money for pretended Pardons and counterfeit Relics, but let not the
Authority of any Priest or Church persuade you out of your Senses. Credulity is
certainly a fault as well as Infidelity: and he who said, blessed are they that
have not seen and yet have believed, has no where said, blessed are they that
have seen and yet have not believed, much less, blessed are they that believe
directly contrary to what they see.

To conclude this Discourse. By what has been said upon this Argument it will
appear, with how little truth, and reason, and regard to the interest of our
common Christianity, it is so often said by our Adversaries, that there are as
good arguments for the belief of Transubstantiation as of the Doctrine of the
Trinity: When they themselves do acknowledge with us that the Doctrine of the
Trinity is grounded upon the Scriptures, and that according to the
interpretation of them by the consent of the ancient Fathers: But their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation I have plainly shown to have no such ground, and
that this is acknowledged by very many learned men of their own Church. And
this Doctrine of theirs being first plainly proved by us to be destitute of all
Divine Warrant and Authority, our Objections against it from the manifold
contradictions of it to Reason and Sense are so many Demonstrations of the
falsehood of it. Against all which they have nothing to put in the opposite
Scale but the Infallibility of their Church, for which there is even less
color of proof from Scripture than for Transubstantiation it self. But so fond
are they of their own Innovations and Errors, that rather than the Dictates of
their Church, how groundless and absurd soever, should be called in question;
rather than not have their will of us in imposing upon us what they please,
they will overthrow any Article of the Christian Faith, and shake the very
foundations of our common Religion: A clear evidence that the Church of Rome is
not the true Mother, since she can be so well contented that Christianity
should be destroyed rather than the Point in question should be decided against
her.

THE Protestant Religion Vindicated, from the Charge of Singularity and
Novelty: IN A SERMON Preached before the KING At WHITE HALL, April the 2d. 1680.
JOSHUA XXIV. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this
day whom you will serve.


THese are the words of Joshua; who, after he had brought the People of Israel
thorough many difficulties and hazards into the quiet possession of the
promised land, like a good Prince and Father of his Country was very
sollicitous, before his death, to lay the firmest foundation he could devise of
the future happiness and prosperity of that People in whose present settlement
he had, by the blessing of God, been so succesfull an instrument.

And because he knew no means so effectual to this end, as to confirm them in
the Religion and Worship of the true God, who had by so remarkable and
miraculous a Providence planted them in that good Land; he summons the people
together, and represents to them all those considerations that might engage
them and their posterity for ever, to continue in the true Religion. He tells
them what God had already done for them, and what he had promised to do more,
if they would be faithful to him: And on the other hand, what fearful
calamities he had threatened, and would certainly bring upon them, in case they
should transgress his Covenant, and go and serve other Gods. And after many
Arguments to this purpose, he concludes with this earnest Exhortation at the
14th. verse, Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth, and put away the Gods which your father served on the other side of the
flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.

And to give the greater weight and force to this Exhortation, he does by a
very eloquent kind of insinuation as it were once more set them at liberty, and
leave them to their own election: It being the nature of man to stick more
steadfastly to that which is not violently imposed, but is our own free and
deliberate choice: And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom you will serve.

Which words offer to our consideration these following Observations.

1. It is here supposed that a Nation must be of some Religion or other. Joshua
does not put this to their choice, but takes it for granted.

2. That though Religion be a matter of choice, yet it is neither a thing
indifferent in it self, nor to a good Governor, what Religion his people are
of. Joshua does not put it to them as if it were an indifferent matter whether
they served God or Idols; he had sufficiently declared before which of these
was to be preferred.

3. The true Religion may have several prejudices and objections against it: If
it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, intimating that upon some accounts,
and to some persons, it may appear so.

4. That the true Religion has those real advantages on its side, that it may
safely be referred to any considerate man's choice. And this seems to be the
true Reason why Joshua refers it to them: Not that he thought the thing
indifferent, but because he was fully satisfied that the truth and goodness of
the one above the other was so evident, that there was no danger that any
prudent man should make a wrong choice, If it seem evil unto you to serve the
Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve; intimating, that the plain
difference of the things in competition would direct them what to choose.

5. The Example of Princes and Governors has a very great influence upon the
people in matters of Religion. This I collect from the Context: And Joshua was
sensible of it; and therefore though he firmly believed the true Religion to
have those advantages that would certainly recommend it to every impartial man's
judgment, yet knowing that the multitude are easily imposed upon and led into
error, he thought fit to incline and determine them by his own example, and by
declaring his own peremptory resolution in the case, Choose you this day whom
you will serve; as for me, I and my house will serve the Lord. Laws are a good
security to Religion; but the Example of Governors is a living Law, which
secretly overrules the minds of men, and bends them to a compliance with it.

-- Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, ut vita Regentis.
The Lives and Actions of Princes have usually a greater sway upon the minds of
the People than their Laws.

All these Observations are I think very natural, and very considerable. I
shall not be able to speak to them all; but shall proceed so far as the time
and your patience will give me leave.

First, It is here supposed that a Nation must be of some Religion or other.
Joshua does not put it to their choice, whether they would worship any Deity at
all. That had been too wild and extravagant a supposition, and which it is
likely in those days had never entered into any man's mind. But he takes it for
granted that all people will be of some Religion; and then offers it to their
consideration which they would pitch upon, Choose you this day whom you will
serve, whether the Gods which your fathers served, etc.

Religion is a thing to which men are not only formed by education and custom,
but, as Tully says, Quo omnes duce natura vehimur, It is that to which we are
all carried by a natural inclination: which is the true Reason why some
Religion or other has so universally prevailed in all Ages and places of the
world.

The temporal felicity of men, and the ends of Government can very hardly, if
at all, be attained without Religion. Take away this, and all Obligations of
Conscience cease: and where there is no obligation of Conscience, all security
of Truth and Justice and mutual confidence among men is at an end. For why
should I repose confidence in that man, why should I take his word, or believe
his promise, or put any of my Interests and concernments into his power, who
has no other restraint upon him but that of humane Laws, and is at liberty in
his own mind and principles to do whatever he judges to be expedient for his
interest, provided he can but do it without danger to himself? So that declared
Atheism and Infidelity does justly bring men under a jealousy and suspicion
with all mankind: And every wise man has reason to be upon his guard against
those, from whom he has no cause to expect more justice and truth and equity
in their dealings than he can compel them to by the mere dint and force of
Laws. For by declaring themselves free from all other obligations they give us
fair warning what we are to expect at their hands, and how far we may trust
them. Religion is the strongest band of humane Society; and God so necessary to
the welfare and happiness of mankind, as it could not have been more, if we
could suppose the Being of God himself to have been purposely designed and
contrived for the benefit and advantage of men: So that very well may it be
taken for granted, that a Nation must be of some Religion or other.

Though Religion be a matter of our choice, yet it is neither a thing
indifferent in it self, nor to a good Governor, what Religion his people are
of. Notwithstanding the supposition of the Text, Joshua does not leave them at
liberty whether they will serve God or Idols; but by a very Rhetorical Scheme
of Speech endeavors to engage them more firmly to the worship of the true God.

To countenance and support the true Religion, and to take care that the people
be instructed in it, and that none be permitted to debauch and seduce men from
it, properly belongs to the Civil Magistrate. This power the Kings of Israel
always exercised, not only with allowance, but with great approbation and
commendation from God himself. And the case is not altered since Christianity:
The better the Religion is, the better it deserves the countenance and support
of the Civil Authority. And this Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of
Religion was never called in question, but by the Enthusiasts of these later
times: And yet among these, every Father and Master of a Family claims this
Power over his Children and Servants, at the same time that they deny it to the
Magistrate over his Subjects. But I would fain know where the difference lies.
Has a Master of a Family more power over those under his Government than the
Magistrate has? No man ever pretended it: Nay, so far is it from that, that
the natural Authority of a Father may be, and often is, limited and restrained
by the Laws of the Civil Magistrate. And why then may not a Magistrate exercise
the same power over his Subjects in matters of Religion, which every Master
challenges to himself in his own Family, that is, to establish the true
worship of God in such manner and with such circumstances as he thinks best,
and to permit none to affront it, or to seduce from it those that are under his
care. And to prevent all misunderstandings in this matter, I do not hereby
ascribe any thing to the Magistrate that can possibly give him any pretense of
right to reject God's true Religion, or to declare what he pleases to be so,
and what Books he pleases to be Canonical and the Word of God; and consequently
to make a false Religion so current by the stamp of his Authority, as to oblige
his Subjects to the profession of it: Because he who acknowledges himself to
derive all his Authority from God, can pretend to none against Him. But if a
false Religion be established by Law, the case here is the same as in all other
Laws that are sinful in the matter of them, but yet made by a lawful
Authority; in this case the Subject is not bound to profess a false Religion,
but patiently to suffer for the constant profession of the true.

And to speak freely in this matter, I cannot think (till I be better informed,
which I am always ready to be) that any pretense of Conscience warrants any
man, that is not extraordinarily commissioned as the Apostles and first
Publishers of the Gospel were, and cannot justify that Commission by Miracles
as they did, to affront the established Religion of a Nation (though it be
false) and openly to draw men off from the profession of it in contempt of the
Magistrate and the Law: All that persons of a different Religion can in such a
case reasonably pretend to, is to enjoy the private liberty and exercise of
their own Conscience and Religion; for which they ought to be very thankful,
and to forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion, (though
they be never so sure that they are in the right) till they have either an
extraordinary Commission from God to that purpose, or the Providence of God
make way for it by the permission or connivance of the Magistrate. Not but that
every man has a Right to publish and propagate the true Religion, and to
declare it against a false one; but there is no Obligation upon any man to
attempt this to no purpose, and when without a miracle it can have no other
effect but the loss of his own life: unless he have an immediate command and
Commission from God to this purpose, and be endued with a power of miracles, as
a public Seal and Testimony of that Commission, which was the case of the
Apostles, who after they had received an immediate Commission were not to enter
upon the execution of it, but to stay at Jerusalem, till they were endued with
power from on high. In this case a man is to abide all hazards, and may
reasonably expect both extraordinary assistance and success, as the Apostles
had; and even a miraculous protection till his work be done; and after that, if
he be call*d to suffer Martyrdom, a supernatural support under those
sufferings.

And that they are guilty however of gross Hypocrisy who pretend a further
obligation of Conscience in this matter, I shall give this plain Demonstration,
which relies upon Concessions generally made on all hands, and by all Parties.
No Protestant (that I know of) holds himself obliged to go and Preach up his
Religion and make Converts in Spain or Italy: Nor do either the Protestant
Ministers or Popish Priests think themselves bound in conscience to Preach the
Gospel in Turkey, and to confute the Alcheran, to convert the Mahometans. And
what is the Reason? because of the severity of the Inquisition in Popish
Countries, and of the Laws in Turkey. But does the danger then alter the
obligation of Conscience? No certainly; but it makes men throw off the false
pretense and disguise of it: But where there is a real obligation of
Conscience, danger should not deter men from their Duty, as it did not the
Apostles: which shows their case to be different from ours, and that probably
this matter was stated right at first. So that whatever is pretended this is
certain, that the Priests and Jesuits of the Church of Rome have in truth no
more obligation of conscience to make Converts here in England than in Sueden
or Turkey; where it seems the evident danger of the attempt has for these many
years given them a perfect discharge from their duty in this particular. I
shall join the

Third and Fourth Observations together. That though the true Religion may have
several prejudices and objections against it, yet upon examination there will
be found those real advantages on its side, that it may safely be referred to
any considerate man's choice: If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose
you this day whom you will serve. If it seem evil unto you, Intimating that to
some persons and upon some accounts it may appear so. But when the matter is
truly represented, the choice is not difficult, nor requires any long
deliberation, Choose you this day whom you will serve. Let but the Cause be
fully and impartially heard, and a wise man may determine himself upon the
spot, and give his Verdict without ever going from the Bar.

The true Religion has always layen under some prejudices with partial and
inconsiderate men; which commonly spring from one of these two Causes, either
the Prepossessions of a contrary Religion, or the contrariety of the true
Religion to the vicious inclinations and practices of men, which usually lies
at the bottom of all prejudice against Religion. Religion is an enemy to men's
beloved lusts, and therefore they are enemies to Religion. I begin with the
first, which is as much as I shall be able to compass at this time.

I. The Prepossessions of a false Religion; which commonly pretends two
advantages on its side, Antiquity and Universality; and is wont to object to
the true Religion Novelty and Singularity. And both these are intimated both
before and after the Text: Put away the gods which your Father served on the
other side of the flood, and in Egypt: And choose you this day whom you will
serve, whether the gods which your Fathers served on the other side of the
flood, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell. Idolatry was the
Religion of their Fathers, and had spread it self over the greatest and most
ancient Nations of the world and the most famous for Learning and Arts, the
Chaldeans and Egyptians; and was the Religion of the Amorites and the Nations
round about them. So that Joshua represents the Heathen Religion with all its
strength and advantage, and does not dissemble its confident pretense to
Antiquity and Universality, whereby they would also insinuate the Novelty and
Singularity of the worship of the God of Israel. And it is very well worthy our
observation, that one or both of these have always been the Exceptions of false
Religions (especially of Idolatry and Superstition) against the true Religion.
The ancient Idolaters of the World pretended their Religion to be ancient and
universal, that their Fathers served these Gods, and that the worship of the
God of Israel was a plain Innovation upon the Ancient and Catholic Religion of
the world, and that the very first rise and original of it was within the
memory of their Fathers; and no doubt they were almost perpetually upon the
Jews with that pert question, Where was your Religion before Abraham? and
telling them, that it was the Religion of a very small part and corner of the
world, confined within a little Territory: But the great Nations of the world,
the Egyptians and Chaldeans, famous for all kind of knowledge and wisdom, and
indeed all the Nations round about them, worshipped other Gods: And therefore
it was an intolerable arrogance and singularity in them, to condemn their
Fathers and all the world, to be of a Religion different from all other
Nations, and hereby to separate themselves and make a Schism from the rest of
mankind.

And when the Gospel appeared in the world, which the Apostle to the Hebrews
(to prevent the scandal of that word) calls the time of Reformation, the Jews
and Heathen still renewed the same Objections against Christianity. The Jews
urged against it, not the ancient Scriptures and the true word of God, but that
which they pretended to be of much greater Authority, the unwritten Word, the
ancient and constant Traditions of their Church; and branded this new Religion
with the name of Heresy, After the way (says St. Paul) that you call Heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers; believing all things that are written in
the Law, and in the Prophets: By which we see, that they of the Church of Rome
were not the first who called it Heresy to reject humane Traditions, and to
make the Scriptures the Rule of Faith: This was done long before by their
reverend Predecessors, the Scribes and and Pharisees.

And the Gentiles, they pretended against it both Antiquity and Universality,
the constant belief and practice of all Ages, and almost all Places of the
World; Sequimur majores nostros qui feliciter secuti sunt suos, says Symmachus,
We follow our Forefathers, who happily followed theirs; But you bring in a new
Religion, never known nor heard of in the World before.

And when the Christian Religion was most miserably depraved and corrupted, in
that dismal night of Ignorance which overspread these Western parts of the
World about the Ninth and Tenth Centuries; and many pernicious Doctrines and
Superstitious Practices were introduced, to the woeful defacing of the
Christian Religion, and making it quite another thing from what our Savior had
left it; and these Corruptions and Abuses had continued for several Ages: No
sooner was a Reformation attempted but the Church of Rome make the same outcry
of Novelty and Singularity: And though we have substantially answered it a
thousand times, yet we cannot obtain of them to forbear that threadbare
Question, Where was your Religion before Luther?

I shall therefore apply my self to answer these two Exceptions with all the
brevity and clearness I can: And I doubt not to make it appear, that as to the
point of Universality (though that be no-wise necessary to justify the truth
of any Religion) ours is not inferior to theirs; if we take in the Christians
of all Ages, and of all parts of the World: And as to the point of Antiquity,
that our Faith and the Doctrines of our Religion have clearly the advantage of
theirs; all our Faith being unquestionably ancient, theirs not so.

1. As to the Point of Universality. Which they of the Church of Rome, I know
not for what reason, will needs make an inseparable property and mark of the
true Church. And they never slout at the Protestant Religion with so good a
grace among the ignorant People, as when they are bragging of their Numbers,
and despising poor Protestancy because embraced by so few. This pestilent
Northern Heresy (as of late they scornfully call it) entertained it seems only
in this cold and cloudy Corner of the World, by a company of dull stupid
People, that can neither penetrate into the proofs nor the possibility of
Transubstantiation; whereas to the more refined Southern Wits all these
difficult and obscure Points are as clear as their Sun at Noonday.

But to speak to the thing it self. If Number be necessary to prove the truth
and goodness of any Religion, ours upon enquiry will be found not so
inconsiderable as our Adversaries would make it. Those of the Reformed
Religion, according to the most exact calculations that have been made by
learned men, being esteemed not much unequal in number to those of the Romish
persuasion. But then if we take in the ancient Christian Church, whose Faith
was the same with ours; and other Christian Churches at this day, which all
together are vastly greater and more numerous than the Roman Church, and which
agree with us, several of them in very considerable Doctrines and Practices in
dispute between us and the Church of Rome, and all of them in disclaiming that
fundamental point of the Roman Religion, and Sum of Christianity (as
Bellarmine calls it) I mean the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome over all
Christians and Churches in the World, then the Number on our side will be much
greater than on theirs.

But we will not stand upon this advantage with them. Suppose we were by much
the sewer. So has the true Church of God often been, without any the least
prejudice to the truth of their Religion. What think we of the Church in
Abraham's time, which for ought we know was confined to one Family; and one
small Kingdom, that of Melchisedec King of Salem? What think we of it in Moses
his time, when it was confined to one People wandering in a Wilderness? What of
it in Elijah's time, when besides the two Tribes that worshipped at Jerusalem,
there were in the other ten but seven thousand that had not bowed their knee to
Baal? What in our Savior's time, when the whole Christian Church consisted of
twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples, and some few Followers beside? How
would Bellarmine have despised this little Flock, because it wanted one or two
of his goodliest marks of the true Church, Universality and Splendour? And what
think we of the Christian Church in the height of Arianism and Pelagianism,
when a great part of Christendom was overrun with these Errors, and the number
of the Orthodox was inconsiderable in comparison of the Heretics?

But what need I to urge these Instances? As if the Truth of a Religion were to
be estimated and carried by the major Vote; which as it can be an Argument to
none but Fools, so I dare say no honest and wise man ever made use of it for a
solid proof of the truth and goodness of any Church or Religion. If multitude
be an Argument that men are in the right, in vain then has the Scripture said,
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: For if this Argument be of any
force, the greater Number never go wrong.

2. As to the Point of Antiquity. This is not always a certain Mark of the true
Religion. For surely there was a time when Christianity began and was a new
Profession, and then both Judaism and Paganism had certainly the advantage of
it in Point of Antiquity. But the proper Question in this Case is, Which is the
true Ancient Christian Faith, that of the Church of Rome, or Ours? And to make
this matter plain, it is to be considered, that a great part of the Roman Faith
is the same with Ours; as, namely, the Articles of the Apostles Creed, as
explained by the first four General Councils. And these make up our whole
Faith, so far as concerns matters of mere and simple Belief, that are of
absolute necessity to Salvation. And in this Faith of Ours, there is nothing
wanting that can be shown in any ancient Creed of the Christian Church. And
thus far Our Faith, and theirs of the Roman Church, are undoubtedly of equal
Antiquity, that is, as ancient as Christianity it self.

All the Question is, as to the matters in difference between us. The principal
whereof are the twelve new Articles of the Creed of Pope Pius the IV,
concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, the Communion in one
kind only, Purgatory, etc. not one of which is to be found in any ancient Creed
or Confession of Faith generally allowed in the Christian Church. The Antiquity
of these we deny, and affirm them to be Innovations; and have particularly
proved them to be so, not only to the answering, but almost to the silencing of
our Adversaries.

And as for the negative Articles of the Protestant Religion, in opposition to
the Errors and Corruptions of the Romish Faith, these are by accident become a
part of our Faith and Religion, occasioned by their Errors; as the renouncing
of the Doctrines of Arianism became part of the Catholic Religion, after the
rise of that Heresy.

So that the Case is plainly this; We believe and teach all that is contained
in the Creeds of the ancient Christian Church, and was by them esteemed
necessary to Salvation: and this is Our Religion. But now the Church of Rome
has innovated in the Christian Religion, and made several Additions to it; and
greatly corrupted it both in the Doctrines and Practices of it: And these
Additions and Corruptions are their Religion, as it is distinct from ours; and
both because they are Corruptions and Novelties we have rejected them: And our
rejection of these is our Reformation: And our Reformation we grant (if this
will do them any good) not to be so ancient as their Corruptions: All
Reformation necessarily supposing Corruptions and Errors to have been before it.

And now we are at a little better leisure to answer that captious Question of
theirs, Where was your Religion before Luther? Wherever Christianity was; in
some places more pure, in others more corrupted: but especially in these
Western parts of Christendom overgrown for several Ages with manifold Errors
and Corruptions, which the Reformation has happily cut off, and cast away. So
that though our Reformation was as late as Luther, our Religion is as ancient
as Christianity it self. For when the Additions which the Church of Rome has
made to the ancient Christian Faith, and their Innovations in practice are
pared off, that which remains of their Religion is ours; and this they cannot
deny to be every tittle of it the ancient Christianity.

And what other Answer than this could the Jews have given to the like
Question, if it had been put to them by the ancient Idolaters of the World,
Where was your Religion before Abraham? but the very same in substance which we
now give to the Church of Rome? That for many Ages the Worship of the one true
God had been corrupted, and the Worship of Idols had prevailed in a great part
of the World: that Abraham was raised up by God to reform Religion, and to
reduce the Worship of God to its first Institution; in the doing whereof he
necessarily separated Himself and his Family from the Communion of those
Idolaters. So that though the Reformation which Abraham began was new, yet his
Religion was truly ancient; as old as that of Noah, and Enoch, and Adam. Which
is the same in substance that we say, and with the same and equal reason.

And if they will still complain of the Newness of our Reformation, so do we
too, and are heartily sorry it began no sooner; but however better late than
never. Besides, it ought to be considered, that this Objection of Novelty lies
against all Reformation whatsoever, though never so necessary, and though
things be never so much amiss: And it is in effect to say, that if things be
once bad, they must never be better, but must always remain as they are; for
they cannot be better, without being reformed, and a Reformation must begin
sometime, and whenever it begins it is certainly new. So that if a real
Reformation be made, the thing justifies it self; and no Objection of Novelty
ought to take place against that which upon all accounts was so fit and
necessary to be done. And if they of the Church of Rome would but speak their
mind out in this matter, they are not so much displeased at the Reformation
which we have made because it is new, as because it is a Reformation. It was
the humor of Babylon of old (as the Prophet tells us) that she would not be
healed; Jer. 51.9.
and this is still the temper of the Church of Rome, they hate to he reformed;
and rather than acknowledge themselves to have been once in an Error, they will
continue in it for ever. And this is that which at first made, and still
continues the breach and Separation between us; of which we are no-wise guilty
who have only reformed what was amiss, but they who obstinately persist in
their errors, and will needs impose them upon us and will not let us be of
their Communion unless we will say they are no Errors.

Prejudice against the true Religion is, the contrariety of it to the vicious
inclinations and practices of Men.

It is too heavy a yoke, and lays too great a restraint upon humane Nature. And
this is that which in truth lies at the bottom of all Objections against
Religion, Men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

But this Argument will require a Discourse by it self, and therefore I shall
not now enter upon it; only crave your patience a little longer, whilst I make
some Reflections upon what has been already delivered.

You see what are the Exceptions which Idolatry and Superstition have always
made, and do at this day still make, against the true Religion; and how slight
and insignificant they are.

But do we then charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry? Our Church most
certainly does so, and has always done it from the beginning of the
Reformation; in her Homilies, and Liturgy, and Canons, and in the Writings of
her best and ablest Champions. And though I have, as impartially as I could,
considered what has been said on both sides in this Controversy; yet I must
confess I could never yet see any tolerable defense made by them against this
heavy charge. And they themselves acknowledge themselves to be greatly under
the suspicion of it, by saying (as Cardinal Perron and others do) that the
Primitive Christians for some Ages did neither worship Images, nor pray to
Saints, for fear of being thought to approach too near the Heathen Idolatry:
And which is yet more; diverse of their most learned men do confess, that if
Transubstantiation be not true, they are as gross Idolaters as any in the
World. And I hope they do not expect it from us, that in complement to them,
and to acquit them from the charge of Idolatry, we should presently deny our
senses, and believe Transubstantiation; and if we do not believe this, they
grant we have Reason to charge them with Idolatry.

But we own them to be a true Church; which they cannot be, if they be guilty
of Idolatry: This they often urge us withal, and there seems at first sight to
be something in it: And for that reason I shall endeavor to give so clear and
satisfactory an answer to it, as that we may never more be troubled with it.

The truth is, we would fain hope, because they still retain the Essentials of
Christianity, and profess to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith,
that notwithstanding their Corruptions they may still retain the true Essence
of a Church: as a man may be truly and really a man, though he have the plague
upon him; and for that reason be fit to be avoided by all that wish well to
themselves But if this will not do, we cannot help it. Therefore to push the
matter home; Are they sure that this is a firm and good consequence, That if
they be Idolaters, they cannot be a true Church? Then let them look to it. It
is they, I take it, that are concerned to prove themselves a true Church, and
not we to prove it for them. And if they will not understand it of themselves,
it is fit they should be told that there is a great difference between
Concessions of Charity and of Necessity, and that a very different use ought to
be made of them. We are willing to think the best of them; but if they dislike
our Charity in this point, nothing against the hair (...) they will forgive us
this Injury, we will not offend them any more: But rather than have any farther
difference with them about this matter, we will for quietness sake compound it
thus; That till they can clearly acquit themselves from being Idolaters, they
shall never more against their wills be esteemed a true Church.

And now to draw to a Conclusion.

If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, and to worship him only; to pray
to him alone, and that only in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, as he
has given us Commandment; because there is but one God, and one Mediator
between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. If it seem evil unto you, to have
the liberty to serve God in a Language you can understand; and to have the free
use of the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make men wise unto Salvation; and
to have the Sacraments of our Religion entirely administered to us, as our Lord
did institute and appoint.

And on the other hand, if it seem good to us, to put our necks once more under
that yoke, which our Fathers were not able to bear: If it be really a
Preferment to a Prince to hold the Pope's Stirrup, and a Privilege to be
deposed by him at his pleasure, and a courtesy to be killed at his command: If
to pray without Understanding, and to obey without Reason, and to believe
against Sense; if Ignorance, and implicit Faith, and an Inquisition, be in good
earnest such charming and desirable things: Then welcome Popery; which,
wherever thou come, do infallibly bring all these wonderful Privileges and
Blessings along with thee.

But the Question is not now about the choice, but the change of our Religion,
after we have been so long settled in the quiet possession and enjoyment of it.
Men are very loath to change even a false Religion. Has a Nation changed their
Gods, which yet are no Gods? And surely there is much more reason why we should
be tenacious of the Truth, and hold fast that which is good.

We have the best Religion in the World, the very same which the Son of God
revealed, which the Apostles planted, and confirmed by Miracles, and which the
noble Army of Martyrs sealed with their Blood: And we have retrenched from it
all false Doctrines and superstitious Practices which have been added since.
And I think we may without immodesty say, That upon the plain square of
Scripture and Reason, of the Tradition and Practice of the first and best Ages
of the Christian Church, we have fully justified Our Religion; and made it
evident to the World, that our Adversaries are put to very hard shifts, and
upon a perpetual disadvantage in the defense of Theirs.

I wish it were as easy for us to justify our Lives as our Religion. I do not
mean in comparison of our Adversaries (for that, as bad as we are, I hope we
are yet able to do) but in comparison of the Rules of our holy Religion, from
which we are infinitely swerved; which I would to God we all did seriously
consider and lay to heart: I say, in comparison of the Rules of our Holy
Religion, which teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present World, in expectation of
the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ; To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, etc.

JOSHUA XXIV. 15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom you will serve.


THese words, as I have already declared in the former Discourse, are the last
counsel and advice which Joshua gave to the People of Israel, after he had
safely conducted them into the Land of Canaan. And that he might more
effectually persuade them to continue steadfast in the worship of the true God,
by an eloquent kind of insinuation he does as it were once more set them at
liberty and leave them to their own choice; If it seem evil unto you to serve
the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve.

The plain sense of which Words may be resolved into this Proposition, That
notwithstanding all the prejudices and objections against the true Religion,
yet it has those real advantages on its side that it may safely be referred to
any impartial and considerate man's choice; If it seem evil unto you to serve
the Lord; intimating that to some persons, and upon some accounts, it may seem
so; but when the matter is thoroughly examined, the resolution and choice cannot
be difficult, nor require any long deliberation, Choose you this day whom you
will serve.

The true Religion has always layn under some prejudices with partial arid
inconsiderate men, arising chiefly from these two Causes; the prepossessions of
a false Religion; and the contrariety of the true Religion to the inclinations
of men, and the uneasiness of it in point of practice.

First, From the prepossessions of a false Religion; which has always been
wont to lay claim to Antiquity and Universality, and to charge the true
Religion with Novelty and Singularity. And both these are intimated before the
Text; Put away the Gods whom your Fathers served, on the other side of the
Flood and in Egypt, and choose you this day whom you will serve. It was
pretended that the worship of Idols was the ancient Religion of the world, of
those great Nations, the Egyptians and Chaldeans, and of all the Nations round
about them. But this has already been considered at large.

Secondly, There are another sort of prejudices against Religion, more apt to
stick with men of better sense and reason; and these arise principally from the
contrariety of the true Religion to the inclinations of men, and the uneasiness
of it in point of practice. It is pretended that Religion is a heavy yoke, and
lays too great a restraint upon humane Nature, and that the Laws of it bear too
hard upon the general inclinations of mankind.

I shall not at present meddle with the speculative Objections against
Religion, upon account of the pretended unreasonableness of many things in
point of Belief: because the contrariety of the true Religion to the
inclinations of men, and the uneasiness of it in point of practice, is that
which in truth lies at the bottom of Atheism and Insidelity, and raises all
that animosity which is in the minds of bad men against Religion, and
exasperates them to oppose it with all their wit and malice: Men love darkness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil. And if this prejudice were but
once removed, and men were in some measure reconciled to the practice of
Religion, the speculative Objections against it would almost vanish of
themselves: for there wants little else to enable a man to answer them, but a
willingness of mind to have them answered, and that we have no interest and
inclination to the contrary. And therefore I shall at present wholly apply my
self to remove this prejudice against Religion, from the contrariety of it to
the inclinations of men, and the uneasiness of it in point of practice.

And there are two parts of this Objection.

1st. That a great part of the Laws of Religion do thwart the natural
inclinations of men, which may reasonably be supposed to be from God. And, 2ly.
That all of them together are a heavy yoke, and do lay too great a restraint
upon humane Nature, intrenching too much upon the pleasures and liberty of it.
I. That a great part of the Laws of Religion do thwart the natural
inclinations of men, which may reasonably be supposed to be from God. So that
God seems to have set our nature and our duty at variance, to have given us
appetites and inclinations one way, and Laws another: which if it were true
must needs render the practice of Religion very grievous and uneasy.

The force of this Objection is very smartly expressed in those celebrated
Verses of a Noble Poet of our own, which are so frequently in the mouths of
many who are thought to bear no good will to Religion.

O wearisome condition of Humanity,
Born under one Law, to another bound;
Vainly begot, and yet forbidden Vanity;
Created sick, commanded to be sound.
If Nature did not take delight in blood,
She would have made more easy ways to good.
So that this Objection would sain charge the sins of men upon God; first upon
account of the evil inclinations of our Nature; and then of the contrariety of
our duty to those inclinations. And from the beginning man has always been apt
to lay the blame of his faults where it can least lie, upon goodness and
perfection it self. The very first sin that ever man was guilty of he
endeavored to throw upon God: The woman whom thou gave me (says Adam) she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat: And his posterity are still apt to excuse
themselves the same way. But to return a particular answer to this Objection.

1. We will acknowledge so much of it as is true; That there is a great
degeneracy and corruption of humane Nature, from what it was originally framed
when it came out of God's hands: of which the Scripture gives us this account,
that it was occasioned by the voluntary transgression of a plain and easy
Command given by God to our first Parents. And this weakness contracted by the
fall of our first. Parents naturally descends upon us their Posterity, and
visibly discovers it self in our inclinations to evil, and impotence to that
which is good.

And of this the heathen Philosophers, from the light of nature, and their own
experience and observation of themselves and others, were very sensible; that
humane Nature was very much declined from its primitive rectitude, and sunk
into a weak and drooping and sickly State which they called a (...), the
moulting of the wings of the soul: But yet they were so just and reasonable as
not to charge this upon God, but upon some corruption and impurity contracted
by the Soul in a former State, before its union with the Body. For the descent
of the Soul into these gross earthly Bodies they looked upon as partly the
punishment of faults committed in a former State, and partly as the opportunity
of a new trial in order to its purgation and recovery. And this was the best
account they were able to give of this matter, without the Light of Divine
Revelation.

So that the degeneracy of humane Nature is universally acknowledged, and God
acquitted from being the cause of it: But however, the posterity of Adam do all
partake of the weakness contracted by his fall, and do still labor under the
miseries and inconveniences of it. But then this degeneracy is not total. For
though our faculties be much weakened and disordered, yet they are not destroyed
nor wholly perverted. Our natural Judgment and Conscience does still direct to
us what is good, and what we ought to do; and the impressions of the natural
Law, as to the great lines of our duty, are still legible upon our hearts. So
that the Law written in God's Word is not contrary to the Law written upon our
hearts. And therefore it is not truly said, that we are born under one Law and
bound to another. But the great disorder is, that our infeririour faculties,
our sensitive appetite and passions, are broke loose and have got head of our
Reason, and are upon all occasions apt to rebel I against it: but our Judgment
still dictates the very same things which the Law of God does enjoin.

It is likewise very visible, that the sad effects of this degeneracy do not
appear equally and alike in all: whether from the better or worse temper of our
Bodies or from some other more secret cause, I shall not determine, because I
know not: But that there is a difference is evident. for though a proneness to
evil, and some seeds of it be in all, yet we may plainly discover in many very
early and forward inclinations to some kinds of virtue and goodness; which
being cultivated by Education, may under the ordinary influence of God's grace
be carried on with great case to great perfection.

And there are others who are not so strongly bent to that which is evil, but
that by good instruction and example in their tender years they may be swayed
the other way, and without great difficulty formed to goodness.

There are some indeed (which is the hardest case) in whom there do very early
appear strong propensions and inclinations to evil, especially to some
particular kinds of vice: But the case of these is not desperate; though
greater attention and care, and a much more prudent management is required in
the education of such persons to correct their evil tempers, and by degrees to
bend their inclinations the right way? and if the seeds of piety and virtue be
but carefully sown at first, very much may be done by this means, even in the
most depraved Natures, toward the altering and changing of them; however, to
the checking and controuling of their vicious inclinations. And if these
persons, when they come to riper years, would pursue these advantages of
education, and take some pains with themselves, and earnestly seek the
assistance of God's grace, I doubt not but even these persons by degrees might
at last get the mastery of their unhappy tempers.

For next to the Being and perfections of God, and the immortality of our own
Souls, there is no Principle of Religion that I do more firmly believe than
this, that God has that love for men that if we do heartily beg his
assistance, and be not wanting to our selves, he will afford it to every one of
us in proportion to our need of it; that he is always before hand with us, and
prevents every man with the gracious offers of his help. And I doubt not but
many very perverse Natures have thus been reclaimed. For God, who is the Lover
of Souls (as the Son of Sirach calls him) though he may put some men under more
difficult circumstances of becoming good than others, yet he leaves no man
under a fatal necessity of being wicked and perishing everlastingly. He
tenderly considers every man's case and circumstances, and it is we that pull
destruction upon our selves, with the works of our own hands: But as sure as
God is good and just, no man in the world is ruined for want of having
sufficient help and aid afforded to him by God for his recovery.

2. It is likewise to be considered that God did not design to create man in
the full possession of happiness at first, but to train him up to it by the
trial of his obedience. But there could be no trial of our obedience without
some difficulty in our duty: Either by reason of powerful temptations from
without, or of cross and perverse inclinations from within.

Our first Parents, in their state of innocence, had only the trial of
temptation without; to which they yielded, and were overcome; having only a
natural power to have resisted the temptation, without any aid of supernatural
grace: And that weakness to good, and proneness to evil, which they by wilful
transgression contracted, is naturally derived to us; and we necessarily
partake of the bitterness and impurity of the Fountain from whence we spring.
So that we now labor under a double difficulty; being assaulted by temptations
from without, and incited by evil inclinations from within: But then, to
balance these, we have a double advantage; that a greater reward is proposed to
us, than for ought we know would have been conferred on our first parents had
they continued innocent; and that we are endued with a supernatural power to
conflict with these difficulties. So that, according to the merciful
dispensation of God, all this conflict between our inclination and our duty
does only serve to give a fairer opportunity for the fitting trial of our
obedience, and for the more glorious reward of it.

3. God has provided an universal remedy for this degeneracy and weakness of
humane Nature: So that what we lost by the first Adam is abundantly repaired to
us by the second. This St. Paul tells us at large, Romans 5. that as by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; so the Grace of God has abounded
to all men by Jesus Christ: And that to such a degree, as effectually to
countervall the ill effects of original sin, and really to enable men, if they
be not wanting to themselves, to master and subdue all the bad inclinations of
nature, even in those who seem to be naturally most corrupt and depraved.

And if this be true, we may without any reflection upon God acknowledge, that
though he did not at first create man sick and weak, yet he having made himself
so, his posterity are born so: But then God has not left us helpless in this
weak and miserable State, into which by wilful transgression mankind is
fallen: But as he commands us to be sound, so he affords us sufficient aids of
his grace by Jesus Christ for our recovery.

And though there is a Law in our Members warring against the Law of our Minds,
and captivating us to the Law of Sin and Death; i. e. though our sensitive
appetite and passions are apt to rebel against the reason of our minds and the
dictates of our natural Concience, yet every Christian may say with St. Paul,
thanks be to God, who has given its the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,
i. e. has not left us destitute of a sufficient aid and strength to enable us
to conquer the rebellious motions of sin, by the powerful assistance of that
grace which is so plentifully offered to us in the Gospel. And this is the case
of all those who live under the Gospel: As for others, as their case is best
known to God, so we have no reason to doubt but that his infinite goodness and
mercy takes that care of them which becomes a merciful Creator: Though both
the measures, and the methods of his mercy toward them are Secret and unknown
to us.

4. The hardest contest between man's inclination and duty, is in those who
have wilfully contracted vicious habits, and by that means, rendered their duty
much more difficult to themselves; having greatly improved the evil
inclinations of nature by wicked practice and custom. For the Scripture plainly
supposes, that men may debauch even corrupt nature, and make themselves ten
fold more the Children of wrath and of the Devil than they were by Nature.

This is a case sadly to be deplored, but yet not utterly to be despaired of.
And therefore those who by a long progress in an evil course, are plunged into
this sad condition, ought to consider that they are not to be rescued out of it
by an ordinary resolution, and a common grace of God. Their case plainly
requires an extraordinary remedy. For he that is deeply engaged in vice is like
a man laid fast in a bogg, who by a faint and lazy struggling to get out, does
but spend his strength to no purpose, and sinks himself the deeper into it: The
only way is, by a resolute and vigorous effort to spring out, if possible, at
once. And therefore in this case, to a vigorous resolution there must be joined
an earnest application to God for his powerful grace and assistance, to help
us out of this miserable State. And if we be truly sensible of the desperate
danger of our condition, the pressing necessity of our case will be apt to
inspire us with a mighty resolution. For power and necessity are neighbors,
and never dwell far asunder. When men are sorely urged and pressed, they find a
power in themselves which they thought they had not. Like a coward driven up to
a wall, who in the extremity of distress and despair will fight terribly and
perform wonders: or like a man lame of the Gout, who being assaulted by a
present and terrible danger forgets his Disease, and will find his legs rather
than lose his life.

And in this, I do not speak above the rate of humane Nature, and what men
thoroughly roused and awakened to a sense of their danger, by a mighty
resolution may morally do, through that Divine grace and assistance which is
ever ready to be afforded to well resolved minds, and such as are sincerely
bent to return to God and their Duty. More than this I cannot say for the
encouragement of those who have proceeded far in an evil course: And they who
have made their case so very desperate, ought to be very thankful to God that
there is any remedy left for them.

5. From all that has been said, it evidently appears, how malicious a
suggestion it is, that God seeks the destruction of men, and has made his Laws
on purpose so difficult and cross to our inclinations that he might have an
advantage to ruin us for our disobedience to them. Alas, we are so absolutely
under the Power of God, and so unable to withstand it, that he may destroy us
when he pleases, without seeking pretenses for it: For who has resisted his
will? If goodness were not his nature, he has power enough to bear out
whatever he has a mind to do to us. But our destruction is plainly of our
selves, and God is free from the blood of all men. And he has not made the way
to Eternal Life so difficult to any of us, with a design to make us miserable,
but that we by a vigorous resolution, and an unwearied diligence, and a patient
continuance in well doing, might win and wear a more glorious Crown, and be fit
to receive a more ample reward from his bounty and goodness: yea, in some
sense, I may say, from his justice; For God is not unrighteous, to forget our
work and labor and love. He will fully consider all the pains that any of us
take in his service, and all the difficulties that we struggle with out of love
to God and clashing of our duty with our inclination, is I hope fully answered:
Since God has provided so powerful and effectual a remedy against our natural
impotency and infirmity, by the Grace of the Gospel.

And though to those who have wilfully contracted vicious habits a religious
and virtuous course of life be very difficult, yet the main difficulty lies in
our first entrance upon it; And when that is over, the ways of goodness are as
easy as it is sit any thing should be that is so excellent, and that has the
encouragement of so glorious a reward. Custom will reconcile men almost to any
thing: but there are those charms in the ways of wisdom and virtue, that a
little acquaintance and conversation with them will soon make them more
delightful than any other course. And who would grudge any pains and trouble
to bring himself into so safe and happy a condition: After we have tried both
courses, of Religion and Profaneness, of Virtue and Vice, we shall certainly
find, that nothing is so wise, so easy, and so comfortable as to be virtuous
we are inwardly convinced we ought to do. Nor would I desire more of any man in
this matter, than to follow the soberest convictions of his own mind, and to do
that which upon the most serious consideration at all times, in prosperity and
affliction, in sickness and health, in the time of life and at the hour of
death, he judges wisest and safest for him to do. I proceed to the

that the Laws of Religion (and particularly of the Christian Religion) are a
heavy yoke, laying too great a restraint upon humane nature, and entrenching
too much upon the pleasures and liberty of it.

There was, I confess, some pretense for this Objection against the Jewish
Religion; which by the multitude of its positive Institutions and external
observances must needs have been very burdensome. And the same Objection lies
against the Church of Rome, who (as they have handled Christianity) by the
unreasonable number of their needless and senseless Ceremonies, have made the
yoke of Christ heavier than that of Moses, and the Gospel a more carnal
Commandment than the Law. So that Christianity is lost among them in the
trappings and accoutrements of it: with which instead of adorning Religion they
have strangely disguised it, and quite stifled it in the crowd of external
Rites and Ceremonies.

But the pure Christian Religion, as it was delivered by our Savior, has
hardly any thing in it that is positive; except the two Sacraments, which are
not very troublesome neither, but very much for our comfort and advantage,
because they convey and confirm to us the great blessings and privileges of our
Religion. In other things, Christianity has hardly imposed any other Laws upon
us but what are enacted in our Natures, or are agreeable to the prime and
fundamental Laws of it: nothing but what every man's reason either dictates to
him to be necessary, or approves as highly fit and reasonable.

But we do most grossly mistake the nature of pleasure and liberty, if we
promise them to our selves in any evil and wicked course. For, upon due search
and trial it will be found, that true pleasure, and perfect freedom, are no
where to be found but in the practice of virtue, and in the service of God. The
Laws of Religion do not abridge us of any pleasure that a wise man can desire,
and safely enjoy, I mean without a greater evil and trouble consequent upon it.
The pleasure of commanding our appetites, and governing our passions, by the
rules of Reason (which are the Laws of God) is infinitely to be preferred
before any sensual pleasure whatsoever: Because it is the pleasure of wifedom
and discretion; and gives us the satisfaction of having done that which is best
and fittest for reasonable Creatures to do. Who would not rather choose to
govern himself as Scipio did, amidst all the temptations and opportunities of
sensual pleasure which his power and victories presented to him, than to wallow
in all the delights of sense?

Nothing is more certain in reason and experience, than that every inordinate
appetite and affection is a punishment to it self; and is perpetually crossing
its own pleasure, and defeating its own satisfaction, by over-shooting the mark
it aims at. For instance, Intemperance in eating and drinking, instead of
delighting and satisfying nature, does but load and cloy it; and instead of
quenching a natural thirst, which it is extremely pleasant to do, creates an
unnatural one, which is troublesome and endless. The pleasure of Revenge, as
soon as it is executed, turns into grief and pity, guilt and remorse, and a
thousand melancholy wishes that we had retrained our selves from so
unreasonable an Act. And the same is as evident in other sensual excesses, not
so fit to be dedescribed. We may trust Epicurus for this, that there can be no
true pleasure without temperance in the use of pleasure. And God and Reason
have set us no other bounds concerning the use of sensual pleasures, but that
we take care not to be injurious to our selves, or others, in the kind, or
degree of them. And it is very visible, that all sensual excess is naturally
attended with a double inconvenience: As it goes beyond the limits of nature,
it begets bodily pains and diseases: As it transgresses the rules of Reason
and Religion, it breeds guilt and remorse in the mind. And these are, beyond
comparison, the two greatest evils in this world: a diseased body, and a
discontented mind, And in this I am sure I speak to the inward feeling and
experience of men; and say nothing but what every vicious man finds, and has a
more lively sense of, than is to be expressed by words.

When all is done, there is no pleasure comparable to that of Innocence, and
freedom from the stings of a guilty conscience: This is a pure and spiritual
pleasure, much above any sensual delight. And yet among all the delights of
sense, that of health (which is the natural consequent of a sober, and cha^te,
and regular life) is a sensual pleasure far beyond that of any Vice: For it is
the life of life; and that which gives a grateful relish to all our other
enjoyments. It is not indeed so violent and transporting a pleasure, but it is
pure, and even, and lasting, and has no guilt and regret, no sorrow and
trouble in it, or after it: which is a worm that infallibly breeds in all
vicious and unlawful pleasures, and makes them to be bitterness in the end.

All the ways of sin are so beset with thorns and difficulties on every side,
there are so many unanswerable objections against Vice, from the
unreasonableness and ugliness of it, from the remorse that attends it, from the
endless misery that follows it, that none but the rash and inconsiderate can
obtain leave of themselves to commit it. It is the Daughter of inadvertency,
and blindness, and folly; and the Mother of guilt, and repentance, and woe.
There is no pleasure that will hold out and abide with us to the last, but that
of Innocence and well-doing. All sin is folly; and as Seneca truly says, omnis
stultitia laborat fastidio sui; all folly soon grows sick and weary of it self.
The pleasure of it is slight and superficial, but the trouble and remorse of it
pierces our very hearts.

And then as to the other part of the Objection, That Religion restrains us of
our liberty: The contrary is most evidently true, that sin and vice are the
greatest slavery. For he is truly a slave, who is not at liberty to follow his
own judgment, and to do those things which he is inwardly convinced it is best
for him to do: but is subject to the unreasonable commands, and the tyrannical
power and violence of his lusts and passions: So that he is not master of
himself, but other Lords have got dominion over him, and he is perfectly at
their beck and command. One vice or passion bids him go, and he goes; another
come, and he comes; and a third, do this, and he does it. The man is at
perpetual variance with his own mind, and continually committing the things
which he condemns in himself. And it is all one, whether a man be subject to
the will and humor of another person, or to his own lusts and passions. Only
this of the two is the worse; because the Tyrant is at home, and always ready
at hand to domineer over him: he is got within him, and so much the harder to
be vanquished and overcome.

But the service of God, and obedience to his Laws is perfect liberty. Because
the Law of God requires nothing of us, but what is recommended to us by our own
reason and from the benefit and advantage of doing it: nothing but what is much
more for our own interest to do it, than it can be for God's to command it. And
if in some things God exact obedience of us more indispensibly, and under
severer penalties, it is because those things are in their Nature more
necessary to our felicity. And how could God possibly have dealt more
graciously and kindly with us, than to oblige us most strictly to that which is
most evidently for our good: and to make such Laws for us, as if we live in
obedience to them will infallibly make us happy. So that taking all things into
consideration, the interest of our bodies and our souls, of the present and the
future, of this world and the other, Religion is the most reasonable and wise,
the most comfortable and compendious course that any man can take in order to
his own happiness.

The consideration whereof ought to be a mighty endearment of our duty to us,
and a most prevalent argument with us to yield a ready and cheerful obedience
to the Laws of God; which are in truth so many acts of grace and favor to
mankind, the real privileges of our nature, and the proper means and causes of
our happiness: And do restrain us from nothing, but from doing mischief to our
selves, from playing the fools and making our selves miserable.

And therefore instead of opposing Religion, upon pretense of the unreasonable
restraints of it, we ought to thank God heartily, that he has laid so strict
an obligation upon us to regard and pursue our true interest; and has been
pleased to take that care of us, as to set bounds to our loose and wild
appetites by our duty; and in giving us rules to live by, has no ways complied
with our inconsiderate and foolish inclinations, to our real harm and
prejudice: But has made those things necessary for us to do, which in all
respects are best for us; and which, if we were perfectly left to our own
liberty, ought in all reason to be our free and first choice: And has made the
folly and inconvenience of sin so grossly palpable, that every man may see it
beforehand that will but consider, and at the beginning of a bad course look to
the end of it: and they that will not consider, shall be forced from woeful
experience at last to acknowledge it, when they find the dismal effects and
mischievous consequences of their vices still meeting them at one turn or other.

And now, by all that has been said upon this Argument, I hope we are
satisfied that Religion is no such intolerable yoke; and that upon a due and
full consideration of things it cannot seem evil unto any of us to serve the
Lord: nay, on the contrary, that it is absolutely necessary, both to our
present peace and our future felicity: And that a religious and virtuous life
is not only upon all accounts the most prudent, but after we are entered upon
it, and accustomed to it, the most pleasant course that any man can take: and
however inconsiderate men may complain of the restraints of Religion that it is
not one jot more our duty, than it is our privilege and our happiness.

And I cannot think that upon sober consideration any man could see reason to
thank God to be released from any of his Laws, or to have had the contrary to
them enjoined. Let us suppose, that the Laws of God had been just the Reverse
of what they now are; that he had commanded us, under severe penalties, to deal
falsely and fraudulently with our neighbor; to demean our selves ungratefully
to our best friends and benefactors; to be drunk every day, and to pursue
sensual pleasures to the endangering of our health and life: How should we have
complained of the unreasonableness of these Laws, and have murmured at the
slavery of such intolerable impositions? And yet now that God has commanded us
the contrary, things every way agreeable to our reason and interest, we are not
pleased neither. What will content us? As our Savior expostulates in a like
case, whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto Children playing
in the Marketplace, and calling unto their Companions, we have piped unto you,
and ye have not danced; we have mourned, and ye have not lamented. This is
perfectly childish, to be pleased with nothing; neither to like this, nor the
contrary. We are not contented with the Laws of God as they are, and yet the
contrary to them we should have esteemed the greatest grievance in the World.

And if this be true that the Laws of God, how contrary soever to our vicious
inclinations, are really calculated for our benefit and advantage, it would
almost be an affront to wise and considerate men to importune them to their
interest; and with great earnestness to persuade them to that which in all
respects is so visibly for their advantage. Choose you therefore this day whom
you will serve; God, or your lusts. And take up a speedy resolution in a matter
of so great and pressing a concernment; choose you this day.

Where there is great hazard in the doing of a thing, it is good to deliberate
long before we undertake it: but where the thing is not only safe but
beneficial, and not only hugely beneficial but highly necessary; when our life
and our happiness depends upon it, and all the danger lies in the delay of it;
there we cannot be too sudden in our resolution, nor too speedy in the
execution of it. That which is evidently safe, needs no deliberation; and that
which is absolutely necessary, will admit of none.

Therefore resolve upon it out of hand; to day, whilst it is called to day,
lest dny of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. In the days of
your youth and health; for that is the acceptable time, that is the day of
salvation: Before the evil day comes, and you be driven to it by the terrible
apprehension and approach of death, when men fly to God only for fear of his
wrath. For the greatest Atheists and Infidels, when they come to dye (if they
have any of that reason left, which they have used so ill) have commonly right
opinions about God and Religion. For then the considence as well as the comfort
of Atheism leaves them, as the Devil uses to do Witches when they are in
distress. Then with Nebuchadnezzar, when they are recovered from being beasts,
they look up to heaven and their understanding returns to them: Then they
believe a God, and cannot help it: they believe, and tremble at the thoughts of
him. Thus Lucretius, one of their great Authors, observes, that when men are in
distress, Acrius advertunt animos ad Religionem,

The thoughts of Religion are then more quick and pungent upon their minds, Nam
verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Eliciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.


Men's words then come from the bottom of their hearts; the mask is taken off,
and things then appear as in truth they are.

But then perhaps it may be too late to make this choice: Nay then it can
hardly be choice, but necessity. Men do not then choose to serve the Lord, but
they are urged and forced to it by their fears. They have served their lusts
all their life long, and now they would fain serve themselves of God at the
hour of death. They have done what they can, by their insolent contempt and
defiance of the Almighty, to make themselves miserable; and now that they can
stand out no longer against him, they are contented at last to be beholding to
him to make them happy. The mercies of God are vast and boundless, but yet
methinks it is too great a presumption in all reason, for men to design
beforehand to make the mercy of God the sanctuary and retreat of a sinful
life.

To draw then to a Conclusion of this Discourse. If safety, or pleasure, or
liberty, or wisdom, or virtue, or even happiness it self have any temptation in
them, Religion has all these baits and allurements. What Tully says Philosophy
is much more true of the Christian Religion, the Wisdom and Philosophy which is
from above; nunquam satis laudari poterit, cui qui pareat, omne tempus aetatis
sine molestia degere possit. We can never praise it enough, since whoever lives
according to the rules of it, may pass the whole age of his life (I may add,
his whole duration, this life and the other) without trouble.

Philosophy has given us several plausible rules for the attaining of peace
and tranquillity of mind, but they fall very much short of bringing men to it.
The very best of them fail us upon the greatest occasions. But the Christian
Religion has effectually done all that which Philosophy pretended to, and
aimed at. The Precepts and Promises of the Holy Scriptures are every way
sufficient for our comfort, and for our instruction in righteousness: to
correct all the errors, and to bear us up under all the evils and adversities
of humane life: especially that holy and heavenly Doctrine which is contained
in the admirable Sermons of our Savior, quem cum legimus, quem Philosophum non
contemnimus? whose excellent discourses when we read, what Philosopher do we
not despise? None of the Philosophers could, upon sure grounds, give that
encouragement to their Scholars which our Savior does to his Disciples; take
my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find rest to your souls. For my
yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

This is the advantage of the Christian Religion sincerely believed and
practiced, that it gives perfect rest and tranquillity to the mind of man: It
frees us from the guilt of an evil conscience, and from the power of our lusts,
and from the slavish fear of death and of the vengeance of another World. It
builds our comfort upon a rock, which will abide all storms, and remain
unshaken in every condition, and will last and hold out for ever: He that
hears these sayings of mine, and does them (says our Lord) I will liken him
to a wise wan, who built his house upon a rock.

In short, Religion makes the life of man a wise design, regular and constant
to its self; because it unites all our resolutions and actions in one great
end: Whereas without Religion the life of man is a wild, and fluttering, and
inconsistent thing, without any certain scope and design. The vicious man lives
at random, and acts by chance: For he that walks by no rule can carry on no
settled and steady design. It would pity a man's heart to see, how hard such
men are put to it for diversion, and what a burden time is to them; and how
solicitous they are to devise ways, not to spend it but to squander it away.
For their great grievance is consideration, and to be obliged to be intent upon
any thing that is serious. They hurry from one vanity and folly to another; and
plunge themselves into drink, not to quench their thirst, but their guilt: and
are beholding to every vain man, and to every trifling occasion, that can but
help to take time off their hands. Wretched and inconsiderate men! who have so
vast a work before them, the happiness of all eternity to take care of and
provide for, and yet are at a loss how to employ their time! So that Irreligion
and Vice makes life an extravagant and unnatural thing, because it perverts and
overthrows the natural course and order of things. For instance; according to
nature men labor to get an Estate, to free themselves from temptations to
rapine and injury; and that they may have wherewithal to supply their own
wants, and to relieve the needs of others. But now the covetous man heaps up
Riches, not to enjoy them, but to have them; and starves himself in the midst
of plenty, and most unnaturally cheats and robbs himself of that which is his
own; and makes a hard shift to be as poor and miserable with a great Estate, as
any man can be without it. According to the design of nature, men should eat
and drink that they may live; but the voluptuous man only lives that he may
eat and drink. Nature in all sensual enjoyments designs pleasure, which may
certainly be had within the limits of virtue: But vice rashly pursues pleasure
into the enemies quarters; and never stops, till the sinner be surrounded and
seized upon by pain and torment.

So that take away God and Religion, and men live to no purpose; without
proposing any worthy and considerable end of life to themselves. Whereas the
fear of God, and the care of our immortal Souls, fixes us upon one great
design, to which our whole life, and all the actions of it are ultimately
referred, ubi unus Deus colitur (says Lactantius) ibi vita, and omnis actus,
ad unum caput, and ad unam summam refertur; when we acknowledge God as the
Author of our Being, as our Sovereign, and our Judge, our end and our happiness
is then fixed; and we can have but one reasonable design, and that is, by
endeavoring to please God to gain his favor and protection in this World, and
to arrive at the blissfull enjoyment of him in the other: In whose presence is
fullness of Joy; and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. To Him,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, dominion and power, now
and for ever. Amen.

JEREMIAH XIII. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.


COnsidering the great difficulty of reclaiming those who are far gone in an
evil course, it is no more than needs to use all sorts of Arguments to this
purpose: From the consideration of the evil of sin, and of the goodness of God
and his wonderful patience and long-suffering toward us in the midst of our
infinite Provocations: From his great mercy and pity declared to us in all
those gracious means and methods which he uses for our recovery: And from his
readiness and forwardness after all our Rebellions to receive us upon our
repentance, and to be perfectly reconciled to us as if we had never offended
him: And from the final issue and event of a wicked life, the dismal and
endless miseries of another World, into which we shall inevitably fall except
we repent in time and return to a better mind: And lastly, from the danger of
being hardened in an evil course, past all remedy and hopes of Repentance.

And yet I am very sensible that to discourse to Men of the impossibility, or
at least the extreme difficulty, of rescuing temselves out of this miserable
state seems to be an odd and cross kind of Argument, and more apt to drive
people to despair than to gain them to repentance.

But since the Spirit of God is pleased to make use of it to this purpose, we
may safely rely upon infinite Wisdom for the fitness of it to awaken sinners
to a sense of their condition, in order to their recovery. For here in the
Text, after terrible threatenings of Captivity and desolation to the People of
the Jews, who were extremely wicked and degenerate, thorough an universal
depravation of manners in all ranks of men from the highest to the lowest, so
that they seemed to stand upon the brink of ruin, and to be fatally devoted to
it; to add to the terror and force of these threatenings, God by his Prophet
represents to them the infinite danger and extreme difficulty of their case, to
see if he could startle them by telling them into what a desperate condition
they had plunged themselves; being by a long cu^^om of sinning so far engaged
in an evil course, that they had almost cut off themselves from a possibility
of retreat; so that the difficulty of their change seemed next to a natural
impossibility. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin or the Leopard his Spots? then
may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.

The Expression is very high, and it is to be hoped somewhat Hyperbolical, and
above the just meaning of the words. Which are, I think, only designed to
signisie to us the extreme difficulty of making this change; which is therefore
resembled to a natural impossibility, as coming very near it, though not
altogether up to it.

And that this Expression is thus to be mitigated, will appear more than
probable, by considering some other like passages of Scripture. As, where our
Savior compares the difficulty of a rich Man's Salvation to that which is
naturally impossible, viz. to a Camels passing thorough the eye of a Needle:
Nay, he pitcheth his expression higher, and does not only make it a thing of
equal but of greater difficulty; I say unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go
thorough the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God. And yet when he comes to explain this to his Disciples, he tells them that
he only meant that the thing was very difficult, how hard is it for those that
have riches to be saved? and that it was not absolutely impossible, but
speaking according to humane probability: with Men this is impossible, but not
with God.

And thus also it is reasonable to understand that severe passage of the
Apostle, Heb. 6.4. It is impossible for them that were once enlightened, if
they fall away, to renew them again to Repentance. It is impossible, that is,
it is very difficult.

In like manner we are to understand this high Expression in the Text, Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin or the Leopard his Spots? then may ye also do good
that are accustomed to do evil; that is, this moral change of men, settled and
fixed in bad habits, is almost as difficult as the other.

From the words thus explained two things will properly fall under our
Consideration.

First, The great difficulty of reforming vicious habits or of changing a bad
course, to those who have been deeply engaged in it and long accustomed to it.

Secondly, Notwithstanding the great difficulty of the thing, what ground of
hope and encouragement there is left that it may be done. So that
notwithstanding the appearing harshness of the Text, the result of my discourse
will be, not to discourage any, how bad soever, from attempting this change,
but to put them upon it, and to persuade them to it; and to remove out of the
way that which may seem to be one of the strongest Objections against all
endeavors of men very bad, to become better.

First, The great difficulty of reforming vicious habits, or of changing a bad
course, to those who have been deeply engaged in it and long accustomed to it.
And this difficulty arises, partly from the general nature of habits
indisserently considered whether they be good, or bad, or indifferent; partly,
from the particular nature of evil and vicious habits; and partly, from the
natural and judicial consequences of a great progress and long continuance in
an evil course. By the consideration of these three particulars, the extreme
difficulty of this change, together with the true causes and reasons of it,
will fully appear.

1. If we consider the nature of all Habits, whether good, or bad, or
indifferent. The custom and frequent practice of any thing begets in us a
facility and easiness in doing it. It bends the powers of our Soul, and turns
the stream and current of our animal Spirits such a way, and gives all our
faculties a tendency and pliableness to such a sort of actions. And when we
have long stood bent one way, we grow settled and confirmed in it; and cannot
without great force and violence be restored to our former state and condition.
For the perfection of any habit whether good, or bad, induces a kind of
necessity of acting accordingly. A rooted habit becomes a governing Principle,
and bears almost an equal sway in us with that which is natural. It is a kind
of a new nature superinduced, and even as hard to be expelled as some things
which are Primitively and Originally natural. When we bend a thing at first it
will endeavor to restore it self; but it may be held bent so long till it will
continue so of it self and grow crooked; and then it may require more force and
violence to reduce it to its former streightness than we used to make it
crooked at first. This is the nature of all habits, the farther we proceed the
more we are confirmed in them: and that which at first we did voluntarily, by
degrees becomes so natural and necessary that it is almost impossible for us to
do otherwise. This is plainly seen in the experience of every day, in things
good and bad, both in lesser and greater matters.

2. This difficulty arises more especially from the particular nature of evil
and vicious habits. These, because they are suitable to our corrupt nature, and
conspire with the inclinations of it, are likely to be of a much quicker growth
and improvement, and in a shorter space, and with less care and endeavor, to
arrive at maturity and strength, than the habits of grace and goodness.
Considering the propension of our depraved nature, the progress of virtue and
goodness is up the hill, in which we not only move hardly and heavily, but are
easily rolled back: but by wickedness and vice we move downwards; which, as it
is much quicker and easier, so is it harder for us to stop in that course, and
infinitely more difficult to return from it.

Not but that at first a sinner has some considerable checks and restraints
upon him, and meets with several rubs, and difficulties in his way; the shame
and unreasonableness of his vices, and the trouble and disquiet which they
create to him: But he breaks loose from these restraints, and gets over these
difficulties by degrees: and the faster and farther he advances in an evil
course the less trouble still they give him, till at last they almost quite
lose their force, and give him little or no disturbance.

Shame also is a great restraint upon sinners at first, but that soon falls
off: and when men have once lost their innocence, their modesty is not like to
be long troublesome to them. For impudence comes on with vice, and grows up
with it. Lesservices do not banish all shame and modesty, but great and
abominable crimes harden men's foreheads and make them shameless. Were they
ashamed (says the Prophet) when they committed abomination? nay they were not
ashamed, neither could they blush. When men have the heart to do a very bad
thing they seldom want the face to bear it out.

And as for the unreasonableness of vice, though nothing in the World be more
evident to a free and impartial judgment, and the sinner himself discerns it
clearly enough at his first setting out in a wicked course.

-- Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor.
He offends against the light of his own mind, and does wickedly when he knows
better: yet after he has continued for some time in this course and is
heartily engaged in it, his foolish heart is darkened, and the notions of good
and evil are obscured and confounded, and things appear to him in a false and
imperfect light: His lusts do at once blind and bias his understanding; and
his judgment by degrees goes over to his inclinations; and he cannot think that
there should be so much reason against those things for which he has so strong
an affection. He is now engaged in a Party, and factiously concerned to
maintain it, and to make the best of it: and to that end, he bends all his wits
to advance such principles as are fittest to justify his wicked practices; and
in all debates plainly savours that side of the Question which will give the
greatest countenance and encouragement to them. When men are corrupt and do
abominable works, they say in their hearts there is no God, that is, they would
fain think so. And every thing serves for an Argument to a willing mind; and
every little objection appears strong and considerable, which makes against
that which men are loath should be true.

Not that any man ever satisfied himself in the Principles of Infidelity, or
was able to arrive to a steady and unshaken persuasion of the truth of them, so
as not vehemently to doubt and fear the contrary. However, by this means many
men though they cannot fully comfort, yet they make a shift to cheat
themselves; to still their Consciences and lay them asleep for a time, so as
not to receive any great and frequent disturbance in their course from the
checks and rebukes of their own minds. And when these restraints are removed,
the work of iniquity goes on amain, being favored both by wind and tide.

3. The difficulty of this change arises likewise from the natural and
judicial consequences of a great progress and long continuance in an evil
course. My meaning is, that inveterate evil habits do partly from their own
nature, and partly from the just judgment and permission of God, put men under
several disadvantages of moving effectually toward their own recovery.

By a long custom of sinning men's Consciences grow brawny, and seared as it
were with a hot iron; and by being often trampled upon they become hard as the
beaten road. So that unless it be upon some extraordinary occasion, they are
seldom awakened to a sense of their guilt. And when men's hearts are thus hard,
the best counsels make but little impression upon them. For they are steeled
against reproof, and impenetrable to good advice; which is therefore seldom
offered to them, even by those that wish them well, because they know it to be
both unacceptable, and unlikely to prevail. It requires a great deal of good
nature in a very bad man, to be able patiently to bear to be told of his faults.

Besides, that habitual wickedness is naturally apt to banish consideration, to
weaken our resolution, and to discourage our hopes both of God's grace and
assistance, and of his mercy and forgiveness; which are the best means and
encouragement to repentance.

Sin is a great enemy to Consideration: and especially when men are deeply
plunged into it, their condition is so very bad, that they are loath to think of
it and to search into it. A vicious man is a very deformed sight, and to none
more than to himself; and therefore he loves to turn his Eyes another way, and
to divert them as much as he can from looking upon himself. He is afraid to be
alone, lest his own mind should arrest him, and his Conscience should take the
opportunity to call him to an account. And if at any time his own thoughts meet
with him, and he cannot avoid consideration, he is ready to say as Ahab did to
Elijah, have thou found me, O my enemy! and is as glad to shake it off as a man
is to get rid of a Creditor, whom because be knows not how to satisfy, he
cares not to speak with him. Consideration is the great troubler and disturber
of men in an evil course, because it would represent to them the plain truth of
their case; and therefore they do all they can to keep it off, as those who
have improvidently managed their affairs, and been ill husbands of their
estates, are loath to make up their accounts, lest by that means they should be
forced to understand the worst of their condition.

Or if consideration happen to take them at an advantage, and they are so hard
pressed by it that they cannot escape the sight of their own condition, yet they
find themselves so miserably entangled and hampered in an evil course, and
bound so fast in the chains of their own wickedness, that they know not how to
get loose. Sin is the saddest slavery in the World; it breaks and sinks men's
Spirits, and makes them so base and servile that they have not the courage to
rescue themselves. No sort of slaves are so poor spirited as they that are in
bondage to their lusts. Their power is gone, or if they have any left they have
not the heart to make use of it. And though they see and feel their misery, yet
they choose rather to sit down in it, and tamely to submit to it, than to make
any resolute attempt for their Liberty. What the Prophet says of whoredom and
wine is proportionably true of other vices, they take away the heart. Every
lust that we entertain deals with us as Dalilah did with Sampson, not only
robbs us of our strength but leaves us fast bound: so that if at any time we be
awakened to a sense of our condition, and try to rescue our selves from it, we
find that our strength is departed from us, and that we are not able to break
loose.

And as long custom and continuance in sin deprives us of our strength, so it
discourageth our hopes, both of God's grace and assistance, and of his mercy
and forgiveness. For why should men expect the continuance of that grace which
they have so often received in vain? After so many provocations, how can we
look the offended Majesty of God in the Face? how can we lift up our eyes to
heaven with any hopes of mercy and forgiveness there? Despair does almost
naturally spring from an evil Conscience: and when men are thoroughly awakened
to a sense of sin, and of the infinite evil of it, as they cannot easily
forgive themselves, so they can hardly believe that there is goodness enough
any where to forgive them.

But besides these disadvantages, which are natural and consequent upon a
vicious course; by the just judgment of God, his Spirit is withdrawn from them,
and they are given up to their own hearts lusts, to commit all iniquity with
greediness. And then there is hardly any thing left, either to restrain them in
their evil course, or to recover them out of it.

And not only so, but by the just permission of God, as men grow worse and more
wicked, the Devil has a nearer access to them and a more immediate power over
them. So the Scripture tells us, that wicked men are led captive by Satan at
his pleasure, and that the evil one works and acts in the Children of
disobedience: They are as it were possessed and inspired by him. And what can be
expected from this cruel and malicious enemy of mankind, but that he will
continually be punishing them on from one wickedness to another, till he drive
them first into despair, and then, if God permit him, into eternal perdition?

And what a forlorn state is this? when men are thus forsaken of God, and left
without check, blindly and headily to follow the sway of their own tempers, and
the bent of their own corrupt hearts? when they are continually exposed to
temptations strongly inviting them to evil; and God lets the Devil loose upon
them to manage those temptations with his utmost skill, and to practice all his
arts and wiles upon them? In these circumstances men almost infallibly run into
sin, as sure as men wander in the dark, and are in danger of falling in
slippery places, and of being entangled when they continually walk in the midst
of snares cunningly laid for them. It is not in men thus disabled and
entangled, to order their own steps, and to restrain their inclinations and
passions in the presence of a powerful temptation. At the best, we need God's
direction to guide us, his continual grace to uphold us, and to guard and
preserve us from evil; and much more do we stand in need of it, when we have
brought our selves into these wretched circumstances; but then alas! how little
reason have we to hope for it?

Blind and miserable men! that in despite of all the merciful warnings of
God's word and providence, will run themselves into this desperate state, and
never think of returning to a better mind, till their retreat is difficult
almost to an impossibility. I proceed to the

left that they may yet be reclaimed and brought to goodness. Indeed humanely
speaking, and according to all appearance and probability, the thing seems to
be very hopeless, and next to an impossibility; but yet what our Savior says
concerning the difficulty of a rich man's Salvation will reach also to this
case, though much more difficult; those things which are impossible with men
are possible with God.

And this will appear, if we consider that even in the worst of men there is
something left which tends to reclaim them, to awaken them to consideration,
and to urge and encourage them to a vigorous resolution of a better course: And
this accompanied with a powerful assistance of God's grace, which when
sincerely sought is never to be despaired of, may prove effectual to bring back
even the greatest of sinners.

1. There is left, even in the worst of men, a natural sense of the evil and
unreasonableness of sin; which can hardly be ever totally extinguished in
humane nature. For though the habits of great vices are very apt to harden and
stupifie men, so that they have seldom a just sense of their evil ways, yet
these persons are sometimes under strong convictions, and their consciences do
severely check and rebuke them for their faults. They are also, by fits, under
great apprehension of the danger of their condition, and that the course which
they are in, if they continue in it, will prove fatal to them, and ruin them
at last: Especially, when their consciences are thoroughly awakened, by some
great affliction, or the near approach of death and a lively sense of another
World. And the apprehension of a mighty danger will make men to look about
them, and to use the best means to avoid it.

2. Very bad men when they have any thoughts of becoming better are apt to
conceive some good hopes of God's grace and mercy. For though they find all the
causes and reasons of despair in themselves, yet the consideration of the
boundless goodness and compassions of God (how undeserved soever on their part)
is apt to kindle some sparks of hope, even in the most desponding mind. His
wonderful patience, in the midst of our manifold provocations, cannot but be a
good sign to us, that he has no mind that we should perish, but rather that we
should come to repentance; and if we do repent, we are assured by his promise,
that we shall be forgiven. He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall have
mercy. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

3. Who knows what men thoroughly rouzed and startled may resolve, and do? And a
mighty resolution will break through difficulties which seem insuperable.
Though we be weak and pitiful Creatures; yet nature when it is mightily
irritated and stirred will do strange things. The resolutions of men upon the
brink of despair, have been of an incredible force: and the Soul of man in
nothing more discovers its divine power and original, than in that spring which
is in it whereby it recovers it self when it is mightily urged and pressed. There
is a sort of resolution which is in a manner invincible, and hardly any
difficulty can resist it or stand before it.

Of this there have been great instances in several kinds. Some by an obstinate
resolution, and taking incredible pains with themselves, have mastered great
natural vices and defects. As Socrates and Demosthenes, who almost, exceeded
all mankind in those two things for which by nature they seemed to be least
made, and most unfit. One, in governing of his passions, and the other in the
mighty force and power of his eloquence.

Some, that by intemperance have brought themselves to a dropsy, which has
just set them upon the brink of the grave, by a bold and steady purpose to
abstain wholly from drink for a long time together, have rescued themselves
from the jaws of death.

Some that had almost ruined themselves by a careless and dissolute life, and
having run themselves out of their estates into debt, and being cast into
prison, have there taken up a manly resolution to retrieve and recover
themselves; and by the indefatigable labor and study of some years, in that
uncomfortable retreat, have mastered the knowledge and skill of one of the most
difficult Professions, in which they have afterward proved great and eminent.

And some, in the full carriere of a wicked course, have by a sudden thought
and resolution, raised in them and assisted by a mighty grace of God, taken up
presently and made an immediate change from great wickedness and impiety of
life to a very exemplary degree of goodness and virtue.

The two great encouragements to virtue which Pythagoras gave to his Scholars
were these; and they were worthy of so great a Philosopher; First, Choose always
the best course of life, and custom will soon make it the most pleasant. The
other was this, that Power aad Necessity are Neighbors and never dwell far
from one another. When men are pressed by a great necessity, when nature is
spurred up and urged to the utmost, men discover in themselves a power which
they thought they had not, and find at last that they can do that which at
first they despaired of ever being able to do.

4. The grace and assistance of God when sincerely sought, is never to be
despaired of. So that if we do but heartily and in good earnest resolve upon a
better course and implore the help of God's grace to this purpose, no degree of
it that is necessary shall be wanting to us. And here is our chief ground of
hope. For we are weak and unstable as water; and when we have taken up good
resolutions do easily start from them. So that fresh supplies, and a continued
assistance of God's grace is necessary to keep up the first warmth and vigor
of our resolutions, till they prove effectual and victorious. And this grace
God has promised he will not deny to us, when we are thus disposed for it;
that he will give his H. Spirit to them that ask it; that he will hot quench
the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, until he bring forth judgment
unto victory.

All that now remains is to apply this to our selves: And we are all concerned
in it: For we shall all find our selves comprehended under one of these three
Heads. Either we are of the number of those few happy Persons, who by the
influence and advantage of a good education were never engaged in a bad course:
Or of those who have been drawn into vice, but are not yet far gone in it: Or,
of those who have been long accustomed to an evil course, and are grown old and
stiff in it.

The first of these having great cause to thank God for this singular felicity,
that they were never ensnared and entangled in vicious habits, that they have
not had the trial of their own weakness under this miserable slavery, that they
never knew what it was to be out of their own power, to have lost their liberty
and the Government of themselves. When we hear of the miserable servitude of
the poor Christians in Turkey we are apt, as there is great reason, to pity
them, and to think what a blessing of God it is to us that we are not in their
condition: And yet that slavery is hot comparable to this, either for the sad
nature, or the dismal consequences of it; or for the difficulty of being
released from it. And let such Persons, who have been thus happy never to have
been engaged in an evil course, preserve their innocence with great tenderness
and care, as the greatest Jewel in the World. No Man knows what he does, and
what a foundation of trouble he lays to himself, when he forfeits his
innocence, and breaks the peace of his own mind; when he yields to a
Temptation, and makes the first step into a bad course. He little thinks
whither his lusts may hurry him, and what a monster they may make of him before
they have done with him.

2. Those who have been seduced, but are not yet deeply engaged in an evil
course, let them make a speedy retreat, lest they put it for ever out of their
power to return. Perhaps their feet only are yet ensnared, but their hands are
at liberty, and they have some power left, whereby with an ordinary grace of
God they may loose and rescue themselves. But after a while their hands may be
manacled, and all their power may be gone; and when they are thus bound hand
and foot, they are just prepared, and in danger every moment, to be cast into
utter darkness.

3. As for those, who are gone very far and are grown old in vice, who can
forbear to lament over them? for they are a sad spectacle indeed, and the
truest object of pity in the World. And yet, their recovery is not utterly to
be despaired of; for with God it is possible. The spirit of God, which has
withdrawn himself, or rather has been driven away by them, may yet be
persuaded to return and to undertake them once more, if they would but
seriously rosolve upon a change, and heartily beg God's assistance to that
purpose. If we would take up a mighty resolution, we might hope that God would
afford a miraculous grace to second it, and make it effectual to our recovery.
Even in this perverse and degenerate Age in which we live, God has not been
wanting to give some miraculous instances of his grace and mercy to sinners,
and those perhaps equal to any of those we meet with in Scripture, of Manasses,
or Mary Magdalen, or the penitent Thief; both for the greatness of the
offenders, and the miracle of their change: To the end that none might despair,
and for want of the encouragement of an example equal to their own case, be
disheartened from so noble an enterprise. I am loath to put you in mind how bad
some have been, who yet have been snatched as Firebrands out of the fire; and
that in so strange a manner, that it would even amaze a Man to think of the
wonder of their recovery: those who have sunk themselves into the very depth of
infidelity and wickedness, have by a mighty hand and outstretched arm of God
been plucked out of this horrible Pit. And will we still stand it out with God,
when such great Leaders have given up the cause, and have surrendered and
yielded up themselves willing Captives to the grace of God? that omnipotent
grace of God, which can easily subdue the stoutest heart of Man, by letting in
so strong a light upon our minds, and pouring such terrible convictions into
our consciences, that we can find no ease but in turning to God.

I hope there are none here so bad, as to need all the encouragement to
repentance which such examples might give them: encouragement I say to
repentance: for surely these examples can encourage no Man to venture any
farther in a wicked course: they are so very rare, and like the instances of
those who have been brought back to life after the sentence of death seemed to
have been fully executed upon them.

But perhaps some will not believe that there have been such examples; or if
there have, they impute all this either to a disturbed imagination, or to the
faint and low spirits of Men under great bodily weakness, or to their natural
cowardice and fear; or to I know not what foolish and fantastical design of
completing and finishing a wicked life with an hypocritical death. Nothing
surely is easier than to put some bad construction upon the best things, and so
slurr even repentance it self, and almost dash it out of countenance by some
bold, and perhaps witty saying about it. But oh that Men were wise; oh that Men
were wise! that they understood, and would consider their latter end! Come, let
us neither trifle, nor dissemble in this matter; I dare say every man's
Conscience is convinced, that they who have led very ill lives have so much
reason for repentance, that we may easily believe it to be real. However, of
all things in the world, let us not make a mock of repentance; that which must
be our last sanctuary and refuge, and which we must all come to before we die,
or it had been better for us we had never been born. Therefore, let my counsel
be acceptable unto you, break off your sins by repentance, and your iniquities
by righteousness: And that instantly, and without delay; lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. If we have been enslaved but a little
to a vicious course, we shall find it a task difficult enough to assert our own
liberty, to break these bonds in sunder and to cast these cords from us: But if
we have been long under this bondage, we have done so much to undo our selves,
and to make our case desperate, that it is God's infinite mercy to us that
there is yet hope. Therefore, give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause
darkness, and your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while you look for
light, he turn it into darkness and the shadow of death. I will conclude with
that encouraging invitation, even to the greatest of sinners, to repentance,
from the mouth of God himself, Isa. 55. Incline your ear, and come unto me;
hear, and your Soul shall live: seek the Lord while he may be found; and call
upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy, and
to our God for he will abundantly pardon.

To him let us apply, out selves, and humbly beseech him, who is mighty to
save, that he would stretch forth the right hand of his power for our
deliverance, from this miserable and cruel bondage of our lusts: and that as
the rain comes down from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the
earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud; so he would grant that his word
may not return void, but accomplish his pleasure, and prosper in the thing to
which he sent it; For his mercy sake in Jesus Christ, To whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

MATTTHEW XXIII. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; and ye neither go in your selves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.


THE Scribes so often mentioned in the Gospel, were the great Doctors among the
Jews, the Teachers and Interpreters of the Law of God. And because many of them
were of the Sect of the Pharisees, which above all others pretended to skill
and knowledge in the Law, therefore it is that our blessed Savior does so
often put the Scribes and Pharisees together. And these were the men of chief
Authority in the Jewish Church; who equalled their own unwritten word and
traditions with the Law of God: Nay our Savior tells us, they made the
Commandments of God of none effect by their traditions. They did in effect
assume to themselves infallibility; and all that opposed and contradicted them
they branded with the odious name of Heretics. Against these our Savior
denounced this Woe here in the Text, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, etc.

All the difficulty in the words is, what is here meant by shutting up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men: St. Luke expresses it more plainly, ye have
taken away the key of knowledge, ye entered not in your selves, and them that
were entering in, ye hindered. By putting these two expressions together we
shall the more easily come at the meaning of the Text. Ye have taken away the
key of knowledge, and have shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men. This
Metaphor of the key of knowledge is undoubtedly an allusion to that known
custom among the Jews in the admission of their Doctors. For to whomsoever
they gave Authority to interpret the Law and the Prophets, they were solemnly
admitted into that office by delivering to them a Key and a Table Book. So that
by the key of knowledge is here meant the interpretation and understanding of
the Scriptures; and by taking away the key of knowledge, not only that they
arrogated to themselves alone the understanding of the Scriptures, but likewise
that they had conveyed away this key of knowledge, and as it were hid it out of
the way, neither using it themselves as they ought, nor suffering others to
make use of it.

And thus they shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men; which is very fitly said
of those who have locked the door against them that were going in, and have
taken away the key. By all which it appears that the plain meaning of our
Savior in these Metaphorical expressions is, that the Scribes and Teachers of
the Law, under a pretense of interpreting the Scriptures, had perverted them
and kept the true knowledge of them from the People: Especially those
Prophecies of the Old Testament which concerned the Messiah. And by this means
the Kingdom of Heaven was shut against men: And they not only rejected the
truth themselves, but by keeping men in ignorance of the true meaning of the
Scriptures, they hindered many from embracing our Savior's Doctrine, and
entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, who were otherwise well enough disposed
for it.

Having thus explained the words, I shall from the main scope and design of
them observe to you these two things.

1. The Necessity of the knowledge of the holy Scriptures in order to our
eternal Salvation. It is called by our Savior the key of knowledge, that which
lets men into the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. The great and inexcusable fault of
those who deprive the People of the knowledge of the holy Scriptures. They hut
the kingdom of heaven against men, and do what in them lies to hinder their
eternal Salvation; and therefore our Savior denounces so heavy a woe against
them.
I shall speak briefly to these two Observations; and then apply them to those
who are principally concerned in them.

First, I observe hence the Necessity of the knowledge of the holy Scriptures
in order to our eternal Salvation. This is by our Savior called the key of
knowledge, that which lets men into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Knowledge is necessary to Religion: It is necessary to the Being of it; and
necessary to the life and practice of it. Without Faith (says the Apostle) it
is impossible to please God: Because Faith is an act of the understanding, and
does necessarily suppose some knowledge and apprehension of what we believe. To
all acts of Religion there is necessarily required some act of the
Understanding; so that without knowledge there can be no devotion in the
service of God, no obedience to his Laws. Religion begins in the Understanding,
and from thence descends upon the heart and life. If ye know these things (says
our Savior) happy are ye if ye do them. We must first know God, before we can
worship him; and understand what is his will, before we can do it.

This is so very evident, that one would think there needed no discourse about
it. And yet there are some in the World that cry up Ignorance as the Mother of
Devotion. And to show that we do not wrong them in this, matter, Mr. Rushworth
in his Dialogues (a Book in great vogue among the Papists here in England) does
expressly reckon up Ignorance among the Parents of Religion. And can any thing
be said more absurdly and more to the disparagement of Religion, than to derive
the pedigree of the most excellent thing in the world from so obscure and
ignoble an Original; and to make that which the Scripture calls the beginning
of wisdom, and the excellency of knowledge, to be the Offspring of Ignorance
and a Child of darkness? Ignorance indeed may be the cause of wonder and
admiration, and the mother of folly and superstition: But surely Religion is of
a nobler Extraction, and is the issue and result of the best wisdom and
knowledge; and descends from above, from the giver of every good and perfect
gift, even the father of lights.

And as knowledge in general is necessary to Religion, so more particularly the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures is necessary to our eternal Salvation. Because
these are the great and standing Revelation of God to mankind; wherein the
Nature of God, and his Will concerning our duty and the terms and conditions of
our eternal happiness in another World are fully and plainly declared to us.

The Scriptures are the Word of God; and from whence can we learn the will of
God so well as from his own mouth? They are the great instrument of our
Salvation; and should not every man be acquainted with that which alone can
perfectly instruct him what he must believe, and what he must do that he may be
saved? This is the testimony which the Scripture gives of it self, that it is
able to make, men wise unto salvation; And is it not very fit that every man
should have this wisdom, and in order thereunto the free use of that Book from
whence this wisdom is to be learned?

Secondly, I observe the great and inexcusable fault of those who keep men in
Ignorance of Religion, and take away from them so excellent and necessary a
means of divine knowledge as the H. Scriptures are. This our Savior calls
taking away the key of knowledge, and shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against
Men, That is, doing what in them lies to render it impossible for men to be
saved. For this he denounces a terrible Woe against the Teachers of the Jewish
Church: Though they did not proceed so far as to deprive men of the use of the
H. Scriptures, but only of the right knowledge and understanding of them. This
alone is a horrible impiety, to lead men into a false sense and interpretation
of Scripture, but much greater to forbid them the reading of it. This is to
stop knowledge at the very Fountainhead; and not only to lead men into Error,
but to take away from them all possibility of rectifying their mistakes. And
can there be a greater sacrilege, than to rob men of the word of God, the best
means in the world of acquainting them with the will of God and their duty, and
the way to eternal happiness? To keep the people in Ignorance of that which is
necessary to save them, is to, judge them unworthy of eternal life, and to
declare it does not belong to them, and maliciously to contrive the eternal
ruin and destruction of their Souls.

To lock up the Scriptures and the service of God from the people in an
unknown, tongue, what is this but in effect to forbid men to know God and to
serve him; to render them incapable of knowing what is the good and acceptable
will of God; of joining in his worship, or performing any part of it, or
receiving any benefit or edification from it; And what is, if this be not, to
shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men? This is so outrageous a cruelty to the
souls of men, that it is not to be excused upon any pretense whatsoever: This
is to take the surest and most effectual way in the world to destroy those for
whom Christ dyed, and directly to thwart the great design of God our Savior,
who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Men may mis^^^ry with their knowledge, but they are sure to perish for want of
it.

The best things in the world have their inconveniences a^^^ding them, and are
liable to be a^used; but surely men are not to be ru^^^d and damned for fear of
abusing their knowledge, or for the prevention of any other inconvenience
whatsoever. Besides, this is to cross the very end of the Scriptures, and the
design of God in inspiring men to write them. Can any man think that God should
send this great light of his Word into the world, for the Priests to hide it
under a bushel; and not rather that it should be set up to the greatest
advantage for the enlightening of the world? St. Paul tells us, Romans 15. 4.
That whatsoever things were written, were written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And 2 Timothy
3.16. That all Scripture is given by inspiration of God; and is prositable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. And if
the Scriptures were written for these ends, can any man have the face to
pretend that they do not concern the people as well as their teachers? Nay St.
Paul expressly tells the Chur^^ of Rome, that they were written for their
learning, however it happens that they are not now permitted to make use of
them. Are the Scriptures so useful and profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for instruction in righteousness? and why may they not be used by the people
for those ends for which they were given? It Is true indeed they are fit for the
most knowing and learned, and sufficient to make the man of God perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to every good work (as the Apostle there tells us.) But
does this exclude their being profitable also to the people; who may reasonably
be presumed to stand much more in need of all means and helps of instruction
than their Teachers? And though there be many difficulties and obscurities in
the Scriptures, enough to exercise the skill and wit of the learned, yet are
they not therefore either useless or dangerous to the People. The ancient
Fathers of the Church were of another mind. St. Chrysostom tells us that,
Whatever things are necessary are manifest in the Scriptures. And St. Austin,
that all things are plain in the Scripture, which concern faith and a good
life; and that those things which are necessary to the Salvation of men, are
not so hard to be come at, but that as to those things which the Scripture
plainly contains, it speaks without disguise like a familiar friend to the
heart of the learned and unlearned. And upon these and such like
considerations, the Fathers did every where in their Orations and Homilies
charge and exhort the people to be conversant in the holy Scriptures, to read
them daily and diligently and attentively. And I challenge our Adversaries to
show me where any of the ancient Fathers do discourage the people from reading
the Scriptures, much less forbid them so to do. So that they who do it now have
no Cloak for their sin: And they who pretend so confidently to Antiquity in
other cases, are by the evidence of truth forced to acknowledge that it is
against them in this. Though they have ten thousand Schoolmen on their side,
yet have they not one Father, not the least pretense of Scripture, or rag of
antiquity to cover their nakedness in this point.

With great reason then does our Savior denounce so heavy a Woe againd such
teachers. Of old in the like case God by his Prophet severely threatens the
Priests of the Jewish Church, for not instructing the people in the knowledge
of God, Hosea 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou
have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee; thou shall be no more a
Priest to me: seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget
thy Children. God, you see, lays the ruin of so many Souls at their doors, and
will require their blood at their hands. So many as perish for want of
knowledge, and eternally miscarry by being deprived of the necessary means of
Salvation, their destruction shall be charged upon those who have taken away
the key of knowledge, and shut the kingdom of heaven against men.

And it is just with God to punish such persons, not only as the occasion, but
as the Authors of their ruin. For who can judge otherwise, but that they who
deprive men of the necessary means to any end, do purposely design to hinder
them of attaining that end? And whatever may be pretended in this case; to
deprive men of the holy Scriptures, and to keep them ignorant of the service of
God, and yet while they do so, to make a show of an earnest desire of their
Salvation, is just such a mockery, as if one of you that is a master should
tell his prentice how much you desire he should thrive in the world, and be a
rich man, but all the while keeps him ignorant of his trade in order to his
being rich; and with the strictest care imaginable conceals from him the best
means of learning that whereby alone he is likely to thrive and get anestate.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites.

By what has been discoursed upon this Argument, you will easily perceive
where the Application is like to fall. For the Woe denounced by our Savior
here in the Text against the Scribes and Pharisees, falls every whit as heavy
upon the Pastors and Teachers of the Roman Church. They have taken away the
key of knowledge with a witness; not only depriving the people of the right
understanding of the Scriptures, but of the very use of them: As if they were
so afraid they should understand them, that they dare not suffer them so much
as to be acquainted with them.

This Tyranny that Church has exercised over those of her Communion for
several hundreds of years. It grew upon them indeed by degrees: For as by the
inundation of Barbarous Nations upon the Roman Empire the Romans lost their
Language by degrees, so the Governors of that Church still kept up the
Scriptures and the service of God in the Latin tongue; which at last was wholly
unknown to the common people. And about the ninth and tenth Centuries, when by
the general consent of all their own Historians gross darkness and ignorance
covered this part of the world, the Pope and the Priests took away the key of
knowledge, and did (as I may so say) put it under the door for several Ages;
till the Reformation fetched it out again, and rubbed off the rust of it.

And I profess seriously that hardly any thing in the world, was ever to me
more astonishing, than this uncharitable and cruel usage of the people in the
Church of Rome. And I cannot tell which to wonder at most, the insolence of
their Governors in imposing upon men this senseless way of serving of God, or
the patience shall I call it, or rather stupidity of the people in enduring to
be so intolerably abused. Why should reasonable creatures be treated at this
rude and barbarous rate? As if they were unworthy to be acquainted with the
will of God; and as if that which every man ought to do, were not fit for every
man to know: As if the common people had only Bodies to be present at the
service of God, but no Souls; or as if they were all distracted and out of
their wits, and it were a dangerous thing to let in the light upon them.

But to speak more distinctly. There are two things we charge them withal, and
which they are not able to deny. Their performing the public service of God in
an unknown Tongue; and depriving the People of the use of the Scriptures. And I
shall first tell you what we have to say against these things, and then
consider what they pretend for them.

1. As for their performing the service of God in a tongue unknown to the
People. And I begin with St. Paul, who in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
has a whole Chapter on purpose to show the unreasonableness of this thing, and
how contrary it is to the edification of Christians. His discourse is so plain
and so well known, that I shall not particularly insist: upon it. Erasmus, in
his Annotations upon this Chapter, breaks out (as well he might) into
admiration at the practice of the Church of Rome in his time. Hac in re mirum
quam mutata sit Ecclesiae consuetudo: It is wonderful (says he) how the custom
of the Church is altered in this matter. St. Paul had rather speak five words
with understanding, and so as to teach others, than ten thousand in an unknown
tongue. Why does the Church doubt to follow so great an Authority, or rather
how dares she to dissent from it?

As for the practice of the ancient Church let Origin bear witness. The
Grecians (says he) in their prayers use the Greek, and the Romans the Latin
tongue; and so every one according to his Language prays unto God, and
praises him as he is able.

And not only in Origen's time, but for more than the first six hundred years,
the service of God was always performed in a known Tongue. And this the learned
men of their own Church do not deny. And Cardinal Cajetan (as Cassander tells
us) said it was much better this Custom were restored; and being reproved for
saying so, he said he learned it from St. Paul. And Bellarmine himself
confesses that the Armenians, Egyptians, Ethiopians, Russians, and others do
use their own Language in their Liturgies at this day.

But it is otherwise now in the Church of Rome, and has been for several Ages.
And it seems they lay great stress upon it, not only as a thing or great Use,
but Necessity. For Pope Gregory the VII. forbids the Prince of Bohemia to
permit to the People the celebration of divine offices in the Sclavonian
Tongue; and commands him to oppose them herein with all his Forces. It seems he
thought it a cause worthy the fighting for: and that it were much better the
People should be killed, than suffered to understand their prayers.

But let us reason this matter a little calmly with them. Is it necessary for
men to understand any thing they do in Religion? And is not Prayer one of the
most solemn parts of Religion? and why then should not men understand their
Prayers as well as any thing else they do in Religion? Is it good that people
should understand their private Prayers? that (we thank them) they allow: and
why not the public as well? Is there less of Religion in public prayers? is
God less honored by them? or are we not as capable of being edified and of
having our hearts and affections moved and excited by them? Where then lies the
difference? The more I consider it the more I am at a loss what tolerable
reason any man can give why people should not understand their public
devotions as well as their private. If men cannot heartily and devoutly pray
alone, without understanding what they ask of God, no more (say I) can they
heartily and devoutly join in the public prayers which are made by the Priest
without understanding what they are. If it be enough for the Priest to
understand them, why should not the Priest only be present at them? unless the
people do not meet to worship God, but only to wait upon the Priest. But by
saying the Priest understands them, it seems it is better some body should
understand them than not; and why is not that which is good for the Priest good
for the people?

So that the true state of the Controversy is, whether it be fit that the
people should be edified in the service of God; and whether it be fit the
Church should order things contrary to edification? For it is plain that the
service of God in an unknown tongue is useless and unprofitable to the People:
Nay, it is evidently no public service of God, when the Priest only
understands it. For how can they be said to be public prayers if the People do
not join in them? and how can they join in that they do not understand? and to
what purpose are Lessons of Scripture read, if people are to learn nothing by
them? and how should they learn when they do not understand? This is as if one
should pretend to teach a man Greek, by reading him Lectures every day out of
an Arabic and Persian Book, of which he understands not one syllable.

Holy Scriptures. Our blessed Savior exhorts the Jews to search the
Scriptures; And St. Paul charge the Christians that the word of God should
dwell richly in them; And the ancient Fathers of the Church do most frequently
and earnestly recommend to the People the reading and study of the Scriptures:
How comes the case now to be so altered? sure the word of God is not changed;
that certainly abides and continues the same for ever.

I shall by and by examine what the Church of Rome pretends in excuse of this
Sacrilege. In the mean time I do not see what considerable Objections can be
made against the People's reading of the Scriptures, which would not have held
as well against the writing and publishing of them at first in a Language
understood by the People: As the Old Testament was by the Jews, and the
Epistles of the Apostles by the Churches to whom they were written, and the
Gospels both by Jews and Greeks. Were there no difficulties and obscurities
then in the Scriptures, capable of being wrested by the unstable and unlearned;
were not people then liable to error, and was there no danger of Heresy in
those Times? And yet these are their great Objections against putting the
Scriptures into the hands of the people. Which is just like their arguing
against giving the Cup to the Laity from the inconveniency of their beards,
lest some of the consecrated wine should be spilt upon them: As if errors and
beards were inconveniences lately sprung up in the world, and which mankind
were not liable to in the first Ages of Christianity.

But if there were the same dangers and inconveniences in all Ages, this
Reason makes against the publishing of the Scriptures to the people at first,
as much as against permitting them the use of them now. And in truth all these
objections are against the Scripture it self: And that which the Church of Rome
would find fault with if they durst, is, that there should be any such Book in
the world, and that it should be in any bodies hands, learned or unlearned; for
if it be dangerous to any, none are so capable of doing mischief with it as men
of wit and learning. So that at the bottom, if they would speak out, the
quarrel is against the Scriptures themselves. This is too evident by the
counsel given to Pope Julius the III. by the Bishops met at Bononia to consult
about the establishment of the Roman See: Where among other things they give
this as their last advice, and as the greatest and weightiest of all, That by
all means as little of the Gospel as might be, especially in the Vulgar Tongue,
should be read to the people; and that little which was in the Mass ought to be
sufficient: neither should it be permitted to any mortal to read more. For so
long (say they) as men were contented with that little, all things went well
with them; but quite otherwise, since more was commonly read. And speaking of
the Scripture, they give this remarkable testimony and commendation of it; this
in short is that Book which, above all others, has raised those tempests and
whirlwinds which we were almost carried away with. And in truth, if any one
diligently considers it, and compares it with what is done in our Church, he
will find them very contrary to each other, and our Doctrine not only to be
very different from it, but repugnant to it. If this be the case, they do like
the rest of the Children of this world, prudently enough in their Generation:
Can we blame them for being against the Scriptures, when the Scriptures are
acknowledged to be so clearly against them? But surely no body that considers
these things would be of that Church, which is brought by the undeniable
evidence of the things themselves to this shameful confession, that several of
their Doctrines and Practices are very contrary to the Word of God.

Much more might have been said against the practice of the Church of Rome in
these two particulars, but this is sufficient.

I shall in the second place consider, what is pretended for them. And indeed
what can be pretended in justification of so contumelious an affront to
mankind, so great a Tyranny and cruelty to the Souls of men? has God forbidden
the People to look into the Scriptures? No; quite contrary. Was it the practice
of the ancient Church to lay this restraint upon men; or to celebrate the
service of God in an unknown Tongue? our adversaries themselves have not the
face to pretend this. I shall truly represent the substance of what they say in
these two points.

four things for themselves.

1. That the people do exercise a general devotion, and come with an intention
to serve God; and that is accepted, though they do not particularly understand
the prayers rhat are made, and the lessons that are read.

But is this all that is intended in the service of God? does not St. Paul
expressly require more? that the understanding of the people should be edified
by the particular service that is performed? And if what is done be not
particularly understood, he tells us the People are not edified, nor can say
Amen to the prayers and thanksgivings that are put up to God; and that any man
that should come in and find people serving of God in this unprofitable and
unreasonable manner would conclude that they were mad.

And if there be any general devotion in the people, it is because in general
they understand what they are about; and why may they not as well understand
the particular service that is performed, that so they might exercise a
particular devotion. So that they are devout no farther than they understand;
and consequently as to what they do not understand, had every whit as good be
absent.

2. They say, the prayers are to God, and he understands them; and that is
enough. But what harm were it, if all they that pray understood them also: Or
indeed how can men pray to God without understanding what they ask of him? Is
not prayer a part of the Christian worship? and is not that a reasonable
service? and is any service reasonable that is not directed by our
understandings, and accompanied with our hearts and affections?

But then what say they to the Lessons and Exhortations of Scripture, which are
likewise read to the people in an unknown tongue? Are these directed to God, or
to the people only? And are they not designed by God for their instruction; and
read either to that purpose or to none? And is it possible to instruct men by
what they do not understand? This is a new and wonderful way of teaching, by
concealing from the people the things which they should learn. Is it not all
one, as to all purposes of edification, as if the Scriptures were not read, or
any thing else in the place of them? as they many times do their Legends, which
the wiser sort among them do not believe when they read them. For all things
are alike to them that understand none; as all things are of a color in the
dark. Ignorance knows no difference of things; it is only knowledge that can
distinguish.

3. They say that some do, at least in some measure, understand the particular
prayers. If they do, that is no thanks to them. It is by accident if they are
more knowing than the rest; and more than the Church either desires or intends.
For if they desired it, they might order their service so, as every man might
understand it.

4. They say that it is convenient that God should be served and worshipped in
the same Language all the world over. Convenient for whom: For God? or for the
People? Not for God surely. For he understands all other Languages as well as
Latin, and for any thing we know to the contrary likes them as well. And
certainly it cannot be so convenient for the People because they generally
understand no Language but their own; and it is very inconvenient they should
not understand what they do in the service of God. But perhaps they mean that
it is convenient for the Roman Church to have it so; because this will look
like an argument that they are the Catholic or universal Church, when the
Language which was originally theirs shall be the universal Language in which
all Nations shall serve God; and by this means also they may bring all Nations
to be of their Religion, and yet make them never the wiser; and this is a very
great convenience, because knowledge is a troublesome thing, and ignorance very
quiet and peaceable, rendering men fit to be governed, and unfit to dispute.

three Heads.

1. That the Church can give leave to men to read the Scriptures. But this not
without great trouble and difficulty: there must be a License for it under the
hand of the Bishop or Inquisitor, by the advice of the Priest or Confessor,
concerning the fitness of the Person that desires this privilege; And we may be
sure they will think none fit, but those of whom they have the greatest
confidence and security: And whoever presumes to do it otherwise, is to be
denied absolution; which is, as much as in them lies, to damn men for presuming
to read the Word of God without their leave.

And, whatever they may allow here in England, where they hold their people
upon more slippery terms, yet this privilege is very rarely granted where they
are in full possession of their power, and have the people perfectly under
their Yoke.

2. They tell us they instruct the people otherwise. This indeed were something
if they did it to purpose; but generally they do it very sparingly and
slightly. Their Sermons are commonly made up of feigned stories and miracles of
Saints, and exhortations to the worship of them (and especially of the blessed
Virgin) and of their Images and Relics. And for the truth of this I appeal to
the innumerable Volumes of their Sermons and Postils in print; which I suppose
are none of their worst. I am sure Erasmus says that in his time in several
Countries the people did scarce once in half a year hear a profitable Sermon to
exhort them to true piety. Indeed they allow the people some Catechisms and
Manuals of devotion; and yet in many of them they have the conscience and the
confidence to steal away the second Commandment in the face of the eighth.

But, to bring the matter to a point, if those helps of instruction are
agreeable to the Scriptures, why are they so afraid the people should read the
Scriptures? if they are not, why do they deceive and delude them?

3. They say that people are apt to wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction, and that the promiscuous use of them has been the great occasion
of Heresies. It cannot be denied to be the condition of the very best things in
the world, that they are liable to be abused: health and light and liberty, as
well as knowledge. But must all these be therefore taken away? This very
inconvenience of peoples wresting the Scriptures to their own ruin St. Peter
takes notice of in his days; but he does not therefore forbid men the reading
of them, as his more prudent Successors have done since. Suppose the reading
of the Scriptures has been the occasion of Heresies; were there ever more than
in the first Ages of Christianity; and yet neither the Apostles nor their
Successors ever prescribed this remedy. But are they in earnest? must not men
know the truth for sear of falling into Error? Because men may possibly miss
their way at noonday, must they never travel but in the night, when they are
sure to lose it?

And when all is done, this is not true, that Heresies have sprung from this
cause. They have generally been broached by the learned, from whom the
Scriptures neither were, nor could be concealed. And for this I appeal to the
History and Experience of all Ages. I am well assured the ancient Fathers were
of another mind. St. Chrysostom says, if men would be conversant in the
Scriptures, and attend to them, they would not only not fall into errors
themselves, but rescue those that are deceived: And that the Scriptures would
instruct men both in right opinions and a good life. And St. Hierome more
expressly to our purpose. That infinite evils arise from the Ignorance of the
Scriptures; and that from that cause the most part of Heresies have come.

But if what they say were true, is not this to lay the blame of all the
ancient Heresies upon the ill management of things by our Savior, and his
Apostles, and the holy Fathers of the Church for so many Ages, and their
imprudent dispensing of the Scriptures to the people. This indeed is to charge
the matter home; and yet this consequence is unavoidable. For the Church of
Rome cannot justify the piety and prudence of their present practices, without
accusing all these.

But the thing which they mainly rely upon as to both these practices is this.
That though these things were otherwise in the Apostles time, and in the
Ancient Church, yet the Church has power to alter them according to the
exigence and circumstances of time. I have purposely reserved this for the last
place, because it is their last refuge; and if this fail them they are gone.

To show the weakness of this pretense, we will, if they please, take it for
granted, that the Governors of the Church have in no Age more power, than the
Apostles had in theirs. Now St. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 10.8. that the Authority
which the Apostles had given them from the Lord was only for edification but
not for destruction: And the same St. Paul makes it the business of a whole
Chapter to show that the performing the public service of God, and
particularly Praying in an unknown Tongue, are contrary to edification; from
which premises the conclusion is plain, That the Apostles themselves had no
Authority to appoint the service of God to be performed in an unknown Tongue;
and surely it is Arrogance for the Church in any Age to pretend to greater
Authority than the Apostles had.

This is the sum of what our Adversaries say in justification of themselves in
these points. And there is no doubt, but that men of wit and confidence will
always make a shift to say something for any thing; and some way or other
blanch over the blackest and most absurd things in the world. But I leave it to
the judgment of mankind whether any thing be more unreasonable than to tell men
in effect, that it is fit they should understand as little of Religion as is
possible; that God has published a very dangerous Book, with which it is not
safe for the people to be familiarly acquainted; that our blessed Savior and
his Apostles and the ancient Christian Church for more than six hundred years
were not wise managers of Religion, nor prudent dispensers of the Scriptures;
but like fond and foolish Fathers put a knife and a sword into the hands of
their Children, with which they might easily have foreseen what mischief they
would do to themselves and others. And who would not choose to be of such a
Church which is provided of such excellent and effectual means of Ignorance,
such wise and infallible methods for the prevention of knowledge in the people,
and such variety of close shutters to keep out the light?

I have chosen to insist upon this Argument, because it is so very plain, that
the most ordinary capacity may judge of this usage and dealing with the souls
of men: which is so very gross that every man must needs be sensible of it;
because it touches men in the common rights of humane nature, which belong to
them as much as the light of heaven, and the air we breath in.

It requires no subtilty of wit, no skill in Antiquity, to understand these
Controversies between Us and the Church of Rome. For there are no Fathers to be
pretended on both sides in these Questions: They yield we have Antiquity on
ours: And we refer it to the common sense of Mankind, which Church, that of
Rome or Ours, has all the right and reason in the world on her side in these
debates? And, who they are that tyrannize over Christians, the Governors of
their Church or ours; who use the people like sons and freemen, and who like
slaves; who feed the flock of Christ committed to them, and who take the
Childrens bread from them? Who they are that when their Children ask bread, for
bread give them a stone, and for an egg a serpent; I mean the Legends of their
Saints instead of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make men wise unto
salvation: And who they are that lie most justly under the suspicion of Errors
and Corruptions, they who bring their Doctrine and Practices into the open
light, and are willing to have them tried by the true touchstone, the Word of
God; or they who shun the light, and decline all manner of trial and
examination? and who are most likely to carry on a worldly design, they who
drive a trade of such mighty gain, and advantage under pretense of Religion,
and make such markets of the ignorance and sins of the people; or we whom
malice it self cannot charge with serving any worldly design by any allowed
Doctrine or Practice of our Religion? For we make no money of the mistakes of
the people, nor do we fill their heads with vain fears of new places of torment
to make them willing to empty their purses in a vainer hope of being delivered
out of them. We do not like them pretend a mighty bank and treasure of Merits
in the Church, which they sell to the people for ready money, giving them bills
of Exchange from the Pope to Purgatory; when they who grant them, have no
reason to believe they will avail them, or be accepted in the other World.

For our parts we have no fear that our people should understand Religion too
well: We could wish, with Moses, that all the Lord's people were Prophets: We
should be heartily glad the people would read the holy Scriptures more
diligently, being sufficiently assured that it is their own fault if they learn
any thing but what is good from thence: We have no Doctrines or Practices
contrary to Scripture, and consequently no occasion to keep it close from the
sight of the people, or to hide any of the Commandments of God from them: We
leave these mean arts to those who stand in need of them.

In a word, there is nothing which God has said to men, which we desire should
be concealed from them; Nay, we are willing the people should examine what we
teach, and bring all our Doctrines to the Law and to the Testimony; that if
they be not according to this Rule, they may neither believe them nor us. It Is
only things, false and adulterate which shun the light and sear the
touchstone. We have that security of the truth of our Religion, and of the
agreeableness of it to the word of God; that honest confidence of the goodness
of our Cause, that we do not forbid the people to read the best Books our
Adversaries can write against it.

And now let any impartial man judge whether this be not a better argument of a
good Cause, to leave men at liberty to try the grounds of their Religion, than
the courses which are taken in the Church of Rome, to awe men with an
Inquisition; and, as much as is possible, to keep the common people in
Ignorance, not only of what their late Adversaries, the Protestants, but their
chief and ancient Adversary, the Scriptures have to say against them.

A man had need of more than common security of the skill and integrity of
those to whom he perfectly resigns his understanding; this is too great a Trust
to be reposed in humane frailty, and too strong a temptation to others to
impose upon us; to abuse our blindness, and to make their own ends of our
voluntary Ignorance and easy credulity. This is such a folly as if a rich man
should make his Physician his heir; which is to tempt him either to destroy him
or to let him die, for his own interest. So he that trusts the care of his soul
with other men, and at the same time by irrevocable Deed settles his
understanding upon them, lays too great a temptation before them to seduce and
damn him for their own ends.

And now to reflect a little upon our selves. What cause have we to bless God
who are so happily rescued from that more than Egyptian darkness and bondage,
wherein this Nation was detained for several Ages; who are delivered out of the
hands of those cruel taskmasters, who required brick without straw; that men
should be religious without competent understanding, and work out their own
salvation while they denied them the means of all others the most necessary to
it; who are so uncharitable as to allow us no salvation out of their Church,
and yet so unreasonable as to deny us the very best means of salvation when we
are in it?

Our Forefathers thought it a mighty privilege to have the Word of God
restored to them, and the public prayers and service of God celebrated in a
known Tongue: Let us use this inestimable privilege with great modesty and
humility; not to the nourishing of pride and self-conceit, of division and
faction; but as the Apostle exhorts, Let the word of God dwell richly in you,
in all wisdom; and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which ye are
called in one body; and be ye thankful.

It concerns us mightily (with which admonition I shall conclude) both for the
honor, and support of our Religion, to be at better union among our selves,
and not to divide about lesser things: and so to demean our selves, as to take
from our Adversaries all those pretenses whereby they would justify
themselves, or at least extenuate the guilt of that heavy charge, which falls
every whit as justly upon them as ever it did upon the Scribes and Pharisees,
of taking away the key of knowledge, and shutting the kingdom of heaven against
men; neither going in themselves, nor suffering those that are entering to go in.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.
THE Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge: Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: in Four
Volumes in Folio.

The First containing Thirty two Sermons, preached upon several Occasions; an
Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; a Learned Treatise of the
Pope's Supremacy; a Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church: also some
Account of the Life of the Author, with Alphabetical Tables.

The Second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon all the Apostles
Creed: with an Alphabetical Table; and to which may be also added the Life of
the Author.

The Third Volume containing Forty six choice Sermons upon several Subjects,
with an Alphabetical Table: which are the last that will be printed in English
of this Learned Author.

The Fourth Volume containing his Opuscula: viz. Determinationes, Conc. Ad
Clerum, Orationes, Poematia, etc.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions: in Three Volumes in 8o. By Dr.
Tillo^son Dean of Canterbury.

The Rule of Faith: or an Answer to the Treatise of M. J.S. entitled
Sure-sooting, etc.

THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented; in answer
to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.

An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery: being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: and
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints and the Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference, between the
Representer and the Answerer. 4o.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representers last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. 4o.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist: in
Two Parts. Wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, etc. And the Doctrine of the Trinity showed to be agreeable
to Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both. 4o.

An Answer to the 8th. Chapter of the Representers Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality;
with an Answer to the eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation: in a Book that came lately from Oxford.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D. D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrence Jewry, London, Jan. 7th. 1686. By William Sherlock,
D.D. Master of the Temple, and Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty.

The Necessity, Dignity and Duty of Gospel Ministers discoursed of before the
University of Cambridge.

A New and easy method to learn to Sing by Book (whereby one who has a good
Voice and Ear) may without other help, learn to sing true by Notes. Designed
chiefly for, and applied to, the promoting of Psalmody; and furnished with
variety of Psalm Tunes in Parts, with Directions for that kind of Singing.

The Parsons Counselor, with the Law of Tithes or Tithing. In two Books. The
first shows the Order every Parson, Vicar, etc. ought to observe in obtaining
a Spiritual Preferment, and what Duties are incumbent upon him after the taking
the same, and many other things necessary for every Clergyman to know and
observe. The second shows in what manner all sorts of Tithes, Offerings,
Mortuaries, and other Church Duties, are to be paid, as well in London, as
elsewhere, etc.

A Letter to a Friend; reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his First Letter to Mr. G.

THE END.

