TWO DISCOURSES.

THE FIRST, Of Evil-Speaking: By His Grace, JOHN, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The Second, Of the Government of the Thoughts: By His Grace, JOHN, Lord
Archbishop of York.

Both Preached before Their Majesty's, 1694.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, Brabazon Aylmer, and William Rogers: In
St. Paul's Churchyard, Cornhill, and Fleetstreet. School.

Price Sixpence.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST Evil-Speaking.
TIT. III. 2. To speak evil of no man.
GEneral Persuasives to Repentance and a good Life, and Invectives against Sin
and Wickedness at large, are certainly of good use to recommend Religion and
Virtue, and to expose the deformity and danger of a Vicious course. But it must
be acknowledged on the other hand, that these general Discourses do not so
immediately tend to reform the Lives of men: Because they fall among the Crowd,
but do not touch the Consciences of particular Persons in so sensible and
awakening a manner as when we treat of particular Duties and Sins, and
endeavor to put men upon the practice of the one, and to reclaim them from the
other, by proper Arguments taken from the Word of God, and from the nature of
particular Virtues and Vices.

The general way is, as if a Physician, instead of applying particular Remedies
to the Distemper of his Patient, should entertain him with a long discourse of
Diseases in general, and of the pleasure and advantages of Health; and
earnestly persuade him to be well; without taking his particular Disease into
consideration, and prescribing Remedies for it.

But if we would effectually reform men, we must take to task the great and
common disorders of their Lives, and represent their faults to them in such a
manner as may convince them of the evil and danger of them, and put them upon
the endeavor of a cure.

And to this end I have pitched upon one of the common and reigning Vices of
the Age, Calumny and Evil-speaking; by which men contract so much guilt to
themselves, and create so much trouble to others: And from which, it is to be
feared, few or none are wholly free. For who is he, says the Son of Sirach,
that has not offended with his tongue? Ecclus. 19. 16. In many things, says
St. James, James 3. 2. we offend all: And if any man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect man.

But how few have attained to this perfection? And yet unless we do endeavor
after it, and in some good measure attain it, all our pretense to Religion is
vain: So the same Apostle tells us, James 1. 26. If any man among you seems
to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that
man's Religion is vain.

For the more distinct handling of this Argument, I shall reduce my Discourse
to these Five Heads.

First, I shall consider the Nature of this Vice, and wherein it consists.
Secondly, I shall consider the due extent of this Prohibition, To speak evil of
no man. Thirdly, I shall show the Evil of this practice, both in the Causes and
Effects of it. Fourthly, I shall add some further Considerations to dissuade
men from it. Fifthly, I shall give some Rules and Directions for the prevention
and cure of it.
I. I shall consider what this Sin or Vice of evil speaking, here forbidden by
the Apostle, is: (...), not to defame and slander any man, not to hurt his
reputation, as the Etymology of the word does import. So that this Vice
consists in saying things of others which tend to their disparagement and
reproach, to the taking away or lessening of their Reputation and good Name.
And this, whether the things said be true or not. If they be false, and we know
it, then it is downright Calumny; and if we do not know it, but take it upon
the report of others, it is however a Slander; and so much the more injurious,
because really groundless and undeserved.

If the thing be true, and we know it to be so, yet it is a defamation, and
tends to the prejudice of our neighbor's reputation: And it is a fault to say
the evil of others which is true, unless there be some good reason for it
besides: Because it is contrary to that charity and goodness which Christianity
requires, to divulge the faults of others, though they be really guilty of
them, without necessity or some other very good reason for it.

Again, It is Evil-speaking and the Vice condemned in the Text, whether we be
the first Authors of an ill Report, or relate it from others; because the man
that is evil spoken of is equally defamed either way.

Again, Whether we speak evil of a man to his face, or behind his back: The
former way indeed seems to be the more generous, but yet is a great Fault, and
that which we call reviling: The latter is more mean and base, and that which
we properly call Slander or Backbiting.

And Lastly, Whether it be done directly and in express terms, or more
obscurely and by way of oblique insinuation; whether by way of downright
reproach, or with some crafty preface of commendation: For so it have the
effect to defame, the manner of address does not much alter the case: The one
may be more dextrous, but is not one jot less faulty: For many times the
deepest Wounds are given by these smoother and more artificial ways of Slander;
as by asking questions, Have you not heard so and so of such a man? I say no
more, I only ask the question: Or by general intimations, that they are loath to
say what they have heard of such a one, are very sorry for it, and do not at
all believe it, if you will believe them: And this many times without telling
the thing, but leaving you in the dark to suspect the worst.

These and such like Arts, though they may seem to be tenderer and gentler ways
of using men's reputation, yet in truth they are the most malicious and
effectual methods of Slander; because they insinuate something that is much
worse than is said, and yet are very apt to create in unwary men a strong
belief of something that is very bad, though they know not what it is. So that
it matters not in what fashion a Slander is dressed up, if it tend to defame a
man and to diminish his Reputation, it is the Sin forbidden in the Text.

II. We will consider the extent of this Prohibition to speak evil of no man;
and the due bounds and limitations of it. For it is not to be understood
absolutely, to forbid us to say any thing concerning others that is bad. This
in some cases may be necessary and our duty, and in several cases very fit and
reasonable. The Question is, In what Cases by the general Rules of Scripture
and right Reason we are warranted to say the evil of others that is true?

In general, we are not to do this without great reason and necessity; as, for
the prevention of some great evil, or the procuring of some considerable good
to our selves, or others. And this I take to be the meaning of that advice of
the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 19. 8. Whether it be to a friend or a foe, talk not of
other men's lives; and if thou can without offense reveal them not; that is,
if without hurt to any body thou can conceal them, divulge them not.

But because this may not be direction sufficient, I shall instance in some of
the principal Cases wherein men are warranted to speak evil of others, and yet
in so doing do not offend against this Prohibition in the Text.

First, It is not only lawful, but very commendable, and many times our duty to
do this in order to the probable amendment of the person of whom evil is
spoken. In such a case we may tell a man of his faults privately; or where it
may not be so fit for us to use that boldness and freedom, we may reveal his
faults to one who is more fit and proper to reprove him, and will probably make
no other use of this discovery but in order to his amendment. And this is so
far from being a breach of Charity, that it is one of the best testimonies of
it. For perhaps the party may not be guilty of what has been reported of him,
and then it is a kindness to give him the opportunity of vindicating himself:
Or if he be guilty, perhaps being privately and prudently told of it he may
reform. In this Case the Son of Sirach advises to reveal men's faults; Ecclus.
19. 13, 14, 15. Admonish a friend, says he, it may be he has not done it; and
if he have done it, that he do it no more: Admonish a friend, it may be he has
not said it; and if he have, that he speak it not again: Admonish a friend, for
many times it is a slander; and believe not every tale.

But then we must take care that this be done out of kindness, and that nothing
of our own passion be mingled with it; and that under pretense of reproving and
reforming men, we do not reproach and revile them, and tell them of their
faults in such a manner as if we did it to show our authority rather than our
charity. It requires a great deal of address and gentle application so to
manage the business of Reproof, as not to irritate and exasperate the person
whom we reprove, instead of curing him.

Secondly, This likewise is not only lawful, but our duty, when we are legally
called to bear witness concerning the fault and crime of another. A good man
would not be an accuser, unless the public good, or the prevention of some
great evil should require it. And then the plain reason of the thing will
sufficiently justify a voluntary accusation: otherwise it has always among
well-manner'd People been esteemed very odious for a man to be officious in
this kind, and a forward Informer concerning the misdemeanors of others.
Magistrates may sometimes think it fit to give encouragement to such persons,
and to set one bad man to catch another, because such men are fittest for such
dirty work: But they can never inwardly approve them, nor will they ever make
them their friends and confidents.

But when a man is called to give testimony in this kind in obedience to the
Laws, and out of reverence to the Oath taken in such Cases, he is so far from
deserving blame for so doing, that it would be an unpardonable fault in him to
conceal the truth, or any part of it.

Thirdly, It is lawful to publish the faults of others in our own necessary
defense and vindication. When a man cannot conceal another's faults without
betraying his own innocence, no charity requires a man to suffer himself to be
defamed to save the reputation of another man. Charity begins at home; and
though a man had never so much goodness, he would first secure his own good
name, and then be concerned for other men's. We are to love our neighbor as
our selves; so that the love of our selves is the Rule and Measure of our love
to our neighbor: And therefore first, otherwise it could not be the Rule. And
it would be very well for the World, if our Charity would rise thus high; and
no man would hurt another man's reputation, but where his own is in real danger.

Fourthly, This also is lawful for caution and warning to a third person, that
is in danger to be infected by the company, or ill example of another; or may
be greatly prejudiced by reposing too much confidence in him, having no
knowledge or suspicion of his bad qualities: But even in this case we ought to
take great care that the ill character we give of any man be spread no further
than is necessary to the good end we designed in it.

Besides these more obvious and remarkable Cases, this Prohibition does not I
think hinder but that in ordinary conversation men may mention that ill of
others which is already made as public as it well can be: Or that one friend
may not in freedom speak to another of the miscarriage of a third person, where
he is secure no ill use will be made of it, and that it will go no further to
his prejudice: Provided always, that we take no delight in hearing or speaking
ill of others: And the less we do it, though without any malice or design of
harm, still the better; because this shows that we do not feed upon ill reports
and take pleasure in them.

These are the usual Cases in which it may be necessary for us to speak evil of
other men. And these are so evidently reasonable that the Prohibition in the
Text cannot with reason be extended to them. And if no man would allow himself
to say any thing to the prejudice of another man's good name, but in these and
the like Cases, the tongues of men would be very innocent, and the World would
be very quiet. I proceed in the

IIId. place to consider the evil of this practice, both in the Causes and the
Consequences of it.

First, We will consider the Causes of it. And it commonly springs from one or
more of these evil Roots.

First, One of the deepest and most common Causes of evil-speaking is
ill nature and cruelty of disposition: And by a general mistake Ill Nature
passes for Wit, as Cunning does for Wisdom; tho in truth they are nothing
akin to one another, but as far distant as Vice and Virtue.

And there is no greater evidence of the bad temper of Mankind, than the
general proneness of men to this Vice. For (as our Savior says) out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And therefore men do commonly
incline to the censorious and uncharitable side: which shows humane Nature to
be strangely distorted from its original rectitude and innocence. The Wit of
Man does more naturally vent it self in Satyr and Censure, than in Praise and
Panegyric. When men set themselves to commend, it comes hardly from them, and
not without great force and straining; and if any thing be fitly said in that
kind, it does hardly relish with most men: But in the way of Invective, the
Invention of men is a plentiful and never-failing Spring: And this kind of Wit
is not more easy than it is acceptable: It is greedily entertained and greatly
applauded, and every man is glad to hear others abused, not considering how
soon it may come to his own turn to lie down and make sport for others.

To speak evil of others, is almost become the general entertainment of all
Companies: And the great and serious business of most Meetings and Visits,
after the necessary Ceremonies and Complements are over, is to sit down and
back-bite all the World. It Is the Sawee of Conversation, and all Discourse is
counted but flat and dull which has not something of piquancy and sharpness in
it against some body. For men generally love rather to hear evil of others than
good, and are secretly pleased with ill reports, and drink them in with
greediness and delight: Though at the same time they have so much Justice, as
to hate those that propagate them; and so much Wit, as to conclude that these
very persons will do the same for them in another Place and Company.

But especially, if it concerns one of another Party, and that differs from us
in matters of Religion; in this Case, all Parties seem to be agreed that they
do God great service in blasting the Reputation of their Adversaries: And tho
they all pretend to be Christiams, and the Disciples of Him who taught nothing
but kindness and meekness and charity; yet it is strange to see with what a
salvage and murderous disposition they will fly at one another's Reputation
and tear it in pieces: And whatever other Scruples they may have, they make
none to bespatter one another in the most bitter and slanderous manner.

But if they hear any good of their Adversaries, with what nicety and caution
do they receive it? how many objections do they raise against it? and with what
coldness do they at last admit it? It is very well, say they, if it be true: I
shall be glad to hear it confirmed. I never heard so much good of him before.
You are a good man your self; but have a care you be not deceived.

Nay it is well, if to balance the matter, and set things even, they do not
clap some infirmity and fault into the other Scale, that so the Enemy may not
go off with flying Colors.

But on the other side, every man is a good and substantial Author of an ill
Report. I do not apply this to any one sort of men, though all are to blame in
this way; Iliacos intra muros peccatur, and extra. To speak impartially, the
Zealots of all Parties have got a scurvy Trick of lying for the Truth.

But of all sorts of People, I have observed the Priests and Bigots of the
Church of Rome to be the ablest in this way, and to have the strongest Faith
for a lusty Falsehood and Calumny. Others will bandy a false Report, and toss it
from one hand to another; but I never knew any that would so hug a Lie and be
so very fond of it. They seem to be described by St. John in that expression in
the Revelation, Whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Another shrewd sign that ill nature lies at the root of this Vice is, that we
easily forget the good that is said of others, and seldom make mention of it;
but the contrary sticks with us, and lies uppermost in our memories, and is
ready to come out upon all occasions: And which is yet more ill-natured and
unjust, many times when we do not believe it our selves we tell it to others,
with this charitable Caution, That we hope it is not true. But in the mean time
we give it our Pass, and venture it to take its fortune to be believed or not,
according to the charity of those into whose hands it comes.

Secondly, Another Cause of the commonness of this Vice is, that many are so
bad themselves, in one kind or other. For to think and speak ill of others is
not only a bad thing, but a sign of a bad man. Our Blessed Savior, speaking of
the evil of the last days, gives this as the reason of the great decay of
Charity among men; Because iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax
cold, Matthew. 24. 12. When men are bad themselves, they are glad of any
opportunity to censure others, and are always apt to suspect that evil of other
men which they know by themselves. They cannot have a good opinion of
themselves, and therefore are very unwilling to have so of any body else; and
for this reason they endeavor to bring men to a level, hoping it will be some
justification of them if they can but render others as bad as themselves.

Thirdly, Another source of this Vice is Malice and Revenge. When men are in
Heat and Passion they do not consider what is true, but what is spiteful and
mischievous; and speak evil of others in revenge of some injury which they have
received from them: And when they are blinded by their Passions, they lay about
them madly and at a venture, not much caring whether the evil they speak be
true or not. Nay many are so Devilish, as to invent and raise false Reports on
purpose to blast men's Reputation. This is a Diabolical temper, and therefore
St. James tells us that the slanderous Tongue is set on fire of Hell: And the
Devil has his very Name from Calumny and false Accusation; and it is his
Nature too, for he is always ready to stir up and foment this evil spirit among
men: Nay, the Scripture tells us that he has the malice and impudence to
accuse good men before God; as he did Job, charging him with Hypocrisy to God
himself; Who, he knows, does know the hearts of all the children of men.

Fourthly, Another Cause of evil-speaking is Envy. Men look with an evil eye
upon the good that is in others, and think that their Reputation obscures them,
and that their commendable qualities do stand in their light; and therefore
they do what they can to cast a cloud over them, that the bright shining of
their Virtues may not scorch them. This makes them greedily to entertain, and
industriously to publish any thing that may serve to that purpose, thereby to
raise themselves upon the Ruins of other men's Reputation: And therefore as
soon as they have got an ill Report of any good man by the end, to work they
presently go to send it abroad by the first Post: For the string is always
ready upon their Bow to let fly this Arrow with an incredible swiftness,
through City and Country; for fear the innocent man's justification should
over-take it.

Fifthly, Another Cause of evil-speaking is Impertinence and Curiosity; an itch
of talking and meddling in the affairs of other Men, which do nowise concern
them. Some persons love to mingle themselves in all business, and are loath to
seem ignorant of so important a piece of News as the faults and follies of men,
or any bad thing that is talked of in good Company. And therefore they do with
great care pick up ill Stories, as good matter of discourse in the next Company
that is worthy of them: And this perhaps not out of any great malice, but for
want of something better to talk of, and because their Parts lie chiefly that
way.

Lastly, Men do this many times out of wantonness and for diversion. So little
do light and vain men consider, that a man's Reputation is too great and tender
a Concernment to be jested withal; and that a slanderous Tongue bites like a
Serpent, and wounds like a Sword. For what can be more barbarous, next to
sporting with a man's Life, than to play with his Honor and Reputation, which
to some men is dearer to them than their Lives?

It is a cruel pleasure which some men take in worrying the Reputation of
others much better than themselves; and this only to divert themselves and the
Company. Solomon compares this sort of men to distracted persons; As a mad man,
says he, who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death, so is the man that
deceives his neighbor; the LXX. render it, So is the man that defameth his
neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport? Such, and so bad are the Causes of
this Vice. I proceed to consider, in the

Second place, the ordinary, but very pernicious Consequences and Effects of
it; both to Others, and to our Selves.

First, To Others; the Parties I mean that are slandered. To them it is
certainly a great injury, and commonly a high Provocation, but always matter of
no small grief and trouble to them.

It is certainly a great injury, and if the evil which we say of them be not
true, it is an injury beyond imagination, and beyond all possible reparation.
And though we should do our utmost endeavor afterward toward their
Vindication, yet that makes but very little amends; because the Vindication
seldom reaches so far as the Reproach, and because commonly men are neither so
forward to spread the Vindication, nor is it so easily received after ill
impressions are once made. The solicitous Vindication of a man's self is, at
the best, but an after-game; and for the most part a man had better sit still,
than to run the hazard of making the matter worse by playing it.

I will add one thing more, That it is an Injury that descends to a man's
Children and Posterity; because the good or ill Name of the Father is derived
down to them; and many times the best thing he has to leave them is the
Reputation of his unblemished Virtue and Worth: And do we make no Conscience to
rob his innocent Children of the best part of this small Patrimony, and of all
the kindness that would have been done them for their Father's sake, if his
Reputation had not been so undeservedly stained? Is it no Crime by the breath
of our mouth at once to blast a man's Reputation, and to ruin his Children,
perhaps to all Posterity? Can we make a jest of so serious a matter? Of an
Injury so very hard to be repented of as it ought, because in such a Case no
Repentance will be acceptable without Restitution, if it be in our power. And
perhaps it will undo us in this World to make it; and if we do it not, will be
our Ruin in the other.

I will put the Case at the best, that the matter of the Slander is true; yet
no man's Reputation is considerably stained, tho never so deservedly, without
great harm and damage to him. And it is great odds but the matter by passing
through several hands is aggravated beyond truth, every one out of his bounty
being apt to add something to it.

But, besides the Injury, it is commonly a very high Provocation. And the
consequence of that may be as bad as we can imagine, and may end in dangerous
and desperate Quarrels. This reason the wise Son of Sirach gives why we should
defame no man: Whether it be, says he, to a friend or to a foe, talk not of
other men's lives. For he has heard and observed thee, Ecclus. 19. 8, 9. that
is, one way or other it will probably come to his knowledge, and when the time
comes he will show his hatred; that is, he will take the first opportunity to
revenge it.

At the best, it is always matter of Grief to the person that is defamed: And
Christianity, which is the best-natur'd Institution in the World, forbids us
the doing of those things whereby we may grieve one another. A man's good name
is a tender thing, and a wound there sinks deep into the spirit even of a wise
and good man: And the more innocent any man is in this kind, the more sensible
is he of this hard usage; because he never treats others so, nor is he
conscious to himself that he has deserved it.

Secondly, The Consequences of this Vice are as bad or worse to our selves.
Whoever is wont to speak evil of others, gives a bad character of himself, even
to those whom he desires to please; who, if they be wise enough, will conclude
that he speaks of them to others, as he does of others to them: And were it not
for that fond partiality which men have for themselves, no man could be so
blind as not to see this.

And it is very well worthy of our consideration, which our Savior says in
this very Case, That with what measure we meet to others, it shall be measured
to us again; Matthew. 7. and that many times heaped up, and running over. For
there is hardly any thing wherein Mankind do use more strict justice and
equality, than in rendering evil for evil, and railing for railing.

Nay, Revenge often goes further than Words. A reproachful and slanderous
Speech has cost many a man a Duel, and in that the loss of his own Life, or
the Murder of another, perhaps with the loss of his own Soul: And I have often
wondered that among Christians this matter is no more laid to heart.

And tho neither of these great mischiefs should happen to us, yet this may be
inconvenient enough many other ways. For no man knows in the chance of things,
and the mutability of humane affairs, whose kindness and good will he may come
to stand in need of before he dies. So that did a man only consult his own
safety and quiet, he ought to refrain from evil-speaking. What man is he, says
the Psalmist, that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good:
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking falsehood, Psalm. 34. 12,
13.

But there is an infinitely greater Danger hanging over us from God. If we
allow our selves in this evil practice, all our Religion is good for nothing.
So St. James expressly tells us, If any man among you seems to be religious,
and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion
is vain, Jam. 1. 26. And St. Paul puts Slanderers and Revilers amongst those
that shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And our Blessed Savior has told
us, That by our words we shall be justified, and by our words we shall be
condemned, 1 Cor. 6. 10. To which I will add the counsel given us by the
Wiseman, Refrain your tongue from backbiting, for there is no word so secret
that shall go for naught, and the mouth that slandereth slays the Soul,
Wisdom of Solomon, c. 1. v. 11. I proceed in the

IVth place, to add some further Arguments and Considerations to take men off
from this Vice: As,

First, That the use of Speech is a peculiar Prerogative of Man above other
Creatures, and bestowed upon him for some excellent end and purpose: That by
this Faculty we might communicate our thoughts more easily to one another, and
consult together for our mutual comfort and benefit: Not to enable us to be
hurtful and injurious, but helpful and beneficial to one another. The Psalmist,
as by Interpreters is generally thought calls our Tongue our Glory; therewith
we praise God and bless Men. Now to bless is to speak well of any, and to wish
them well. So that we pervert the use of Speech and turn our glory into shame,
when we abuse this Faculty to the injury and reproach of any.

Secondly, Consider how cheap a kindness it is to speak well, at least not to
speak ill of any. A good word is an easy obligation, but not to speak ill
requires only our Silence, which costs us nothing. Some instances of Charity
are chargeable, as to relieve the wants and necessities of others: The expense
deterrs many from this kind of Charity. But were a man never so covetous, he
might afford another man his good word; at least he might refrain from speaking
ill of him: especially if it be considered how dear many have paid for a
slanderous and reproachful word.

Thirdly, Consider that no quality does ordinarily recommend one more to the
favor and good will of men, than to be free from this Vice. Every one desires
such a man's friendship, and is apt to repose a great trust and confidence in
him: And when he is dead, men will praise him; and next to Piety toward God,
and Righteousness to Men, nothing is thought a more significant commendation,
than that he was never, or very rarely heard to speak ill of any. It was a
singular Character of a Roman Gentleman, Nescivit quid esset maledicere, he
knew not what it was to give any man an ill word.

Fourthly, Let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and consider how himself
is apt to be affected with this usage. Speak thy Conscience Man, and say
whether, as bad as thou art, thou would not be glad to have every man's,
especially every good man's good word? And to have thy faults concealed, and
not to be hardly spoken of, though it may be not altogether without truth, by
those whom thou did never offend by word or deed? But with what face or
reason do thou expect this from others, to whom thy carriage has been so
contrary? Nothing surely is more equal and reasonable than that known Rule,
What thou would have no man do to thee, that do thou to no man.

Fifthly, When you are going to speak reproachfully of others, consider whether
you do not lie open to just reproach in the same, or some other kind. Therefore
give no Occasion, no Example of this barbarous usage of one another.

There are very few so innocent and free either from infirmities or greater
faults, as not to be obnoxious to reproach upon one account or other; even the
wisest, and most virtuous, and most perfect among men have some little vanity,
or affectation, which lays them open to the railery of a mimical and malicious
Wit: Therefore we should often turn our thoughts upon our selves, and look into
that part of the Wallet which men commonly fling over their shoulders and keep
behind them, that they may not see their own Faults: And when we have searched
that well, let us remember our Savior's Rule, He that is without sin, let him
cast the first stone.

Lastly consider, That it is in many Cases as great a Charity to conceal the
evil you hear and know of others, as if you relieved them in a great necessity.
And we think him a hard-hearted man that will not bestow a small Alms upon one
in great want. It is an excellent Advice which the Son of Sirach gives to this
purpose; Talk not of other men's lives: If thou have heard a word, let it die
with thee; and be bold it will not burst thee, Ecclus. 19. 10. I shall in the

Vth. and last place, give some Rules and Directions for the prevention and
cure of this great evil among men.

First, Never say any evil of any man, but what you certainly know. When ever
you positively accuse and endite any man of any Crime, though it be in private
and among Friends, speak as if you were upon your Oath, because God sees and
hears you. This not only Charity, but Justice and regard to truth do demand of
us. He that easily credits an ill Report is almost as faulty as the first
inventer of it. For tho you do not make, yet you commonly propagate a Lie.
Therefore never speak evil of any upon common Fame, which for the most part is
false, but almost always uncertain whether it be true or not.

Not but that it is a fault, in most Cases, to report the evil of men which is
true, and which we certainly know to be so: But if I cannot prevail to make men
wholly to abstain from this fault, I would be glad to compound with some
Persons, and to gain this point of them however; because it would retrench nine
parts in ten of the evil-speaking that is in the World.

Secondly, Before you speak evil of any man, consider whether he has not
obliged you by some real kindness, and then it is a bad return to speak ill of
him who has done us good. Consider also, whether you may not come hereafter to
be acquainted with him, related to him, or obliged by him whom you have thus
injured? And how will you then be ashamed when you reflect upon it, and perhaps
have reason also to believe that he to whom you have done this injury is not
ignorant of it?

Consider likewise, whether in the change of Humane affairs, you may not some
time or other come to stand in need of his favor; and how incapable this
carriage of yours toward him will render you of it? And whether it may not be
in his power to revenge a spiteful and needless word by a shrewd turn? So that
if a man made no conscience of hurting others, yet he should in prudence have
some consideration of himself.

Thirdly, Let us accustom our selves to pity the Faults of men and to be truly
sorry for them, and then we shall take no pleasure in publishing them. And this
common Humanity requires of us, considering the great infirmities of humane
Nature, and that we our selves also are liable to be tempted: Considering
likewise, how severe a Punishment every Fault and miscarriage is to it self;
and how terribly it exposes a man to the wrath of God, both in this World and
the other. He is not a good Christian, that is not heartily sorry for the
faults even of his greatest Enemies; and if he be so, he will discover them no
further than is necessary to some good end.

Fourthly, Whenever we hear any man evil-spoken of, if we know any good of him
let us say that. It is always the more humane and the more honorable part to
stand up in the defense and vindication of others, than to accuse and bespatter
them. Possibly the good you heard of them may not be true, but it is much more
probable that the evil which you have heard of them is not true neither:
However, it is better to preserve the credit of a bad man, than to stain the
Reputation of the innocent. And if there were any need that a man should be
evil-spoken of, it is but fair and equal that his good and bad Qualities should
be mentioned together; otherwise he may be strangely misrepresented, and an
indifferent Man may be made a Monster.

They that will observe nothing in a Wise man, but his over-sights and follies;
nothing in a Good man, but his failings and infirmities; may make a shift to
render a very wise and good man very despicable. If one should heap together
all the passionate Speeches, all the froward and imprudent Actions of the best
Man; all that he had said or done amiss in his whole Life, and present it all
at one view, concealing his Wisdom and Virtues; the Man in this Disguise would
look like a Madman or a Fury: And yet if his Life were fairly represented, and
just in the same manner it was led; and his many and great Virtues set
over against his failings and infirmities, he would appear to all the World to
be an admirable and excellent Person. But how many and great soever any man's
ill Qualities are, it is but just that with all this heavy load of Faults he
should have the due praise of the few real Virtues that are in him.

Fifthly, That you may not speak ill of any, do not delight to hear ill of
them. Give no countenance to Busy-bodies, and those that love to talk of other
men's Faults: Or if you cannot decently reprove them because of their Quality,
then divert the discourse some other way; or if you cannot do that, by seeming
not to mind it, you may sufficiently signify that you do not like it.

Sixthly, Let every man mind himself, and his own Duty and Concernment. Do but
endeavor in good earnest to mend thy self, and it will be work enough for one
Man, and leave thee but little time to talk of others. When Plato withdrew from
the Court of Dionysius, who would fain have had a famous Philosopher for his
Flatterer, they parted in some unkindness, and Dionysius bad him not to speak
ill of him when he was returned into Greece; Plato told him, he had no leisure
for it; meaning that he had better things to mind, than to take up his thoughts
and talk with the faults of so bad a man, so notoriously known to all the World.

Lastly, Let us set a watch before the door of our lips, and not speak but upon
consideration: I do not mean to speak finely, but fitly. Especially when thou
speak of others, consider of whom, and what thou art going to speak: Use
great Caution and Circumspection in this matter: Look well about thee; on every
side of the thing, and on every Person in the Company, before thy words slip
from thee; which when they are once out of thy lips, are for ever out of thy
power.

Not that men should be sullen in company, and say nothing; or so stiff in
conversation, as to drop nothing but Aphorisms and Oracles: Especially, among
Equals and Friends, we should not be so reserved as if we would have it taken
for a mighty favor that we vouchsafe to say any thing. If a Man had the
understanding of an Angel, he must be contented to abate something of this
excess of Wisdom, for fear of being thought Cunning. The true Art of
Conversation, if any body can hit upon it, seems to be this; an appearing
freedom and openness, with a resolute reservedness as little appearing as is
possible.

All that I mean by this Caution is, that we should consider well what we say,
especially of others. And to this end we should endeavor to get our minds
furnished with matter of Discourse concerning things useful in themselves, and
not hurtful to others: And, if we have but a Mind wise enough, and good enough,
we may easily find a Field large enough for innocent Conversation; such as will
harm no body, and yet be acceptable enough to the better and wiser part of
Mankind: And why should any one be at the cost of playing the fool to gratify
any body whatsoever?

I have done with the Five things I propounded to speak to upon this Argument.
But because hardly any thing can be so clear, but something may be said against
it; nor any thing so bad, but something may be pleaded in excuse for it: I
shall therefore take notice of two or three Pleas that may be made for it.

First, Some pretend mighty injury and provocation. If in the same kind, it
seems thou art sensible of it; and therefore thou of all men ought to
abstain from it: But in what kind soever it be, the Christian Religion forbids
Revenge. Therefore do not plead one Sin in excuse of another, and make Revenge
an Apology for Reviling.

Secondly, It is alleged by others, with a little better grace, that if this
Doctrine were practiced, Conversation would be spoiled, and there would not be
matter enough for pleasant discourse and entertainment.

I answer, The design of this Discourse is to redress a great evil in
Conversation, and that I hope which mends it will not spoil it. And however, if
men's Tongues lay a little more still, and most of us spoke a good deal less
than we do, both of our selves and others, I see no great harm in it: I hope we
might for all that live comfortably and in good health, and see many good days.
David, I am sure, prescribes it as an excellent Receipt, in his Opinion, for a
quiet, and cheerful, and long Life, to refrain from evil-speaking; Psalm. 34.
12, 13. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking falsehood.

But granting that there is some pleasure in Invective, I hope there is a great
deal more in Innocence: And the more any man considers this, the truer he will
find it; and whenever we are serious, we our selves cannot but acknowledge it.
When a man examines himself impartially before the Sacrament, or is put in mind
upon a Deathbed to make reparation for Injuries done in this kind, he will
then certainly be of this mind and wish he had not done them. For this
certainly is one necessary qualification for the Blessed Sacrament, that we be
in love and charity with our neighbors; with which temper of mind this quality
is utterly inconsistent.

Thirdly, There is yet a more specious Plea than either of the former, that men
will be encouraged to do ill if they can escape the tongues of men; as they
would do, if this Doctrine did effectually take place: Because by this means
one great restraint from doing evil would be taken away, which these good men
who are so bent upon reforming the World, think would be great pity. For many
who will venture upon the displeasure of God, will yet abstain from doing bad
things for fear of reproach from Men: Besides, that this seems the most proper
punishment of many Faults which the Laws of Men can take no notice of.

Admitting all this to be true, yet it does not seem so good and laudable a way
to punish one Fault by another. But let no man encourage himself in an evil way
with this hope, that he shall escape the censure of men: When I have said all I
can, there will, I fear, be evil-speaking enough in the World to chastise them
that do ill: And tho we should hold our peace, there will be bad tongues enough
to reproach men with their evil-doings. I wish we could but be persuaded to
make the Experiment for a little while, whether men would not be sufficiently
lashed for their Faults, tho we sat by and said nothing.

So that there is no need at all that good Men should be concerned in this
odious Work. There will always be Offenders and Malefactors enough to be the
Executioners to inflict this punishment upon one another. Therefore let no man
presume upon Impunity on the one hand; and on the other, let no man despair but
that this business will be sufficiently done one way or other. I am very much
mistaken, if we may not safely trust an ill-natured World that there will be no
failure of Justice in this kind.

And here, if I durst, I would fain have said a word or two concerning that
more public sort of Obloquy by Lampoons and Libels, so much in fashion in this
witty Age. But I have no mind to provoke a very terrible sort of men. Yet thus
much I hope may be said without offense, that how much soever men are pleased
to see others abused in this kind, yet it is always grievous when it comes to
their own turn: However I cannot but hope that every man that impartially
considers must own it to be a fault of a very high nature to revile those whom
God has placed in Authority over us, and to slander the footsteps of the
Lord's Anointed: Especially since it is so expressly written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the Rulers of thy People.

Having represented the great evil of this Vice, it might not now be improper
to say something to those who suffer by it. Are we guilty of the evil said of
us? Let us reform, and cut off all occasions for the future; and so turn the
malice of our Enemies to our own advantage, and defeat their ill intentions by
making so good an use of it: And then it will be well for us to have been evil
spoken of.

Are we innocent? We may so much the better bear it patiently; imitating herein
the Pattern of our Blessed Savior, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

We may consider likewise, that tho it be a misfortune to be evil-spoken of, it
is their fault that do it, and not ours; and therefore should not put us into
Passion, because another man's being injurious to me is no good reason why I
should be uneasy to my self. We should not revenge the injuries done to us, no
not upon them that do them, much less upon our selves. Let no man's Provocation
make thee to lose thy Patience. Be not such a fool, as to part with any one
Virtue because some men are so malicious as to endeavor to rob thee of the
Reputation of all the rest. When men speak ill of thee, do as Plato said he
would do in that case; Live so, as that no body may believe them.

All that now remains is to reflect upon what has been said, and to urge you
and my self to do accordingly. For all is nothing, if we do not practice what
we so plainly see to be our Duty. Many are so taken up with the deep Points and
Mysteries of Religion, that they never think of the common Duties and Offices
of human Life. But Faith and a good Life are so far from clashing with one
another, that the Christian Religion has made them inseparable. True Faith is
necessary in order to a good Life, and a good Life is the genuine product of a
right Belief; and therefore the one never ought to be pressed to the prejudice
of the other.

I foresee what will be said, because I have heard it so often said in the like
case; that there is not one word of Jesus Christ in all this. No more is there
in the Text. And yet I hope that Jesus Christ is truly preached, whenever his
Will and Laws, and the Duties enjoined by the Christian Religion are inculcated
upon us.

But some men are pleased to say, that this is mere Morality: I answer, that
this is Scripture-Morality and Christian-Morality, and who has any thing to
say against that? Nay, I will go yet further, that no man ought to pretend to
believe the Christian Religion, who lives in the neglect of so plain a Duty;
and in the practice of a Sin so clearly condemned by it, as this of
evil-speaking is.

But because the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than a
two-edged Sword, yea sharper than Calumny itself; and pierces the very Hearts
and Consciences of men, laying us open to our selves, and convincing us of our
more secret as well as our more visible Faults; I shall therefore at one view
represent to you what is dispersedly said concerning this Sin in the Holy Word
of God.

And I have purposely reserved this to the last, because it is more persuasive
and penetrating than any Humane Discourse. And to this end be pleased to
consider in what company the Holy Ghost does usually mention this Sin. There is
scarce any black Catalogue of Sins in the Bible but we find this among them; in
the company of the very worst Actions and most irregular Passions of men. Out
of the heart, says our Savior, Matt. 15. 19. proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, false witness, evil speakings. And the Apostle, Romans
1. 29. ranks backbiters with fornicators, and murderers, and haters of God; and
with those of whom it is expressly said, 1 Cor. 6. 10. that they shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

And when he enumerates the Sins of the last times, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. Men, says
he, shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, evil-speakers, without
natural affection, perfidious, false accusers, etc. And which is the strangest
of all, they who are said to be guilty of these great Vices and Enormities are
noted by the Apostle to be great pretenders to Religion; for so it follows in
the next words, Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. So
that it is no new thing for men to make a more than ordinary profession of
Christianity, and yet at the same time to live in a most palpable contradiction
to the Precepts of that Holy Religion: As if any pretense to Mystery and I know
not what extraordinary seize in the knowledge of Christ, could exempt men
from obedience to his Laws, and set them above the Virtues of a good Life.

And now after all this, do we hardly think that to be a Sin, which is in
Scripture so frequently ranked with Murder and Adultery and the blackest
Crimes; such as are inconsistent with the life and power of Religion, and will
certainly shut men out of the Kingdom of God? Do we believe the Bible to be the
Word of God? and can we allow our selves in the common practice of a Sin, than
which there is hardly any Fault of men's Lives more frequently mentioned, more
severely reproved, and more odiously branded in that Holy Book.

Consider seriously these Texts, Psalm. 15. 1. Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that backbiteth not with his
tongue, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor. Have ye never heard
what our Savior says, that of every idle word we must give an account in the
day of Judgment; that by thy words thou sbalt be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned? What can be more severe than that of St. James? If any
man among you seems to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain.

To conclude: The Sin which I have now warned men against, is plainly condemned
by the Word of God; and the Duty which I have now been persuading you to, is
easy for every man to understand, not hard for any man, that can but resolve to
keep a good guard upon himself for some time, by the grace of God to practice;
and most reasonable for all Men, but especially for all Christians, to observe.
It is as easy as a resolute silence upon just occasion, as reasonable as
prudence and justice and charity, and the preservation of peace and good will
among men, can make it; and of as necessary and indispensible an obligation, as
the Authority of God can render any thing.

Upon all which Considerations let us every one of us be persuaded to take up
David's deliberate Resolution, Psalm. 31. 1. I said, I will take heed to my
ways, that I offend not with my tongue. And I do verily believe, that would we
but heartily endeavor to amend this one Fault, we should soon be better Men in
our whole lives: I mean, that the correcting of this Vice, together with those
that are nearly allied to it, and may at the same time, and almost with the
same resolution and care be corrected, would make us Owners of a great many
considerable Virtues, and carry us on a good way toward perfection; it being
hardly to be imagined that a man that makes conscience of his Words should not
take an equal or a greater care of his Actions. And this I take to be both the
true meaning, and the true reason of that saying of St. James, and with which I
shall conclude: If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect man.

Now the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good word and work, to do his will; working in you
always that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom
be glory for ever,

Amen.
THE Archbishop of YORK's SERMON About the Government of the Thoughts, Before
the King and Queen, At White Hall, March iv. 1693/4.

A SERMON About the Government of the Thoughts, Preach d before the KING and
QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, The 4th of March, being the 2d Sunday in LENT, 1693/4.

By the Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Archbishop of York.

Published by Their Majesty's Especial Command.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church
Yard, School.

A SERMON About the Government of the Thoughts, Preached before the King and
Queen.
PROVE. iv. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of Life.
THE Argument with which this Audience was entertained the last Lord's Day,
being the Government of the Tongue; I cannot think it improper or unseasonable
for me, who have the Honor to come next, to treat about the Government of the
Thoughts: There being a near relation between these two, and a necessary
dependence of the one upon the other.

Our Words indeed are more easily governed than our Thoughts, because they are
more in our Power. But it will be impossible either to govern our Words or our
Actions, as we should, unless we first bring our Thoughts in some measure under
Government.

I must confess this Argument of the Government of the Thoughts, though it be a
very useful, yet it seems also a very nice and difficult one, through the great
variety of Cases, arising from Men's different Tempers, which will not come
under the same Rules, and yet ought to be provided for. But however, this shall
not discourage me from undertaking this Argument; it shall only make me more
careful as to what I say about it. That is, to have respect, as much as I can,
to all sorts of Tempers, and to deliver what I have to say with so much
Plainness, that every body may go along with me.

The Words, upon which I ground my Discourse, are those of Solomon, which I
have read unto you, and which contain one of those Precepts that he lays down
(...) the Religious Conduct of our Lives. Keep (says he) thy Heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life.

Not to trouble you with what others have said upon this Text, I take the true
Meaning of it to be this.

By the [Heart] here, which we are exhorted to keep, we are to understand the
Inward Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Souls or Spirits; all which
in the inspired Writings are constantly said to be seated in the Heart. This
undoubtedly is the Scripture Notion of the Heart.

And when we are here bid to keep our Hearts with all diligence, I think there
is no question to be made, the Meaning is, That we should diligently attend to
the Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Minds; that we should watch
them narrowly, lest at any time we should give our Consent to something we
ought not. This is the Meaning of keeping our Hearts with all diligence.

And then a Reason is added, why it concerns us thus to keep them. And that is
this. Because out of the heart are the issues of life. What is the Meaning of
that Phrase? Plainly this. The Issues, the Fruits, the Effects that are shown
in our Lives and Conversation, do certainly proceed from the Heart, and
therefore, accordingly as that is well or ill guarded or kept, so will our
Lives and Conversations be. The Goodness or Badness of our Lives does
altogether depend upon the attending or not attending to the Thoughts, and
Motions, and Inclinations of our Minds. As our Caution and Watchfulness in this
Point is greater or less, so will our Course of Life be better or worse. And
therefore it concerns us all, that mean to live well, to be infinitely careful
in this Matter.

This is a plain Account of the Advice that is here given us. So that you see,
if I mean to discourse pertinently to my Text, my Argument must be (what I
said) the Care, and Management, and Government of our Thoughts, as they fall
under a Religious Consideration.

In treating of this Argument there seem to me Two Things needful to be done.

First, To give an Account what Power a Man has over his own Thoughts.

Secondly, To show wherein the Art of Governing of them does consist.

It is indeed this second thing which my Text naturally leads me to speak to:
But I cannot speak to that to any purpose, till I have made way for it by
clearing the first. It is in vain to give Rules about the Government of our
Thoughts, till we know how far we have Power over them; how far they fall, or
do not fall, under our Conduct and Management.

And I must needs say, that most of those I have met with, that have discoursed
about the Government of Thoughts, by not enquiring into, and settling this
Point, have been so far from benefiting all their Hearers, that desired to
receive benefit by their good advices, that to several of them they have done
harm: Because as to them their advices have been perfectly unpracticable. Now
those that by their own Experience found them to be so, instead of considering
that that Teacher might be in a mistake, or that He did not sufficiently weigh
and examine the Case of all Persons he gave his advice to, have peremptorily
concluded that they themselves were in the fault, and therefore they were in an
evil condition, because they found themselves not able to live up to what was
advised them.

The first Question then is, How far a Man has power over his own Thoughts.
There is not indeed any single Answer to be given to this Question, that will
fit all Men. For that is impossible. It would be as unreasonable to demand it,
as it would be to require of a Workman to make a Garment, that should fit all
sorts and sizes of Men.

Some Men by the very Principles of their Make and Constitution, are much
better able to govern their Thoughts than others. Some that are naturally
weaker, have by long use and many trials obtained a greater power over their
Thoughts than others. Again, the same Persons that at some times have a greater
power over the motions of their Minds, may at other times have a less Command
over them; and this according as their Health, or their Business, or a hundred
Contingencies of outward things do affect them. So that all that can be done,
as to this matter, is to lay down some general Propositions, which every Body
is to apply to himself as there is Occasion. And Five of this kind I have to
offer, and which, I think, will take in all, or the greatest part of what
belongs to this Argument.

The first Proposition I lay down is this, That the first Motions of our Minds
are very little, if at all, in our power.

By the first Motions of our Minds, I mean those sudden Thoughts, or
Apprehensions, or Passions, or Desires, which are excited in our Minds by any
Object that is at that time presented to our Imagination. As to these, I say,
we are not so much Masters of our selves as to be able to stop them; nay,
though perhaps they be very irregular. And the Reason is, because they are
produced so quick, that there is not time enough given for Reason to interpose.

There is no necessity indeed that a Man should give Consent to these Motions;
but as for their coming into his Mind, he can no more help it, than he can help
his present Temper, or the present Circumstances he is engaged in.

Thus for Instance. Do you think it possible for a Man that is of a Fiery
Passionate Temper, to avoid the feeling a sudden Resentment of Anger arising in
his Mind, if he meets with any unexpected Affront, or other great Provocation?
Or for a Man that desires to be well thought of, not to entertain some Vanity
of Imagination, when he hears himself commended or flatterd? Or for a Man that
is addicted to Pleasures, not to feel some irregular Inclinations in himself
toward the gratifying his Appetites in those things, when he has all the
Temptations before him? And thus in all other Cases.

I grant indeed that a Man by long Consideration, and a serious exercising
himself in the ways of Virtue and Piety, may bring himself to that Temper, that
he shall not have so many irregular undecent Motions in his own Mind, upon any
occasion whatsoever, as he was wont to have; and that those that were formerly
Temptations to him, will at last be none: But still I say, the first Motions
and Workings of his Mind however they be occasioned, are in a great measure out
of his power; he cannot stop them; and therefore the Art of governing his
Thoughts does not lie there.

The second Proposition I lay down is this, When a Man's Mind is vigorously
affected and possessed, either with the outward Objects of sense, or with
inward Passions of any kind, in that Case he has little or no Command of his
Thoughts. His Mind at that time will be in a manner wholly taken up with that
it is then full of* Nor will he be able, till those Impressions be worn off, to
think freely of what he pleases.

Thus for Instance, When a Man is under a sharp, tormenting Pain; as he cannot
avoid the feeling of that Pain, so neither can he avoid the thinking of it.
When one is full of Grief for the loss of a dear Relation; or transported with
Passion for some unworthy usage he has met with: It is in vain to say, Pray
think not of these Matters; for these things must and will in a great measure
employ his Thoughts, till his Passions do cool, and the Impressions that caused
them be vanished.

Thus for a Man to come from some Business in which he is more than ordinarily
concerned; or from the hearing some very good or very bad News; I say, to come
fresh from this to the saying his Prayers: I do not, I cannot wonder, that in
this case his Mind will be much upon his Business, or his News, notwithstanding
all his Endeavors to the contrary.

For the Nature of Man is such, that he cannot so of a sudden turn his mind
from one Business to another; but that if he did closely and vigorously apply
himself to the first Business, his Thoughts will for some time run upon it,
even after he has applied his Mind to the other.

I do not deny, but that a Man may often so order his Affairs, as to be able to
keep his Mind clear and free from such Prepossessions as I am now speaking of,
so as that when he comes to apply himself to any Business he has a mind to, he
may intend it with his whole Might. But this I say, If our Minds be once
engaged with warm Thoughts about any thing; it is very hard, if not impossible,
to get them disengaged on a sudden. So that the Art of Governing our Thoughts
does not much lie in that neither.

Thirdly, There are some Cases likewise, where a Man's Thoughts are in a manner
forced upon him, from the present Temper and Indisposition of his Body. So that
though he be in no Passion, though there be no unusual Objects of Sense that
excite those T^oughts in him; nay, though he never so much resolve not to think
upon those things; yet so long as that Habit of Body lasts, he cannot avoid
those kind of Thoughts: So that in this Case also, there is little room left
for the Government of Thoughts.

That which I now say, happens frequently, not only in all sorts of Distempers
where the Brain is visibly disturbed, as in Fevers, and the like; which often
cause a thousand delirous Fancies, and sometimes downright Madness and
Distraction: But also in other Cases where there seems to be no Fever, or
other visible Distemper; nor does the Brain, as to other matters, seem to be at
all disordered; but the persons, in all appearance, are sound both in Body and
Mind.

And this is the Case of some deeply Hypochondriac Persons; many of which will
be haunted with a Set of Thoughts and Fancies, that they can by no means get
rid of, though they desire it never so earnestly.

Sometimes they cannot get it out of their Heads, but that they are Atheists
and Infidels; they neither believe in God nor in Jesus Christ, nor have any
sense at all of Religion.

Sometimes they are tormented with Blasphemous Thoughts, and they cannot set
themselves to the Performance of any Office of Devotion, but a thousand impious
Fancies will come in and spoil all.

Sometimes they fancy they are guilty of several grievous Crimes, which it is
to be hoped, it was hardly possible they should be guilty of; nay, you cannot
convince them but that they do every day commit some of these Crimes, because
they imagine they give consent to them.

And whilst these sorts of Thoughts fill their Imaginations, there is not a
Passage in the Bible that they read, nor a Sermon that they hear, but they find
something in it, which they do so perversely apply to their own Case, as thereby
to increase their trouble, but not to get any relief.

I have known several well-disposed Persons, and some of them sincerely Pious,
that have been in this Condition.

What now is to be said to this? Why, it is very certain that all these
Thoughts and Fancies are thrust upon them, and are not the free, natural,
voluntary Operations of their own Minds; but the effects of Vapors or
Hypochondriac Melancholy. Nor can the Persons themselves any more help their
thus Thinking, or Fancying, than they can help the Disturbances of their Dreams
when they have a mind to sleep quietly. Indeed we may properly enough call
these Fancies of theirs, their waking Dreams; as their Dreams are their
sleeping Fancies.

Well but now of all Persons whatsoever, these People are most desirous to have
Rules given them for the Government of the Thoughts. And I cannot blame them,
because their Thoughts are certainly very Troublesome. But truly if we would
speak pertinently to their Case, instead of giving them Advices for the
regulating their Thoughts, they should rather be advised to look after their
Bodies, and by the help of good Prescriptions to get rid of those Fumes and
Vapors which occasion these Fancies. When the Cause is removed, the Effect
will soon cease. I do not in the least doubt, whatever these People may think
of their own Case, but that this is as properly a Bodily Disease, as a Fever,
or Fits of the Falling Sickness.

In the mean time, while they are in this Condition, whatever Rules are proper
to be given to other Persons for the Government of the Thoughts, of all People
living those Rules do the least concern them. For those Thoughts which they
complain of, do not at all fall under Regulation or Government; because they
are suggested to their Minds whether they will or no. And for my part, I think
it a great deal more advisable (if it could be) to neglect and despise them;
then to be perpetually struggling and disputing with them, and vexing themselves
about them.

But, you will say, if Men be such Slaves to their Thoughts, and are thus
necessarily passive under them, where is the Freedom of Thoughts? To this I
answer.

In the fourth place, out of these three Cases I before mentioned, we have
Liberty of Thinking, and may choose our own Thoughts. And that Liberty and
Freedom we have in Thinking, does, to my apprehension, mainly consist in this,
viz. That all of us (who are not in the Circumstances I have been hitherto
speaking of) can, if we please, apply our Minds more vigorously to one sort of
thing than to another; and accordingly as we do thus apply our Minds, so will
the most of our Thoughts be.

It is in our power among the multitude of Objects which present themselves to
our Mind, (as for Instance, God, Virtue, Holiness, Heaven, Wealth, Power,
Greatness, Preferments, Fine Clothes, Splendid Equipage, Sensuat Pleasures,
Recreations, Divertisements, Knowledge, Learning, Arts, and the like: I say,
that among all this multitude of Objects that present themselves to our Minds)
it is in our power to determine our selves, which of them we will dwell upon,
and make a Business of. And accordingly, when at any time we have pitched upon
any of them, as a Business, it is in our power to mind that Business, either
more or less diligently. And if it be such a one, as that we mean in good
earnest to concern our selves about it, it will then so fill our Minds, as that
by attending to that, we shall either prevent in a great measure other Thoughts
from coming into our Heads; or if they do come in, they will not long stay
there, but will very speedily give place to that which is our main Business at
that time.

And the Reason of this is plain; Because our Natures are of that Make, that
two things at once cannot well possess our Minds; and therefore if we be intent
about one thing, we cannot have much room or leisure for Thoughts of another
Nature.

But then Fifthly and lastly, Though this that I have said be the true Nature
of that power we have over our Thoughts, as to the directing them to a
particular Object: Yet there is another power we have over them that ought here
more especially to be considered; because in it are laid the very Foundations
of Virtue and Vice, and upon account of it, all our Thoughts become either
morally good or evil.

That which I mean is this. Though we cannot in many Cases, think always of
what we would; nay, though we cannot hinder abundance of Thoughts from coming
into our Minds against our will: Yet it is always in our power to assent to our
Thoughts, or to deny our Consent to them. And here it is that the Morality of
our Thoughts begins. According as we Assent or Dissent to the Motions that are
made in our Minds; so will our Thoughts have the Notion of Virtuous or Sinful
Thoughts.

When any Temptations are presented to us from without, we cannot perhaps (as
I said before) avoid the feeling an irregular Passion, or Motion, or
Inclination stirring within us upon occasion thereof: But yet at that very-time
it is in our power, whether we will comply with those Passions and
Inclinations, or not; whether we will consent to them, or not; whether we will
pursue them further or not. Now if we do not consent to them, but endeavor to
stop, and stifle, and resist them as soon as we are aware of them; there is yet
no harm done. Our Thoughts, how undecent or irregular soever they were, are
rather to be accounted the Infirmities of our Corrupt Nature, than our Sins
properly so called.

And thus it is likewise as to our Wandering Thoughts in our Prayers. If we
strive against them, and endeavor to keep our Minds in a Devout Composed
Temper, and attend as well as we can to the Duty we are about: I say, if we do
this, I hope those Distractions and Wanderings will never rise up in Judgment
against us.

And as for the frightful Blasphemous Fancies, which, as I told you, some, even
Pious Persons are tormented with: As to them, I say, they, of all other
irregular Thoughts, have the least danger of Sin in them, though they be not so
solemnly and formally disputed with, and contested against. Because indeed they
are so terrible in their own Nature, that no Man in his Wits, and that has any
sense of God or Goodness, can be supposed to consent to them. They are indeed
great Infeticities, but by no means any Sin, any farther than we approve of
them; and to approve of them for any tolerably good Man is impossible.

But then on the other side, If we consent to any wicked Motion or Inclination
that we feel in our selves; let it come in how it will, never so suddenly,
never so unexpectedly; if we close with any Thought that prompts us to Evil, so
as to be pleased with it, to delight in it, to think of pursuing it, till it be
brought into Action: In that case we are no longer to plead our Original
Corruption; for in that very instant we become Actual Sinners; Actual
Transgressors of the Law of God, the Obligation of which reaches to our very
Hearts and Thoughts as well as our Actions. Though yet we are not so great
Transgressors, so long as our Sin is only in Thought, or Desire, or Purpose; as
if it had proceeded to outward Action.

All this is taught us for true Divinity, by no less an Author than St. James,
in the first Chapter of his Epistle, v. 13, 14, 15. Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God; for God tempts no man. But every man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
Death.

Which passage of the Apostle does plainly contain these three Propositions.

First, That no Man is drawn to commit Sin by any State or Condition that God
has put him into; no, nor by any Temptation, either outward or inward, that is
presented to him. It is not a Sin to be tempted; no, nor to feel that we are
tempted by some disorderly Inclination that arises in our Minds thereupon.

But, second, then our Sin begins, when we yield to the Temptation, when we are
drawn away by our own Lusts, and enticed, when they get the Victory over us,
and we do consent to them. Then Lust has conceived, and brings forth Sin.

But, Thirdly, Though the very consent of our Wills to a Temptation, be a Sin
in us; yet that Sin is not so great as it will be afterward, if it be brought
to Action. Sin in the desire or purpose, is but an Embryo; it is but the first
Rudiments of Sin; but when it comes to be acted, it is then a Sin in its full
dimensions; and the Consequents of it may be Fatal without Repentance. Sin when
it is finished brings forth Death.

Having thus given some Account, how far our Hearts or Thoughts do fall under
Government; I now come to my Second Point, that is, to treat of the Art of
Governing them, or to lay down the necessary Rules and Directions, which are to
be observed in order thereunto.

And we shall not need to go far for these Rules, for they will all naturally
flow from the Principles I have already laid down. And I think, they may
conveniently enough be reduced likewise to these Five following.

First, From what has been said, it appears, that the First and great Point to
be done by us, if we would keep our Hearts in a good Frame, and order our
Thoughts to good purposes, is, that we rightly pitch our main Designs; that we
choose that for the great business of our Lives, that really ought to be so.

Now what that is, can bear no dispute with any Man that will fairly use his
Reason. For certainly, that which is our greatest Concernment in the World,
ought to be our greatest Business and Design in the World.

And it is evident to every one, that believes he has a Soul to save, that his
greatest Concernment of all, is, to approve himself to that God who made him,
and disposes of all his affairs; and who accordingly as we sincerely endeavor,
or not endeavor to serve him, will make us either very Happy, or very
Miserable, both in this Life and the other. So that there can, as I said, be no
Dispute about what ought to be the great Business and Design of our whole
Lives, and to which all other Businesses must yield.

Now if we be so wise, as really to propose this as our main End, and resolve
to mind it, and follow it as such; I say, if we be so wise as to do this; we
have made a very great step toward the obtaining a security to our selves,
that the greatest part of our Thoughts, and Desires, and Affections, will be
such as they should be; such as will be acceptable to God, and satisfactory to
our selves.

For as I told you before, whatever is our main Business, be it what it will,
it will, in a great measure, draw all our Thoughts to it. Our Natures are so
contrived, that we must always be thinking of some thing or other. But then
they are so contrived likewise, that we think most of that, which is most in
our Eye, most in our Esteem, most in our Pursuit. And this is that which our
Savior tells us; Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Whatever it be that you place your Happiness in, upon that will your Thoughts
run; upon that will your Desires, your Inclinations, your Affections, be fixed.

We have a World of Instances of the truth of this every day before our Eyes.
If a Man has set his heart on Money, and proposes it to himself, as the
Business of his Life, to be Rich: Why, I dare say, such a one will own to you,
that most of his Thoughts are upon that Project; and that he finds it so far
from being difficult to keep his Mind close and steady to his Main Interest, as
he calls it; that it is rather difficult to him to think of any other Matters.

If a Man be given up to Pleasure, and thinks nothing worthy his living for,
but Wine and Women, and good Eating and good Company; Is it not natural to
such an one to bend all his Thoughts that way? Or does he put any force or
violence upon himself, in thinking and contriving all the day long, how to
bring to pass the Gratification of his Lusts or his Appetites.

Why, my Brethren, if we did all of us in good earnest make the Service of
God, and the purchasing Heaven and Happiness to our selves, as much our
Business, our End, our Design, as these Men make Wealth or Pleasure to be
theirs, we should certainly be thus affected. The common Course of our
Thoughts, would naturally and easily, without the least constraint, run upon
those Objects: And we should take as great delight in Thinking of our Treasure,
and Contriving for the obtaining of it; as they do in Thinking and Projecting
for theirs.

I say, Thus it would be with us. For I cannot for my Life apprehend, what
Charms there can be in Worldly or Sensual Things, to attract a Man's Mind; what
Fetters there can be in them, to bind his Thoughts, and tie them to themselves:
But that there are the fame, or greater, in Virtue and Goodness; in the Love
and Favor of God; in a Pure Conscience here, and Eternal Glory hereafter:
Always provided, that they are as much made the Objects of our Choice and
Pursuit, as the other.

And therefore I cannot but suspect, where we see Men so very cold and backward
to Spiritual Things; and so apt to spend all their Thoughts upon trifling,
vain, or worldly Matters, that it is with a great deal of Pains and Reluctance,
that they can bring themselves to think of their Everlasting Concernments. I
say, I cannot but suspect that these Persons have not yet laid up their
Treasure in Heaven, as our Savior expresses it; they have not yet so wholly
devoted themselves to the Service of God, as to make it their Main Business.
When once they have done that, I dare assure them, they will find it so far
from being a force upon them, to think of good things, that it will be very
natural to them; and they will find the greatest Pleasure in the World in so
doing.

Secondly, Whoever would keep his Heart always in a good Frame, and be able to
give a good Account of his Thoughts to God, must have an especial care to avoid
two things, viz. Idleness and loose Company. For both of these do strangely
unhinge a Man's Mind; and disarm it of that Severity, which is its best guard
and defense against Evil Thoughts; and make it become an easy prey to every
Temptation that will attacque it.

A wise Man should never be at such a pass, as to say, I have nothing to do, I
do not know how to spend my next Hour: But should so order the Course of his
Life, that all the Portions of his Time, as much as is possible, may be filled
with some useful, or at least some innocent Employment.

It is Idleness, and having nothing to do, that is, the Mother of most of those
vain, and unprofitable, and sinful Fancies, in which some Men spend their days.
And whereas Temptations do now and then come in the way of other Men; the Idle
Man is forced to seek out Temptations for the shipwreck of his Virtue. And
therefore no wonder, if he that seeks them, finds abundance of them.

And truly Loose and Impertinent Conversation, which was the other thing I
named, though it looks something with a better Grace, yet is not much better
than Idleness. For wherever it is much used, it will so emasculate a Man's
Mind, and take off the edge and vigor of it, as to serious things, that he
cannot easily get it into a good Frame again. Evil Communication (says St.
Paul) does corrupt good Manners. And therefore those people, a great part of
whose Life is taken up in gadding up and down; in Play; in merry Meetings; in
telling or hearing idle Stories, and the like: It is impossible but their
Thoughts and Inclinations, and the whole Frame of their Hearts will be
suitable; that is to say, very frothy; very light and foolish; not to say,
profane, and wicked, and Atheistical too, if the Company they much converse
with, be of that strain.

Thirdly, Another thing of great moment, for the keeping our Hearts, is, to be
as attentive as is possible to the first Motions of our Minds; and whenever we
find that they tend toward something that is forbidden, to stop them as soon as
we can.

We cannot, as I told you before, often prevent irregular Desires, or Passions,
or Inclinations, from arising in our Minds, upon sundry occasions. But this we
can do: As soon as we are aware of them, we can refuse our Consent to them;
(and in that cafe I hope they will not be imputed to us as Sins;) Nay, not only
so, but we can refuse their breaking out, or showing themselves in our Words,
or our Actions. For the Motions of our outward Members are all at our Command,
though the first Motions of our Minds be not.

Here therefore will lie a main Point in the Art of well governing our Minds
and Thoughts. You cannot perhaps, for instance, prevent a sudden Passion of
Anger from rising in your Minds upon twenty Accidents: But as soon as you feel
this Passion, you can thus far stifle it; you can seal up your Mouth, so that
the Passion shall not vent it self in unseemly Words; And if you will withdraw
that Fuel from the new-kindled Fire, it will soon be extinguished, and die.
Whereas if you suffer it to break out in bitter Speeches and Expressions, it
will flame beyond measure.

Thus again, If any undecent, impure Fancies or Desires should be excited in
you upon any occasion: It was not perhaps in your power to keep them from
coming into your Minds: But it is in your power to withdraw from the Temptation
that caused them; and to endeavor to direct your Thoughts to some other
Object; at least not to proceed one step in any outward Action toward the
accomplishing of those Desires. If you take this Course, the Disturbance of
your Mind will soon cease, and you will return presently to your ordinary
Temper.

And let me tell you this further; That by your being thus careful to resist
and smother the first beginnings of Sin; you will not only preserve, in a great
measure, the Innocence of your Minds under the present Temptation; but you will
also have this farther advantage, that by this means, you increase your Power
over your Thoughts, against the next time that the Temptation returns. Every
check you give to the first motions of Sin, makes the next assault of them the
less furious. And if you do constantly use your selves, thus to Guard and Watch
over your Hearts; you will in time obtain such a Command over them, that you
will not be troubled with a quarter of those irregular desires, and passions,
which heretofore upon several Occasions used to be kindled in you. By this
Method you will strengthen your Faculties, and enlarge your Powers; and by
degrees bring your selves to that happy Temper of Soul, that there will be no
great War between the Law of your Members, and the Law of your Minds: But the
World and the Flesh will be Crucified to you, as you are to them; that I may
use St. Paul's Expressions.

But then Fourthly, That you may be able not only to keep bad Thoughts out of
your Minds; but also to have a constant spring of good ones; there are some
particular Exercises very proper for this purpose to be recommended. Such I
mean as these, Converse with discreet and pious Persons; Reading good Books,
especially the. Holy Scriptures; taking times of Meditation and Recollection;
and above all, Fervent and Constant Prayer to God.

It is not to be told how every one of these things does help to inspire us
with good Thoughts and Purposes.

A little passage now and then, though but occasionally dropped in a
Conversation, that is to the business of Virtue and Goodness, will supply us
some times with matter for good Thoughts for a considerable while after What
lasting Impressions then, do you think, would be left upon our Minds, if we
made it our constant Exercise every day, to read or hear something out of the
Bible, or some other good Book, with a design to grow Better thereby?

But above all things, we must take care to be diligent and serious in our
Applications to the Throne of Grace: It is Hearty Prayer and Devotion, that
when all is done, will prove the most Effectual Means, for the keeping our
Hearts steady to that which is Good, and securing them from the pollutions of
the sensible Earthly Objects that do surround us.

O therefore let us be constant in our Religious Offices. Nay, let us take
every opportunity that our Affairs will allow us, of raising our Minds to God,
and thanking him for his Infinite Love and Goodness to us; and imploring the
continual Influences of his Grace and Holy Spirit, and re-inforcing our Vows
and Purposes of persevering in his Service.

By this means we shall come to lead Spiritual Lives indeed. Our Souls will be
a perpetual Fountain of Good Thoughts. And while we live here, our Conversation
will be in Heaven. For God and Christ, and the things above will have our
Hearts, though the World has our Bodies.

But then, in the Fifth and last place, Notwithstanding what I have hitherto
said, concerning the Diligence with which we are to keep our Hearts; yet this
is always to be remembered, That with our Diligence we must be careful to join
Discretion.

My Meaning is this, We must have a care not to intend our Thoughts
immoderately, and more than our Tempers will bear, even to the best things: But
we must so keep our Hearts, as at the same time to preserve our Healths, and
keep up the Vigor of our Minds.

And the way to do that, is, Not to put them too much, or too long, upon the
stretch at any one time: But to relax them when there is occasion, and to let
them run out, and entertain themselves upon any thing that comes next to hand,
so long as it is Innocent.

It is a vain thing to imagine, that we can always be thinking of our great
Business; or that we can always be a Praying, or Reading, or Meditating; or,
that, as our Condition is in this World, even the greater part of our Thoughts
should be such as we call Devout and Religious Thoughts.

God has provided a great deal of other Business for us to apply our Minds to,
so long as we live in this World. And by minding that diligently and
conscientiously, we do serve God as acceptably, as if we were Reading or
Praying.

Nay even then, when we have no urgent Business upon our hands to take up our
Minds, it is not necessary that we should be always thinking of Religion. Nor
would I call every Thought, a vain, or an idle, or a sinful Thought, that has
not God, or our Spiritual Concernments for its Object. Even the most
Spiritually-minded among us, must oftentimes be content to be entertained with
such Thoughts as our Company, or our Temper, or the present Circumstances we
are in, do suggest to us. And provided those Thoughts be innocent, and do not
entrench upon the Laws of Piety, and Purity, and Charity; be they otherwise
very trifling and impertinent: I say, I would not look upon them as ill
Thoughts, nor have any one angry at himself upon account of them.

The truth of it is, So long as we consist of Bodies and Souls, we cannot
always be thinking of serious things. They indeed are the Wisest that think of
them most, but it is even dangerous to attempt to think of them always. For, as
most Men's Constitutions are, that is the ready way to spoil the Habit of our
Bodies, and by that means to render our Minds perfectly unfit for Thinking at
all to any good Purposes.

Thus have I laid before you the Main Things wherein, as I do believe, the
right Governing our Thoughts does consist. And I doubt not, they are so safe,
and so effectual, that whosoever will sincerely practice them, as far as he
can, will so keep his Heart, that the Issues from thence in his Life and
Conversation will be Happy and Prosperous. I conclude all with the Collect of
this Day.

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that
we may be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from
all EVIL THOUGHTS which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

FINIS.

