TAM QUAM: OR AN ATTAINT Brought in the Supreme Court of the King of Kings;
upon the Statutes, Exodus 20. 7, 16. and Levit. 19. 12.

Against those Modern Jurors who have found any Indictments upon the Statutes
of 23 Eliz. 29 Eliz. or 3 Jacobi, against Protestants, for monthly Absence from
Church, without any Confession of the Parties, or Oath of Witness against them,
or made any Presentiments of them. Contrary to the express Letter of their Oaths
taken in a Court of Judgment, the course of the Law of England, or any right
Reason.

Wherein is discoursed; Whether any Protestants be concerned in that part of
those Laws? the contrary is proved. As also whether a Grand-Jury's finding an
Indictment, be any Evidence to a Petit-Jury? The absurdness, and most
pernicious Consequents of which are detected, and the Vengeance of God also
against False-swearing is declared.

By one who Prosecutes, as well for his Sovereign Lord the King of Kings, as
for the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of all the Subjects of England.

Eccles. 5. 8. If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent perverting
of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter; for he that is
higher than the highest, regards; and there be an higher than they.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by L. Curtis. 1683.

CHAP. I.
The Mischief arising to the Nation from the loss of the Religion of Oaths. The
Nature of an Oath. The Religion of an Oath lost, by profane and common
Swearing, more by false Swearing, especially in Judgment, whether by Jurors or
Witnesses. The Vengeance of God declared against it. The Discourse restrained
to the Oaths of Jurors, and more especially those Oaths upon which they bring
in Presentiments, and find Indictments against Protestants upon the Statutes 23
Eliz. 29 Eliz. and 3 Jacobi.

1. AMongst other melancholic Considerations relating to the Nation, which at
this time affect the Souls of thinking Men, who believe there is a God that
judges the Earth, there is none more sad, or justly afflictive, than the
Consideration how much we have lost the Religion of an Oath, and by that means
broken the Ligament of Humane Society, and upon the point invalidated the
Institution of God for the end of all Strife: For according to the present use
of Oaths they will be the end of no Strife, or at least but a legal end; while
no Man's Mind can acquiesce in an Assertion or Promise confirmed by it. For how
is it possible that the Mind of any should acquiesce upon the Oaths of others,
when he discerns how many there are that make no Conscience of swearing what is
false, or what is impossible they should know to be true? Nor is there a
greater Evidence of the stupid Atheism of a multitude of Persons: For, how can
any think that those believe there is a God, so omniscient, just, and potent,
as the Supreme Being must be, who dare call him to be a Witness that they speak
Truth, or that they will do this or that thing, and challenge him to be their
Judge in case they do it not, and desire that He, and his holy Gospel may do
them no good if they do it not; and by and by dare to speak what they either
know to be false, or do not know to be true? It is not possible that Men indeed
should believe there is a God, and do any such things. Every false Swearer must
either declare himself to be ignorant of what he does when he takes an Oath,
or to be an Atheist.

2. It being more charitable to judge such persons ignorant, than to determine
them absolute Atheists. Charity will oblige every good Man to instruct his
Relations or Neighbors in this great Point. All Divines agree that the nature
of an Oath lies in the calling of God to witness, either to the truth of a
Man's Assertion, or the Sincerity of his Heart as to his Promise, and his
faithfulness in the performance of what he promises. It was God's Ordinance,
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall Swear
by his Name. Repeated again, Deuteronomy. 12. 20. To him thou shall cleave, and Swear
by his Name. Isa. 65. 16. He that swears in the Earth shall swear by the God
of Truth. Jer. 12. 16. And it shall come to pass if they will diligently learn
my ways, and swear by my Name, The Lord lives. The Scriptures are full of
Reproofs and Threatenings of and against any other Swearing, by those that are
no Gods; Jer. 5. 7. Josh. 23. 7. Exodus 23. 13. Nor indeed is it reasonable,
that any other than the living God should be invoked in Swearing, who else can
know the correspondency of our Hearts and Actions, or the sincerity of our
Intentions? Who else has a power (in multitudes of cases hidden from Men) to
punish him who swears falsely? So as an Oath by any other, than by the living
God, is no security to our Neighbor. Hence all swearing by any Creatures is
profane Swearing, and not only a violation of a Divine Command, but also of
the very nature and end of an Oath, giving no security to the Person, for whose
security of our Truth it is taken. Indeed it is no better than Idolatry, if
Idolatry be a worshipping of that for God which is no God: For Swearing is a
Worship, tho indeed a less ordinary piece of the Worship of God than Prayer and
Praise are.

3. An Oath being so grave a thing as a Divine Institution. The Name of God
being in it, and a solemn Invocation of him, to witness our Truth, essential to
it, and the end of its Institution being to determine Strife, and to give our
Neighbor the highest Security imaginable of our Truth and Faithfulness. Common
Reason will instruct Mankind, that it ought not to be used lightly and rashly:
for, besides that such use of an Oath tends to make it useless to its end; it
is also an high profanation of the holy and dreadful Name of the Lord our God.
Which of us would not judge himself affronted, to have our Neighbors make use
of any of our Names upon every light and trivial occasion? or to be called on
to witness every silly and impertinent discourse, or piece of Men's common Talk?
Nor can that thing be any security to my Neighbor in any weighty Concern,
which I lay to pawn at every Alehouse, and expose at every Stall, much less
that which has proved to be no security a thousand times, but made use of to
seal a Lie. Besides that such common use of the Name of God, takes away all the
Aw and Reverence of it; and who so thinks that any Man will make more
Conscience of an Oath in a Judicial Testimony, for, or against his Neighbor,
than he does in his common discourse, must at least think that the person who
does it, has more Charity toward Men, than Piety toward God, (which is very
unreasonable, considering that all Charity is the Daughter of Piety) or else he
must have some odd thoughts of God, imagining him more severe in revenging a
Wrong done to Man, than in the Vindication of his own Glory, whose Name is
invoked as much in idle and common Swearing, as in a Judicial Testimony; and
who is as much called to Witness, and whose Power is as much challenged to
revenge a Falsehood in the one as the other case. So that the many Precepts of
God against common and ordinary Swearing in light and trivial matters, Exodus
20. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. Mat. 5. 34. Jam. 5. 12. Levit. 19.12. are but consonant to
the common Reason of Mankind. And indeed the Judicial Swearing of a common
Swearer in all his light and ordinary discourse, will from hence appear to a
deliberate Man but a very doubtful and suspicious Evidence. For why should I
think the Man speaks Truth any more, when in a Court he says, So help me God,
and his holy Gospel; than when in a Tavern, Alehouse or Market he says, God
damn me it is so, or I will do such or such a thing when I know it is not so,
and am a witness to his not doing of it after such Imprecations; so as in truth
there could not be a juster Law than to make common Swearers legally infamous;
which might probably reduce Men's Tongues to a better decorum, and recover
amongst us the Religion of an Oath, upon the upholding the Religion of which
depend all our Lives and Properties.

4. A false swearing by the Name of the most high God, (especially in Judgment)
will easily from hence appear to be one of the highest Crimes, and daring
pieces of Impudence, that a mortal Man can be guilty of. A Guilt incurred, not
only when the thing we confirm by our Oaths is false, but when we do not know
it to be true. And in promisary Oaths, when we do not do the thing which we
have sworn to do. Thou shall swear the Lord lives, in Truth, in Righteousness,
and in Judgment; Jer. 4. 2. This is the Law of God concerning an Oath; I must
not call God to witness that a thing is true, and disclaim any hopes in him, or
desire of help from him, or the Word of Salvation if it be not true, if the
thing be false; or unless I know it to be true: for I cannot say a thing is
true, which does not so appear to me. Nor must I call God to witness that I
will do such or such a thing; and disclaim any hopes, or desire of any benefit
from him, or the Word of Salvation, if I do it not, and then not do it. Under
the Levitical Law, (Lev. 5.4.) God indeed appointed a Trepass Offering for him
that had sworn to do Evil, or to do Good, if it were hid from him, confessing
that he had sinned in that thing; but in that Confession was required in the
case, and not Confession only, but a Sacrifice, the Sin of those who swear
falsely (tho ignorantly) is evident enough; and in that we read of no Sacrifice
appointed for those that swear falsely, knowing thereof when they swear, we may
be assured that was a Guilt God did not expect from any of his People; or at
least, which he would not easily forgive, or purge by Sacrifice. And indeed
what punishment can we suppose too great for that person, who shall dare to
call God to Witness that he speaks Truth, when he knows it is a Lie, or does
not know that what he says is true? Or, who dares to disclaim all Benefit from
God, or the Word of his Grace, if he does not do this or that, and then does it
not? His Blood is upon his own head, if God strikes this Man dead in the place;
if he immediately throws him into the Bottomless-Pit, and concludes him under
his Wrath to all Eternity, he does but deal with him according to his own
Prayer and Desire. He has asked no further Grace, Mercy or Favor from God
than according to the Truth of his Heart and Actions in such or such a thing
wherein he has wilfully suffered his Truth to fail; and that it may be not
only in the highest contempt, and defiance of God, but may be to the no small
hurt and prejudice of his Neighbor, (tho that be much the lighter thing in the
Case): for what can the Interest of a Man be considered with that of the Lord's
Name and Glory? Out of his own mouth he is condemned; he has spoken words
against his own life. Whosoever he be that solemnly calls God to be his
Witness, That in such or such a thing he speaks the Truth, and that he shall
or will do a thing in such a manner, and disclaimeth all Help or Salvation from
God if he does it not; and in the same matter, after such a solemn Invocation
of the Divine Name, and bold Challenge of the Divine Power, shall dare to
affirm what he cannot say is Truth, or to do the quite contrary to what he has
promised with such an Imprecation; what does he do less than say, I value not
what the Almighty God can do unto me; I desie his Power, and deny his Being and
Omnisciency?

5. These things considered, we need not wonder at Jeremiah's telling us (Jer.
23. 10.) That because of Swearing the Land mourns; nor yet at the Prophet
Hosea telling the Israelites from the Lord, That the Lord had a Controversy
with the Inhabitants of the Land; because there was no Truth, nor Mercy, nor
Knowledge of God in the Land. By [Swearing], and Lying, and Killing, and
Stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood.
Nor at the Prophet Zecheriah's flying Roll, (Zech. 5.) twenty Cubits long, and
ten Cubits broad, which v. 3. is expounded to be the Curse that goes over the
face of the whole Earth; for every one that steals shall be cut off on this
side according to it: and every one that [sweareth] shall be cut off on that
side, according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord God of Hosts, and
it shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that
[sweareth falsly] by my Name; and it shall remain in the midst of his house,
and shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Nor
shall we need wonder if we see this Curse entering into many houses in this
Nation, and remaining in them, until it has consumed the Timber thereof, and
the Stones thereof. For swearing falsely is no less than a profaning the Name
of the Lord our God. Levit. 19. 12. a taking of his Name in vain, who has
said, He will not hold him guiltless who takes his Name in vain. And God has
said, I will come near unto you in Judgment, and I will be a swift Witness
against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against the false
Swearers, Mal. 3. 5.

6. It is true, the Law of England makes a distinction betwixt false-swearing,
or forswearing and Perjury, and will not allow forswearing to be Perjury,
punishable by the Statute Law, unless it be malicious, and in a Case betwixt
Party and Party. The Law of God makes no such distinction; false-swearing is
the Crime which the Divine Law denounces the Judgment of God against: And he
that reads my Lord Cook's Chapter of Perjury in his Pleas of the Crown, will
find, that according to the old Law of England, though one swear what was
Truth, but not what he could know to be true, was not punishable in other
Courts, yet he was punishable in the Star Chamber, of which he gives us an
Instance in that Chapter: And without doubt so it ought to be, for I cannot
truly swear that Thing to be, or to have been done, which I do not know is, or
has been done. In Palmer's Reports, is an Instance of one indicted and
punished for swearing a Thing so, and so, (which indeed was so) because he did
not know it to be so. Guide to Juries, p. 33.

7. It is not my design to discourse this Theme in the latitude, but only so
far as concerns Jurors in the Courts of Assizes and Sessions, and that only
with respect to Criminal Cases. Our Law was not so confident of twelve or 24
Men in a Grand Jury, or a Petit-Jury, but that it has provided against
false-swearing in them, by two Acts of Attaint: by the one, 11 Hen. 7.21.
provision is only made for the City of London; by the other, for the whole
Nation, 23 Hen. 8. 3. Which Statute allows, the Person wronged by an untrue
Verdict, to bring an Attaint against the Persons giving such Verdict, if it
amounted to the value of forty Pounds, and recover of every one of them twenty
Pounds, ten for the King, ten for himself; but this must be only in Cases
betwixt Party and Party. It seems a defect in our Law, that if the King be a
Party, the Jury shall not be attainted; for every one will apprehend it very
unreasonable, that Jurors should be attainted, and their Verdicts again be
examined by 24 Men in an Attaint, where the Subject is a loser forty Pounds or
upwards; and that they should be liable to no punishment for an untrue Verdict,
where the Damage amounts to much more. I remember in a parallel Case of
Perjury in a Witness, where the Law determines no Indictment on the Statute
shall lie, because the Statute is restrained to Oaths between Party and Party,
My Lord Cook determines, that though no Indictment upon the Stat. 5 Eliz. will
lie in the Case, yet an Indictment shall lie at Common Law; and that has been
often experienced; and that great Oracle of the Law gives an unanswerable
Reason for it, Because it is not reasonable that the King's Name, (who is the
Fountain of Justice) should patronize Injustice. Whether an Attaint at the
Common Law does not lie against Jurors bringing in false Verdicts, (which
indeed is nonsense) though they find for the King, deserves the study of
Lawyers. Sure I am, my Lord Cook, in his Chapter of Perjury, gives us an
account, That by the old Law of England, Jurors bringing in untrue Verdicts,
were most severely punished, by Imprisonment, seizure of all their Estates,
turning out their Wives and Children, pulling down their Houses, and being made
infamous, their Oaths never more to be admitted in any Court. This Law is
surely not so extinguished, but some punishment yet remains for all such
Persons, if once we could hit upon the Methods that shall bring them to it.

8. But my business is only to show them, that there lies an Attaint against
them in the Court of Heaven, the punishment of which is, not only the eternal
damnation of their Souls, according to their own desire in the Oath they take,
but the Curse of God entering into their Houses, and abiding in them until it
has consumed the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Nor shall I meddle
with all their Verdicts, only such as they have brought in against dissenting
Protestants, upon the Statutes 23 Eliz. and 29 Eliz. and 3 Jacobi. This is the
only Point I design to put in Issue, being assured, That if the Conviction of
these Men upon those Statutes, prove to be upon their false-swearing, it has
in it all the aggravations almost imaginable, being done in a Court of Justice,
and issuing in the ruin of so many thousand Persons, and Families. Hoping also
that if it so proves, those who have urged, instructed, and taught them so to
do, will reflect upon themselves in time, and consider whether they are not
like to come under our Savior's Censure, of being the least in the Kingdom of
God, for teaching (if not forcing) ignorant Souls to break the Commandment of
God, and that in Matters, where his Glory, as well as the Good of their
Neighbors, are most eminently concerned.

CHAP. II.
The Forms of the Oaths administered to Grand-Jurors, Petit-Jurors and
Witnesses, at the Assizes or General Quarter Sessions. The Presentiments of
Grand-Juries upon the aforesaid Statutes; with the Form of the Indictments
found, either by them or Petit-Juries. Their Method in proceeding. Grand-Jurors
by their Oath, can present nothing, but what they know to be Truth, either of
their own Knowledge, or the Oaths of credible Persons, but they must be
forsworn. Petit-Jurors are forsworn, if they find without Evidence. The Law no
where casts the Proof upon the Party accused, but in this Case directs other
Evidence expressly. Grand-Juries finding an Indictment, no Evidence to the
Petit-Jury of the Truth of it, proved by six Arguments. The pernicious
Consequents of the allowing them to be Evidence as a Grand Jury. It confounds
Accusers and Evidence in some Cases; Judges and Evidence in other Cases. The
Law allows it in no Case. Nor can Petit-Jurors, without being forsworn, find an
Indictment upon no other Evidence.

1. THis Issue cannot be better tried, than by an enquiry into the Oaths taken
by all Jurymen, and then into the Indictment upon these Statutes; and lastly,
into the Evidence brought before them of the Fact.

The Oath which every Person of Grand-Juries takes, is in this Form.

You shall diligently inquire, and true Presentment make, of all such Things
and Matters as shall be given you in Charge, or shall come to your knowledge
concerning this present Service. The King's Counsel, and your Own, and your
Fellows, you shall well and truly keep secret. You shall present nothing for
Malice, Lucre, Ill Will; nor leave any thing unpresented, for Love, Favor, or
Affection, Reward, or any hopes thereof: but in all things that concern this
present Service, you shall present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Truth. So help you God.

This every one of them promises, and testifies his Promise, by kissing the
Book of God. I desire it may be observed, that the Oath says not, You shall
true Presentment make of such things as you think or suspect, or presume, but
that shall come to your Knowledge. You shall present the Truth, not your Fancies
or Surmises, and what you have no knowledge of, either from your personal
certain Knowledge, or by the Oaths of credible Persons, and nothing but the
Truth; that is, what shall come to your knowledge, either by the Oaths of
credible Persons, or from your own sight, or observation; for nothing else can
appear to a Grand-Jury-Man as Truth in Judgment.

Every Member of a Petit-Jury takes this Oath. You shall well and truly try,
and true deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Prisoner, [or Person] at the Bar, according to your Evidence. So help you God.

The Witnesses swear, They will speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth, etc.

Every Jury-Man, and Witness, in testimony of his taking that Promisory Oath,
kisseth the Book; thereby only testifying, that he calls God to Witness, that
he will do that thing which is propounded to him, without Malice or Favor; and
desiring God, that he may receive no Mercy from him, nor benefit from his
Gospel, if he does otherwise.

2. The Grand-Jury's Presentment, according to these Statutes, must be, That
such a Person, for the space of one or more Months, being of the Age of sixteen
Years and upward, did not repair to some Church, Ghappel, or usual place of
Common Prayer, but did forbear the same, having no lawful Let nor Impediment,
contrary to the Statute made in the first Year of her Majesty's Reign. They
commonly run in a shorter Form; but they declare to the Clerk of the Assizes or
Sessions, that they desire they might be drawn up according to Form. Which is
done by him, nothing material being omitted in the Form mentioned, nor added
thereunto. This is found by the Grand Jury at the next Assizes or Sessions, and
being found by them, is without alteration transmitted to the Petit-Jury, and
by them found, or rejected, without any alteration.

3. I grant it possible, that there are several cases, wherein Jurymen may
find such an Indictment without false swearing. Admit they know that such a
Person were all those days, in his own House, or in some Neighbors Houses, at
an Alehouse, or at an Unlawful Meeting, or walking idly in the Fields, etc. Or
that any such thing be sworn before them, they may undoubtedly, yea and by
their Oath are obliged to present him, or indict him: But if they know no such
thing from their own sight or observation, nor from the Oath of Persons whom
they judge credible; That they who have called God to Witness, that they will
present the Truth, and nothing but the Truth, that is come to their Knowledge,
may present any upon that Statute, or upon their Oaths aver the Truth of any
such Indictment, is what no Learned and Sober Divine in the World dare assert.
Never yet did any Divine assert, that it was no forswearing a Man's self for
him to affirm upon Oath, what he did not know, either from his own sight, or
observation, or the credible Testimony of others asserting it upon their Oaths,
(for no Jury ought to hear or regard any other Information). How impossible it
is that any Grand-Jury-Man should know that A. B. was neither at his
Parish Church, nor any other, any Sunday, or Holy Day, for one or more Months,
unless he knew that all such Days he was at another place, is obvious to the
meanest Understanding. If he does not know it, he swears falsely, in
presenting the Person for it upon that Oath which he has taken to present the
Truth, and nothing but the Truth. What he knows not, can be to him no Truth,
much less can it be a thing come to his Knowledge. And I am sure it is nothing
given him in charge. None ever in his Wits, yet said, that a thing which one
only presumes, suspects, or thinks, is come to his Knowledge, or what he can
aver to be Truth.

4. It is true, sometimes Grand-Juries, only offer Constables Presentiments upon
their Oaths, in which case much is to be said in the Excuse of Grand-Juries. It
is then come to their knowledge, upon the Oaths of those whom the Law judges
credible Persons; but such Presentmens use not to be of Persons for not coming
to their Parish Church, nor any other, they only can speak for their
Parish Church. Nor can any Grand Jury bring in any such Presentiments, but for
absence from their Parish Church. If they add, nor to any other, they make the
Act their own; or if it be added by any other who draws such Indictment into
Form, the next Grand Jury cannot, without false-swearing, find it, unless they
personally know it, or it be made good to them by one or more credible Oaths.
If they do, they notoriously violate the Oath they have taken, to present
nothing but the Truth, and what comes to their Knowledge; whatsoever is added
to the first Presentment, can be said in no sense to come to their Knowledge, if
they do not know it personally, without new Oaths to confirm it.

5. These things considered, it will pose the subtillest Divines in the World
to excuse Persons serving upon Grand-Juries, from false-swearing, in these
Presentiments or Indictments, who do not personally know the thing to be true
which they present, or at least know it from the Oaths of others taken before
them: of whom also it is their Duty, according to their Oath, diligently to
enquire upon what grounds they swear such a thing, before they can true
Presentment make. These things are so obvious, that it may justly amaze any
understanding Person that any should have any other apprehensions. Nor
certainly is it possible they should, if Men's common Learning in their ordinary
Discourse had not banished out of the World all fear and Religion of an Oath.

6. For the Petit-Jury, they swear to make a true Deliverance according to
their Evidence. So as the Truth or Falsehood of their Oath depends upon the
Evidence they have. It will pose any Person to think what Evidence twelve Men
can have, that another for all the Sundays and Holy Days in a Month, or more,
has not been at some Church or Chapel where Divine Service has been, and
having no lawful Let or Impediment. This every Member of a Petit-Jury, who
finds any Indictments of this Nature, does, and must affirm, or there could
be no Conviction. And he affirms it, after his solemn calling God to Witness,
that in this case, he will affirm Truth, and that according to his Evidence.
What Evidence is it possible such a Jury should have, but Confession of the
Party, or the Oath of some Person who has been with him all those days in
other Places, any reasonable Person may judge; and we shall see anon, that in
this very Case of Absence from Church, the Law of England allows no other
Proof. And every Petit-Jury-Man, does affirm this to be Truth upon no less than
his Salvation, and desires that the God of Mercy, and his Holy Gospel may so
help him, as he has acted truly, not according to his Suspicions, Fears, or
Belief, but according to his Evidence in saying, he is Guilty. Has not (think
we) the Clerk of the Court reason to part with these Juries after such
Verdicts, with the same Prayer or Complement, that he does sometime part with
condemned Prisoners with, -- and the Lord have Mercy upon your Souls? For not
one Indictment of many hundreds of this nature, are found upon any such
Evidence, or indeed upon any Evidence at all, which is either such in its own
Nature, or according to the Law of England in all other Cases, as also in this
very Case.

7. Proofs ought to be clear, and perspicuous, says my Lord Cook; and it is
impossible any thing should be an Evidence, which does not make the Thing clear
and evident. Indeed none that uses to speak Sense, will call any thing less,
Evidence. Now what is there can be imagined in Nature to make a matter of Fact
evident to others, but either the confession of the Party, or the Oath of
Witness, or the personal knowledge of the Truth of it to the Persons to whom it
is so to be made evident? Those that serve upon Grand-Juries, may, according to
their Oaths, look upon the last, as an Evidence for them sufficient to present
upon; that a Petit-Jury may, I never heard affirmed: none of them can be
Witnesses, because they are Judges in the Matter of Fact. The Law of England
indeed allows another conviction in this Case, viz. In case a Person
presented, indicted, and proclaimed, does not appear in Person at the next
Sessions or Assizes, and put himself upon his Traverse. The Reason is, because
the Law takes such a Person to confess the Fact. And it may be this is
righteous enough, provided that such persons have Summons to appear, truly
served upon them. But if they have not, it is the highest Unrighteousness
imaginable: For though the Law supposes all his Majesty's Subjects to be
present at Assizes and Sessions, yet every one knows how impossible a thing it
is that all Men and Women above sixteen years of age should so appear, and know
what is done: Upon which account our Law orders Summons of the Party upon
every Presentment; and if the Party be not summoned to proceed against him, can
be no Righteousness; for our Law condemns none before the Executioners of it
have heard him speak, or at least given him an opportunity, that if it be not
his own fault, they may hear him speak for himself. Yet multitudes are thus
Presented, and Convicted, and great portions of their Estates seized, who never
so much as knew they were Presented or Accused, till the Sheriff and Bailiffs
come and make a Seizure of their Estates, which certainly is in the Officers an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judge, and an Act of Unrighteousness from which
every one ought to be relieved: for tho the person's not appearing if he be
summoned and proclaimed, and has notice of such Proclamation, may be a ground
of a Righteous Conviction; yet if he has no such Summons, or notice of such
Proclamation, no such Conviction can be righteous. For it is the condemning a
Person, before they have heard him speak, or given him a liberty to speak for
himself, a thing abhorred by the Heathens, who had no more than the Light of
Nature to guide them in the things which they ought to do, and avoid. But this
is a digression from my Argument.

8. There are some so absurd in this case as to affirm there needs no
Evidence; it is a thing which cannot be proved. And if the Person presented and
indicted, cannot prove that within the time for which he is so presented and
endicted, he was at some Church or Chapel, and that during the time, and the
whole time of Common Prayer, or had some lawful impediment, the Petit-Jury
ought to find such Indictment. The Absurdities of this Assertion are so many,
that it is not easy to number all of them; I will hint at some few.

(1.) If the Oath administered to the Petit-Jury were, You shall well and truly
try, and true deliverance make betwixt our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Person at the Bar, without any Evidence. Though it would be a strange Oath for
any to administer, or take, yet it might excuse the Petit-Jury from the
infamous crime of false swearing, though they found such Indictments. But their
Oath being to find according to their Evidence, it is impossible to excuse
them, finding without any Evidence: for none ever called Silence, Evidence, nor
yet the extorted Confession of the Party. The Law of England requires no Man
to speak any thing to accuse himself, nor to prove himself guiltless, unless
some Attempts have been first made to prove him guilty, which he can disprove.

(2.) Again, This Assertion obliges every Subject of England to have Witnesses
ready to prove he was at Church, at least one time within every 28 days
throughout the year: if not, he may, it seems, be Presented, Indicted, and
ought to be found guilty. The Statute gives twelve months time to prosecute
upon these Statutes; Suppose persons presented and indicted, for absence the
first 28 days in that year: how many thousand of innocent persons may not be
able to bring Proof of their presence at Church after eleven months, any one
day within that month?

(3.) There is no such Proceeding allowed in any other Criminal Cause. Is the
Man indicted for Robbery, or Murder, bound to prove he was at another place,
and in another company, at that time when the Murder or Robbery was done,
before it be first proved to the Jury upon Oath, that he was at that time in
that place where such a fact was committed? I cannot understand but by these
Men's Law the very same Persons found guilty of this Crime, may, when they
please be found guilty of Murder, robbing by the High Way, or any other Capital
Crime; if this be sufficient Evidence to the Petit-Jury, that the Party accused
having no Evidence against him, yet shall not acquit himself by proving the
Place where he was at that Time, which after nine or ten Months, who is able to
do? And these very Jurymen, who are so liberal of their Souls, as to find
without Evidence in these Cases, may one day, by God's righteous Retaliation,
find themselves thus dealt with. -- Nec Lex est justior ulla. Quam necis
artifices art perire sua. To allow Persons guilty of a Crime, without any
other Evidence, but because they will not, or perhaps cannot acquit themselves
by proving Circumstances of Time and Place where they were, after 3, 5, 6, 10
Months time, (having no prospect of such an Accusation) is a thing which may
prove of most fatal Consequence to every Mother's Child in the Nation.

(4.) Yet if the Law of England (which allows it in no other Case) did, by
any Clauses in it, allow this to be a sufficient Evidence, in this something
might be said. The Civil Power may be allowed, when themselves create a Crime,
to set down what shall be Evidence of that Crime: But does any of the Statutes,
made in this Case, ordain any such thing? Either the Statute 23, or 29 Eliz. or
that 3 Jac. Nay, the Statute determines the quite contrary, and that for this
Crime of not coming to some Church. And that where the Punishment cannot exceed
4 s. it says, -- Upon proof made of such default, by confession of the Party,
or Oath of Witness, 3 Jacobi 4. Now will not the Law of England, in this Case,
allow so little a sum as 3 or 4 s. to be taken from any Subject, without either
the accused Person's confession of his Fault, or Oath of Witness. And shall
any, pretending to know the Law, impose upon a Jury to believe? Or shall any
reasonable Man that can but read, be ever made to believe, that there need no
Proof, no Confession, but they must find the Indictment for 20 l. or it may be
200 l. (according to the number of the Months) especially when the consequence
of their finding it will be, the Party's paying of 240 l. every Year after it,
or losing all his Goods, and two thirds of his real Estate, or lying in Prison
all his Life, unless the Party accused can prove himself Guiltless, and this
after that such Jurymen have called God to Witness, they will give in their
Verdict according to their Evidence: And the Law has in this particular Crime
made other Evidence necessary, and no where directed, or allowed any such
thing, as the accused Persons not clearing himself for Evidence. Do such
Jurymen believe there is a God, or expect any thing from this God, or
advantage from his Gospel, when they have dared God to show them no Mercy, if
they do not do that, the quite contrary to which they do in an hours time? Will
any Divine say these Men are not desperately forsworn? Let any of them bring
their Pleas, and let us see if they can speak sense in the Case; let them
produce their Divines, that dare justify this not to be false-swearing, and the
most abominable forswearing, to the prejudice of their Brother, as well as the
most impudent pollution and profanation of the most holy and dreadful Name of
God; and what wickedness may be presumed they will startle at, who in such a
degree proclaim they have no fear of God before their eyes, nor any belief of
the Being, Power, Omniscience, Truth, or Justice of God in their Hearts.

9. But they will say, The Petit-Jury has Evidence: for the finding of the
Indictment by the Grand Jury, is sufficient Evidence to the Petit-Jury. This
new Notion is so false in it self, and of so dangerous Consequence, as it
perfectly subverteth the whole Law of England in Criminal Causes, and
destroys one of the greatest pieces of the English Liberty.

1. It is a fundamental Point in our Government, that unless it be by
Parliament, No Man's Life shall be touched, but by the Judgment of 24 Men;
twelve of which make the Grand-Inquest, and are the Jury to inquire of Facts,
whereof any are accused; twelve make the Petit-Jury for trial of the Issue.
None can, at Assizes or Sessions for their Life, or any part of their Estate,
be put upon trial before the Grand-Inquest has found the Indictment to be a
true Bill. So as it is impossible that the Grand Jury, as a Grand Jury, should
be any Evidence to the Petit-Jury; for they have no Oath of Witnesses
administered to them, they are only sworn to enquire, and to make a true
Presentment to the Court. If any Persons know any thing of their personal
knowledge, they may leave their capacity of Grand-Jury-Men, and come down, and
give their Oaths in Court before the Petit-Jury, and may be Witnesses; but as a
Grand Jury they can be no Evidence, nor have they any Oath administered to them
to that purpose, nor can the Petit-Jury propound any Questions to them, (a
liberty allowed them as to all their Evidence): to make a Grand Jury, Evidence,
is to allow the Persons to be Judges and Witnesses; a thing never heard of in
any just Court. The Work of Witnesses is to prove a Fact; the Work of Judges,
is to determine, according as the proof is made.

2. This were to make Petit-Juries perfectly needless, and of no use: for if
the Grand-Juries finding an Indictment be Proof sufficient, Reason will tell
us, they are the fittest Men to determine the Fact, being ordinarily both a
greater number, and Men of more Reason and Understanding, and of better Quality
than those who appear on Petit-Juries: And if Petit-Juries have no power to
bring in Not Guilty as a Verdict upon any Indictment by them found, they are
perfectly of no use at all. Thus this seems a new Art to deprive the Subjects
of all Trials by Juries.

3. The Grand-Juries who find these Indictments, find them of course,
ordinarily, without the least proof of the truth of them, and know no more,
than that a former Grand Jury upon their Oaths made such Presentiments, whether
true or false, is still left to a Proof before the Petit-Jury.

4. The Indictments, as they come to the Petit-Jury, have ordinarily more in
them, than the Presentiments of the first Grand Jury in the Case. The first
Grand Jury, either presents upon some of their own particular Knowledge of the
Thing, or upon some Constable's Presentment brought into them: let it be the
one or the other, they are only for not coming to their Parish Church. No
Constables will upon their Oaths present more; nor can it be presumed of any
Grand-Jury-Man, because it is impossible for them to know, that they neither
came to their own, nor to any other. These words, Nor unto any other Church,
which are essential words to the Charge, upon the truth of which the heavy
Penalty lies, are put in by the Clerks, who draw up the Indictments in Form,
and neither sworn before, or to one Grand Jury or another. So as of them there
is not the least Evidence to the Petit-Jury.

5. Nor is it reasonable that the finding of an Indictment by a Grand Jury,
which is formed upon a Presentment by a former Grand Jury, should be allowed as
the least Evidence of the Truth of the Fact contained in the said Indictment;
because Grand-Juries, though by their Oath they are bound to present the Truth,
and nothing but the Truth, and what is given them in Charge, and shall come to
their Knowledge, yet (with what faithfulness to their Oaths deserves their
second Thoughts, and may hereafter come to be examined) take upon them to
present what none of them does know, nor can know; nor is made, by the Oaths of
any, to appear to them, but what they suspect, or have heard from others, not
upon Oath, counting that a thing comes to their knowledge, tho they have catched
it from the tittle tattle of the Town, or the mouths of any malicious Persons;
not considering that they also swear to present the Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, and have disclaimed all hopes of Salvation, if they do otherwise than
according to such an Oath. Many of them have been so easily deluded, to invoke
God's Vengeance upon themselves, as to think that they may do it upon a common
Fame, and that not proved before them neither; nay more, that they may do it,
though some of themselves know the contrary to such Presentment or Indictment;
and put the Persons to 40 s. charge at Sessions, or 7 or 8 l. charge at the
Assizes to clear themselves; and very often it is proved that such Presentiments
are notoriously false. Now that a Petit-Jury should take such Presentiments, or
Indictments, for Evidence, is a thing so obviously contrary to Sense and
Reason, as well as their Oath which they take, that nothing need be said
against it.

6. It is expressly contrary to the Law of England, in all other Causes
Criminal, That the Presentiments of Officers, who present ex officio, should go
for Evidence: Nor does either the Common, or Statute Law of England, direct it
any where in this Case. This is to make the Accusers, Evidence, and to confound
Accusers and Witnesses. Whereas, Si satis sit accusari nullus erit innocens; It
was all our Fore-father's Opinion, that none could be innocent, if the Accusers
might be allowed for Evidence. If the Grand Jury do but deliver in the
Presentiments, or Indictments of others, they are in that case considered as
Judges in the Matter of Fact, averring their charitable belief that such
Presentiments are true. If the Presentment arises originally from themselves,
they are but the Accusers, and in that capacity can be no Evidence; to say that
Common Fame is the Accuser in the Case, when that Common Fame is a mere aerial
thing, sucked in by some or other of the Grand Jury, and not justified to the
whole Body of the Grand Jury, viva Voce, is but to dignify a Chimera. There can
be no Common Fame, without a multitude to report it; which I presume
Grand-Juries have not coming to them upon that Errand; and if they had, they
must be sworn in Court, before (by the Law of England) they can come near to
make the Common Fame. In all such Cases therefore, to make a Grand Jury an
Evidence to the Petit-Jury, is to make Accusers, Evidence, the Consequents of
which I leave to every Man of sense.

7. If Malice did not outlaw the Reason of Jurors, who find Indictments on no
other Evidence than this, they would consider, Hodie mihi, cras tibi, What you
make the Lot of others to day, may be yours to morrow. A Grand Jury may find
against you an Indictment for treasonable words you never spoke, Heretical
Opinions or Speeches, Murder, Theft, Burglary. In three or four of these Cases
it is very ordinary for Grand-Juries to find, upon slighty Evidence, because
the Good of the Public is concerned. If the Petit-Jury need no other Evidence,
every Subject's Life, Liberty, and Property is at the Mercy of every Villain.
If any will say, that in such Cases there must be further Evidence brought to
the Petit-Jury; I ask, Why? Evidence is Evidence, I hope in one Cause as well
as in another, except the Statute Law directs otherwise, which I am sure it
does not. Besides, that Grand-Juries often find Indictments (where the Public
Peace and Government is concerned) upon very slight Evidence, because they know
they cannot be convicted without other more full and particular Evidence. So
that to allow their finding the Indictment for Evidence to found a Conviction
upon, is the greatest Unrighteousness imaginable. Upon the Trial of my Lord
Shaftsbury, my Lord Chief Justice told the Grand Jury,

That that which was referred to them to consider, was, Whether upon the
Evidence should be given to them, there be any Reason or Ground for the King to
call these Persons to an account: if there be probable ground, it is as much as
you are to enquire into. You are not to judge the Persons: but for the Honor of
the King, and Decency of the Matter, it is not thought fit by the Law, that
Persons should be accused and indicted, where there is no color nor ground for
it, where there is no kind of suspicion of a Crime, nor reason to believe that
the thing can be proved. It is not for the King's Honor to call Men to an
account in such Cases; therefore you are to enquire Whether that that you hear,
be any Cause or Reason for the King to put the Party to answer it. You do not
condemn, nor is there such a strict enquiry to be made by you, as by others
that are sworn to a Fact or Issue. A probable Cause, or some Ground, that the
King has to call those Persons to answer for it, is enough (Gentlemen) for you
to find the Bill, it is as much as is by Law required.

From this great Oracle of Law, may easily be gathered;

1. That any probable Ground or Reason that the King has to question a Person
for such a Fact, any kind of suspicion of the Crime, and that it may be proved,
is enough for a Grand Jury. 2. That the Grand-Juries Work is not to condemn,
nor to make so strict an inquiry, as the Jury for Trial, who are sworn to a
Fact, or Issue. Add now to this, the common sayings of some little Country
Lawyers at a Sessions Cushion. That the Grand-Juries finding the Indictment is
Evidence enough. And affirming to Juries, That this is Law; and observe what
follows.

Then a suspicion that a Man has stolen an Horse, or a probable Ground that
the King has reason to question a Man for a Murder, without any strict inquiry
into the thing, whether it be so or no, is ground enough by Law for a
Petit-Jury to find a Man guilty of the Theft, or of the Murder. But this was
not my Lord Chief Justice his sense, who tells us the Jury for Trial, who are
sworn to a Fact or Issue, must make a strict enquiry, as to which he conceives
a Grand Jury not concerned; and therefore what they find is no Evidence to a
Petit-Jury. But those that find an Indictment upon no other Evidence, are
apparently forsworn, bringing in their Verdict not according to their Evidence,
but without any Evidence.

CHAP. III.
A short Disquisition, whether the Statutes of 23 Eliz. 29 Eliz. and 3 Jacobi,
concern any Protestants. The Arguments for their concern in them propounded,
and answered, and found too light to balance three great Arguments to the
contrary: which are propounded and enlarged upon.

1. I Know it is Foreign to this Discourse to debate the Question, Whether
those Statutes of 23 Eliz. 29 Eliz. 3 Jac. do in all the branches of them
concern Protestants, or no, particularly in those Branches which relate to
coming to, or absenting from Church? Great Lawyers are divided in their
Opinions as to it: those who think they do, urge,

(1.) The general words, every Person, and the mention of Recusants sometimes,
without the addition of Popish.

(2.) The reference of those Statutes to the Stat. 1 Eliz. 2. in which they say
Protestants as well as Papists are most certainly concerned.

(3.) The Oath of Allegiance, which is within the Stat. 3 Jacobi, and may be
given to any Protestants.

None of which can be determined, concludent, in the Case, after the foregoing
part of a Statute has declared the Reasons and Grounds for the making of that
Law, viz. The bringing in of Popish Bulls, seducing People to the Romish
Religion, and determined such Persons guilty of Treason, (Crimes which no
Protestant can be guilty of) though it follows as a means to prevent these
things, that every Person that for a Month shall absent himself from his
Parish Church, shall forfeit 20 l. Yet certainly it is a fair Interpretation of
it to restrain that general Term, to that sort of Persons which alone are
mentioned in all the preceding part of the Act. Nor certainly in any just
construction, can general words, whether Affirmative or Negative, have more
extent in one Statute than in another. In the late Act for the Sabbath, made
for the keeping that Holy Day from profanation; and an higher end cannot be,
God having made it the 4th Commandment in the Decalogue, and denominated all
Religion from it, Isa. 56. 4. there is this clause,

Provided also, That no Person or Persons, upon the Lord's Day, shall serve, or
execute, or cause to be served or executed any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order,
Judgment, or Decree, (except in Cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of the
Peace) but that the service of every such Writ, Process, Warrant, Order,
Judgment, or Decree, shall be void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. And
the Person or Persons so serving, or executing the same, shall be as liable to
the Suit of the Party grieved, and to answer Damages to him for doing thereof,
as if he or they had done the same without any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order,
Judgment, or Decree.

Here are no less than three general terms; nor is there one Line in the Act
excluding Dissenters from the benefit of this Act, nor more authorizing the
Service of Warrants upon them for Meetings, than upon any others. It is true,
the Act against Conventicles, gives a further liberty; but it has always held
a Rule in Law, That latter Laws abrogate such as were before, if contrary to
them. Neither does this Act abrogate it further than concerns the Lord's Day,
(the better Sanctification of which, was the design of the Act). Besides, were
not the former Laws which gave Liberty to Arrest Men on any Days, abrogated by
this Act, so far forth as concerned that Point? Yet multitudes of Justices have
so interpreted these general terms, that Dissenters have no benefit by it in
this point, Warrants are yet executed on them, and their Doors broken open by
Warrants, on these days. So, as it seems, general words in Statutes, shall
comprehend dissenting Protestants, where they will serve to do them mischief,
but not where they may do them kindness. But this is a Question not yet decided
(that I have heard of) by my Lords the Judges, as having not come judicially
before them and the Justices. And others who have adventured thus far to make
Blots, may some of them live to see them hit. General words are certainly every
where of equal extent.

2. Nor is the reference to the Statute of 1 Eliz. 2. a proof, that all
concerned in that Statute, are also concerned in the Statute of 23 Eliz. for it
is mentioned only as directive of the manner how Persons should go to Church,
and there behave themselves: How does it from thence follow, that all who do
not go, should be punished by a like Punishment, because all are obliged to go
to Church in the same Order, and to behave themselves there in the same decent
manner? Nor is the third Argument of more value, for there is nothing more
ordinary than to find heterogeneous things in the same Statute Law. Nor will it
follow, That the Penalties for not coming to Church, in the Statute 3 Jacobi,
concern Protestants, because the Oath of Allegiance in it does, especially when
most Clauses in that Act express Popish Recusants. But the Clauses concerning
that Oath, expressly mention any Persons 18 Years of Age, whether indicted or
convicted of Recusancy, or no. But those who make this Objection, should also
consider that it is by the Act 7 Jacobi 6. that the Oath of Allegiance in 3
Jac. is given to Protestants, not by the Act. 3 Jac. 4.

3. The Arguments being no stronger for Protestants Concernment in those Acts,
let us see what can be said to prove they are not concerned in them. I do not
pretend to so good an acquaintance with Records: But if it does appear, 1. that
for threescore Years after the making the Act 23 Eliz. it was never put in
Execution upon any but known and professed Popish Recusants, it is certain a
greater Argument to prove that Protestants are not within it in any due
Constructions, than any can bring to prove they are. 2. I am sure, if
Protestants, though Dissenters, be within those Acts, they are, by the Statute
Law of England, in a far worse case, and exposed to much higher Penalties, for
not going to Church, and going to Meetings, than professed Papists are: for
besides they are in all points made equal with them, as to the Stat. 23 Eliz.
29 Eliz. and 3 Jacobi; They are further in danger of the Stat. 35 Eliz. (out of
which Papists are in terms excepted); According to which Statute, Protestants,
(and none but they) for these Crimes may be forced to abjure the Realm, or to
die like Felons. I would gladly understand, from any Man of sense, to what
purpose the Parliament 35 Eliz. should make so severe a Law against Protestant
Dissenters, upon that little freak (the effect of a melancholic Deliration
only) of Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington; if they had thought they had been
included in the Acts of 23 Eliz. made but twelve Years before, or of 29 Eliz.
made but six Years before? Was not the losing 260 l. a Year, a sufficient
Punishment for any thing they had showed themselves guilty of? Or was it judged
punishment enough for Papists; for the Papists, who had attempted to poison, to
stab the Queen, to invade her by an invincible Armado, to raise up Rebellion in
the Nation, and not enough for Protestants? Can we judge that any English
Parliament in those days could so judge? The Act of 23 Eliz. was made upon the
Papists filling the Land with Priests and Jesuits from the English Seminaries
at Doway, Rhemes, and Rome; their publishing of Books to stir up Rebellion in
England, declaring that the Pope, and the King of Spain, had conspired that
England should be made a Prey: And the woeful stir then made by those active
Jesuits, Campian and Parsons. Campian, Sherwin, Kerby, and Briant, were taken
the Year before, Anno 1581. This Act passed 1582. The 29 Eliz. was 1588, when
we were invaded by the King of Spain 's invincible Armado; and six Years before
Campian, the Head of that Faction, had openly declared, that in case of such an
Invasion, he would take part with them against the Queen. The Act 3 Jacobi,
came forth upon the Powder Plot. I appeal to any Man of ordinary sense, whether
he can think that the Parliaments of those Times, ever intended to put
Protestants into a far worse condition than Papists, which they apparently are,
if these Statutes equally concern them as well as Papists, and they then were
liable to the Act 35 Eliz. out of which Papists are expressly excepted.

4. Further yet; I do very well know that Votes of Parliament repeal no Laws,
much less have the force of Laws in them, nor are to be mentioned in legal
Pleas: But the Question here is not, whether these Acts be of force or no? It
is on all hands granted that they are; but what is the true sense and meaning
of them? And (as to that, under correction) I think a great deference is to be
given to the Parliaments Judgment declared in them, the far greater part of all
the gravest and most famous Lawyers of England being generally in every
Convention, or Session of Parliament. It was, as I remember, either in the
latter end of the Year 1677, or the beginning of the Year 1678, that upon the
Petition of the Quakers, the Parliament (at that time sitting) first took
notice, That the Laws made principally against Papists, were executed
princially upon Protestants, and appointed a Committee, who spent a great deal
of time in examining the Returns of Convictions made upon those Statutes into
the Office, and applied themselves to his Majesty for favor to his Protestant
Subjects as to those Laws. About the middle of the Year 1678, the horrid Popish
Plot was discovered; from Michaelmas that Year, till December. 30. the Parliament
had enough to do to search into the Popish Plot, and they had made but little
progress in it when they were Prorogued, which was December. 30. and soon after
Dissolved. The next Parliament began March 6. 1678/9, and sat until May
27.1679. their whole time was also spent in a further discovery of that Hellish
Plot. All this while I met with no Declarations of the Parliament's mind or
sense in the case of those Acts: Nor (as I believe) were there any complaints
of any prosecutions of Protestant Dissenters, upon any of those Statutes. The
next Parliament began October. 21. and held unto Jan. 10. 1680. By this time the
Popish Party had a little recovered their Courage, and began to defame the very
Report of a Popish Plot. They had eight months before began to sham it, though
with very ill success: But before this time they had began to divert the
prosecution of it, by obtaining of their Friends (who would be thought
Protestants) every where to prosecute Dissenters upon those Statutes. The
Parliament that sat down October. 21.1680. had intelligence of it. The Term
before Estreats were given out upon all Convictions upon those Statutes; but
with express Instructions, from the Commissioners of the Treasury, to leavy the
Forfeitures upon none but known Popish Recusants, which it is likely that in
many Counties the Sheriffs observed. In others it is certain they did not, but
levied them equally, if not principally upon Protestants; but were enforced to
refund some of them, and for a great while after this, upon a Certificate into
the Exchequer, that the Persons were Protestants, and had taken the Test,
proceedings against them, by order out of the Exchequer, were staid. This is
supposed to have proceeded from his Majesty's Goodness, complying with the
desires of his Parliament, in the Case of the Quakers. The House of Commons
which sat in the Westminster Parliament, October. 21. 1680. had sat but a Month
and two or three odd days, before they came to this Vote, without one Man's
contradiction, in Nov. 1680.

Resolved, nemine contradicente, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the
Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
against Popish Recusants, ought not to be extended to Protestant Dissenters.

Accordingly, they made their Application to his Majesty by the Members of
their House, which were of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
beseeching him, That all the Protestant Dissenters prosecuted upon those Acts,
might be discharged, without paying any Fees; and that he would recommend this
Business to the Judges. Upon the 26th of November. 1680. we find it thus in the
Votes, under the Speaker's Hand.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquainteth the House, that his Majesty had been
attended by the Members of his most Honorable Privy Council, with an Address
concerning Protestant Dissenters. And that his Majesty's Answer is, That they
should be discharged, and that without Fees, as far as might be done according
to Law, and they shall be recommended to the Judges.

The Parliament which then sat, has the repute to have been short of none, who
ever sat within those Walls, for Men of Honor, Wisdom, and Estates.

Here was plainly their Judgments declared, That these Acts concern not, nor
ought to be extended to Protestant Dissenters. After which certainly that
single Country Justice, or Lawyer, who dares to say they do, must arrogate
much more to himself than he ought to do, considering how many of the greatest
Lawyers of England unanimously concurred in that Vote, which did not repeal
those Laws, nor stop or supersede the execution of them, but only declared the
sense of them.

If any Person, after all this, will affirm, they do concern them as well as
others, I have nothing more to say against it, but only wish, That the Question
might be determined by my Lords the Judges, and not left to the various
determinations of puny Lawyers, and many Justices of the Peace, who were never
bred to the Studies, nor exercised in the practice of our Laws. This whole
Discourse is but a Digression from my proper Theme; for admit those Statutes do
concern Protestants, it is another Question, Whether Grand-Juries, finding such
Indictments, be Evidence to a Petit-Jury in the Case? The Affirmative part of
which I never look to find determined by Judges; whatever be determined as to
the other Question.

CHAP. IV.
A Pathetical Conclusion to Jurors, to consider what they have done, to repent,
and to their Ability to make satisfaction, avoiding the like enormous practices
for the future: And to such as are Commissioners of the Peace, not to be any
Temptation to them to bring such Guilt upon themselves, their Families and
Country.

WHat can remain further, but that as an Orator for the Great God of Heaven and
Earth, I should admonish all my Countrymen, who have been deluded by their own
Lusts and Passions, or overawed by any others, to make any such Presentiments
of things whereof they had no knowledge, or which they could not do in Truth, or
to find any such Indictments without any Evidence, and this after that in
Judgment they had called God to Witness, that they would present nothing but
the Truth, and what came to their knowledge, and true Deliverance make according
to their Evidence. And after they had sealed this their Promisory Oath, by
disclaiming any desire of help, or Salvation, from God and his Gospel, if they
do present any thing but the Truth, that should come to their knowledge; or find
any otherwise than according to their Evidence.

That they would every one make haste, and bring their Trespass Offering to the
Lord, by a serious confession of an Iniquity, than which hardly any is capable
of higher aggravation, and make satisfaction to their Neighbors for the wrong
they have done them by forswearing themselves, (in which Case no Divines will
say Repentance is true, without what Satisfaction we are able to give our
Neighbors); upon their Souls will lie the cries of Parents, Husbands, Wives,
and Children, imprisoned, or ruined and undone, by their going expressly
contrary to their Oaths in Judgment; and let them be assured, there is Wrath
against them from the Lord; and if those Texts, Zech. 5. 4. and Mal. 3. 5. be
pieces of Holy Writ, God will be a swift Witness against them; and the Curse of
God will enter into their Houses, and abide there until it has consumed the
Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. If therefore you believe there is a
God, or that the Scriptures are the Word of God; If you believe that both your
Bodies and Souls are subject to the Power and Justice of God, both in this
Life, and that which is to come, show it by fearing to swear, and not
punctually doing according to what you have sworn. There is no greater
indication of Atheists than swearing falsely, or not performing punctually what
they have sworn. Nor is it possible that there should be a more infamous Pest
of Humane Society. True Oaths in Judgment preserve and uphold it; false
swearing destroys it, and turns it into an Herd of Beasts: for it is not
possible Justice should be supported, where the Religion of an Oath is lost.
Whosoever swears falsely to the prejudice of his Neighbor, whether as a Juror
or a Witness, is condemned in the Law of God; and though his Judgment may sleep
awhile, yet it is not probable it should sleep long, when demanded of the
Righteous Judge, by the importunate Cries of so many as are oppressed by it.

2. And let it not be accounted presumption in me, to beseech such worthy
Gentlemen as his Majesty has thought fit to dignify with the Commission of the
Peace, to consider what they do in Causes of this Nature. Those Noble and
Worthy Gentlemen, cannot but know that it is most notoriously contrary to the
Law of England, for those who are Judges, in any case to influence Jurors, or
Witnesses; who being under Oaths, ought to be left free to the true Observance
of them, and not urged either to what is certainly, or is in their opinion a
violation of them. Witnesses ought not to be instructed; and to be so
instructed, is enough, according to all just Laws in the World, to invalidate
their Testimony. Constables in their Presentiments, given in at Assizes and
Sessions, are Witnesses, they are (generally) all the Evidence Grand-Jurors
have, unless some Informers (which is very rare) swear such Informations or
Indictments before them: Or some of their own Body know the Matter of Fact to
be true, which as rarely happens. To instruct them, and much more to threaten
and fright them into such Presentiments, is the boldest violation of all Laws,
both of God and Men, that is imaginable. Judges have no more to do, than to
declare the Law, and to receive such Presentiments of Facts contrary to it, as
Persons upon Oath shall give freely, according to their Consciences. If Persons
under Oaths to make Presentiments, do not make them truly, they may be legally
prosecuted for their Concealments; but to force them, being upon their Oaths,
to make Presentiments, which they profess they cannot do in Truth, is what is
neither justifiable to God nor Men. That Jurors are not finable by Judges for
their Verdicts, has been resolved twice within these few Years; once by
Parliament, in the Year 1677, in the Case of my Lord Chief Justice Keeling, who
had fined a Grand Jury in Somersetshire, for not finding an Indictment of
Murder, for which they saw no Evidence. The Parliament judged, That the
Presidents and Practices of fining Juries, in, and for not giving their
Verdicts, is Illegal, and the Chief Justice was then for it brought upon his
Knees to the Bar of the House of Commons. The other by the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in Brown Bushel's Case, largely reported by my Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan; and certainly they are no more to be overawed and threatened, than to
be fined. The Wise Man commands us, saying, Prove. 23. 10. Remove not the old
Landmark, and enter not into the Fields of the Fatherless. The removing of old
Landmarks in Judgment, and entering into the Fields of the Fatherless, usually
follow the one the other; they are seldom or never removed, but in order to
some notorious Oppression: The Curse of God therefore is against them that do
it; Deuteronomy. 27. 17. Our Forefathers set these as Landmarks, for Public
Justice, That no Persons in our Public Courts of Judicature should be deprived
of Life, Liberty, or Property, but by the Judgment of at least 24. Persons;
twelve or more to enquire whether there were any probably just ground, so much
as to call in Question such a Person for such a Crime, for which any such
Punishment should be inflicted; other twelve, to try the thing in issue,
according to such Evidence as they should have upon Oath given of it. That
neither the first nor second of these Juries should be awed, or threatened into
their Verdict, nor fined for it, but left to their Consciences upon their
Oaths. That nothing should be found against any but upon good and sufficient
Evidence of honest and legal Witnesses. If these ancient Landmarks be removed,
we shall soon see entering into the Fields of the Fatherless.

3. I shall conclude with another saying of Solomon, Eccles. 10. 8. He that
diggeth a Pit, shall fall into it; and whosoever breaks an Hedge, a Serpent shall
bite him. Those that alter the just Order and Boundaries of Law, founded upon
Reason and Justice, usually pay for their Folly; cutting up a Bridge, which at
one time or other they or their Children will want for themselves to pass over,
for the avoiding of the hands of Violence and Oppression. We shall observe that
the Righteous God punishes no Sins so frequently by Retaliation, as those
which are against Justice and Charity, and therein he infinitely commends his
Love to humane Society, for the preservation and upholding of it, against the
brutish Passions of those who will deny their own reason to disturb it; and
abjure their Manhood, to prove themselves Creatures, merely under the conduct
of their concupiscible or irrascible Appetite; from which sottishness let every
good Man deliver himself.

FINIS.
There is lately published a useful Treatise for this present Juncture,
Entitled, The Case and Cure of Persons Excommunicated, according to the
present Law of England. With some Friendly Advice to Persons pursued in
Inferior Ecclesiastical Courts by Malicious Promoters; both in order to their
avoiding Excommunication, or delivering themselves from Prisons, if imprisoned,
because they have stood Excommunicated Forty days. With an account of their
several Fees due in those Courts. Sold by Richard Janeway.


