THE Quakers Apostasy FROM The perfect Rule of the Scriptures DISCOVERED, In a
double Reply to a twofold Answer of theirs, in the Vindication of several
Queries propounded by the Author.

WHEREIN Their Deceits, Blasphemies and Reproaches against Scripture Authority
and Ordinances of institute Religious Worship, are spoken unto. Their main
Principles examined and denied. The truth defended and cleared against their
Railing, Slandering, Censorious Pens and Tongues.

By JOHN TIMSON of Great Bowden in Leicestershire.

1 TIMOTHY 4.1, 2. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils: speaking lies in hyprocrifie, having their consciences seared with an
hot iron.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Tho. Williams at the Bible in Little Britain, and
Will Tomson at Harborough in Leicestershire. 1656.

The Preface to the Reader.
THE occasion of these few sheets was this: The deep sense and apprehension of
my spirit toward these seduced people in general, and some of my dear friends
in special, that are drawn aside and entangled in these dark Diabolical
snares, has moved my bowels to pitch upon this, as a fit expedient to reduce
them from that sad temptation, and way of wandering, themselves are so
insensible of. These Queries I first delivered to my friends, and I desired
that they would get them answered by the ablest they could of that persuasion.
At last I received an answer from William Duesbury, then prisoner at
Northampton; which Answer was so obscure, deceitful, and confused, that I was
constrained in my Reply to urge him earnestly to Answer directly to the
Question, with several Queries to understand his sense; which accordingly
himself, and Thomas Stubs, and John Whitehead, have answered more directly, and
subscribed their hands.

I have in this given you the substance of theirs, as faithfully as I was able
to understand their sense, and have not in the least wittingly mistaken them.
And however they are apt to accuse me of slandering them in things that are too
gross in plainness of words to publish to the world, they judging their
novices, and all others besides themselves incapable to receive some of their
principles as yet, and therefore they study how to darken their sense by
subtle glozing, equivocating expressions and shuffles, yet their damnable
heresies are apparent to the intelligent, and impartial, sober Christian And I
shall desire of them to deal no otherwise by me, then I have dealt with them:
what I have charged them withal is upon such rational grounds, that I am sure
themselves are convinced in the secrets of their hearts, that I lie not; and
for them to reproach me with that they cannot in conscience, with any color of
reason make good, will most reflect upon their own heads, and be a shame to
themselves and cause by saying and unsaying, to evade what is justly charged
upon them. Truth is invincible, and ought to be published, it seeks no corners,
nor minds any shiftings, but is entire of it self, and will stand, when all the
imaginations and inventions of the dark mind of man shall be scattered and
brought to nothing. They frequently judge men by the light which gave forth the
Scriptures, even while they are opposing the Authority of Scriptures, as they
are the only rule of knowing the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
and how to believe in hun, and live in all Christian obedience unto him. If
they judge of men and error by the same light that gave forth the Scriptures,
why do they censure me for but pleading the Authority of Scriptures to be a
perfect Rule of faith and obedience? Is the light of the Spirit of God contrary
to the light of his own Inspirations? Are the Inspirations of God upon Divine
record, to be rejected, as useless and fallible, because they cross the
instigiations of ignorant man, who is all his life long subject to error? Are
they so drunk with delusion and impudence, that they will rather charge the
Scriptures with deceit, then question their own deceitful hearts? Can they be
more sure that the Instigations in their own hearts are from God, rather then
the Inspirations of God in the Scriptures? We may be sure that the Scriptures
are of God, and writ for our learning, Romans 1.5. But neither we nor themselves
can be sure that their Revelations pretended to are of God, and given for our
learning, comfort, and hope, unless they were confirmed by the same
unquestionable Authority that the Scriptures are. And for them to plead an
infallible rule within, and yet to be urging a Rule without from the Scripture,
is most absurd: if the Spirit be the Rule as they affirm, why do they not
stick to that rule? has the Rule of the Spirit need of the testimony of the
letter, to prove it by? What proof can be given to prove that which is the
highest proof and rule it self? How many things do they pretend Scripture for,
while at the same time they will deny and question the most things that the
Scriptures plainly teach? Let them tell us what they believe and practice from
the teaching and obligation of Scriptures; if they stand obliged to nothing
that the Scriptures teach, why do they quote it, and speak in the language
thereof? As if they were for it, when they are not, which is rank hypocrisy,
and done of purpose to deceive: If they judge themselves obliged to some things
which the Scriptures teach, because God has taught them therein, why do they
not then believe, and do all that the Lord teaches in them, upon the same
reason and account? But if any men in the world are without the true light of
God, those men are that speak not according to the Law and Divine Testimony of
Scriptures, Isa. 8.20. If any speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them, their light is involved in darkness, their wisdom
in folly, so says the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 10. Ye have rejected the word of
the Lord, and what wisdom is there in you? Were not this verified upon these
men, would they boast that they are as perfect as Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, and say, that he that trusts in Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, for
salvation, shall be deceived; and reproach his Institutions, and holy
Ordinances, with the odium of men's Traditions, outward observations,
inconsistent with Gods Kingdom, and compare them to NebuchadneZZar's great
Idol? would they set up a light and power in blind, impotent nature, corrupted,
sufficient to lead out of darkness to eternal life, without the use and
knowledge of Scriptures? would they form a Christ in their minds, that is in
all men, without person, natures, offices? would they confound God and man into
one, denying God to be distinct from his Saints? would they renounce all their
former teachings, and practices, received from the Lord, by the means of his
word and ordinances, and wholly follow the imaginations of a strong deluded
heart, etc. I beseech you dear friends consider, are not such things as these
evident expresses of dark deluded minds, that have forsaken the right way, and
are entangled as you see. Let me entreat your patience and diligence seriously
to read these few sheets, without prejudice and contempt: the Lord knows what
diligence and tenderness of bowels I have had to prepare this for you, and
some others, to prevent and reduce from these dangerous snares, which I am more
sensible of, and affected with, then any temptation (common to man) that ever I
heard of before: It Is carried on with such mysterious wiles, that poor souls
are surprised and taken in the net with great content, and the more they are
surprised, the better pleased, and readier to embrace whatever is suggested,
and rarely do any return from this Apostasy, that were knowing practicing
Christians before. But I have enlarged my self, and opened my heart to my
friends of Farndon in this Tract, and I hope it will not be an offense unto
them; if it be, it was hoped and intended otherwise, I am confident your own
hearts will witness unto most I have wrote, although it be against that way,
which for the present you groundlesly adore.

As for those persons that have answered me, who have charged me with bringing
forth many lies, and slanders, and have made a noise thereof, as if I were some
carnal lying wretch that matter not what I write: those that are sober, and of
judgment may easily conceive by my Questions and Replies, what lies I have
brought forth, and what lies those are they charge me with, even such that the
holy Scriptures witness to be the will and truth of God; and as for any
personal lie, why have they not made the discovery? Themselves cannot but be
sensible that they have accused me of slanders in things that themselves have
published, which I did not know of until afterward by their own Books. But
let me desire you in your returns to answer to the main strength that is
against you, soberly, and with as great a strength of reason, and of Scripture
Authority as you can; for nothing else is like to take with him you oppose: and
be ashamed to asperse and reproach me to the world, with mere impudence for
want of just matter; which trade is too common with you, and those of your way,
to those of best quality and esteem amongst Christians. But look into your own
Papers, and in cold blood consider how frequent you are in reviling and
censuring of those that you have nothing to accuse them of justly, from any
Scripture ground, but because they oppose you for being adversaries unto the
truth. As for your queries at last, the most of them have been answered by a
Reverend Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Baxtor, who is sufficiently reviled and
reproached for his pains. But the day is coming that will declare every man's
work, of what sort it is. And I judge it necessary, first to be resolved what
the Rule is that we are to answer from to yours, seeing you have denied the
Scriptures for being a perfect Rule of faith and obedience: for my part I judge
those not worthy to be answered at all, nor in the least to be regarded, that
have denied the Rule of Scriptures: and were it not for the sake of those that
are ignorant of their deceits, and apt to be taken with the cunning sleight of
seducing men, and in hope of convincing my friends, that I might be an
Instrument to inform the one, and reduce the other, I had never engaged with
these unperswadeable perverse men, so wholly turned from the truth, as he that
runs may read, and clearly see.

John Timson.

A VINDICATION OF Some Questions propounded to the QVAKERS.
The first Question.
WHether the holy Scriptures be the true declaration of the will and mind of
God which does oblige all that profess them necessarily to know, believe and
observe them as the only rule of faith and obedience.

The Quakers Answer.
The Scriptures are a true declaration of the things believed among the Saints,
and a true Testimony of Jesus; but not any does them know by the outward
declaration, but by the word of Faith in the mouth and in the heart, which word
of Faith we preach. Romans 10.

My Reply.
The Answer seems to be in the affirmative, by saying the Scriptures are a true
declaration of the things believed among the Saints. But first the Question is,
who you mean by Saints, whether your selves, that are against all outward
administrations and forms of worship in the Church as the Scriptures teach, or
those Saints of God that are willing to subject themselves to observe and do
whatever is revealed to be done from the written word: which has been the
profession and practice of all sound Christians both in and since the
Apostolical Churches: unless some few upstart Heretics, or Apostates, or
profane have done otherwise. Prove that ever any had the title of Saints,
Beleivers, Christians, etc. that came not under Water, Baptism, the Lords
Supper, the Churches watch and rule, Censures, etc. which you deny, and
therefore it stands you upon to prove your selves Saints distinct from
Apostates.

In your answer to this all you say is this. That this charge is but a lying
Slander, and bid me prove it, or else let thy mouth be stopped.

To this I answer.

What proof would you have? Is it not your own profane language, both in your
Papers and conference? It is no news to hear most of your way to dispute
against Water, Baptism, the Lords Supper, a settled fixed Ministry over
particular Churches. Tell us what Quakers administer Water, Baptism, the Lords
Supper; and constantly watch over a particular Flock; or else for shame own the
charge, and confess your sin in telling the world, that these are my lying
slanders, when I know, and your own consciences do witness it, that what I
have accused you of, is the plain truth. Nay, William Duesbury says in a lying
Paper called A true Prophecy of the mighty day of the Lord, already risen in
the North of England, etc. in which paper he makes it his work to reproach and
slander the Ordinances of Gospel worship, under the notion of outward
observations, which Christ's Kingdom comes not in. Luke 17. And thus he
accounts of all the Ordinances and institutions, prescribed by Christ himself
in the Apostolical Churches: and accounts all the strict observing of outward
forms of Worship, is but imitating the Saints practices in this Babylonish,
and heathenish wisdom, all this outward form is the outward Court, which is
without the Temple, page 1, 2. meaning they are without the Church, and
therefore calls them Babylonish and Heathenish, as in his 4 page is more clear,
where he profanely compares the holy Ordinances and institutions of the Lord,
to that great Image, set up by Nebuchadnezzar 's proud nature, spoken of by
Daniel. Dan. 3.3.
That Image was but a type and figure of this which now shines gloriously in
forms and observations.

And then speaking to the Anabaptists and Independents, he tells them, they
have set up a finer Image in the Gospel ordinances, as you call them, page 10.
Page 10.
And what other ordinances do these or we set up but what was practiced in the
Apostolical Churches? Thus you may see how this Impostor does reproach the holy
things of God. And further in his second page, he in the height of his insolent
rashness, and madness, says thus. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,
I will gather my people out of all forms and observations, and out of all
kindreds, Tongues and Nations, and I will pour out my Spirit upon them. And
this he writes in a different Character, as if it were all scripture. By this,
you may see it proved what I have accused them with, in denying the ordinances
and administrations of the Gospel Church, is true. And yet this impudent liar
tells me it is a lying slander. They would render me a liar for telling them
the truth; but it seems they can rather and with more ease deny the accusation,
then prove themselves Saints, and stand to it: thus when they are pincht they
will say, and unsay, or any thing to evade. But while you deny the Ordinances
before mentioned, I say you are none of Gods Saints, but are Apostates,
backsliders, that have departed from the living God, in transgressing the
laws, changed his ordinances, and broken the everlasting Covenant. Isa. 24.5.
But I shall come to the next, you accuse me of belying you with: and that is
suspecting you to be under the crime of denying the holy Scriptures to be a
perfect rule of faith and life, you say ye deny the crime: and witness them in
their place with the Spirit that gave them forth, which is a perfect rule of
faith, and life: as Joh. 16.13.

An^w. You deny the crime, but own the thing, by asserting the Spirit to be a
perfect rule of faith and life; for if the Spirit immediately, be a perfect
rule to us now, of faith and life, of what use is the Scriptures of, I pray you
tell. Thus you own the charge, but deny the crime, because you judge it no
crime to deny the Scriptures to be a perfect rule of faith and life; and hence
you insolently infer, that I am judged by the same Spirit which gave forth
the Scriptures, who would set the Scriptures in the Spirits place, by calling
them the rule of faith and life. Thus all men may run and read that you are so
far from judging it a crime to deny the Scriptures for a perfect rule of
knowing God, believing in him, and living unto him, that by the Spirit you act
from, you judge me, for calling them the rule of faith and obedience. And yet
you witness the Scriptures in their place, that is, you witness that there is
such writings, but not to any such ends, and purpose, as to be a rule to know
God, and live unto him, as the question intends. The Spirit you make the only
rule of faith, and life, Joh. 16.13.

Which I answer unto.

1. That promise is made directly to the twelve, as is evident if you peruse
the 13, 14, 15. chapt. where we have the like promise, chap. 14.26. The
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, shall come and teach you all things; and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have spoken unto you: and
accordingly they have declared unto us what they have heard and seen, Luke 7.1.
Christ tells them, chap. 16.12, 13. I have many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now, howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth, etc. Hence it is clear these promises are made in special
to his Apostles, which does assure us of the infallibility of what they
preached and writ: the Church being built upon the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ the chief corner Stone, Ephesians. 2.20.
that has inspired both to agree in one and the same Doctrine of faith and
obedience; and he is the same for ever even to the end of the World. Now let me
ask you, are you Apostles? have you seen Jesus Christ? are you sent for a
foundation, for the Church to be built upon? that go about to overthrow and
pluck up the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles recorded in Scriptures?
Let men and Angels judge.

2. If all truth were revealed to the Apostles, by the Spirit of truth, and the
Apostles faithful in declaring this truth by writing, or teaching, as cannot
be denied, then it will follow that those writings, or teachings of the
Apostles were the only rule; which writings through Gods grace we enjoy, and
therefore the rule of divine truth. It Is true we have need of Gods blessings of
Grace to apply the rule to us, and our hearts and lives to the rule; And so
many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them. Gal. 6.26. Nay, Christ
prayed not only for his Apostles, but for them also that should believe on him
through their word. Joh. 17.20.

3. We say the holy Scriptures are the inspirations of the Spirit of God, in
their own sense as expressed, and have such sure evidence thereof, that without
any scruple, we so believe the truth and directions, discoveries thereof, that
we are content to stand or fall to their Verdict, not caring for man's judging:
and tell us in what truth of God the Scriptures are imperfect in, you proud
Worms that so vilify and diminish from them.

But they go on and tell me, that Abel, Enoch, and Noah had faith before
Scripture was, and the holy men of God believed, therefore they spoke.

Answ. 1. Abel, Enoch, Noah, were not without the word of faith from the Lord,
the Lord spoke to these out of heaven, by voice, Heb. 1.1. At sundry times, and
in ^^vers manners, the Lord has spoken unto his servants the Prephets. But in
this last age he has spoken to us by his Son The^^fore never look for no other
manner of speaking, (...) what has been, before there was any thing committed
(...) to writing, the Lord did more visibly reveal his will by voice or
vision, Angels, etc. but since he has committed his whole will and mind unto
writing: by the Prophets and Apostles, those former manners are ceased.

2. This is our argument, because some had faith before Scripture was, by an
immediate speaking by voice, etc. Therefore now although we have the mind of
God discovered in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, we must look for
the same discoveries still, by voice, or vision, inspiration, as if all that
were written by inspiration of God, were nothing to us: and nothing of force to
any, but to the present ages they were writ in: such madness you run into.

Whereas in your Answer you say, That not any does know the Scriptures by the
outward declaration, but by the word of faith in the mouth, and in the heart,
which word of faith we preach. Romans 10. I told you that was a contradiction,
and a confused senseless thing: which you say, stands as a witness against
me, and bid me prove my accusation.

Answ. 1. I queryed you, whether any of you did know and believe what is
written in the Scriptures, without the outward declaration, unto which you
answer not at all.

2. I query what you mean by the word of faith, in the mouth, and in the heart,
which the Apostle preached, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. whether it be the same with the
Doctrine of faith, declared in the Scriptures writ to the Churches, or
different from it. As I concluded before, in my reply, so I shall make it good
still, notwithstanding all that you have writ, that the word of faith which the
Apostles preached, and writ to the several Churches, is the same with that
which you call the outward declaration. What are the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, but the word of faith? I told you that this of the Apostle does
allude to that in Deuteronom. 30. and there we find the same of the word as it
was written in the law, as here of the word of faith preached. The Doctrine of
faith was so familiarly preached, and beat into men's heads, hearts, and
mouths, that ignorance could not excuse any: and the Apostle explains what
this word of faith is, verse 9. thus. That if thou shall confess with the
mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved. You may see it is clear enough, what the Apostle
understands by word in the mouth, and in the heart, if you be not too perverse:
and in the 10 verse there is a reason urged to make all your cavils fall. For
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation: and proves it by the Scripture, Whosoever believes on
him, shall not be ashamed. Isa. 28.16. What can be concluded hence, but what
the writings of the Scriptures contain and declare? and yet you say, not any
can know the Scriptures by the outward declaration, but by the word of faith:
which word of faith in your quotation is discovered by the Scriptures what it
is; so that you say, and unsay, not by the outward declaration, but by it, a
mere contradiction which you will never free your selves of. But why cannot any
know Scripture by its own writing? Can you know what is contained in the holy
Scriptures, without the outward declaration? if not, then you must know it by
the outward declaration, or not at all: How do you know what is in your books,
but by the outward declaration? But instead of answering to clear your selves
you are froward and very impertinent, and obscure, and desperately confused, as
follows in their next, wherein they should show us the difference between the
declaration of Scripture, and the word of faith preached.

And first they witness the Scriptures by the same light and Spirit that gave
them forth, Romans 10.
and in Christ Jesus the Lord of faith, which the Apostles preached and
declared of, they believe Romans 10.6, 7. as the Apostles did, who knew the
Letter which killed, and the word of faith which is quick and powerful, which
word say they is God, that made all things, and the letter testifies of him,
whose name is called the word of God, Revel. 19.11, 12. Joh. 1.1. Heb. 4.12.
And then they say they have come off clear, of what I have accused them of in
their answer.

Answ. Here is nothing but pride and coniusion in these lines: unless we can
credit every thing they have the boldness to say as infallible. How are the
Scriptures beholding to them for their witness, who have the same light and
Spirit which gave them forth? the Lord of Hosts gave them forth: all Scripture
is given by the inspiration of God, 1. Tim. 3. and they have the same light,
and the same spirit equal with God, if one may believe what they say of
themselves. But what think you, are not the Scriptures as inspired and given of
God, a perfect rule of faith and obedience, unless you witness them to be so?
and what letter was that which the Apostles knew killed? you take it for
granted that it is the whole declaration of holy Scriptures: but it is because
you have no light nor Spirit of God in you. The word of faith, Romans 10.6, 7. is
quick and powerful, etc. which word is God that made all things. Most
senseless. Is the profession of Christ in the mouth, and believing in him with
the heart, God that made all things? is every gift and work of God in man, God
that made all things? this is like their other notion, Christ lights all and
therefore that light is Christ, as if every work and operation of Christ, is
Christ: just like those that make God to be every thing, that from him lives,
and moves, etc. So again Christ is the word, his name shall be called the word
of God, and they have Christ the word of God within them, and what need of that
which is written? they have it in the life and fountain, and they will come
under no other writings nor rule, although never so much commanded by God in
the expressions of the holy Spirit in the Scriptures.

Touching Heb. 4.12. in the second verse he shows us what word he meant, where
he says, That the Gospel was preached to them, as unto us, but the word that
they heard, profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in them that
heard it. What word was this, which was heard, but the outward declaration in
voice, or writing, or both? And this word is quick and powerful, etc. and the
savor of life to some, and of death to others, according to the pleasure of
him with whom we have to do, he blessing, or blasting his own word and
ordinance to the different ends intended by himself, and for his glory, whether
in the diligent use thereof men be saved, or in the contempt and neglect of the
word, men be damned.

The 2 Cor. 3.6. where it is said the Letter kills, is to be understood of
the ministry of Moses, in comparison of the Gospel ministry administered by
the Apostles, that of Moses not so spiritual, glorious, effectual, as the new
Testament was, and yet it had its glory too, but no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excels. verse. 10. The Ceremonials their Gospel were
but shadows of good things to come, the substance was Christ, who was but
darkly seen by the people, but the Precepts and Threats of the Law were clear
which brought them under guilt; and the remedy obscure, and the fruit but
little, in comparison of the Apostles Ministry, etc. And hence the letter
killed as administered by Moses, but grace and truth comes by Jesus Christ. It Is
true, the ministry of the Apostles without the powerful operation of the
Spirit concurring, was not sufficient; For Paul may plant, and Apollo water,
but it is God that gives the increase: and yet the word of God as made known in
the holy Scriptures, must be our rule to act and live by, in order to Gods
blessing of Spirit and grace to our regeneration and completing the same unto
eternal life. Besides we have no promises of Gods giving his spirit unto
sinners that have it not, to quicken those that are dead in trespasses and
sins, but what is made in the letter of Scripture, and no promises of any thing
but what is writ there, Romans 5.15.
all good news from heaven to lost sinners is writ there, they are written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. And yet will you say that all the letter kills. Now Reader lay things
together, and then judge by all that they have said, how true it is that they
say, they have come off clear in what I have charged them with, what difference
have they made between the outward declaration, and the word of faith which the
Apostles preached, and writ to the several Churches; if all be but the same,
as I have cleared from theirs, the contradiction, and their confused nonsense
still remains, notwithstanding their bitter censures and shuffles. And how
notoriously false is that of theirs? That not any does know the Scriptures by
the outward declaration, when the outward declaration, 2. Tim. 3.16.
as consisting of words committed to writing, is the Scriptures that we plead,
Rev. 1.17.
for a perfect rule, the declaration and the matter and sense contained
therein, but the same: all which is the inspiration of God, and that which the
Spirit says to the Churches; for what the Scriptures says, the Spirit says,
because all Scripture is by inspiration of God, 2. Pet. 1.20.21.
etc. And not only John, but all the penmen thereof writ as they were moved by
the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost. And hence when you Quakers set up the
Spirit to be a perfect Rule of faith and life distinct from the Scriptures, it
will run you upon these Rocks, which you will never evade.

1. You must either set up another Spirit distinct from the Spirit of God, that
gave the Scriptures; or

2. Maintain that the same Spirit gives a different rule to that which is
written by his own inspiration; and so make God not only mutable, but contrary
to himself: which to think is to be abhorred as blasphemous.

3. Or that the same Spirit has given additionall laws to be the rule above
what is written by the Prophets, and Apostles, on which the Church is built:
which is hardly so, I shall judge, until

1. I see the same divine approbation and confirmation of those Laws, as has
been given of all holy Scriptures.

2. And yet those Laws are as consonant, and as agreeable to all the
Scriptures, as written by the Prophets and Apostles, as the Apostles writings
are consonant and agreeable to the Prophets.

3. And until they can prove that the Scriptures prophecy of such a change in
the Church, as to set up superadded Laws.

4. And that themselves are the men that the Scriptures have foretold of, to
superadde spiritual Laws in the Church, to bind the consciences of all: as we
affirm that the Scripture does.

But to prevent mistakes, I grant as they, 1. That the Spirit is the rule; but
then you must understand it as the mind of God is revealed by the Spirit in the
Scriptures.

2. I grant that we have all need of the illuminating, quickening operations and
influences of the same Spirit that revealed the rule, to enable us to know it,
and believe it, and to apply it to our selves, and to apply our selves unto
it, so as to live unto God in all Christian obedience according to this Rule.

3. I grant that the Rule without the blessing of Grace concurring, does not
simply of it self enlighten and quicken any, nor are any truly and savingly
enlightened, quickened, and renewed, but by the revealed word of God, as the only
means appointed and designed of God, to that very end, to the intelligent.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. And of his own
good will has he begot us again by his word, Jam. 2.1.

And now I shall give a word to my dear friends of Farndon, and to all that are
abused and drawn aside by these deceivers, and the deceits and cheats of their
own hearts, in hope of a blessing to my poor endeavors, who am touched with a
deep sense of the sad delusions which at the present you are entangled most
desperately in.

My dear friends,

Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth which you have once
received with a great deal of joy, and comfort to your souls, when with
constancy and patience, you have made a good pro^ession of the ways of
Godliness revealed by the word, practiced by men and women fearing God, in all
the ages of the Church of Christ, you know the times, and places, when and
where your Spirits have been made joyful in the house of Prayer, and praising
of the ever blessed God. Your hearts have been heated and warmed, by the power
of his word, and Sacraments, the strict observing of Sabbath^, a constant
course of the worshipping God in your families, by a serious calling upon the
name of the Lord, instruction of those under you, in the principles of Gods
truth and fear; and have walked before them in all Godliness and honesty,
according to this word of the Lord, which now is in contempt and reproach by
those that seduce you, as is too obvious to the impartial, as is above
cleared, and their slanders, shifts, and shuffles discovered. You may see how
they have reproached the Institutions, and ordinances of our Lord, as
heathenish, by compareing them to that great Image of that heathen King, Dan.
3.3. You may see how they deny the Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of knowing
God, believing in him, and living unto him. And yet they reproach me to be a
lying slanderer, in charging them with that which is an apparent truth, as I
have witnessed by their own lying Papers; and thus they have reproached me most
falsely: and the lies are returned upon their own heads, whilst they witness
themselves perfect, and without sin, and have entered the new Jerusalem, in
which none shall enter that makes a lie. My friends, some of you have heard
William Duesbury say of himself, In Duesbury new Births, he thus witnesses of
himself.
that he was as perfect as that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem; this is
witnessed by one of credit, and fidelity amongst your selves; I forbear his
name. Oh proud polluted Worm! that dare exalt himself to a perfection equal
with God the everlasting father, whose name is called Wonderful, Counselor,
the Prince of peace, the mighty God, Isa. 9. who fulfilled all righteousness
from his birth to the consummating of all things upon the Cross, in whom the
Godhead dwelt bodily, and from whom all that any has, is received: he was the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, by offering up himself an
oblation once for all, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto
God, and obtain an eternal redemption for us: and yet this insolent polluted
lying worm makes himself equal in perfection with Christ the only Son of the
living God. You may see of what spirit your leaders are of, and how unlike the
Prophets and Apostles these are, which cause you to err by their lies. But why
is it thus with you, that you should be left of God to heap up to your selves
such perverse teachers, that reproach the ordinances, and institutions of our
Lord, as heathenish, and the wisdom of the flesh, and outward observations
which Christ's Kingdom comes not in? But the Kingdom of Heaven is within you,
Luk 17. say they. But where are the commands, institutions, and appointments of
Christ to his Church; called Observations? the Pharisees to whom Christ spoke,
had such expectations touching the Kingdom and coming of the Messiah, that he
should come in great power, and pomp like unto earthly Potentates, and so
redeem Israel from that bondage they were in; hence Christ tells them the
Kingdom of Heaven comes not in observations, but is within you; look into your
old Bibles, and in the margin it is rendered (or among you) and as others, the
Kingdom of heaven is in the midst of you, according to the Original. You may
see that he gave his Apostles charge to teach all that came under Baptism, to
observe and do all the Commands of Christ, Mat. 28.29. and in so doing they
had the promise of his presence, to give his blessings always: but these
seducers say, Christ is not in outward forms and observations, as they in
derision call the Ordinances, and Institutions of Gospel Worship. Christ walks
in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, and commands our observance in
the duties of his own institute Worship, with the promise of his presence
always: they say no, Christ is not here, but he is within you, without all
this ado; teaching men to break the Commands of Christ, which the faithful in
all ages have been so careful and zealous in the observing thereof: and have
witnessed unto with their blood, against both heathenish and Antichristian
persecutors. Dear friends, be not deceived with vain words, but bethink with
your own hearts from what you are fallen: how could you quench out the light
and fire of the Spirit in you, that you have received with such evident
conviction, that has thrown down all before it; and acted you twenty years to
make conscience of the Commands of Christ, both private and public? what
conflictings of Spirit, and sinnings against light, and hardening your hearts
against Gods fear, and the strivings of his Spirit have you withstood, and
resisted, before you could sin and be quiet in the wilful neglect of all
duties of Christianity? what has your backslidings been? You first fell off
from Infant Baptism, then from the public ministry, then from Water Baptism
it self, and from all the Ordinances in the Church, cavilling against all
forms of Worship; and then to speak diminishingly of the holy Scriptures, and
at length to forsake all means whatever, and to pretend an immediate living in
God, in the neglect of all things commanded in the word. But when you attain to
live upon an immediate blessing of Divine Providence, without plowing, and
sowing, eating and drinking, and clothing, in order to the preserving the life
of nature, then you may think to live immediately upon God, to the preserving
the life of Grace, and not till then. God has appointed the use of means, for
the life and growth in Grace, as of the life of the body; and your diligence
and care for the preserving the life of nature, will condemn your negligence,
and presumption in the other, in that day when God shall judge the secrets of
men by the Gospel of Christ. What promises does God make to any to give them
his Spirit, and happiness without enquiring after God in ways of his own
prescribing? The most freest promises made to the Church of the Jews, Ezekiel.
36. are bounded with this Provise, Yet will I be inquired of by you for all
these things Chouse of Israel: but the way and method you are taught is
contrary, you must cease from all religious duties of commanded Worship,
without scruple or check of Conscience before you can enjoy God and be taught
immediately what to do: first put out the true light and power of Conscience
to do its office, by neglecting or despising the means of enlightening and
convincing it to act in the soul, and then resolve to follow the immediate
commands of Conscience, without questioning the Author of these laws at all. Oh
depth of deceit and delusion, and yet obvious to those that are not in these
snares! and were it not that there is a spiritual judgment upon the heart for
former coldness, people should not be left to such thick darkness, and
blindness, from which they are moved to deny their former forwardness in holy
observances, and belie the Lord in saying they never received God by
frequenting the public ministry, and ordinances, which are called by them,
outward observations; being very zealous to asperse that good way, themselves
have given good encouragement, and been an ensample to others to follow. Is it
not an evil with a witness, to fall off from Christian obedience, your selves
have with zeal and good conscience been forward and active in? but you must
now renounce, and deny the good ways of the Lord, and dissuade others from
walking therein: can this be from the same Spirit that called you out of
darkness to the light of Grace, and out of profaneness, wherein you all had
your conversation in the days of youth, and vanity, to serve the blessed God
religiously, in all good Conscience and holy sear above twenty years; if this
great change of heart and life was the work of God, from whom is this change of
mind, now, that moves you to deny the things that have been wrought? do you
think that God is contrary to himself, or do you think that all those
inclinations to holiness and constancy in ways of righteousness, to do Gods
will, were from the Devil? Well, consider what you have been, and how contrary
minded you are now, to what you were: to change from worse to better, is highly
commendable; but to change from better to wore, is the highest of desperate
folly: but to despise and reproach those things of God once received, is most
desperate and dangerous. But I must hasten.

The Second Question propounded.
WHether any other Revelations and observances not to be found in the
Scriptures, be as binding to the Conscience as the holy Scriptures are: or
whether such Revelations and Dictates within a man's heart and soul, be as
binding to a man's self, and to be urged upon others, as the authority of the
Scripture.

The Quakers Answer.
The Revelations of Jesus Christ are according to Scripture which bind up the
testimony, and seal the law in the hearts among my disciples. And what
Revelations and Dictates in the heart are contrary to the law and testimony,
are to be disowned and rejected, according to Isai. 8.20.

My Reply.
The Answer is both cloudie and deceitful, yet seems to be in the Negative,
when they say what Dictates and Revelations is in the Conscience and heart of
man contrary to the Law and Testimony, is not to be regarded, but disowned. But
then the Question is, what they mean by Law and Testimony, whether the old and
new Testaments, or Law and Testimony in the heart. If of the first, their
Answer is true; but if of the last, their Answer is false, and unsound; and it
will follow that the Revelations and Dictates of the heart, not to be found in
Scriptures, are as binding to my own and other men's Consciences, as the
Scriptures, contrary to their own quotation, Isai. 8.20. etc. The truth is,
they will have the inward Dictates of the heart binding to Conscience, and the
rule, when they have denied the holy Scriptures to be a rule of faith, and
obedience, as we have seen in their Answer to the first Question; they will
take no notice of Scripture Authority, as if they were altogether out of Date:
Whereas every true Christian does believe, that God has ordained the holy
Scriptures alone, to be the object of faith, and ground of all our obedience,
and serving of God, and to do any Religious service to God, out of any other
Principle, is but will worship, and to follow the imaginations of our own
hearts, serving the Devil, and not God.

Their Answer says, My accusation is false, and the cloud and deceit is in my
self, who cannot endure sound Doctrine, but call it unsound; and question
whether the Law and Testimony in the heart, which is the Law of the new
Covenant, Jer. 31.33. be the Rule to judge error by: and here with the light of
Christ the spiritual man, who judges all things, thy blindness and deceit is
seen, and judged: and we witness the Scriptures to be writ for our learning,
and a testimony against thee and all such liars, who have got them to talk on;
and would set them above the Revelations of the Spirit, and light of Christ,
which we witness is absolutely binding, and the sole judge of error, for to him
is all Judgment given, Joh. 5.22. And in his power thou art bound, and thy
error judged.

Answ. Reader, thou may see what impudent foreheads they have, by saying my
accusation is false, when themselves have discovered to purpose the deceit of
their Answer, which says, The Revelations of Christ are according to the
Scriptures: and what Dictates are in the heart of man, contrary to the Law and
Testimony, is not to be regarded, but disowned, according to Isai. 8.20. In
which Text we are to go to the Law and the Testimony, and if any speak not
according to that word, it is (...) cause there is no light in them: which word
is to be understood of Moses and the Prophets, without all controversy. So
that take their answer as expressed, and a plain minded Christian cannot but
judge it sober and true, but you may see they speak one thing, and mean another
thing: for in their last answer to mine, they tell us what they mean by Law and
Testimony, namely, the Dictates, Revelations, and Law and Testimony in the
heart. And is not that a deceitful answer, to make a show of one thing, and
intend another; for if their answer had been to their intent, it should have
been this. The Revelations of Christ within, are of greater force then the
Scriptures: and what Dictates or Revelations in the heart of man, are contrary
to the Law and Testimony in the heart, are to be disowned; and they should
have left out their quotation, had they not been purposely minded to deceive;
and yet they tell us often, that as they write, so they mean, and speak the
truth in plainness: most horrible hypocrisy, and deceit, which nothing but
impudent lying, and a knavish head dare go about to excuse, much less impute
falsehood upon the innocent, for discovering it. Did you ever read of Law and
Testimony in the heart; and did you ever read that the Law and Testimony in
the heart, is the Law of the new Covenant; and did you ever read that the Law
in the heart, is the Law of the new Covenant? where is the new Covenant called
a Law; and the only rule to judge error by? We know the whole Book of God
written by Moses, and the Prophets, is called the Book of the Covenant, Exodus
24.7. And that which you call the Law of the New Covenant, is the blessing
promised in the new Covenant, put into performance, where, and to whom God is
pleased in the use of the word and ordinances of the Covenant, to regenerate,
renew, quicken, and change the hearts of any, to yield willing and hearty
obedience to the holy Laws of God, commanded in his word. Do these strangers
to the nature of the new Covenant, think that all have the Law of God writ in
their hearts, by virtue of; he new Covenant? Who can deny this writing of Gods
Law, and giving his Spirit, etc. Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8. to be a saving blessing of
the Covenant, far different to Romans 2.14. which is a Law in the heart, common
to all upon another account: If that which they plead, be writ in all, then all
have true saving Grace, and shall be saved, for that Covenant is everlasting
and unchangeable; and then if all have not that Law of the new Covenant, to
what end is that quoted, but to deceive, making the most to believe a lie,
where their damnable Tenants take? and so upon the matter, they destroy all
Christian Laws, and obedience, and press men that are Christians to turn
Heathens, in minding the Law of Nature only. And should I speak my heart
touching the nature of the new Covenant, I should express my self thus. That
the Covenant of Grace, that brings salvation to fallen man, is founded upon, and
confirmed by, the death of Christ, in which Covenant the promises of a new
heart, and of giving Gods Spirit, and writing his Laws, are the main, all
other promises, precepts, threats, and ordinances, in the whole Book of God
have their tendencie in order to the Lords putting into execution of those
spiritual blessings promised: and this Covenant is to be restrained to the
visible professing Church, and their seed, as a special blessing, beyond all
the rest of the world, that are left to wander in their own ways. And in the
Church, this Covenant is not to all universally, and absolute, but
indefinitely, and conditional; so that not any can be excluded from it in
particular, nor all included in it conjunctively taken: for in the visible
Church of Christ, that are under the Doctrine and ordinances of the grace of
the Covenant, many are called, but few are chosen. And these Impostors, and
Perverters of the new Covenant, that teach that all have the Laws of the new
Covenant writ in their hearts, may as truly say, that all have the promises
thereof writ in their hearts, then which nothing is more absurd: therefore I
conclude, that as the promises of the Covenant are upon Divine record, that we
may have hope for our selves and children, so likewise is the rule, that we are
to conform unto, in order to the receiving of the spiritual blessings
promised.

In the next place to excuse their rash insolent censures, they assume to
themselves, To be the spiritual man that judges all things: and thereupon by
their light, they say that my blindness, and deceit is seen, and judged, who
accuses them of waving the Scripture-authority, as if they were out of date.

Answ. And let the World judge what use they make of the Authority of holy
Scriptures, that have in plain terms denied them to be the perfect rule of
faith and obedience, as you have seen before, and not many lines off again,
where they judge me, they say, The Spirit and light of Christ in them, which
they witness, is absolutely binding, and the sole judge of error, for to him
is all judgment given, Joh. 5.22. Thus you see they set up another Rule, to be
sole judge of error, and yet they judge me for accusing them falsely. But this
is but the same in other words, which they have urged, and I have answered
already in the first Question. There they say the Spirit is the rule, here the
light of Christ in them the sole judge of error; for they make the light within
the law, in the heart, the Spirit, and Christ, the exercise of the conscience,
to be all one; and they quote Scriptures merely to delude the simple, and to
color over their real delusions, and deceits: for if the Spirit, and the
immediate Revelations of Christ in the heart, be the only rule, and sole judge
of error, to what end do they prove it by Scriptures? for that which is the
sole Judge of error is infallible of it self, and needs not any demonstration,
but faith to believe it, that it is so, and their going to the Scriptures, to
prove the Spirit to be the rule, in that very thing, they make the Scriptures
the absolute rule, and therein contradict all they say. If Christ in them, be
the sole judge of truth and error, why do they make such a noise of Scripture
expressions? can they not speak in the Authority of that Christ within them,
unless they fill up their Revelations with those borrowed expressions of the
Scriptures, which they call a dead Letter that kills? Certainly in the secret
of their Consciences they are convinced that the holy Scriptures are the sole
Judge of error, they being given by the Inspiration of God, and the word that
we shall be judged by at the last day, Joh. 12.48. although they reject it from
being the Judge of error now; because it crosses their idle proud fancies, and
itching humors, to set up something of their own brain, in their Apostate
condition; and therefore like condition, like rule, rather then they will
repent and return to the right Rule, they will set up a Rule of their own
making, that shall please them better; but what will they do in the end
thereof? Because they had not executed my judgments, but despised my statutes,
and polluted my Sabbaths, etc. wherefore I gave them statutes also that were
not good, and judgments whereby they should not live; and the Lord polluted
them in their own Gifts, etc. Ezekiel. 20.24, 25. The Lord give them hearts to
consider the judgment of God upon such that despise the judgments, statutes,
and Sabbaths the Lord has commanded in his word: Was this judgment of the
Lord inflicted for the despising the judgments, and Statutes, and Sabbaths,
that were written in their own hearts, think you? no, but for the despising,
and breaking the statutes, laws, and ordinances commanded to be writ and
taught the people by Moses, and the Prophets, as innumerable Texts do evince.
But while they quote Scripture, although they deny it for a rule, let us not be
beaten with our own weapon; and therefore give me leave to examine their
quotations, to prove the spiritual man, and the light of Christ within, to be
the sole judge of error; distinct from the Scriptures.

The 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. them that are spiritual are put in opposition to the
natural man, the one knows, approves and judges of spiritual things, the other
receives not the things of the Spirit, nor can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: the spiritual man has his senses exercised to discern
and judge of things that differ, but it is no where said he does this without
the rule of the word, that gives that discovery. The spiritual man, as well as
all others, may not judge his brother, nor another man's servant; for we must
all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, our Lord and Master, and all
judgment is committed to the Son, that men may honor the Son, as they honor
the Father, Joh. 5. as they quote; hence they infer that Christ is the sole
judge of error. Indeed Christ as he is the Son of man, God and Man in one
person, who has ascended far above all heavens, sitting at the right hand of
God, from thence shall he come in the clouds of Heaven, with his mighty Angels,
in flames of fire, to render vengeance on the disobedient to the Gospel.
Because God has appointed him a day, in which he shall judge the World in
righteousness, even by that man whom he has ordained: whereof God has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead, Act. 17.31. We
believe that Jesus Christ shall come in his day, with that very same body that
suffered death upon the Cross, and was raised from the dead the third day; and
he shall judge the whole world of mankind, that ever were, even all those that
are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, the righteous to
the resurrection of everlasting life; and the wicked to the resurrection of
condemnation. Joh. 5.28, 29. And let these seduced people take notice of Joh
12.28, 29 He that receives not my words, says Christ, has one that judges
him, the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day. And
this word of Christ, they reject from being the rule of faith and obedience;
but whether they will or no, they must stand to the judgment of this word of
Christ, which he has spoken, at the last day. William Dusbury tells us that
the mighty day of the Lord is appeared in the North of England, and is arising
toward the South, and shall overspread this Nation, and all Nations of the
world. What the man's fancy, and design is, in bruiting and making such a noise
of the the appearance of the mighty day of the Lord, judge ye.

I am sure, he has sufficiently discovered his own folly, in blazing abroad
such dreams of his own lying heart; as if he could persuade people to believe
that he can tell them of a lying wonder. Well, but all judgment is given to
the Son, and by his light and spirit in them, they assume to judge all error,
and bind all persons that oppose them as they tell me, in his power thou art
bound, and thy error judged. Themselves you see are set in the Throne of
Christ, and under the notion of a Christ, they are judgeing the whole world;
but if all judgment be given to the Son of man in them, whom they hold is not
distinct from themselves, then men must honor their persons, as they honor
the Father, and every knee must bow to them in Heaven and Earth: Christ came
not to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through him, while
the day of salvation lasts. Nay, he forbids this judging, Judge not, lest you
be judged; and will they say that the person of Christ is come from heaven, and
appears in his Majesty, and Glory, with his mighty Angels in them? why do they
not command the dead to arise, and appear before them; and receive their
everlasting Doom? but they will sooner deny the resurrection and say it is past
already, with Hymeneus and Philetus, then raise one dead Corpse to life again.
But let them tell us plainly how Christ is the sole Judge of error, and how
persons are judged in the time of Grace by Christ in them, if not by his word,
that shall judge all at the last day that reject it, and not receive it, by
what then? They say the light of Christ.

Ausw. 1. Are not the holy Scriptures a light, given to the Church by Christ,
the head thereof?

2. Christ is to be considered in his person and natures simply, or in his
Authority, and divine operations vertually. There is not any, whom Christ
dwells in, by his person, and natures, for so he is far above all heavens at
the right hand of God, Act. 7. And it is blasphemy to say that Christ is in
them, by his person as God and man, and to deny the glorified body of Christ,
that God has raised from the dead, as the Quakers do, and will not allow the
Divinity of Christ any other union with his humane Nature, but what he has
with his body, the Church, is a pernicious, blasphemous opinion also; for by
this, they make all the particular bodies of his Saints, to be but one, and
that the Godhead is in them bodily: so that the Saints are God and man in one
person, as Howgill Borrough, and others commonly spaeke. And hence they judge,
that Christ's sufferings in them, makes satisfaction for all their own sins, and
so make the death of Christ in that body that suffered at Jerusalem, of none
effect, as to satisfaction, and salvation, they call him a Christ without,
which was but a type and figure of this Christ within; but to leave these
Infidel Dreams, I told you that Christ is to be considered in his Authority,
as revealed unto us in his word, by commands backed with promises, and
Precedents, for to encourage to obedience. And

2. His Commands are guarded with menaces, and threats and with Precedents of
Gods executing his judgments upon transgressors, for the terror of those that
shall transgress afterward. And this written word of God is the sole Judge of
error, given by Christ to that very end. And those Divine operations, and
workings of Christ in the hearts of those whom he does quicken with his
special renewing grace, do work up his peoples spirits to a willing obedience
to his holy rule, prescribed in the holy Scriptures. Now for them to say that
the power and workings of Christ in his chosen, and the gifts of grace he gives
to them, is Christ, and the eternal word, that made the world, is such a
frenzy that cannot be expressed; as if every influence and operation the Sun
has upon the Earth, upon Plants and all other creatures, so far distant and
distinct from it, were the Sun, or as if every drop of water that the clouds
exhale out, and scatter from the Sea, was the Sea; or as if the gift, was the
giver: but we may question whether they that thus spoke of a Christ in them,
that made the World: know any thing of Christ or of themselves, as they ought
to know at all.

In the next place, they tell me, Thou in thy dark mind talkest of the
Revelations of Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine, and the Christians life, and
the ground of their obedience, all which thou thou art a stranger to, as is
manifest, by these thy following words.

Namely where I writ to them thus.

That God has ordained the holy Scriptures alone, to be the object of Faith,
and ground of all our obedience, and serving of God, and to do any religious
service to God out of any other rule, or principle, is but Will Worship, and to
follow the imaginations of our own hearts, serving the Devil and not God.

Unto this they Answer. With the eternal word of God that was from the
beginning, art thou judged, to be none of Abraham's seed, and art raised out
from his faith, to which thou art a stranger, for it had an object before the
Scripture was written, in which faith he see Christ's day, who is the object of
our faith, and ground of our obedience, Heb. 11.16 etc. And in his light we see
thee to be in the Will Worship, who obeyes from another ground, and walks after
the imaginations of thy own heart, which leads thee to worship the Devil, in
bringing forth the many lies in this paper, which he has begotten in thee, who
is the Father of lies.

My reply to theirs, is.

In these lines, the spirit in them moved very strongly, as the indifferent
Reader may easily judge, by their insolent rash censures, and ignominious
crimes they reproach me with, for my asserting that which every one that is a
Christian can do no less then own; namely, That God has ordained the holy
Scriptures alone to be the object of faith, and ground of all our obedience,
and serving of God, etc. For this I am sentenced by the eternal word to be
none of Abraham's seed, and rased from his faith. But

1. How shall I be sure they received this sentence from the eternal word,
which they have pronounced against me; it being so directly contrary to what
Christ has forbidden, Judge not lest you be judged? Mat. 7.
And they themselves say, in their Answer to the Question we are upon, That the
Revelations of Christ, are according to Scripture: if this judging came to them
by Revelation from Christ, how will you make it to accord, and be reconcilable
with Scripture? I, but say they, Thou art judged by the eternal word, which
was from the beginning, not by themselves.

Answ. 1. That word was manifested in the flesh, and dwelt amongst men,
justified in the Spirit, and received into glory, far above the Heavens. I
demand how they know his mind, touching my particular state in this censure
pronounced? whether they have it by voice from heaven, or by vision, or by the
ministry of Angels, or dream, or fancy, or how?

2. If the eternal word that was made flesh revealed it to them, as he is in
them, for that is the fancy, then the word made flesh, is in them bodily, and
not at the right hand of God, where he lives for ever, to make intercession for
those he dyed for, and obey him.

3. If these censures be from the eternal word, what is the reason they are so
contrary to the written word, which is the inspiration of God; and the
revelation of Christ: and that which the Spirit says to the Churches, which
every one that has an ear to hear, let him hear. What have I pleaded, but
the Spirits rule, as contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles;
Christ the chief Corner stone, on which the true Church is built in all ages?
and for this, these great Prophets judge me to be none of Abraham's seed, and
say I am rased out of his faith: but what was his faith, as to salvation, more
then what the Scriptures reveal, and the weakest true Believer has? In that I
say the Scriptures are the object of faith, etc. is to be understood of what is
contained in them, and taught by them: How do you or any know that there is but
one God, and what he is? and how he will be worshipped and served, but by the
Scriptures? How do you or any know that there is a Christ? what he is? and how
he came into the World to save sinners? and how he saves them? and who he
saves, but by the Scriptures? How do you or any know that there is a Covenant
of grace, and promises of eternal life, and what commands, but by the
Scriptures?

Hence the Scriptures are the only rule of knowing God, and Jesus Christ,
believing in him and living unto him. They say Christ is the object of faith;
but that this is known, and for what ends and uses, and what is faith, and how
to live by it, the Scriptures only make the discovery; and they are writ for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope: all those that are without the Scriptures, are without all comfort, and
hope, and God, in the World. And now whether they that oppose and deny the
Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of faith and obedience, or I, that defend them
to be the only rule, deserve to be judged; let every one that would be reckoned
for a true Christian judge. And as touching the faith of Abraham, and who are
his seed, themselves are not much skilled in, who talk of the Law of the new
Covenant, writ in every man's heart; as if every man were of the seed of
Abraham, and in the new Covenant made with him, except my self and some others,
that out of zeal to the truth, and doing service for the Church, oppose them.
Both Abraham and all the faithful upon Divine Record, were obedient to the
Commands of God, and gave glory to God in believing his promises, which you are
far from, that reject his commands, and promises in the Prophets and
Apostles; which not any of the children of Abraham, in a spiritual sense, ever
did. Them that are of faith, are children unto Abraham, and blessed with him;
but as for those that have departed from the true Doctrine of faith, and
obedience, the Apostles writ to the Churches for their Rule, as it is manifest
from your own tongues, and pens, your selves have; and choose your own ways,
following the imaginations of your own deceiving hearts: that your selves are
not of Abraham's seed, much less of his faith, while you cast off that
Christian obedience to the laws of Christ revealed in his word, so did not our
father Abraham. And let me tell you in plainness, your Worship, and all your
service is merely vain; so long as you like the Pharisees, teach for Doctrine,
the precepts of men: namely, such precepts that are the Dictates of your own
idle brains. And by an excessive fondness to the commands of your own fancies,
or the Devils suggestions, you wickedly make void the holy, just, and equal
commands of God. What think you, is not God the same as he ever was? Has he
not given his statutes, laws, and ordinances to Israel? and to all that are of
the same Church? And is not this a great blessing among his people? God has
not done this for the Heathen, no, they have not known his ways. Has not God
strictly forbidden either to add to, or diminish from his laws, upon the
penalty of a curse? Did not God say to Joshua, thou shall diligently observe
and do all that is commanded, not turning to the right hand or to the left?
Does not Christ charge his Disciples to teach the baptized to observe and do
all things whatever he has commanded? Matthew. 28. And does not Paul commend the
Church of Corinth, for being obedient in all things, and for keeping the
ordinances that he delivered unto them? 1 Cor. 11.2. The Laws and Ordinances
of Jesus Christ were in force in the Apostolical Churches; when were they
repealed, by what Authority? and by whom? Is not Christ the same, yesterday, to
day and for ever. You talk of the light of Conscience much; can this light be
blotted out of the Book of your Conscience? it will not be long, before
conscience be fully opened, to accuse and condemn you for reproaching the
commands and ordinances of the Lord Jesus. You talk of a Christ within you,
while you are disobedient and rebellious to Jesus Christ without you, that gave
his life a ransom for many. Do you think a Christ within of your own making,
is able to secure you from the wrath of the Lamb, when he shall come with his
mighty Angels, in flames of fire, to render vengeance upon the disobedient to
the Gospel. You say you are perfect, and in heaven; and in the mean time
strengthen your selves with lies, and open your mouths with blasphemies, and
contempt of the holy things of Christ, as has been showed: but what will you
do in the end thereof? you tell me now out of your wonted boldness, to belie
the truth which the Scriptures teach, that I am in the Will Worship, in acting
obedience from another Principle, (namely the Scriptures) and so walk after the
imaginations of my own heart; which leads thee to worship the Devil, in
bringing forth those many lies in thy Paper, begotten by the father of lies.
But I tell you, the time is coming when your mouths, that are opened in
blasphemies, shall be stopped; and that word that I have urged against you,
shall judge you in that day. Romans 2.
God will judge the secrets of men by the Gospel, which I all along plead to
be the only rule of faith and obedience; and you have denied it as to that and,
and set up another rule, which God commands not. You accuse me of many lies,
but why do you not prove it, and evidently convince me of one, by the Authority
of Scriptures, or else own the accusation to be false, and from the Devil that
overpowers you to blaspheme the truth? But to proceed.

In the Answer to my question they say the Revelations of Christ, are according
to Scripture, etc. In my reply I told them that the Revelations of Christ, that
are according to Scriptures, are either texts of Scripture expressed, or
rational deductions, consequences, and conclusions, that naturally flow from
particular passages of Scriptures, the which said I is Scripture, and not any
other Revelations can be pleaded for a Rule.

Their answer to this is little to the purpose, Here say they, Thou have made
thy self manifest to all the children of light, to be a stranger to the
Revelations of Christ Jesus: which they witnessed, who thereby was taught the
Gospel, and knew the Son revealed by the Father; and the brightness of his
coming who reveals the man of sin: which was not done by rational deductions,
nor by Texts of Scriptures, which thou have got to talk of. 2 These. 2, 3.8. 2
Cor. 1.1.7.

My Answer.

1. That the Holy Scriptures are the Revelations of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
is without all doubt; and they teach the whole counsel of God, necessary to
every good work, and of salvation, in all righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet.
1.21. Rev. 1.1.

2. Those Revelations of Christ that are according to Scriptures, as their
Answer to the Question is, must be such that accord, and are reconcilable with
the current and stream of Scriptures, at least they must not clash, nor cross
the stream of Scripture, if they answer as they really think: and then why do
they deny the Scriptures to be a perfect Rule, and set up the Spirit within to
be the only Rule? if the Revelations of Christ within, are according to
Scriptures, then it will follow that those Revelations are to be examined by
Scripture rule, to try whether they accord with Scripture, yea or no: and then
they make the Scripture the Rule, which in plain terms they have denied to be
the Rule. Therefore we may conclude their Answer is deceitful, say one thing,
and mean another. For following them in my first reply to this, as before,
they very discreetly pass it by with silence, and catch at my mentioning of
Scripture consequences, etc. otherwise then was intended, which I shall speak
to anon.

There is one thing which I think I may do well to inform the Reader of, as
touching their Answer though they intend it not. That the Revelations of Christ
are according to Scripture in this respect, namely, Christ revealing himself to
the soul by his powerful working, quickening, enlightening, strengthening,
comforting, and the like; all which are the Revealings, and communications of
Christ to the soul, in his Divine workings, all which is according to his Word;
we must look for all spiritual and temporal promises of good things we want
in the written word, but look for the fulfilling of the good things promised in
our selves, by the powerful workings and Divine givings of the Son of Gods:
and in that way, and by what means himself has appointed, and prescribed in
his word: as there is the revelation of light in the Scripture, so there must
be the revealings of Christ's power to give sight to the eyes of the soul,
before any be able to see the mysteries of the Gospel unto salvation. The
promise of a new heart, and giving repentance, is the Revelation of Scripture;
but the renewing of the heart, and make it to repent indeed, is done by the
mighty power of Christ in the heart; which all that have it, are in some
measure sensible of. The spirit of Christ by the word reveals the rule unto us,
and the same Spirit by his powerful workings revealed in us, works up our
hearts to a willing conformity to the rule, as I have said before.

They talk how that Antichrist was not revealed by deductions nor texts of
Scriptures; by what then? How shall we know what that man of sin is, and who,
but by Scripture? I think those that are against Scripture, are against Christ,
that by his Spirit gave them forth for the comfort, hope, and instruction of
his Church: and by their opposing the Revelations of Christ in Scriptures
themselves may be the man of sin they talk of, in setting up another rule, and
teaching another Gospel contrary to what the Apostles preached and writ.

But they are ready to catch at my expressions of Scripture consequences,
although I used them in favor of their own answer, had they been real in it,
but you see they are so far from owning of consequences drawn from the
Scriptures that they have denied the whole Scriptures from being a Christians
Rule. Their quotations are against them, unless they can prove that they
received their Gospel by the Revelations of Christ, as Paul did; or that
themselves have the Spirit from the mouth of Christ, that reveals the man of
sin. It satisfies me, that we have the very same Gospel in writing that Paul
received by the revelation of Christ: and that we have that word that came from
the mouth of Christ, that discovers all errors and deceivers: of whom not any
more obvious then themselves. And that the Quakers deny the Scriptures is
evident by this Argument, They that deny all consequences drawn from
Scriptures, deny the Scriptures; but the Quakers deny all consequences drawn
from Scriptures, therefore the Quakers deny the Scriptures.

The Minor is clear, they will not deny it. The Major is to be proved. It Is
certain the Scriptures were writ many ages before this of ours; and were
particularly directed and given first to the Church of the Jews, then secondly
to the Churches of the believing Gentiles in the Apostles age: that it is by
consequence that we in our times can challenge a propriety and interest in the
use and benefit of them; because not any part thereof was given directly unto
any that are now alive, but were given to the whole Church, of whom we are
added to, and grafted in, by Faith: and therefore, as we are of the Church, we
have a propriety in the Churches privile^ges, of which the holy Scriptures are
a principal part. There is the same reason of all particulars in the
Scriptures, as they are directed to particular persons in the Church: of
whatsoever quality, condition, relation any are in; for whatsoever was written
to any directly as such, by consequence is writ to all such, and of the same
kind, where there is the same equality of reason, and the like circumstances
concurring. And hence we may still say, whatever were written before time, were
written for our learning; that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope: but the particular application of the whole, or a
part, is by consequence; because they were not firstly writ to us at all.
Therefore the conclusion is unavoydable against them: and yet while themselves
are denying the Scriptures to be the rule of faith and obedience, and for which
they are under the plagues written therein, as was urged against them, their
insensible stupid spirits shift it from themselves, and make my self the man
that dare add to the Scriptures my own conclusions; and so am under all the
plagues written therein. Rev. 22.18, 19. But let them prove wherein I have in
the least diminished and added to the Scriptures, who am defending their Divine
authority unto all against them, who out of Apostasy and strong delusion have
denied the Authority of Scripture to be the Rule of faith and life. I spoke of
consequences, and conclusions, that naturally flow from express Texts of
Scripture; not forced far-fetched out of Texts perverted, and misunderstood; as
themselves by concluding my self the man that are under all the plagues, even
while I am defending their Authority, and themselves free even while they are
denying Scripture Authority.

In their next, judging me the castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. And found in the old
Covenant, when the Law and Testimony is without, and shut out of the new
Covenant, where the Law is written in the heart. Because I queried how the Law
and Testimony may be said to be in the heart, seeing that the Scripture placed
them in the Ark, which is called the Ark of the Testimony, where the two
Tables were placed, that were written with the finger of God, Exodus 25.16.20,
21. and 31.18. and to this is those Texts, Isai. 8.16. and verse 20. to be
referred, which they interpret to be the Law and Testimony of the heart, and
would have the Law and Testimony in the Ark, writ with the finger of God, but
a figure of the other; as if the Laws writ in the two Tables were not real
Laws, which all are bound to obey, but a figure of some other Laws writ in
the heart of corrupt man, that would make every idle fancy and suggestion of
Satan a Law to be ruled by, as is too evident by themselves, who will allow of
no Laws of God nor Scriptures; but the Revelations and Edicts of their own
bewitched fancies: for they have rejected the word of the Lord, Jam. 8.9.
and what wisdom is there in them? But Christians, what think you? were not
the Children of Israel, to whom God gave these Laws in writing, the seed of
Abraham, and in that everlasting Covenant made to Abraham? Genesis 17.7, 8. where
the Lord promises to be a God to him and his seed in their Generations, for
ever: and was not this the Covenant of Grace, which included all the saving
blessings thereof, unto salvation, and the Law of Grace in the heart? and yet
the Lord in his wisdom, and mercy to his Covenant people, gave them his Laws
in an outward writing; and they were bound to the keeping and observing of
these Laws upon promises of the greatest blessings; and threats of the
greatest penalties annexed. Were not Moses, Joshua, Caleb, and all the godly,
that had the fear of God, and the Spirit of God in their souls, bound to the
observance of this Law, which was in the Ark of the Testimony? and were they
in the old Covenant so, as to be shut out of the new? as they say of me for
defending the same truth, which those servants of the Lord practiced, and all
others that feared God after them. What think you, Christians, is the book of
the Law inconsistent with the new Covenant? when the truth is, the great
blessing of the new Covenant, is so to renew our hearts, and incline them to
the Law of God, that with love and delight, we may walk in Gods Laws and
ordinances prescribed to his Glory. But behold their censures, they judge me
none of Abraham's seed, and rased out from his faith, and shut out of the new
Covenant, and judged to be under all the plagues written in the Book of God:
and now are come to deny my prayers, and the God whom I serve. Who does thee
guide, say they, to belie the truth and slander the innocent? I say, the Lord
rebuke thee Satan, thou enemy to mankind; who by thy wiles, beguilest weak
man, who all his life time is subject to temptation, and error: and although
thou have prevailed upon these frail men, to run upon mistakes, putting light
for darkness, and taking darkness for light; and thereby has drawn them to
deny the true and living God, whose being and blessedness, is in himself
infinite: yet God forbid that I shoul cease praying for them, and that unto my
God, in the name of Jesus Christ, to heal their back slidings, and to reduce
them from wandering from thy truth, and Church, in all the mysterious errors,
they are bewildered and scattered in, in the cloudy and dark day, not for want
of light, who have been in a valley of vision, but for want of love thereof,
and wholesome Discipline, to prevent such extravagances.

And now my dear Friends of Farndon, and all others that are entangled in these
dangerous snares, and unheard of errors, that men of perverse minds, and proud
presumptuous spirits have the boldness to vent and publish in our loose days;
What think you now? you have been ready to defend these deceivers, and tell us
that they keep to the Scriptures, and teach nothing but what they have ground
of Scripture for, and they are as full of Scripture quotations as any whatever.
But what think you now? have not they in plain words denied the Scriptures to
be the only rule of faith and obedience, and set up another rule to be the sole
Judge of error, and ground of all obedience, namely, the light of Christ in
them; which sometimes they call the eternal Word, by which they judge of
errors, and persons, bind, and sentence at pleasure; as if all judgment in
heaven and earth was given to them only, and the same honor due to them which
is due to the Father; as you have seen it cleared unto you before. I beseech
you to be serious in your thoughts of what has been writ, in discovering their
deceits, and blasphemies, and the very foundation of all heresy, their denying
the Rule that all things are to be tried by, and make themselves the absolute
rule, and we may not question what themselves say, be it never so insolent, and
to be abhorred of all sober Christians. But they presently pass sentence and
judgment on us, as if all judgment was given to them indeed; and as if
themselves were the only Masters, that all must stand or fall unto. Had they
but power to execute, as they have pride and insolency to judge and censure,
what flesh were able to stand before them, that should but cross their proud
fancies? But their pride will be their ruin: And the Lord will rebuke the
madness of these Prophets; and they are in the same way of perishing, as in
the gainsaying of Corab.

But dear friends, I hope that there is that fear of God in your hearts that
will preserve you from running out into these desperate heresies as to deny the
holy Scriptures to be the Rule and ground of faith and obedience: For you know,
deny the Authority of Scriptures, the only boundary of truth, and the only
Touchstone that every spirit and opinion is to be tried by; then all shall be
left to follow the imaginations of their own idle heads; and act as their
deceitful hearts shall suggest: then they that can get the greatest
confidence, conceitednesse, and strongest fancies, and the impudentest tongues,
to vent their own inventions, will be the only men for the true Religion, and
then who can tell what is truth, and who are guided by the spirit of God, and
who by the Devil? The very denying the Authority of the Scriptures, brings
all into confusion and heathenisme inevitably. Cast off that which God has
ordained to direct us, then the Devil will put in, to mislead into all error;
and how shall any be able to know his workings, and temptations from the pure
workings of God for our good, when the authority of the Scriptures are laid
aside? Nay, who can be certain of any things in himself, or in others, that
they please God, when I, or they cannot be certain, they are ordained of God to
that end, if you lay aside the Authority of Scriptures? And how just is it for
God to punish the hearts of men with all spiritual delusions, blindness, and
error, and to let Satan loose upon men's souls, when they cast off that which
God has given to direct, and instruct in all righteousness, and to every good
work, as 1 Timothy 3. You know how it is said, that he that provideth not for his
own, has denied the faith, as to that particular duty which the Doctrine of
faith teaches, and is worse then an Infidel. What would the Apostle have said
of these that deny the whole Doctrine and Rule of Faith; and yet have been once
Christians? sure they are worse than Infidells, and it had been better they had
never known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn
from the holy Commandments of the Lord, delivered unto them, by word or
writing. 2 Pet. 2.20. see chap. 3.1.2. wherein the Apostle endeavored to stir
up their pure minds by way of remembrance, that they might be mindsul of the
words that were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the Commandments of
us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior, which comprehends the whole Scriptures
of old and new Testament, on which the Church is built: the Scriptures are, and
in them do contain the Oracles of God, which is a great advantage and
preferment to those they are committed unto, beyond all others, Romans 2.1, 2. To
them is the Covenant, and the promises, and the service of God, chap. 9.

And whatever were writ before time, was writ for our learning, that the Church
of God through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.
Whereas on the other hand, those that are denied the Scriptures, are Aliens
from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and
without hope and God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. as is clear of the like Infidel
state, that the Ephesians were in before their conversion to Christianity. I
tell you, to deny the Scriptures is the desperatest error that any mortals can
possibly plunge themselves into, having once professed them; such I am sure
forsake their own mercies, and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life, by
despising the Gospel of Christ contained in the Scriptures; they slight the
everlasting Covenant of Grace, and all the promises writ in the Book of God;
there being not a promise made to any in the world, but what is in the
Scripture; nor can any expect that God will give that which he does not promise
to any. Let them tell me what promises are writ in the heart, that deny the
Scripture to be the only rule of faith and obedience; if they be without the
promise, then they are without hope, and God in the world, as the poor Indians
are; if not worse, by denying that which they have the means to know, nay, have
known, and been convinced, and rejoiced in the spiritual blessings promised;
but now wilfully deny them, and reject them, as not to be believed, that are
written for the great comfort of the Lords people.

I tell you friends, these miserable Worms uncovenant themselves, and unchrist
themselves, as if they cared not for grace and mercy in their standing before
God. In denying the Scripture, they deny all that grace and mercy, that is writ
there, for the comfort and hope of poor penitent finners. If the Scriptures
shall be denied their Authority, by them, then it will follow, that they have
removed the Lords ancient bounds, and the only Judge of all error. What is
heresy, but the broaching of errors, and vain opinions, and practices,
contrary to the holy Laws and Institutions of God, recorded in Scriptures? in
taking away the rule, they are involved in all heresy whatever; for God will
not be any otherwise known, trusted in, worshipped, and obeyed, then himself
has taught, and prescribed us in his word. When men dare think of God after
their own fancies, and believe in him after their vain minds, and worship God
as seems good in their own eyes, as all do that deny the Scripture to be a
perfect Rule, no wonder that they make God like themselves, and themselves like
God, and that they preach another Gospel, and set up another Christ, and
fancy another Heaven, and another day of judgment, and another Law and Rule
to try all things by. If men cease to be Christians, and forsake the rules of
Christianity, while they continue to be men, and have any sparks of immortality
in them, they will be doing in one way or other, in order to eternity: But will
you receive these seducers into your houses, and bid them God speed, that deny
the only Rule of righteousness, and not be partakers with them? Judge ye. And
can a greater proof, and demonstration be given against any, that they are
Impostors, and deceivers, false teachers, then this, that in plain terms will
deny the Authority of the holy Scriptures to be the only Rule of faith and
obedience; as those do which you receive, and adhere unto? which is a
confirmation to me of the truth, and Divine approbation of the public
ministry, that you have forsaken, when I observe what teachers you follow, even
those that deny the Authority of Scriptures.

And should our Teachers deny the Authority of holy Scriptures to be the Rule
of faith and obedience, and set up their own fancies to be the Rule, as they do
which you adhere unto, it were time to forsake and abhor them. Remember the
Argument of our Savior, to distinguish between those that are of God, and
those that are not. Joh. 8.47. He that is of God hears Gods words; but ye
therefore hear them not, therefore ye are not of God. They are blessed that
hear the word of God and keep it: and this word is that word which they heard
from the beginning, as the same Apostle witnesses, 1 John 2.7. Brethren, I
write no new Commandment unto you, but an old which you had from the
beginning; and the old Commandment is the word which you have heard from the
beginning: and he that says he knows Christ, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him: Even those Commandments
which were writ and spoke from the beginning, that we love one another; and
this is love, that we walk after Christ's commandments: and this is the
Commandment, that as you have heard from the beginning, so should you walk in
it. Our duty is to look unto what Christ has spoken, and was heard by them
that lived when he was upon the earth; as his Apostles who had the promise of
the Spirit to bring all things, to their remembrance which he had spoken unto
them. And we are not to look for new commands from Christ now, but to cleave to
the old: and we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip: How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salsation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.

So likewise God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times
past unto the Fathers, by the Prophets, Heb. 1.1.
has in these last days spoke unto us by his Son: he does not say that God in
these last days does speak, or will speak unto us by his Son; but God has
already in time past spoke by his Son, and that speaking is to these last
days; so that we are not to look for any other speaking or Revelations from
any, let them pretend what they can, but must hear what the Spirit has said
unto the Churches: for whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine
of Christ, has not God; and this Doctrine of Christ confists in the
Commandments, that ye have heard from the beginning, that we should walk in
them. 2 John 2.6, 9. For many deceivers are entered into the World, who confess
that Jesus Christ is not come in the flesh, this is is a deceiver and an
Antichrist: and that is another rule to try the Spirits by, whether they be of
God or no. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh
is of God, and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is not of God, but is Antichrist. I confess in the Apostles days
that was looked upon to be the great herefie that troubled the Church, namely
that Jewish denial of Christ's being come in the flesh, and that which did
overthrow the Christian faith. And we cannot say that the Quakers directly are
in that Antichristian heresy, but this we can safely say, that they deny the
benefits that come to the Church by Christ's sufferings in that flesh he
received from the Virgin Mary, or else deny it to be a real body of flesh, and
so make him but a figure and type of Christ in the Saints, who are his true
real body, which he now suffers in, and by suffering makes satisfaction for
them; making that death upon the Cross of none effect: which is all one with
denying that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: because they deny him that body
of flesh that God prepared for him to suffer in, even for all those his blood
was shed for, for remission of fins: hence it is that they so commonly say,
that we must not think to be saved by that Christ without us, that dyed at
Jerusalem; but by Christ within us; and that Christ within they make to be all
one with the light that is in all. Such mad confused notions they have of Jesus
Christ, who shed his blood for many, for remission of sins; and did he not shed
his blood without us, and he is able to save to the utmost them that come to
God by him, seeing he lives for ever to make intercession for them. For such a
high Priest became us, who is holy, undefiled, separate from finners, and made
higher then the heavens, Heb. 7.25, 26. And is this done within any, think you?
It Is true Jesus Christ works powerfully and effectually in the Saints, to
their converfion and reforming: but to imagine that his powerful workings in
the hearts of his people, is Christ in his being and person, is a foul
mistake, as much as to say, the actions of a man is the man.

Dear Friends, I cannot but admire and wonder, that ever you should adhere to
such Teachers, that so notoriously derogate from the death, and bloodshed, and
intercession of Jesus Christ; who has suffered but once for sins, the just for
the unjust, to bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh, but quickened
in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many,
Heb. 9.28. By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
chap. 10.14. All which these Impostors which you follow, make void, which is to
make the whole Gospel of no effect. All good news to sinners, is grounded
upon this one suffering of Christ without us, thereby bearing our sins, and
taking them away by his blood; his blood cleanses from all sin, and that
alone: without blood is no remission, by his stripes we have healing; in him we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.
Does Christ undergo the stripes of a just God, and shed his blood for our
Redemption, and forgiveness, within you? What abhorred dotages are you
bewitched with? And no great wonder when you depart from the Counsels of God,
revealed clearly in the holy Scriptures: why, whither will you wander, when you
are got beyond all true bounds? If one should have told you when you first had
prejudice against the faithful Ministry, that you will fall off from all
Ministry, and Worship, and Sabbaths, and private exercises of Religion in your
families, and from Scriptures, and from Christ, as the Scriptures teach him for
Justification, and Salvation, etc. you would have took it as ill as Hazael: but
by sad experience you may see your souls surprised with all this, and I fear
have added obstinacy unto it, even scorning all counsel, and endeavors to
reduce you from these miserable snares, with which you are taken, and undone,
if God prevent not by his everlasting love, and Covenant mercle; from which
they that have had good experience of your constancy and fidelity in the ways
of Righteousness, and true godliness, are inclined in charity, to hope well
of you, that there is some good at the bottom, and life at the root, that will
spring forth again, and make you isntrumental, by your sad experiences to warn
others.

The Third Question propounded.
WHether any thing besides the holy Scriptures, is constituted of the blessed
God to reveal Jesus Christ as Redeemer and Savior to the Spirits of sinful
miserable lost man, to bring up men to happiness. On whether lost man without
the knowledge of Christ, as the Scriptures reveal him, may attain unto
salvation, yea or no.

The Quakers Answer.
None can come to Christ, but whom the Father draws by his unlimited power,
nor know the Father, but he whom the Son reveals him, and he that thinks to
attain the way to eternal life, by reading the Letter of Scripture; and
regards not the light which comes from Christ that witnesses for God in the
secret of the heart, and Conscience, deceives himself, for the mystery of
eternal life is sealed up in the sealed Book, which none shall know by the
outward Testimony of Scripture, but by the Inspiration of the Spirit of
Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, to all that in his light wait
his power, them to guide, in faithful obedience to the Righteous; and perfect
Law of God written in the heart, for the exercise of the Conscience, which
keeps them void of offense toward God and men, according to Testimony of
Scripture, Act. 24.16.23.1.

My Reply.
Their Answer to my third Question falls upon other Questions, but gives no
direct Answer at all: for the question does not exclude the power, and grace of
the Father, and the Son from man's attaining unto salvation, but is of another
thing, namely, whether fallen lost man without the knowledge, and use of the
Scriptures, may in an ordinary way know Christ as Mediator, and be saved by
him; or thus, whether God has and does exercise his power, and Spirit in
bringing corrupt man to the knowledge of Christ, as Redeemer, and believe in
him to eternal life, without the use and knowledge of the Scriptures
ordinarily? The Question is not of extraordinary cases, and of Gods unlimited
power, who can do more then he has any where revealed he will do, but it is
of his ordinary course and power that is limited by his word of truth, to do
what he will, in order to the blessedness of those that wait upon him, in
those ways and in the use of such means, himself has appointed in his holy
word; all other stamps and forms, pretending to the knowledge of God, and
religious worshipping of him, or of being saved by Christ, are but the
superstitious births of deluded fancies, that tend to the deceiving and ruin of
a man's self and others.

Their Answer to this is but dark, and to little purpose, only they say,

That their Answer does stand as a witness against me, and declares the way to
the Father, and the Son, according to Scriptures, Matthew. 11.27. Joh. 6.44.
Which they say my dark mind is a stranger unto, who am querying of Gods
constituting ordinary means of salvation, and of his ordinary way of working,
to reveal Christ as Redeemer, which say they, are unlearned Questions, and to
be condemned with the light, which reproves the world of sin, and leads to the
Son, who is the Redeemer, and way to the Father, Joh. 14.6. Which way is but
one, and condemnation you must own, unless thou can show us a Scripture that
speaks of ordinary and extraordinary way of Gods exercising his power, and
Spirit, or of a limited power of God, which words proceed from thy dark
Imaginations, and not grounded upon Scripture, are concluded to be the births
of the deluded fancy you speak of.

Answ. By all this we may judge the sum of their Answer amounts to this, That
my Question is unlearned, and to be condemned with the light which reproves the
world of sin, and leads to the Son immediately without the help of those means
God has appointed to that end; and therefore, as before the Scriptures, and
Ordinances therein commanded, are not of necessity; but this pretended light,
and Spirit, and unlimited power of God, is to be attended upon only, not
regarding any ordinary means whatever, though such as God himself has
appointed, and does only reveal in his word; as if all those ordinary and
usual helps that God himself commands in his word, for men to use to come to
the knowledge of Christ, and how to be saved by him, were superfluous, or
opposite to the knowing of him, etc. although the Scriptures were written, and
all Instructions therein contained for our learning, that we might have comfort
and hope, all others that have not the use and benefit of Scriptures, have no
hope, and without God in the world: as has been spoken to already: and yet
this they say is an unlearned Question; but surely they say so, because they
know not how to give a direct Answer to it in plainness, but it will lay them
open to the weakest judgments, to be against Christ as Redeemer, as the
Scriptures teach him, which few would hearken unto, should they speak plainly.
But let all men judge of what Spirit these men are of, that condemns the
Questions, as propounded by the light which condemns the world of sin.

But let them first discover what sin is in these Questions, before they rashly
condemn them.

Secondly, let them tell us what light is that which reproves for sin, if not
the mind of Christ, and the voice of the Spirit revealed in the Scriptures.

Thirdly, let them prove that the light which they condemn the Questions with,
is the true light of Christ: or else who will regard them? How dare those proud
Worms condemn the things they know not how to answer, but by denying the holy
Scriptures, and what they teach?

But what light is that, that leads to the Son who is the Redeemer? while you
disown the light of Scriptures, to be the Rule to make out this high discovery.
Did you ever know or hear of any, since Scriptures were, that have attained to
know Christ as Redeemer, and to believe in him to salvation, that never heard
of Christ by Scriptures, or Scripture ministry? Does not the Apostle determine
absolutely, as to this case and question, by several interrogations, Romans 10.
How shall they call on him, of whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not (so much as) heard of? and how can they
hear without a preacher? and how can they preach except they be sent, etc. And
does he not conclude from these interrogations, that faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God? he urging that necessity of hearing the word of
God, in order to faith, without which it cannot be; And therefore it was that
he queries the Galatians, thus: Received ye the Spirit by the Law, or by faith
preached? not by the Law, but by the preaching of the Doctrine of faith.
Neither is there salvation in any other, but in that Savior and Redeemer which
the Apostles preached, Act. 9.12. for there is no other name under heaven,
given amongst men, whereby we must be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom the Jews crucified, and God raised from the dead, ver. 11. and
this name, and person, Christ Jesus, designed of God to be a Savior, cannot
any know of, or believe in him, but by the help of Scriptures, or the ministry
thereof: and he that believes not (in this name Christ Jesus the Son of the
living God) shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. And does not our Savior affirm that
salvation is of the Jews? as they were the Church of God, peculiar from all
other people under heaven; because, unto them was committed the Oracles of God:
and is not the christian Church grafted into them, and peculiar from all
others, Infidels, and misbelievers, and have the same and more spiritual
privileges, and blessings of the Covenant, while all others are left to wander
in their own ways? were not the Apostles Doctrine which they preached, the
only means of enlightening the dark world? and let them show us where, and to
whom they preached the light in men, to be the Gospel, and Christ within them,
that the Gentiles should be saved by. No, they preached Christ crucified, a
dying, bleeding Christ, for remission of sins: It pleased God, by the
foolishness of preaching (Christ, as they did) to save them that believe: as
they were fitted and sent of God, so they were directed in doing his work
faithfully, and were accompanied with an answerable success; witness the many
Churches that they gathered, and converted to the christian faith, turning them
from darkness to the true light, and from the power of Satan unto God;
striving to preach Christ, where he never had been named before, Romans 15.20.
And what Christ did they preach, is easy to determine, may the Scriptures
judge. Either let these sinners against their own souls preach the same Christ
to sinners, for the same ends and purposes, as the Scriptures witness of the
Apostles, or else let their lying mouths be stopped, and persist no further in
deceiving themselves, and seducing others.

Reader, thou can not but judge the Question rational and religious, if the
Scriptures may judge, and to be answered in the negative; and yet these men who
out of their thick darkness having denied the Scriptures to be the Rule of
faith and obedience, are forced to forge out of their dark imaginations another
Rule of revealing Christ to lost man, besides the Scriptures, which Rule is in
every man, sometimes under the notion off light within, law of the heart, here
they bring in an unlimited power of God, distinct from the use of those
Ordinances, and ways which God has appointed to make useful in those Divine
discoveries of Christ the only Mediator between God and sinful man; and
without which Christ as Mediator and Redeemer is not known nor believed in,
unto salvation at all.

They carp and cavil at my expressions, because the Question is to Gods
ordinary and usual dealings with the souls of men, (and have waved the
extraordinary, and unusual operations of the hidden unlimited power of God,
doing what he will to Infants distracted, deaf in the Church, in showing them
mercy) but they reject all ordinary means of Scripture, and ordinances therein
appointed, and only set up an immediate, unlimited power of God, though if the
word of an Apostle be of credit before them, the Gospel of Christ is the power
of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. So necessary is the ministry of the Gospel to
salvation, that it is called the power of God to that end; and yet I have all
along yielded, that to the means must be added a Divine hand in working
effectually upon the souls of men, or else nothing can be wrought unto
salvation; and as for the expressions themselves, it is not much material that
they be found in Scripture, so long as the thing and sense is there, as has,
and much more might be added in proof thereof, were it needful.

The word ordinary food, is in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 16.27.
there the Lord threatened to deny it, which were their daily bread; but I say
the thing it self is grounded upon Scriptures. Israel drank of water in the
Brooks, and Springs, and Wells that they dug, which was ordinary, and yet
Gods gift: they also drank of water that God gave them out of a Rock in the
Wilderness, where no water was before, and that was extraordinary. Israel took
of their Dough for bread, which they had prepared in Egypt, and that was
ordinary: but when their food was spent, the Lord gave them bread from heaven,
and that was extraordinary, for a time till they could be put into a capacity
of ordinary food again. I might instance in twenty things more, but I forbear.
But see the peversenesse of these men; because God at some times has revealed
himself immediately by his Spirit without means, therefore they conclude he
does so still, although we have his word to reveal his mind, and will unto us
in all things necessary to be known and done. Their quotations are perverted,
and wrested, as they do all other Scriptures, to their own destruction: and to
what end do they quote Scriptures in proof of any thing they assert, while they
deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of faith and obedience?

In my reply, I urged Joh. 5.39. against the latter part of their Answer, in
which I told them, that Christ commands the Jews to search the Scriptures, for
in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. But these Quakers say contrary. He that thinks to attain the way to
eternal life by reading the Scriptures, and regards not the light that comes
from Christ, deceives himself. To this I said, it seems the holy Scriptures are
opposed to the light which comes from Christ; and I judge that the Scriptures
are a light that comes from Christ, and the only way and means appointed by
God, both to know and believe in Christ to eternal life, where and to whom the
Lord is pleased to give his blessing.

Their Answer.

To say that we speak contrary to Christ, is false, but he that reads the
Scriptures, and regards not the light which gave them forth, to learn, wrests
them to his own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. and so deceives himself: and such are
they that put them in place of the light, and think them the only way and means
appointed by God, to eternal life.

Answ. Did not Christ approve of the Jews opinion, in thinking that in the
Scriptures they should have eternal life? for where is there any promise of
eternal life, or discovery of the way and means to attain it, but in the
Scriptures? and from that good opinion the Jews had of the truth of
Scriptures, Christ refers them to the Scriptures, as bearing testimony that he
was the true Christ. Of a five-fold witness and testimony that Christ urged on
his own behalf, in this chapter, this of the testimony of Scripture is one, and
not the least to prevail upon the credence of that unbeleeving people. What
they mean by not regarding the light which gave them forth to learn, is beyond
my understanding to find out. What light is that which gave the Scriptures? is
it not the Spirit of God? all Scripture being given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. Surely he that regards the Inspirations of God, regards the Author
of those inspirations; for to say a man is obedient to the Scriptures, and by
search is willing to know Gods will, to do it more, and yet regards not God
that gave it forth, is a contradiction in it self: but these men assume, that
in them only is the light which gave the Scripture; and hence they judge, in
that we regard not what they say and write, we regard not the light, etc. and
our cleaving to the rule of Scriptures, which are the Inspirations of God, and
not regarding them, seems to be the deceit, and to wrest the Scriptures to our
own destruction, as if the Scriptures were writ for men's destruction and
deceit, and not for their learning, comfort, and hope: but that place in 2 Pet.
3.16. is spoken of unlearned and unstable men, that wrest, not only some hard
places, but also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction; and therefore
bids the Church beware, lest being drawn away by the error of the wicked, they
fall from their own steadfastness. Oh the giddiness, and unstability of these
men's Spirits, that have runned from Sect to Sect, till they have run through
all, and then think to center in a way of their own choosing; in which they do
not practice any one duty of religious Worship to God, private or public, as
the holy Scriptures teach, and to make Conscience thereof, from Scripture
Authority! And yet others, and not themselves, they charge with wresting the
Scriptures, as in their next clause. Such are they that put them in the place
of the light, and think them the only way and means appointed by God to
eternal life.

Answ. You may see who they judge to be most guilty of wresting the Scriptures
to their own destruction, namely, those that think them the only way, and means
appointed by God, both to know and believe in Christ the Redeemer to eternal
life, and to live unto God according to this Rule, this is but the same with
their denying the Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of faith and obedience,
censuring those that make them the Rule of faith and obedience, as if by so
doing men deceive themselves, and wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction. Oh profane impiety, and sinful blindness themselves are involved
in, for not receiving the truth in the love of it, etc.

But I see I shall be too large, and tire the Reader, if I examine all things
of theirs, which is needless, because we have the same again and again in
other words, which is answered already, as to the substance of them. But they
tell me, Thou go on in thy blind zeal, seeking to maintain the Scriptures
to be the only means to reveal Christ as Redeemer, and the only way in which
God puts forth his Divine power to give light and life to men.

To this they Answer.

But who art thou that wilt limit God to a way, and means of manifesting his
power and Spirit, who has promised to power it upon all flesh, and that Sons
and Daughters shall prophecy, and see visions, Joel. 2.28. And we witness his
promise fulfilled and fulfilling, and know that he will have mercy on whom he
will have mercy.

Answ. 1. It Is true, God will have mercy on whom he will; but the Question is,
whether God exercises his saving mercies of the Covenant to any in bringing
them to salvation by Christ, without the knowledge and use of the Scriptures:
for how can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard, and how can they
be saved, that do not at all believe in Christ? as has been spoke to already,
Romans 10. And if our Gospel be hid, or withheld, it is to them that perish.

2. The blessing of the Scriptures given to a people, is a peculiar mercy to
any people, and never was common unto all: God has given his Laws and
Statutes unto Israel, as for the heathen, they have not known his ways. To them
was committed the Oracles of God, the Covenant, and the promises, and the
service of God, and the Adoption, etc. but all others are without Christ,
strangers to the Covenant of promise, and without hope and God in the world,
Ephesians. 2. And whomsoever God shows mercy unto, as to the end, to save them, he
shows mercy unto in giving them the means he saves by: and as is the end, so is
the means appointed by the Lords peculiar mercy, restrained to the Christian
Churches; distinct from all others; and to affirm the same, is not our
limiting of God, but it is the pleasure and wisdom of God to limit his power,
by the word of his eternal truth; and to argue from his unlimited power,
against his word of truth, Covenant and promise, is to be wise above what is
written, if not contrary, which trusted unto, is high presumption. As for that
of Joel. 2.28. The Apostle witnessed that promise fulfilled, when those
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were given to the Apostles, Act. 2.16, 17. So
likewise upon the Gentiles when Peter preached the word unto Cornelius and his
friends, were the same gifts of the holy Ghost, and they spoke with Tongues as
did the Apostles at the beginning, chap. 10.45, 46. chap. 11.15, 16, 17.
compared. So that it is clear, that of Joel, was fulfilled in the Apostles
days, and by them applied to that very manner of giving forth of the Spirit:
which not any in our times can witness, or evince by the same gifts of
miracles and Tongues: and yet these conceited Quakers witness the same
promise, fulfilling in them still, although they have nothing of the same
things spoken of, Act. 2.4.16. When they have the gift of Tongues, working
miracles, we shall more easily incline to believe they are endowed with
immediate Revelations, themselves so much boast of: If they have not the gift
of Tongues, and of miracles, the Apostles and some others had which accompanied
the gift of Revelations, what reason have we to believe them, in what they
pretend, while they are utterly destitute of the other? I do not go about to
limit Gods power, but that in his wisdom and good pleasure he may give the
same gifts again to men; but yet I am not bound to believe God has, and does
give the same gifts to these men that so boast, they being not approved of God,
in having gifts of Tongues, and miracles, as they had, that applied that of the
Prophet Joel to themselves. I grant that all necessary gifts of the Spirit unto
salvation may have some footing from that promise, and so to the Gentiles. But
this reaches not the thing in hand, and is no more proper to them, than to the
weakest Christian that is renewed by the Spirit of Grace. In the most proper
sense, that promise was fulfilled as Peter witnesses, Act. 2.16. above 1600.
years ago; but these say, they witness it fulfilling now, but they want not
for boldness to say any thing they have a mind unto.

Next, they bid me show that Scripture that speaks of a written word, or that
calls it the savor of life, quick and powerful, or that attributes any such
things unto it, as thou say, but if you cannot, stop thy mouth.

Answ. Most absurd is their first. What is the Scriptures but words from the
Lord, committed unto writing? and every sentence of Scripture is a written
word: What is Scripture, but the writings of the prophets, and Apostles? and
what did they write but words? and what were those words, but the Inspirations
of God? all Scriptures are given by Inspiration of God; as has been quoted
again and again.

And what will they make of that promise themselves quote Joel 2. is not that a
written word, and all their other quotations?

The Apostles were the savor of death to some, 2 Cor.
and life to others, 2 Cor. 2.16. But how was this, but as they were Ministers
of the Word? for they were not as many, which corrupt the word, etc. and the
word is quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12. It Is called the immortal seed, the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. David tells us, Thy word has quickened
me, and was light to his feet, the rejoicing of his heart, his heritage for
ever, and gives light and understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119.130. He
witnesses that Gods word is pure, therefore he loved it, ver. 140. It is
endless to recount the Epithites, and honor, and glorious esteem the
servants of God have always had of the word, as it is written; and they that
despise this word shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.13. And let these worms that
are all along diminishing, and detracting from the power and majesty of the
Scriptures, beware, lest being given over to despise the word, they be polluted
in their own gifts, and follow the imaginations of their own deluded hearts, to
their utter ruin, if God, by his grace prevent it not.

Whereas in their first Answer to the Question in hand, they talk of yielding
faithful obedience to the righteous and perfect Law of God in the heart, in my
reply, I told them that they build all upon the light within, and the Law of
God writ in the heart, and the Inspirations of Christ, and so make the holy
Scriptures superfluous, and of no use, whereas the writing of Gods Law in the
heart is a blessing of the Covenant promised to the use of those ways and
means God has given to the Church in order to that end; his word and
ordinances, the Isntrumental cause of this blessing of grace, to whom he will;
the writing of his Law in the heart, being but the same with a new heart
regenerate, and quickened by a Divine power of special grace, which softens the
hard uncircumcised heart of man, and makes it pliable to receive the Words
impression, as standing willing and ready to believe, and do what Jesus Christ
in the Rule of his word, would have him to do; being made willing in the day of
his power upon the heart to yield faithful obedience to all the Laws and
Ordinances of Christ revealed in his holy word. And to jumble things together,
as they, by making the light, and Inspirations of Christ, and Law in the heart
all one, are most confused notions of things that differ as much as the
efficient, and the effect, the giver and the gift, the will of God in
commanding, and the blessing of God overruling the subject to a willing
obedience; but let them tell us where the Scriptures speak of a righteous
perfect Law of God in the heart, either in all men, or in some; and who they
are, that have such a Law written within; which of the Prophets, or Apostles
gives the discovery of a perfect Law in the heart, unto which all our obedience
is to terminate as the only Rule; if they cannot produce Scripture Authority
for it, let them confess it a Law of their own fancy, as to the end they
intend it for.

But they say in their last Answer to this in hand.

Upon the Prophets, and Apostles we build, and Christ Jesus, who has
enlightened every one that comes into the world, is the chief corner stone,
though he be set at naught by thee, and the builders, who would set the
Scriptures in his place, making them the enlightener, and calls his light but
an effect of them; which light was before Scripture was, and will lead them
that walk in it out of darkness, to the knowledge of God and eternal life,
Joh. 8.12. But this light is not received into the mind and head from the
Scripture, neither can it be blotted out, as thou have said, but it comes from
Christ who is the glory of his people Israel, and the light of the Gentiles,
such as thou call'st pagans, who shall be excused, when thou, and all that
oppose the light of Christ, shall be condemned, though you can talk of Christ
as Bedeemer, and Mediator of his Spirit, and regenerating Grace, all which you
are strangers to, etc.

Answ. Let the indifferent Reader judge, how true it is, that they build upon
the Prophets and Apostles, while they have, and are denying the holy Scriptures
to be a perfect Rule of faith and obedience, and affirm that the light of
Christ is not received by the Scriptures, and yet they say, upon the Prophets,
and Apostles they build: and is not the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles
that Scripture that they exclude from receiving the light of Christ in their
minds and heads. What Prophets and Apostles is the Church built upon, if not
upon those that have declared the mind of God, and Jesus Christ, in the holy
Scriptures? And shall any think that the Scriptures oppose the light of Christ,
because they are written to make the clear discovery of Christ, as Redeemer,
and without which, not any can know him to any such end? But it is charged upon
me to be a fault, in making the Scripture an enlightener, and calls Christ's
light but an effect of them. Answer, whether I used those terms, I am not sure;
this I said, and cleared my self in, that the Scriptures simply considered of
themselves did not enlighten, nor convert as an efficient cause thereof, but
were appointed, and designed of God to be the only Instrument and Vessel of his
Spirit, to conveigh the knowledge of Christ as Redeemer to lost man, and
without them Christ is not known at all to any saving ends: or to this purpose
I spoke. I have proved that the Word does give light to the simple: and David
acknowledges it to be both a Lamp, and a light, Psalm. 119. Besides, whatsoever
makes manifest, is light, but the Scripture does make manifest what Christ is,
and what he has done and suffered, and for whom, and for what ends. So also
they make manifest what sin is, and the wages thereof, what holiness, and true
Worship of God is, and how God will be served by all that shall be saved;
therefore the Scriptures are a true light. If the Spirit of Christ does give
forth light to men, then the Scriptures are a light to enlighten men, because
holy men writ them, as they were moved, and inspired by the holy Ghost, and all
Scripture were given by Inspiration of God: and therefore deny the light of
Scriptures, and deny the light of the Spirit; for what the Scripture says, the
Spirit says, they being the Revelations, and Inspirations of the Spirit. And
what may we think of these seducers, that under pretense of a light within, and
a perfect Law of God in the heart, and the Revelations of Christ in them,
condemn me for making the Revelations and Inspirations of God in Scripture, a
perfect Rule of faith and obedience? but we are sure the Law of God which
Scriptures teach, is perfect, holy, just, and good, and a sure word; and the
Inspirations of God, contained in Scriptures, are true as God himself, but as
for that Law and Spirit, that cannot stand, unless the Scriptures fall, it is
easy to discern from whence it is. But say they, this light is not received
from the Scripture, but from Christ, etc.

Answ. The light of Scripture, is the light of Christ, as also the Scripture
Ministry, by which alone Christ became a light to the Gentiles; and in that
Christ has appointed a Ministry of men, and given them gifts, and Authority to
preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and by his blessing has made them
successful, to turn them from darkness to light, as in the Apostles age
especially: Thus, and no otherwise is he sent to be a light unto the Gentiles;
for how can any believe in him of whom they never heard? as has been spoke to
already: and what ever is wrought by his Authority in the use of means, is all
one with being wrought by Christ himself, to any that are sober. And hence
those distinctions of mine, are grounded, of Christ, more strictly, and
immediately; and of Christ more comprehensive, and in a mediate sense, as he
has made the promise of his presence and blessing to those Ministers of the
Gospel, that teach, and administer in the Church all things, whatsoever Christ
has commanded to be done, Matthew. 28.19. He that walks in the midst of the
seven Golden Candlesticks, will be with the Scripture Ministry to the end of
the World, until the whole be gathered and united to their head, and made
complete in him.

They say this light of Christ cannot be blotted out as thou say. That which
I said, was a supposition thus. Suppose, that all the light of Christ as
Redeemer, which you from time to time have received from the use of Scriptures,
Ministry, Education, Discourse, were blotted out of your minds and heads, tell
me what you could know of Christ, as he is designed of God to redeem lost man,
and how the work of Redemption is wrought, more then the rude heathen, that
never heard of his name. All that they Answer to this, is, That the light
cannot be blotted out, as thou say. But what light is that, which cannot be
blotted out?

Say they,

The light of Christ, that leads out of darkness to the knowledge of God to
eternal life, though they have not the use of Scriptures, this light is not
received into the mind and head, from the Scripture, neither cannot be blotted
out, but it comes from Christ the light of the Gentiles, such as thou call
Heathens, who, many of them show the work of the Law in their hearts, and shall
be excused, when thou, and all that oppose the light of Christ, shall be
condemned.

Christians, look about you, for the Devil was never so bold, as now; and I
think there is more of the Devil in so few lines, then ever were writ by man
before: consider them well, I assure you it is all their own. Was ever such an
abominable thing asserted amongst Christians? The light of Christ, that leads
out of darkness to the knowledge of God, to eternal life, is not received in
the mind, from the Scripture, but from Christ the light of the Gentiles. As if
the Scriptures were opposed to the light of Christ, or of no use to reveal
Christ as Redeemer to the salvation of lost man.

Christians, you see now their Answer, what it is to the Question, namely, That
the light of Christ, without the use of Scripture, leads out of darkness, to
the knowledge of God, to eternal life, etc. even to the Gentiles, that never
heard of Christ, nor believe in him to salvation. But if this be true, to what
end did Christ come into the world, and lay down his life, to be a ransom for
many; and why did he shed his blood for many, for remission of sins? Christ's
death and resurrection is all in vain, for all the world from the beginning
have had this kind of light, showing the work of the law in their hearts, and
do by nature the things contained in the Law.

1. But let them prove that this work of the Law, is the light of Christ that
Simeon prophesied of, and the Prophets, and that the Apostles witnessed,
fulfilled by their preaching, and writings.

2. And let them prove that the work of the Law in their hearts, leads out of
darkness to eternal life. The Scriptures say the contrary: By the works of
the Law shall no flesh be justified, nor is there any law that can give life.

3. And let them prove that the work of the Law in the hearts of unbelieving
Gentiles, is a spiritual blesseing of the new Covenant, Heb. 8. which the
Apostle applied to the believing Church; so did the Prophets of old time, Jer.
31. If they cannot prove these three things, let shame stop their lying mouths.

Jesus Christ as he was promised to be a light of the Gentiles, Isai. 42.6, 7.
is to be understood of a peculiar spiritual light, Christ was given for such a
light to the Gentiles, as should open the blind eyes, and bring out the
Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness, in the Regions and
shadow of death, out of the Prison house, to guide their feet in the way of
peace, Luke 1. Which accordingly was fulfilled in the Apostles age, but how?
not by Christ immediately, but by Christ's Authority, who appointed men, and
furnished them with gifts, and abilities to preach the Gospel unto them, and
opened their hearts to receive it, and become Christians in profession and
truth. And in that they were converted and enlightened by means himself
appointed, is all one by being converted and enlightened by him, because his
appointing means, and blessing them to that end, was that which did the work;
as several Texts does witness in the writings of the Apostles, Act. 11.15.17,
18. who concluding, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto
life, and this was wrought by the ministry of the word, by Peter. Act.
13.46.47. It was necessary that the word of God, should first be preached to
the Jews, but they rejecting it, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the
Lord ordained us, saying, I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that
thou should be for salvation to the ends of the earth; Paul and Barnabas
attributing that to Christ, which was to be done by their ministry, by his
Authority and command, Act. 15.14, 15, 16, 17, 19. Peter has declared how God
at the first, did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his
name, as it is written in the Prophets; that the residue of men might seek
after the Lord; and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called, says the
Lord. Wherefore my sentence is, (says James) that we trouble not them which
from among the Gentiles are turned to God: and how were they turned to God? Not
by a light immediate as the Quakers would, but by the ministry of the word; as
further appears Act. 26.17, 18. as is witnessed by the Apostle Paul, which
received it from Christ himself; Christ promised to appear unto him, delivering
him from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee, to open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and in he itance
among them which are sanctified by faith, that is in me, working in them the
same faith by the word, on which forgiveness, and eternal life only depend;
that is, faith in Christ.

To open the blind eyes of the Gentile world, that were darkness it self, and
turn them to the true light, is the only work of Jesus Christ, as he is God:
and yet Paul, as he was made a Minister of the Gentiles, he was sent to do it,
by the preaching of the Gospel: and the Lord wrought wonderfully by his
ministry, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed, Romans 15.18, 19. How
many Churches of the Gentiles, were gathered by the Preaching of the Gospel,
came under Baptism, and all other known duties of Christian obedience? Was not
Christ a light to all these believing Gentiles, in granting them repentance
unto life, as I quoted before? As for the other Gentiles which never heard of
Christ, or hearing of him, rejected him, they remained Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, without Christ, and Covenant of promise, and hope, and
God in the world, having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness
of their hearts. Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18. But on the other hand, how does the
Apostle admire and wonder at those unsearchable riches of Grace to the Gentiles
that believed in Christ Jesus? Ye, who were sometimes far off, are made high by
the blood of Jesus; therefore now ye are no more strangers, and foreiners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
cornerstone, in whom all the building, fitly framed together (Jews and
Gentiles) grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Hence see what that building
is, of whom Christ is said to be the chief Cornerstone, not the profane
building of the pagan unbelieving world, that are built upon the Devil, and
the vain imaginations of their dark minds (as you have^^t, ^^ard these Quakers
blasphemingly apply this text) but Believers, be they Jews, or Gentiles, that
are built upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, to them only is
Christ the chief Cornerstone, chap. 2.19, 20, 21. If they have ears to hear,
let them hear what the Spirit has said unto the Churches: and in particular
how Christ Jesus has enlightened and grafted the believing Gentiles into his
visible professing Church, and made them a peculiar chosen people to himself,
distinct and separate from the heathen Idolatrous world.

But it seems they are angry, because in my reply, I told them, it will pose
them to prove that that righteous and perfect Law of God in their hearts (they
so much pretended to) to be of God, and not from their idle brains. And good
cause there was, that they should be put to the proof thereof, they answering
so deceitfully, and subtly about the Authority of Scriptures, as I have
sufficiently discovered. Besides I bid them tell me plainly, whether the
perfect Law of the heart, to which all their obedience is bounded, be the same
perfect Law of God which the holy Scriptures teach, consisting of precepts
moral, and positive Institutions of holy Worship, in force in the Apostolical
Churches, etc. Or, whether is the Law in the heart different from it. If, say
I, that in the heart be but the very same with the whole of Scriptures, then it
will follow that the perfect Law and Rule of Scriptures is superfluous, and
writ in vain. Then on the other hand if that in their heart be different from
the Scriptures, it concerns them to prove it to be of God, and not from their
idle brains. To that purpose I writ.

Their Answer is,

We speak in plainness, as the Law of God written in our hearts directs us,
which Law we know is perfect, and a blessing of the everlasting Covenant, which
thou talkest of, but know not, being disobedient, and abominable, etc.

Answ. 1. What may we judge of that Law that accuses another to be disobedient
and abominable, for proposing rational queries, and demanding proof of what
they assert.

2. Is their saying they know they have the perfect Law of God in their hearts
a satisfying proof? Judge ye. But

3. If this Law be but a blessing of the Covenant, then it is not the eternal
word that made the world, as before they Answer upon the like occasion upon the
first Question, unless they will confound God (that gives the blessing) and
the blessing given into one.

Well, they take it for granted in stead of proof, That the perfect Law of God
is written in their hearts; by which they judge my error, who am pleading for
that Law to be the ground of the Saints obedience, that made nothing perfect,
say they.

This is notable. Did I ever plead for that Law of Priesthood, that were
exercised in the sacrificing beasts, sprinklings of blood, which were but types
of Christ, the bringer in of a better hope? Heb. 7. I say, did I ever plead
this Law of Ceremonies, which were but a shadow of good things to come, the
ground of the Saints obedience? Let them produce it, or else cease thus to
abuse me with lying words. But if they will wickedly pervert the text, and
judge me, for pleading the holy perfect just Laws, and Institutions of God and
Christ, that Scriptures teach, the only Rule of the Saints obedience; as if
these were to vanish, as making nothing perfect, as is very probable that is
their sense. Therefore no great matter, that I come under their censure, when
the holy Laws of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, cannot escape their
slanders. Thus you may see of what Spirit they are of, both by their
forwardness to censure, and falsehood in their Answer. But then in the next
paragraph, they have another Answer to the same thing; where they yield,

1. That the perfect Law in the heart, is the same with that in Scripture, but
under another Covenant.

2. They say this perfect Law of God in the heart, is in all that are in the
new Covenant.

3. Then they say, That this Law is perpetually one and the same in all that
have it, and it admits of no addition, alteration, nor repeal.

4. Where Regeneration is witnessed, and the heart quickened by the grace of
God, his Law is writ in that heart.

These four things were occasioned upon some queries put to them, which for
want of my Copy I cannot directly transcribe: amongst which Queries, one was,
Whether this perfect Law in the heart gives any Evangelicall discoveries of the
person, natures, offices of Christ; which they say is an unlearned Question,
condemned by the light which gave forth the Scriptures, etc.

Reader mark, here they make the Law in the heart the Rule which is perpetual
without repeal, as before, which directs them in answering; and yet this Law
is but a blessing of the new Covenant. Another while they say, the Spirit is
the sole judge, and only Rule, as you have heard. Another while the light of
Christ, that enlighteneth every one that comes into the world; another while
the eternal word that was from the beginning, which made all things; and in
their close of all they say, written from the Spirit of truth, who is the same
in all the children of light. Thus you see, they make the Law written in the
heart, and the Spirit of truth, and the eternal word, all one: the Law which is
promised, and given by that one God that made all things, is the same that made
all things. Again, one while they plead the work of the Law writ in the hearts
of all in the world; another while restrain it only to those that are in the
new Covenant, and regenerate, quickened by the grace of God; one while man by
nature has no light remaining in him at all, but is darkness, another while
all in the world are enlightened by Christ. They plead a perfect Law within and
the same with the Laws of God in Scriptures, and yet condemn me for pleading
the Laws and Ordinances of God in Scripture for a Rule. That of the Scripture
made nothing perfect, say they, and yet confess it the same with that in the
heart. Surely, either these are learned Paradoxes, or else absurd
contradictions: they may do well to clear themselves better, and speak plain
and directly to the things in hand.

1. The Question is still, where we read of a perfect Law of God in the heart,
and where it is made the Rule and ground of the Saints obedience.

2. And the Question is, whether the Law in the heart be under another Covenant
distinct from the perfect law of God, as declared in the Scripture.

3. And still the Question is, what we are to understand by the Law of God in
the heart, which is the same with Scriptures, whether the ten Commandments
writ in Tables of Stone, only, or all those positive precepts of Gospel
worship, and obedience conjoined with them also.

4. And still the Question is, whether the Law in the heart, without the use of
Scriptures, make any evangelicall discoveries of the person, natures, and
offices of Christ, as he is Redeemer of lost man.

5. And whether all shall be saved that have the Law of God writ in their
hearts by virtue of the new Covenant, or any be saved that live to years of
discretion, that know not Christ as the Scriptures testify of him, in order to
his coming in the world to save sinners.

Although these queries have been put to them, they will not answer plainly and
directly, but darkly, and with deceit, of purpose to evade the strength of
truth, that is against them, should they speak out. They quote Psalm. 19.7. to
prove the Law of God to be perfect in the heart; but David intended another
Law, namely that of the Prophets. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: the
Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the Commandments of the
Lord are pure, enlightening the eyes, etc.

I have given my thoughts how the Law is writ in the hearts of Gods sanctified
people, and do grant the thing in all that are Godly by virtue of the new
Covenant; which they accuse me to deny, though falsely: but this I deny, That
the perfection of the whole Law of God is writ in any man's heart, so as to know
it, and do it, as it is written in the Prophets and Apostles. For as Paul
says, We know in part, and prophecy in part, and see but darkly, 1 Cor.
13.9.12. So in James, in many things we offend all. Besides the Scripture does
not say as they do, of yielding faithful obedience to the righteous and
perfect Law of God in the heart, and when they speak not according to
Scripture, it is to be rejected and disowned, themselves have granted in their
Answer to the second Question.

And what that other Covenant is, the Law in the heart is under, themselves
have often expressed to be the new Covenant, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. And will they
deny the Laws Statutes, Ordinances of God in force, writ in Scriptures to be a
blessing of privilege, as they are means appointed for man to use in order to
that end of Gods writing them in the heart by his Spirit? Both the outward
writing and the inward impression, wrought by the power of Divine grace, is
from the same Covenant, witness Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8, 9. For what Nation is so great,
that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is, in all things that we
call upon him for? And what Nation so great, that has Statutes and Judgments
so righteous, as all this Law which Moses set before them? and therefore he
warns them to keep their souls diligently, lest they forget the Laws which
their eyes have seen, and lest they depart from their hearts; but teach them
thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons, and so on. These words of the Law of God, they
were commanded to get them in their hearts, and teach them diligently to their
children, when they sat in their houses, and walked abroad, lying down, and
rising up, chap. 6.6, 7.

Thus we may see that those that have the Laws of God are nigh unto God, and
great above all other Nations, by way of privilege. And to what end were the
Laws of God given unto them, and us, but that we should know them, and do them
for our good? chap. 10.12, 13. See chap. 11.18, 19. The use of the outward is a
means of the inward, where God gives the blessing. And for those that have not
the benefit of the outward writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, or have
them, and yet regard them not, as it is written, is too palpable a sign that
they are strangers from the Law of God in the heart, as it is a blessing of the
new Covenant. We know the written Law was given to the people by the hands of a
Mediator; and not against the promise, but subservient to the receiving of the
benefits, and blessings thereof. And therefore let them show us what other
Covenant that is to which pertains the perfect Law in the heart, distinct from
the outward writing, and how the outward declaration is under one Covenant, and
the Laws of God in the heart, under another, they being both the same, as is
confessed: but whether they understand all the same in the heart, as is in
force in the holy Scriptures, I suspect, for they wave the answer of that,
whereas the whole of what the Scripture plainly teaches, is in the hearts of
the Lords people, to believe, love, and do, with an equal respect, as the
Scripture is plain in.

By evangelicall discoveries they carp at, and judge as unlearned, and to be
condemned, which I do much admire, knowing that themselves are no strangers to
the phrase, and sense, nor unacquainted with those Scriptures that give such
discoveries of the person, natures, offices of a redeeming Christ, that never
any have attained unto, and discovered, either by word, or writing, which never
had nor heard of the help of the Gospel, as contained in the Scriptures. And
for them to condemn me for putting the Question unless I can prove by
Scripture those things of Christ, argues their denial of them, which to do,
seems to me no less, then to deny the true Christ, anointed of God, and fitted
to perform the work of man's redemption in his own body, once offered by the
eternal Spirit, that he might bring sinners to God. Had he not a body given
him which was sacrificed unto death, was buried, rose again, and ascended into
Heaven, as Scriptures witness? And was he not a person? Pilate's wife
acknowledged him a just person, Matthew. 27.24. And Paul forgave in the person of
Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10.
and to his humane nature is united his Divine, which the Saints are said to
partake of, in its special and peculiar workings upon their hearts: the word
made flesh, in that he took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham,
born of a Virgin, etc. truly God, and truly man in one person: and his
offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, as evident, according to Scripture, that
not any but Infidels, and malicious Apostates will deny. But I hasten. And I
doubt not but that all that have the Law writ in their hearts, by virtue of the
new Covenant, shall be saved, that being the same with a new heart regenerate,
and quickened by the grace of God, and not any other, although they have the use
of Scriptures, much less those that are denied the ordinary use and benefit
thereof, as they reveal Christ the Redeemer to the world, without knowing, and
believing in, shall perish.

But Christians, I pray you mark what a Christ these men fancy to themselves,
as Redeemer, that have condemned me with the light that gave forth the
Scripture, for querying whether the light that is in all in the world, gives
the discovery of the person, natures, and offices of Christ, unless the
Scriptures do prove them, why do not they know that the Scriptures do give
this Gospel discovery, if they will own it, as I am sure they cannot be
ignorant of it? Why do they put me to the proof, condemning the Query, as
unlearned, because I ask whether those that have not the use of Scripture, have
a sufficient Gospel light to give this discovery? If they deny it, (as I
believe they do) then judge what a Christ they frame in their imaginations,
that is without person, natures, and offices, whether he be that very same
Christ that was equal with God, and took upon him the form of a Servant, made
in the likeness of men, and being found in the fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil.
2.7, 8. That suffered in the flesh, the just for the unjust, to bring us unto
God, 1 Pet. 3.18. I tell you, did not these deceivers fear the Authority of
man, that has put forth an Act against Blasphemy, more then the Authority of
God in Scriptures, they would speak out in plain terms, and deny the person,
natures, and offices of Christ, and so deny Christ himself, who is not at all a
Mediator, and Redeemer on the behalf of lost man, but by his person, natures,
and offices, etc. And therefore it is well that fear of man will stop the mouth
of blasphemy. But mark, they cannot condemn the Question as unlearned, by the
Authority and light of Scripture, which are undoubtedly the Inspirations of
God; but their insolence carries them higher then the light of Scripture
Inspirations, namely, to a light in themselves, by which they condemn the
mysteries of Christ in the work of Redemption, which the Scriptures so plainly
teach. But what light is this, that condems the query?

They answer, the light that gave forth the Scriptures.

Reply. God is light, and the Scriptures are the Inspirations of God, does it
follow that the light in man, is that God that gave the Scriptures? when can
you prove that the light in man gave forth the Scriptures? if you cannot prove
it, by what Authority do you assert it?

The Fourth Question propounded.
WHether that light of Conscience, which is more or less, in all since the
fall, be the Remainder or Relics left in man, of the first Adam, in reference
to the Covenant of works, or whether common to all from the Redemption of the
second Adam, as flowing from the Covenant of Grace, or how else. I desire your
clear Answer.

The Quakers Answer.
Man in his fallen estate has not any light remains in him, to guide him to do
any thing pleasing to God, as he stands in the state of corrupt nature, for all
his righteousness is as filthy rags. The light that convinces men of the
evil of their hearts, and discovers the filthiness of their own
Righteousness, is the light that comes from Christ, the true light, that
lighteneth every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. And this light is
not common to men by nature, it is the great gift of God his grace, that has
appeared unto all men, etc. Tit. 2.11.

My Reply.
The Answer to my fourth Question, is in the negative in the first part denying
that man has any light in him, at all, to please God in the state of corrupt
nature, and this I judge a truth, though not proper to the Question, which is
not of doing to please God, but of whence that light is, that all have, you
talk of, which in the second part you answer is from Christ, according to Joh.
1.9. and yet not common to all men by nature, but is the great gift of God,
etc. which Answer I charged with a contradiction; because all are lightened by
Christ that come into the world, as you quote, and yet say, man in corrupt
nature has not any light in him, nor is it common to men by nature, when it is
certain that men come into the world by natural birth.

But to reconcile these, they Answer.

That man in corrupt nature is darkness, but Christ lightneth every one, and
his light shines in darkness, and makes manifest what ever is reproved. Though
we deny that the light which convinces for sin is of corrupt man, yet we
affirm it to be given to man in Christ. And this is the substance of what is
said.

That man in corrupt nature should be darkness in the abstract, and has not
any light in him: and that man in the same estate is lightened by Christ, and
that with such a light too, that if it be owned and loved, will lead out of
darkness to eternal life, as they affirm, let them that are sober judge how
these agree together. Such cannot do any thing to please God, and yet have that
within them, that will lead them out of darkness to eternal life, which is
the greatest acceptance of favor God gives to man. Then they conclude, For
though we deny the light which convinces of sin, to be of corrupt man, yet say
they, We affirm it to be given to man in Christ, who is the life, and
enlighteneth every one that comes into the world. But how can they affirm that
all men in corrupt nature are in Christ, and so enlightened by him, when the
Scriptures speak contrary, as Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Wherefore remember, that ye
being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, that at that time ye were without
Christ, and strangers to the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without
God in the world. They were sometimes darkness, but now are they light in the
Lord, since they embraced the Doctrine of faith, that the Apostles preached,
and lived in Christian obedience, they are said to be light in the Lord:
Contradistinct to the other Gentiles that walked after the vanity of their
minds, chap. 4.17, 18, 19. And there are some that are not in the faith, nor
new creatures, which all are, that are in Christ, as 2 Cor. 5.17. chap. 13.5.
And how can any be said to be in Christ but by faith, which all men have not? 2
These. 3.2. And how did the Apostles by their preaching open blind eyes and turn
them from darkness to light, by the command and power of Christ, if they had
the light of Christ, and in Christ, as before, which has been spoken to, as
Christ is the light of the Gentiles, according to Scriptures? By this you may
see how clear they come off, in what I have charged them with. To say that man
in the state of corrupt nature has not any light at all is not true, but it is
true, that a man in that estate cannot do any thing acceptable to God, as those
that are renewed by grace. The former without doubt have the light and use of
true reason, and understanding faculties, though corrupted; and as the light of
reason presents things to the Conscience, good or evil, does the Conscience
accuse or give quiet to the mind of man in all his actions. Hence the Gentiles
by nature do the things contained in the Law, and are a Law unto themselves,
Romans 2.14, 15. The Apostle does not say that they do the things contained in
the Law, by Grace in Christ Jesus, as you say and witness in your next: But he
says, they do the things contained in the Law, and are a Law to themselves by
nature, simply; will you say that what they did by nature, they did by Christ,
and wherein they were a Law to themselves, Christ was that Law to them? Surely,
no, unless you have an art to make the nature of man corrupted, and Christ,
both one: that the being and nature of man, is of Christ uncorrupted, as all
things are which he has made, may be granted, for in him we live, move, and
have our being. And as the reasonable soul is created and given, it may be said
to be of God, and the candle of the Lord: but in man's fallen estate, this soul,
the candle of the Lord, is so perverted, and under blindness, and obliquity,
that not any flesh can be justified, and saved by any works of the Law, but by
faith in the blood of Christ Jesus, shed for many for remission of sins. There
is not any that does good, no not one, all have sinned, and are deprived of the
Glory of God, Romans 3. How Christ is the light of the Gentiles, and for
salvation to the ends of the earth, that have not the letter, as they again, is
answered above, and what follows, I deny, namely, And not any other light
leads to do the things contained in the law, because, those the Apostle speaks
of, were of those other Gentiles, that were alienated from the life of Christ,
through the ignorance that is in them, darkness.

But they go on, and say further.

But this light of Christ does not only lead to the righteousness of the law,
as thou say, but it leads through the law, to Christ Jesus, in whom
justification is witnessed; who is the end of the law, for righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

Answ. The main scope and end of the Law, is this, to require of man a
righteousness suitable in his own person, as he is Gods creature, unto it: but
man being never able to come up to this end, in his fallen estate, and so, by
coming short of righteousness, he falls short of life. Jesus Christ was sent
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, or by a sacrifice for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh. And on the sinners behalf, is the end of the law
for righteousness, that by his coming up to the end of the law, poor sinners
that believe in him, may have righteousness and life: But what is this to them
that have not heard of Christ, nor known his name, nor believed in him in truth
at all.

The Apostle said as I, That the Gentiles by nature, do the things contained in
the Law; he no where calls this Law in themselves, the light of Christ
promised, nor does he say what they do by nature, leads through the Law to
Christ, nor any other Scripture, as you affirm. Well may I charge you with
confused notions, if you can no better clear your main fundamental. Did you
ever read of going through the Law to Christ? Must a sinner go through it in
perfect obedience, till nothing remains, to oblige him further? And is this the
way to Christ, in whom justification is witnessed only? I think those that can
do so, will see but little need of that true Christ, who justifies the ungodly,
and came into the world to save sinners. And whether I, or you be alienated
from the life of Christ (as you censure me) according to Scripture, let the
sober judge.

And whereas I said in my Reply, the light which is common to man in corrupt
nature, does make discoveries of the eternal Deity, and of the righteousness
contained in the written law of God; but discovers nothing of Christ, as
Redeemer, or how a sinner is made just in him: the Scriptures being necessary
to discover that, is the truth. Your denial argues plainly, that you have no
light in you, until you prove either by the Law and Testimony of the Prophets
and Apostles, what you deny, till then, let shame stop your censorious mouths,
which almost every line has some ill favor of.

And what I have accused you with, in pressing people to look to the light
within, is but to follow after the righteousness of the Law, at best, is true,
and in so doing you hinder them from seeking after the righteousness of
Christ, as Scriptures teach, and you deceive your selves, and others; your show
of quotations will not cover you, as being wilfully perverted, there not being
any color in any of the Texts, to prove that all in corrupt nature, are
lightened with the light of Christ, to lead out of darkness to eternal life,
Joh. 1.9. Which I shall endeavor next to examine your strength, and give in my
Answer, is the main one.

1. That all the light in the World, whatsoever notion, or consideration, kind,
or degree it can come under, is from Christ, the eternal word that made all
things, is an unquestionable truth.

2. And that he is the only procuring cause of that spiritual light and life
to man, without which not any can be saved.

3. And that this spiritual light and life is in himself, as in the fountain,
and he the principal efficient, enlightening, and quickening whom he will, is by
me as easily yielded: but whether Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, the
only Mediator between a holy God and sinful man, does enlighten every man that
is in the world with such a sufficient light of his Spirit, that whosoever will
but heed, and observe it, to obey, it will lead them out of the darkness of
corrupt nature to eternal life. Whether they have the use of Scriptures, or
not the use of them, is the Question to be disputed from this Text, Joh. 1.9.
And my Answer is in the negative to it, opposing it, as very unsound,
especially when the neglect of necessary means is pleaded, and an immediate
light, and power of Christ only pretended and urged.

And yet something is to be premised too. I yield that all men have so much
light or means of light offered and afforded, that shall leave all men without
excuse before the great Tribunal of Jesus Christ; where men shall not be
condemned for what they could not do, and be, but for not doing, and doing
things they should not, and had power and light to do, and forbear, but would
not, such a corrupt thing is man in his fall, that he will not, though he may
do better, in order to his eternal welfare. Who amongst unregenerate men can
stand to plead it with God? and say, Lord, I have done my utmost to forsake my
sins, and turn to thee, in the use of all those helps, and means, enjoyed with
constancy and diligence, to the utmost of my power, time, and place, and yet
thou have denied me thy Grace of acceptance unto life, and condemnest me for
that which I had not power at all to do, and be? God cannot be said to be
behind-hand with any, nor does the work stick at him, while men carelessely
neglect to do what they have power to do, in the use of those advantages God
gives to any. Although every mouth shall be stopped, and all stand guilty
before God, that perish, yet it will not follow as in the Question, that all
have a sufficiency of light, and power of Grace, by Christ to come out of
darkness, to eternal life; which is a wide different thing, which not any
Scripture teaches, but disowneth, by evident demonstrations: nor can this
Scripture in hand, be urged further then will agree with the proportion of
faith. And in as much as our adversaries own this Text of Scripture for the
rule of their opinion and practice, and some others; it does oblige them to own
the whole of Scriptures, because the same Spirit is the Author of the whole, as
of those few Texts they build upon. And for them to deny the Scriptures for a
perfect Rule, and in the mean while are so stiff in urging some particular
Texts as this in hand, and Swear not at all and Call no man Master, and Salute
no man by the way, The Spirit shall guide you in all truth, You shall not need
to teach one another, etc. is a contradiction in its self, and a speaking lies
in hypocrisy, as ever were known. But now I come to the words themselves, That
was the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world: this
true light is to be understood of Christ, God and man, is clear, for it was
spoken of him whom John was sent to bear witness of. The Evangelist says,
that John was not that light, which shines in darkness, etc. but was sent to
bear witness of that light, verse. 8. And yet we know John is called a burning
and a shining light too, which is to be understood ministerially, as he was
fitted and sent to prepare the way, and give the present discovery of the very
person of Christ, to the people of the Jews, (who had generally a good opinion
of John, that he was a true Prophet) that so all men through him might believe.
But why is Christ called that true light fingularly, beyond John who was a true
light to all men, to bring them to believe in Christ? Because Christ has all
light and life in himself originally, and enlightens others, as an efficient of
himself, being God: but John was but his Instrument, and Messenger, and
received all from him, for the carrying on that work he was sent to do; so that
it is true of John, that his person and office was a true shining light in his
place; but Christ, in his person and ministry, for as much as he was more then
man, is that true light indeed, that gives light of himself to lighten the
world: as if he had said there is not a man in the world but whatsoever light he
has, or good, under that notion, he has received it from Christ. Indeed he is
the very Soul of the world, upholding all things by his power, for his Elects
sake, that they may be gathered to himself. But the Text does not say, that he
enlighteneth every one in the world with a spiritual light, sufficient to
eternal life and happiness: if they will but mind it. There is something in
the word lights, which had respect to the present time, noting some benefit
given to the world, which never was before, according to Joh. 3.19. And this is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light. As the present mercy, and benefit of Christ's coming into the
world (in his person, and immediate ministry, confirmed by his works of
miracles) were a greater light to direct them, and lead them out of darkness
to God; so their condemnation was thereby aggravated in their refusal, loving
darkness before the directions of this true light. Besides, lights, is
rather an outward light, a borrowed expression taken from a Torch or Candle,
which have their use in an outward sense. And we know John bare witness of
Christ in his person, and office unto which he was designed of the Father, in
making him the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: and he bare
witness to this very end, that through his Testimony all men might believe in
him. Had the Apostle meant as they would have it, he would have put in more
words, I think, and not left it so obscurely to that end they would build on:
for whether this Text proves any such thing as Christ's inward enlightening and
quickening by his Spirit, in the souls of men unto life, is to me a great
Question, though a clear truth from other Texts: for this light is said to
shine in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; he came unto his
own, but they received him not. The Jews were counted his own, as being the
only people of God, in profession, and Covenant, and yet they are accounted
darkness, in regard of their incredulity, in not receiving him; for where
Christ enlightneth and quickneth spiritually any soul with his grace, all
principles of rejectings and resistings of Christ and his word, are removed,
and darkness expelled: as light comes into any soul, darkness goes out, it
being nothing else but the absence of light: and therefore I think the Text is
to be understood of the light of his person made flesh, his ministry and
miracles, and all other means, which by his Authority are appointed to bring
men to true faith in him, to salvation; as many as believed in him, he gave
power to become the sons of God, and not any other. And we know how the
Apostles understood the enlightening of the Gentiles, were by their Ministry,
in Gods granting them repentance unto life, and turning them from the darkness
of paganism, to the light of Christianity thereby as Scriptures teach, as has
been proved. The main objection of theirs against this sense is this, Christ's
person, ministry, miracles were not known to every man, therefore every man
could not be lighted so. Answ. By World may be understood that part of the
world where Christ was, and is made known by virtue of his word; Christ was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and yet he was not in all parts of
the world; and so he was in the world, and the world knew him not, cannot be
understood of the whole world, for some did know him, who he was, and for what
end he came into the world. So, it is said that Christ baptizeth, and all men
come to him; here all must be understood of many in those parts. And so the
Apostle says, John was sent of God to bear witness of the light, that all men
through him might believe: this must necessarily be understood with limitation,
for all men did not know, nor so much as hear of John, for he bare this
witness only in Judea.

Again they say,

That John bare record of his life and light, from which those works proceeded,
and not of his person, and we know, say they, that his record is true, which
proves thee a liar, who says he bare record of his person, manifest in the
flesh, and the lie rests upon thee, until thou prove it.

Answ. By this you may conceive that they deny the person of Christ, and so
consequently Christ himself, as he is a Savior for spiritual life and light,
were not capable of death, shedding of blood, undergoing the curse, and
treading the Wine Press of his fathers wrath, a sacrifice for sin, for the
redemption, pardon, and salvation of sinners. Did not John bear record of his
person, when he said to the people (as Christ came toward them) Behold the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world? Joh. 1.29.36. And John
baptized him with water, and according to an immediate word and sign given of
the Lord, he saw, and bare record, that this Christ was the Son of God, verse.
33, 34. And this is he of whom I said, After me comes a man, which is
preferred before me, verse. 30. And did John give record that he was a man whom
he baptized with water, and talked with, and pointed at, and yet bare no record
of his person? could he be a man, and not a person, the Son of God, and not a
person, when he is said, to be the express Character of his Fathers person?
Heb. 1.3. Thus you see in respect of his Divinity, and Humanity, he is called a
Person: Add that which I have said before, and then judge who is the liar. The
Jews themselves, how malicious soever, could not deny his person, but they
denied that this just person Christ Jesus was the true Messiah, promised in the
Prophets: and therefore they with bitterness opposed him, as a deceiver, a
false Christ, etc. But Christ told them, If you believe not that I am he, you
shall die in your sins. What He is this, and not a person? But enough has been
spoke to this, to discover their folly and madness unto all that are sober.
His life and light, and person, is inseparable; but he is not any otherwise a
light, and comfort, and Savior to lost sinners, but by his incarnation, taking
man's nature, bearing our sins, satisfying offended justice by the sacrifice of
himself, and has obtained an eternal redemption for us thereby. And he that
does not believe in him thus, as the Scriptures hold him forth a Redeemer, by
suffering in his own person, in the behalf and stead of lost sinners, for their
eternal redemption, believes nothing at all of Christ unto eternal life,
whatever other notions or fancies are pretended.

What these men's fancies are of Christ, what he is, and how he redeems, and
saves sinners, who can certainly tell? They own not his person, his natures,
his offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, as the Scriptures reveal of him, in
the performance of that great work of man's redemption. What do these people
understand, what Jesus Christ that came into the world (made flesh, and a curse
too) to save sinners, is? Do they think that he was a mere light without a
visible being? and do they think that he saves not by suffering, but by
lightning, and with such a light that all have too? when we know, the greatest
part of the world have no other light but the rational understanding faculties
of their own souls, which is able to understand something of God, by the things
which he has made, and directs to do the things contained in the Law, and said
to be a Law to themselves, etc. But is this little spark of reason (subject to
error and vanity) Christ in them the Redeemer, which, when put in competition
with Christ indeed, and the Christian profession of him is called darkness,
and a state of alienation from his life, through the ignorance that is in them,
as has been proved? Truly I fear that they believe no other Christ then the
rational soul of every man, accounting that the pure nature they talk of, and
the eternal word, uncreate, the same with God, and that every one is Christ in
flesh. And although I know they will lie, as I have made it manifest, yet they
will very hardly in plain terms deny this, which I suspect they hold. And we
should have heard of many Christ's amongst us before now, but for that Act
against blasphemy, which they cannot get beyond. But I proceed.

The Lord Jesus says of John that he was a burning and a shining light, which
the Jews rejoiced in, for a season, Joh. 5.35. which is to be understood of
his ministry, as sent of God, to be the Prophet of the most highest, to prepare
his ways; and to give knowledge of salvation to his people, etc. and to give
light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide
their feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.76, 77, 79. So also Christ says of his
Disciples, and followers, that they are the light of the world, and commands
them so to improve it, that others may be enlightened by them, that they may
glorify God, Matthew. 5.14, 15, 16. And yet all this light is to be understood
of an outward dispensation by words, or works, to the world. So again, Christ
is called the light of the world, Joh. 8.12. and he says, I am come a light
into the world, that whosoever believes in me, should not abide in darkness,
Joh. 12.46. Add to this Joh. 3.19. His actual coming into the world in person,
to exercise his ministry, and the dispensation of his mighty works, is to be
understood of such a light that never was in the world before, which was
visible, and convincing to men, as rational and sensible creatures: and
therefore, those that did not receive him, and own his person, in order to
salvation, had no cloak for their sin, but were left without all excuse, he
doing as never any did: this visible light was the condemnation of those that
refused it. And hence it is, that Christ speaking of his death to the people,
said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you, walk while you have
the light, lest darkness come upon you, while ye have the light, believe in
the light, that is, in his person, and name, which is called light; for it was
the same that Christ said should be lifted up, signifying what death he should
die, and so the people understood it, as appears Joh. 12.34, 35, 36. etc. And
in the same sense it was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, 9.1, 2. The Land of
Zebulun, and Naphtali, by the way of the sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the
Gentiles. The people which sat in darkness, saw a great light, and to them
which sat in the Region, and shadow of death, light is sprung up. Then to
this, compare Matthew. 4.12. to the 17. there you may see how the Evangelist
applies that prophecy to the very person and preaching of Christ. When Jesus
heard that John was cast in prison (he knew his work was ended) he lest
Nazareth, and came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the sea coasts, in the
border of Zebulun, and Naphtali; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet Isaias, repeating the same words, and then observes, That from that
very time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven
is at hand; and this Jesus thus preaching, is the fulfilling of that prophecy.
By these quotations it is evident as the light of the Sun, that his personal
ministry, and mighty works, his Authority, commands, upon the earth, in
fitting, and sending others to preach externally, is called the light of the
world, which, all that refused and rejected, was their condemnation, And that
those that believed and received, should not abide in darkness; intimating,
that all those that received not this visible ministry, acted by his own person
and Authority, were in and under darkness, and condemnation: and we know, what
he began, was carried on by his Authority and commission, in the Apostolical
Churches, and has made his promise, to be with his Church, in giving them
Pastors, and Teachers, and his presence to the end. Compare Matthew. 28.18, 19.
with Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Now then I say, if the visible ministry of Christ, in the
days of Christ and his Apostles upon earth, were the light of the world, then
it is still, though not in the same persons, yet in their Authority, and
writings, transmitted and derived from them; the Churches of the believing
Gentiles being built upon the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ the chief
cornerstone, all the building from the beginning to the end is completed by
his Authority, and powerful working, in the use of those means himself has
appointed, and revealed: once you see it was so, it remains so still, unless
these bold pretenders to an immediate light of Christ to all men in the world
can clearly prove by the Authority of Scripture, the time and age when this
light of the world was repealed, if they cannot, I hope their lying mouths
will be stopped, and that they will cease deceiving themselves and others.

Again, if Christ was the light of the world, by coming into the world in
person, in the days of his flesh, as he was the Son of man, and that great
Prophet Moses spoke of, to our fathers, as says Peter, Act. 3.21. A Prophet
shall the Lord raise up unto you, of your brethren, him shall you hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that
every soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed; and by this
Prophet he understands Jesus the Son of God, whom God raised, and sent him to
bless the Jews first, in turning them from their iniquities, verse. 26. I say
if Christ was thus the light of the world, as I have cleared, and which our
greatest Adversaries will be forced to confess, if there be any light in them,
then it will follow,

1. That John 1.9. is to be understood with limitation, and is not universal,
to every man that ever was in the world; because Christ was not in all ages,
and places of the world, in his person and ministry, and powerful workings
visibly. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather then light: this is from the same pen, and must be
understood of the same light that he calls that true light, chap. 1.9. By which
words of John, 3.19. is evident, is to be understood of Christ himself, in
person, as he was the Son of man, and the Son of God; see verse. 14.16, 17. This
very discourse to the 22. verse, is a relation of what Christ himself spoke,
occasioned by that Question of Nicodemus, ver. 4. God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, etc. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved; and he that believes not in him, is
condemned already: And then follows verse. 19: Which light is himself, then
come into the world, as the former verses read, show. And hence you may see,
that this advantage the people of the Jews had of Christ's corporal presence
amongst them, preaching the Kingdom of God unto them, was such a light as
never was in the world before, and their not believing in this light was their
condemnation; and for any now, not to believe in the very same person, the only
Son of God, the true light of the world, both by his immediate person manifest
in the flesh, and by his Authority and Spirit flowing from the same Christ,
immediately revealed in his word, cannot be saved: and to have the light of
Scriptures to discover Christ that true light, what he is, and what he has
done for sinners, to bring them to God, and believes not in him accordingly, is
the condemnation of all such. And these Quakers I have often observed, though
in all their writings they quote this Text, John 3.19. they seldom repeat the
whole words, but usually render the Text thus, This is the condemnation of the
world, the light: Insomuch, that some that have adhered to them too much, have
thought that there had been just such a Text indeed, but there is not: It seems
themselves are sensible of the light which is said to come into the world, was
another thing then what they intend, because they leave them out, as they are
placed by the penman, and so put the words together, as may make some color of
an immediate inward light, which is in all, as if the light that is in all men
in the world, is constituted of God only, to be the condemnation of the whole
world in the Text, when it speaks not of any light, save of Christ's person and
ministry, then really come and manifest in that part of the world, the Jews
lived in. A light for eminency superadded to all that were before him, as the
Sun excelling the leaft Stars; and to love darkness rather then this Sun of
righteousness the light of the world, is the condemnation; but yet to be
limited to that part of the world, where the light of Christ shines, through
the benefit and use of the Prophets and Apostles discoveries only.

How shall they escape that neglect so great salvation, which at first began to
be preached unto them? Heb. 2. Though it be true, that there is tribulation and
woe, to every one that does evil, both to Jew and Gentile, and Christian, yet
as many as sin without Law, shall perish without Law; and as many as have
finned under the written Law, shall be judged by the Law: and so those that
refuse the light of the Gospel, that discovers the only remedy, this is their
condemnation: and a sorer judgment much more heavier then of Sodom and
Gomorrah, or of those that sinned, and were punished under Moses and the
Prophets. And that these depravers and contemners of the mysteries of Christ's
Kingdom, dispensed by Gospel Ordinances, in order to the enlightening,
quickening, and saving of sinners, shall assuredly feel, if the free peculiar
grace of God, through the blood of Christ, prevent it not, in giving them
repentance and remission of sins; who have merely out of their dark minds,
through the malice of that old Serpent, fomented such blasphemies, against the
glorious Kingdom and person of Jesus Christ, as Satan has not had the
boldness to suggest to the worst of men in former times that have been
Christians, as very many of their own papers published abroad do witness, and
which some both of learning and fidelity have taken the pains to give the world
notice of. And the whole of this in hand, will witness them Impostors, and
Apostates, that have departed from the Christian Doctrine of faith, and
obedience, both for matter and manner, by denying the right Rule, and the true
object, as the Rule reveals Christ Jesus the Redeemer of lost man, and the way
and means appointed by Christ to convey the blessings of special grace, into
the souls of men, unto eternal life, they have denied, and reproached, as
heathenish observations, men's Traditions, etc. And besides their questioning
the person, natures, offices of Christ, and so his Mediatorship in performing
the work of our Redemption, by that one sacrifice of himself upon the Cross,
making peace, without which person, natures, offices is not any thing yet done
to the salvation of mankind; our faith is in vain, our worship in vain, and we
must all die in our sins, and yet they tell us of a Christ, and a true light of
the world, and of the blessings of the new Covenant, namely, the Law of the new
Covenant in the heart, the free grace of God, that has appeared unto all men,
etc. and by all this they understand no more then the light in man's soul, which
every one in the world has, more or less, that is in the dark, dead, polluted
state of corrupt nature: and this light they say, is the true light, and of the
pure nature of God, that being loved, and heeded, leads out of darkness to the
knowledge of God, to eternal life, though they have not the use of Scriptures;
and this is the eternal Word, the everlasting Gospel, the Light which gave
forth the Scriptures, and the Judge of the world, and the Kingdom of heaven
within, and the Law of the new Covenant, Christ within, and I know not what,
and that this Christ, this light, this Gospel, this Scripture within, this
perfect law of the heart, may be the better heeded amongst people, they render
the Scriptures a dead letter, the ordinances of worship but outward
observations, which the kingdom of God is not in; and the Ministers they
render more odious then a few words will express, though the office and
function more honorable then any other calling amongst men; and then urge them
to cease from all their own works, of hearing, praying, reading, etc. and from
all that knowledge got from the letter, and carnal teachings of man's wisdom,
as they call it, they bid them be dead to all these, and then they shall be in
the way to be taught of God, and lead on to eternal life and perfection.

All you that are Christians, and know any thing of the things of Christ's
Kingdom, may run, and read that the very height of their seize and
perfections endeavored after, is nothing else but downright Apostasy, putting
darkness for light, and light for darkness, who out of a blind zeal from that
very mistake forsake the Lord, and those helps and means himself has appointed
to lead men on in the ways of light and life; and choose their own delusions,
until Satan captivate them at his pleasure, who has suggesfed, and filled
their hearts with all those abhorred lies, as you have seen, which fall down
flat before the simplicity of truth, as the Scriptures teach, as Dagon before
the Ark of God, as in some competent measure has already been discovered. But
to return to the text in hand, let us now examine things further. The substance
of what I have writ, has been to show how Christ is the light of the world,
and by what ways and means he communicates the true light of spiritual life,
to the saving of the souls of sinners; and without which ordinary ways and
means himself has designed to that end, as his words and holy Ordinances
dispensed accordingly, not any can be said to be lightened by Christ, as the
Text intends: and they must confess, it cannot be understood in a universal
sense, that Christ lightneth every man that ever was, is, and shall be in the
world from the beginning to the end: for there is a great part of mankind that
come into the world, and go out of it again, that never had so much as the use
of reason, as Insants, and fools; nay, some never were lighted with the light
of nature, as those that are born blind, and therefore reason does force them
to put in some limitation: why not that which I have contended for? seeing it
is so much agreeing with the light of other Scriptures. The state of man in
corrupt nature, your selves consesse, is darkness, which is the state of all
the heathen, and unbelievers every where. And then again you say this light is
from Christ, and is not common to man by nature, it is the great gift of God,
his Grace that has appeared unto all men, and teaches all that are guided by
it, as in your Answ. Tit. 2.12. Now say I, if it be such a light of Christ,
that is not common to men by nature, but a gift of Gods Grace that (in the
Apostolical Churches) has appeared to all men by the preaching of the Gospel,
the word of Gods Grace, as they quote, then it follows that themselves
restrain the Text to the same limit and sense that I have cleared: for by this
in Titus, they have explained what their sense is of the other; and this of
Titus is spoken of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which by the grace of God was
manifested in those times and places writ unto by the preaching of the Gospel,
the rules and directions contained therein, so teaches all men, every where,
as in particular by his Epistle he had instructed them: as the particulars
instanced in, is obvious, to any indifferent eye that reads the Epistle. And
therefore against their wills, you see sometimes they will speak truth, though
they intend not the truth, but a show of countenancing their error, because
here they find the word All, which proves not a universality in that place, as
themselves dream, even while they say this light is the gift of God, his grace
to all universally, and yet say is not common to men by nature, for man by
nature is darkness, and has no light in him, etc. then it follows that by
the gift of Gods grace, which all men in the state of nature are enlightened
withal, is common to all by gift, that are but in the state of nature; and
wherein does this differ from that which you say, that it is not common to men
by nature? what is the nature of man in generation, but the gift of God,
distinguished from the nature of all other sensitive living creatures? Is not
the rational soul of man common to men by nature? and yet is Gods created gift
in common to all that by nature are born alive in the world; and what ever all
have by gift, is of grace in a true sense. But what is this to the light of
Christ, to enlighten and save the world, when this gift, as to the end of
saving, is peculiarly limited and intended to them only that upon the discovery
and tender of his person and merit, believe in him to eternal life, Joh. 3.
And this discovery of his person and merit, knows no man, but by the only
ministry of the word of Christ and the Apostles, as has been proved. We
usually understand what gift is common to all in the state of nature, that is a
common gift in all by nature, not excluding the God of man's nature, from whom
all good givings come to the Sons of men.

But it remains still to prove that Christ is given for light and salvation in
common to all universally, so that every one in the world may be saved by him
that will, and that this light of Christ is nothing else but the writing of the
Law of God in the heart, which the heathens in some measure all have, and does
show; amongst whom Christ is not so much as named, much lesse-known to eternal
life: This is life eternal to know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent.

Doubtless, the Spirit of God in Scripture puts a difference between person,
and person by nature, we that are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, etc. Gods Covenant and promises to the Jews Nation, and their
engaging to service, and worship, according to Gods laws in writing, gives
them peculiar advantage by nature, from the rest of the Gentile world they were
separate from, by an external form of Religion, and profession of the true
God, which I conceive holds still of the visible professing Church of Christ,
that externally at least worship God in truth, as the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles teach. And besides in the visible Church that have the same means,
and Covenant of promise, and God nigh unto them, the distinguishing grace of
God makes a difference. Many are outwardly thus called, and yet but few elect
and chosen to salvation. Jacob and Esau in the Church by nature, and yet the
distinguishing will and pleasure of God made them to differ, his free love to
the one, and not to the other, before they had done either good or evil. Not
in him that wills, and runs, but in God that shows mercy: man's diligence
is his duty, but Gods blessing to man's diligence is Gods free mercy: but now
their opinion of a sufficiency of universal grace to all in Christ, that leads
out of darkness to eternal life, as the Quakers do, as has been showed by
their own Papers under their hands, destroys Gods distinguishing will of his
purpose and good pleasure manifesting his mercy and love to whom he will,
because he will, and not to others: not only in respect of the end, but of the
means subservient to the end: hence comes free will to be saved or damned:
which these men cannot evade; for if every man in the world has a sufficient
light of Christ, to lead out of darkness to eternal life, if they will but
heed it, etc. then it follows that all men may be saved that will; unless you
say, that that condition of loving and heeding this sufficient light in man, is
not in the power of man, but is the special grace of God, given to whom he
will, upon choice; but you cannot say so but you will destroy your main
principle, which is universal, and must be urged every way sufficient to
eternal life and happiness, or else to what purpose is the pressing of this
light to all, if all have not a power to improve it up to that very end of
happiness. That there is such a light and power in all men, that shall leave
them without excuse, and being improved to the utmost, shall not only mitigate
the Torments of hell, but be a means of enjoying many blessings in this world,
and the way and means of renewing, quickening grace where God gives his word and
ordinances to any, is easily yielded by men of sober judgment; but to say as
you, that all men in the world have a sufficient light in Christ, to lead them
out of that corrupt dark state of nature, to eternal life, and have power in
themselves thus to improve it, if they will. This text, Joh. 1.9. falls short
of the proof, or any other Scripture whatever; and therefore to be rejected as
a fancy of man's vain mind merely. And do but seriously consider what wicked
errors this one principle of yours runs you upon, point blank to plain and
evident Scriptures.

First, you have in favor of this, fancyed such a light in every one, that you
sometimes call the light Christ the Law of the new Covenant, the counsel of
God in the secret of the soul, that Spirit of Christ which convinces the world
of sin, and Christ the light of the Gentiles; all which as you apply them to
every man in the world, have been confuted, and are most pernicious errors,
which the Scriptures oppose.

Secondly, hence you persuade all men to cease from all outward means of light,
and only attend upon the light within, and to wave all outward worship in holy
observances according to Scriptures, and only obey the commands of the light,
and commands of Christ within, though inconfistent with the Scriptures never so
much. For that which I call the word and ordinances, namely, the holy writings
of the Prophets and Apostles, and the ordinances of holy Worship, which have
their institution and foundation from the Spirit of God, speaking and moving
what they writ; These things you say is but the letter, and traditions of men,
as in the latter end of your answer to this fourth Question; besides your
frequent reproaching these things in most of your papers that fly abroad; I
have made some discovery already, and what means all this, but that you judge
the light of Christ to all is sufficient alone to life eternal?

Thirdly, hence it is that you have fancyed a more spiritual Christ, then
Christ that was made flesh by incarnation, who was truly God, and truly man
in one person, and offered himself a sacrifice to God, to reconcile sinners to
God, and preached peace to them that were near, and afar off, etc. Because
this Christ, this person, this sacrifice, and the ends thereof, are not known
nor heard of to all in the world; so that rather then you will put a limit to
this Text, Joh. 1.9. which merely the strength of fancy has taken up, you will
invent another Christ, that will make the Text hold to every man, and that is
no other then the rational soul of man corrupted, which indeed is called the
candle of the Lord, but no where called the Lords Christ, in whom we have
redemption through his blood, etc.

Fourthly, hence you have fancyed an universal free Grace of God to all men in
the world equally alike, and a new Covenant to all men in the world; and this
light is that Grace of God, and the blessing promised in the new Covenant, Heb.
8 and these universalls cannot be without the other of universal redemption,
though they say little of it, because that Christ they have in their fancy, was
not capable of shedding blood for any such end. And why not a universal
salvation as well? inasmuch the one as the other, but that men will not
besaved, notwithstanding they are redeemed, and renewed with saving grace by
virtue of Redemption, and the new Covenant. But do you think that this is all
which the Scriptures teach, as touching Redemption by Christ, the free love and
grace of God, bestowed on men, as they are blessings of the new and everlasting
Covenant, which stands in remission of sins, and in the giving of his Spirit to
renew, and sanctify and soften the carnal, old, hard, and rebellious heart of
man? I say, does all the mercy and grace of God through Christ amount to no
more then so, as to depend upon the will of man, resisting, or not improving
what God intends to their eternal happiness? If all men have new hearts, and
the Spirit, and pardon of sin, by virtue of the new Covenant, what can hinder
the salvation of all? Or what is it that makes this great difference between
one man and another, if the Grace of God according to the new Covenant, makes
all equal at first? What is it, or who has made thee to differ from another
man? I pray you answer, in whom does the election obtain it, for that some
believe, and others not? You talk of the children of light, unto whom says is
only given; but why should you make any restriction amongst men, if all have
Christ in them, and have the Law of the new Covenant writ in their hearts, as a
blessing thereof? What should hinder the salvation of all, that have this
supernatural Grace? will the Lord condemn any that have the light and life of
real grace, and forgiveness of sins by virtue of the new Covenant, which you
apply to all in the world? If all that come into the world have a sufficiency
of Grace, to lead out of darkness to eternal life, then what need has any of
converting regenerating Grace? Or what need any pray for the Grace of God, to
convert and turn them to God, if they have it in themselves as they come into
the world? Do you think, or can you believe that those promises of giving Gods
Spirit, a new heart, and of putting his fear, and writing his laws, and
circumcising the hearts of the Fathers and children, to love the Lord with all
their hearts, and sending his Son to bless his people, in turning them from
their iniquities, and to give them repentance and remission of fins, is
performed to all in the world?

I pray you consider, and do not wilfully forsake your own mercies, in the
resisting of that truth which by this time you cannot but confess in the
secret of your souls, and stand convinced in your selves, that your foundation
is merely the mud and sand of a deluded fancy: See what absurdities you plunge
your selves into, besides the denying of the Scriptures for a perfect Rule of
faith and obedience, and all other means of working Grace that God has
appointed to that end. And in your denying the Authority of Scriptures for a
Rule, you have weakened the seeming strength of this Text, for if it be not a
Rule of faith at all, then not in this particular thing; and then what remains
to color over your main principle, save only your private fancies, under the
pretense of the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, as if the same Spirit
would cross and contradict it self so notoriously as you have seen: and thus
by laying another foundation, besides what the Apostles preached and practiced
in the Christian Churches of Christ, has runned you out of all truth, which
the Scriptures teach, and which the Saints in all ages since have professed and
witnessed with their dearest blood.

I confess the Church of God has been troubled with men of perverse minds,
that have forsaken the truth, and fomented many of the same erroneous opinions
that you center in, as universal Redemption, universal grace, freewill,
justification by works, falling finally from grace, yet the Authors of these
errors use to be more sober and rational in their inferences and practices
concluded hence, then you of this Generation, they still urged the use of all
out ward helps and advantages, as to Christian practice, both to God and man,
according to the rule of the word; they professed the word for the rule, though
upon mistake they were forced to pervert it; the opinions being so point blank
against the evident light of Scriptures, as has been made to appear by able
pens, in all times and places against them. But the improvement of the same
things as touching your selves, is most desperate and Diabolical; talk of a
sufficient light and grace in all, to be saved, and then discourage from the
use of Scriptures, ministry, ordinances of Religious Worship, etc. bid people
mind the light, while they do what they can to put it out, even that which they
have received by the blessing of the Lord, in the use of Christian education
according to Scriptures, as if all that any man receives from the Lord, in the
use of those means himself has undoubtedly appointed and commanded, were
inconsistent to the light within, when all impressions of the light of
Conscience, as it is Divine, is attained by the blessing of the Lord, in the
use of the Scriptures, and Scripture ministry, as has been spoke to. Then to
make this light in all, Christ the eternal word, the Law of the new Covenant,
the Spirit of God, which was promised to be sent, to convince the world of sin,
etc. Who ever fancyed such prodigious blasphemies before now, which your papers
stink of? You have questioned the light of Scriptures, the light of Christ's
person, and ministry, and Authority, you have questioned whether there were a
written word of God, a person, natures, and offices of Christ, and have upon
the matter made that little spark of the light of reason, corrupted, which is
in mere heathens, the light of Christ, who according to promise, is called the
light of the Gentiles, as if that light, which is in all that know not God, nor
ever heard of Jesus Christ, what he is, and what he did, was the fulfilling of
those promises and prophosies. What use is there of such promises and
prophesies that all in the world have had the performance of from the beginning
of the world? but the holy Apostles understood those promises fufilled only to
those Gentiles that were enlightened by Christ's word, to believe in his name,
and to submit to his Laws revealed; such Gentiles only were built upon the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ the chief cornerstone, all others were without
Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Gods Israel, strangers from the
Covenant of promise, and without hope, and without God in the world. These
things are so plain, and have been so cleared against you, that you will be
left without all excuse, if you resist such evident light; and be ashamed ever
to talk of Scripture more, if your Consciences be past feeling, that you can
oppose the light and Authority of Scripture without fear. The truth is, you are
so intoxicated with this notion of Christ lightning all immediately, and so
bewitched in your minds, touching the manner of working it, that you prefer
the light common to all in the world, and the discoveries thereof to eternal
happiness, before all the light of Christ, which by his Spirit he has
discovered unto any, by the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. But without
any doubt, all this is, because you have no light in you.

I have gone beyond my intended bounds, though I have not done my intended
work, which was, to go through all your Answers to my ten Questions; but for
want of my Papers, which you detein from me against your promise, and that
civility I presumed upon, in you when I sent them, without keeping a Copy by
me, as I told you. And indeed, fearing that I shall be too tedious to the
Reader, and to my own occasions, I have thought good to publish these, as
judging them necessary, not only to forewarn you to fly from the wrath which
is to come, but also to admonish my friends more timely, and to inform those
of weaker judgments, to prevent their running into these damnable herefies;
while your selves some of you, are compassing the earth, to make Proselytes,
and to seduce them into these snares of Hell below.

And because I know delusion is very strong, when it is inflicted in judgment,
for former coldness, out of which I fear your obstinacy in that Gulf of
Apostasy that you are involved in, will rather prompt you to defend and
excuse, or deny what I have charged you with (and endeavored to convict you
of) Therefore though out of the same Spirit you writ to me before, you be moved
to the same envy, malice, lying, censures, railings, judgings, in your return,
as I see you want not for impudence to face out any thing, to asperse and make
odious those that are far better then my self: yet I know that my record is
on high, that out of the integrity of my heart, and measure of light received I
have writ what I have published; and am resolved to be more vile, fith it is
for God, and the salvation of poor souls entangled under this dark temptation,
presented under the specious pretenses of the Ministers of Christ. What
civility or Christianity can I or any expect from those that have denied the
holy Scriptures as to that end they were intended, and reproached the
ordinances and Institutions of the Lord Jesus, that Scriptures teach, under the
notions of heathenish worship, and traditions of men, outward observations,
inconsistent with the kingdom of God? which reproaches reflect upon the Author
and Inspirer of Scripture appointments, which is the spirit of God; and to be
reproached by those that are the reproachers of God and his worship, while I am
defending him to my power, will be my Crown and honor, when confusion and
shame shall stop the mouths of his malicious enemies.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
These few amongst other Errataes are to be amended by the Reader.

Page 6. l. 5. for our, r. your. p 7. l. 31. for lord, r. word. p. 10. l. 35.
for yet, r. that. p. 15. l. 14. for god, r. Good. p. 20. l. 12. put the stop
after within. p. 32. l. 33. for are, r. am. lb. l. 38. for when, r. where. p.
33. in the margin for Jam. r. Jer. p. 45. for Act. 9. r. 4.

Books written by the Author, and are to be sold by Thomas Williams at the
Bible in Little-Britain, London, and William Tompson at Harborough in
Leichestershire.
THE Bar to free Admission to the Lords Supper, removed: Or, a Vindication of
Mr. Humphreys Free Admission to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 8.

To receive the Lords Supper, the Actual Right and Duty of all Church Members
of years not Excommunicate. Made good against Mr. Collins his Exceptions
against The Bar Removed. large 8.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
BReaking off abruptly for fear of swelling too big, I was forced to omit some
special things that I should have been glad to have spoken unto, amongst
others, that the next Questions would have led me unto; I have thought good to
give a further hint as touching that which I conceive is a main principle of
these men's deceiving themselves and others. They seem first to debase man as
man, and say he is altogether a dark, dead, polluted thing, the child of
wrath: and his best actings as man, are but as a menstruous cloth. But then
they advance the same man in general, by affirming that every man is lighted by
the Spirit of Christ that convinces of sin. And this they would have to be
free Grace, and that promised Spirit which should convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment, and whosoever minds and believes it, shall by
this grace and spirit, come out of darkness to eternal life.

But to discover so great a mistake, we must know, That it is true, that all
men in the world have some light by nature, more or less, that convinces of
sin; for it is said, that the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the
Law, and are a Law unto themselves, their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another, Romans 2.14. Mark, the Apostle does not say, that the Gentiles, by the
Spirit of Christ, and free grace inlightning them, do the things contained in
the Law, but they do those things of the Law by nature, and they are a law to
themselves. The Spirit of God is not a Law to themselves; because that is
distinct from man, and gives Laws to man, as he did the written Law to his
people, but this is another distinct thing, they are a Law to themselves. Man
since the fall has not lost his reason; but that Divine rectitude and
perfection thereof, that made him conformable to the will of God unto life:
there is a spark of reason and immortality in the soul of man still, which
rational soul, though it be depraved of what it was, and now is subject to
error and vanity, that not any can be saved by following that light only: yet
it is such a light, as it is called the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. and
directs men to do the things contained in the Law. And this is witnessed by
most people and nations upon the earth. That reason which they have by nature
directs them to make laws to preserve humane societies, and the Commonweal of
the whole, and hence punish Theft, Murder, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Perjury,
etc. and encourage to moral Virtues: which things are contained in the Law of
God, and yet they know nothing of Jesus Christ, nor of any other things which
accompany salvation.

Besides as men are under greater advantages of light in respect of the outward
means, as the Scripture, Ministry, Education, Examples: so also in respect of
the more common workings of the Spirit inlightning and convincing some, man by
nature knows more, and does more the things contained in the Law and Gospel
too. The very principle of Reason and Conscience urges every one to do the
Good, and to shun the Evil: What man of ingenuity can withstand the strength
of reason, but yields his assent; though not able to bring up himself to the
practice of what himself allows, with sincerity, till renewed by the Spirit of
Grace? The spirit of man knows the things in man, and has that inspection and
reflection in man from the understanding faculty, that it knows its own
motions, intentions and actions, whether good or evil, according to its light:
and accordingly Conscience Gods Deputy, greater then a thousand witnesses,
either condemns or excuses. And I judge that all men have this in some
measure, until through custom in sin, and withstanding this light, and Gods
just Judgment concurring: they be given up to a seared conscience, past
feeling, as is said of some.

But now for these people to run up and down to teach men that this which is
but the light of Reason improved by the help of ordinary means and workings, is
the Spirit of Christ, and the free Grace of God, that brings salvation, is such
a pernicious Diabolical dream, that never came into the head of any till now, I
think.

That man's soul is a created substance given of God, from whom are all things,
is true, but that this spirit of man which is called the candle of the Lord, is
Gods Spirit that was promised to convince the world of unbelief, and of the
necessity of righteousness by Christ, victory over sin, Satan, and hell (as
that of John intends) and leads out of darkness into eternal life, is a most
blasphemous error. What though they will not say that the soul of man is the
Spirit of Christ promised to convince of sin, under that notion and expression?
yet upon the matter they say the same, when out of desperate mistake, they make
that to be the immediate light and power of the Spirit of Christ, which in deed
and truth is but the rational soul of man in all, by nature, or acquired in the
use of ordinary means and workings.

And thus you see while they are debasing man below what he is by nature, they
are advancing him above what he is at the same time by nature; they endow him
with the Spirit of God and the gifts of free Grace to lead all men out of
darkness to eternal life: hence they Deifie that which is the gift of nature,
and make all men their own Saviors; hence they make the differencing act
between good and bad, the saved and damned, to be man's self, under dark
impotent nature corrupted; hence they slight the Death of Christ, and say, as
one to me, that sinners have no benefit by that Blood of Christ that was shed
at Jerusalem, for that was the blood of man: and it is the Blood of God that
man has benefit by: not that God is capable of shedding blood; but this is a
figurative speech setting forth the Spirit of God that convinces the world of
sin. It being asked, To what end did Jesus Christ come into the world and so to
suffer? his Answer was, To put an end to the Cereremonies: and that was all
that he would yield, although he is a man of considerable abilities; so strong
is the delusion. Hence they comprehend all men under the grace of the New
Testament, and make no difference between the visible professing Church, and
the Pagan world; all may be saved alike if they will. Hence they cast off all
outward means; Ordinances, forms of Religious Worship: and bid hearken to the
spirit within, etc. as if all things God in his Word has appointed were
always superfluous and in vain. They throw away Gods Election, special
redemption, the Saints perseverance. They will have men to have the Spirit of
Christ and the free Grace of the Covenant, and yet be none of his: Just
contrary to plain Scriptures, Rom 8. But I must not enlarge, let them tell us
how they will escape these Rocks. Let them tell us what difference they make
between the convictions of the Spirit in the unregenerate Pagan (or Christian)
and those that are regenerate; and how the Spirit is in the Infidel, and how in
the true believer; and where any that are accounted for light in the Lord, are
under darkness too: and where are any in an Infidel state, called light in the
Lord. Prove all things, and the Lord direct to that right understanding of
truth best pleasing to himself and our good. Farewell.


