The Wisdom of being Religious. A SERMON Preached at St. PAUL'S.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn.

BATEMAN Mayor Martis quinto decimo die Martii 1663. Annoque Caroli secundi
Angliae, etc. sexto decimo.

IT is Ordered, That Mr. Tillotson be desired to Print his Sermon lately
Preached at St. Paul's Church before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

WELD.

PErlegi hanc Concionem, in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli habitam, cui Titulus (The
Wisdom of being Religious) in qua nihil reperio Doctrinae, Disciplinaeve
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus contrarium: Plurima tamen, quae ad
praecipuum religionis fundamentum tutandum; Et ad Prodigiosam Atheorum hujus
seculi vanitatem redar guendam egregie sunt accommodata. Quapropter dignissimam
Censeo quae in Utilitatem publicam

Typis mandetur.

Joh. Hall, Rev. in Christo Pat. Humfredo Episc. Land. a sac. Domest. Maij. 13.
1664.

LONDON, Printed for SA. GELLIBRAND. 1664.

To the Right Honorable Sir ANTHONY BATEMAN, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
and the Honorable Court of Aldermen there.
Right Honorable,
IN obedience to your Order I here present you with a Sermon which you formerly
heard. I know not how acceptable Discourses of this nature may be, I am sure
they are very seasonable in this degenerate Age, in which Atheism and
Profaneness are grown so impudent, and notwithstanding the restraints of Shame
and Laws, do appear with so bold a face in the world. When men arrive to that
degree of confidence, as to tell the world that Leviathan. part. 3. c. 34.
the Notion of a Spirit implies a contradiction, that Fear and Fancy are the
Parents of a Deity, and Ignorance and Melancholy the true Causes of Devotion,
and that Religion is nothing else but Leviathan. part. 1. c. 6.
the fear of an invisible power feigned by the mind, or imagined from Tales
publicly allowed; when it shall be countted brave to defy God, and every
dabbler in Natural Philosophy, or Mathematics, or Politics, shall set up for
an Atheist; sure then it is high time to resist this growing evil. For this
purpose I have enlarged that part of the Discourse, which is more immediately
levelled against Atheism, beyond what the limits of time would allow me in the
Preaching of it; and in hope that it may do some service to that end, it is now
humbly offered to you by

Your Honors most humble servant John Tillotson.

The Wisdom of being Religious.
JOB. 28. 28. And unto man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord that is Wisdom,
and to depart from evil that is understanding.
IN the beginning of this Chapter Job discourses of the knowledge of Nature,
and the secret and unaccountable operations of Natural Causes, and of the
unsearchable perfections of the Works of God. And enquiring at the 12th Verse,
where this Wisdom is to be found, he tells us, that it is not to be met with in
any of the Creatures; It is not found in the land of the living; The depth
says, It is not in me, and the Sea says, It is not in me, etc. Therefore he
puts the question again, ver. 20. Whence then comes Wisdom, and where is the
place of understanding, seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living? To which
he returns an answer, ver. 23. God understands the way thereof, and he
knows the place thereof, for he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees
under the whole heaven to make the weight for the wind, etc. The result of
which discourse is, That a perfect knowledge of nature is no where to be found
but in the Author of it; no less wisdom and understanding then that which made
the World, and contrived this vast and regular frame of Nature, can thoroughly
understand the Philosophy of it, and give a perfect account of all its motions
and operations. But there is a wisdom and knowledge which is very proper to man,
and lies level to a humane understanding, which is suited and accommodated to
the end, and uses, and necessities of man: and that is, the knowledge of God,
and of that duty which we owe to him; the wisdom of pleasing God, by doing what
he commands, and avoiding what he forbids: This Knowledge and Wisdom may be
attained by man, and is sufficient to make him happy. And unto man he said,
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding.

Which words consist of two propositions, which are not distinct in sense, but
one and the same thing variously expressed; For wisdom and understanding are
Synonymous words here, and though sometimes they have different notions, yet in
the Poetical books of Scripture they are most frequently used as words
equivalent, and do both of them indifferently signify either a speculative
knowledge of things, or a practical skill about them, according to the exigency
of the matter or thing spoken of. And so likewise the fear of the Lord, and
departure from evil, are phrases of a very near sense, and like importance, and
therefore we find them several times put together in Scripture. Prove. 3. 7.
Fear the Lord and depart from evil. Prove. 16. 6. By the fear of the Lord men
depart from evil. So that they differ only as cause and effect, which by a
Metonymy usual in all sorts of Authors, are frequently put for one another.

Now, To fear the Lord, and to depart from evil, are phrases which the
Scripture uses in a very great latitude, to express to us the sum of Religion,
and the whole of our duty. And because the large acceptance of these phrases
is to be the foundation of my subsequent discourse, I shall for the further
clearing of this matter endeavor to show these two things.

1. That it is very usual in the language of Scripture, to express the whole of
Religion by these, and such like phrases.

2. The particular fitness of these two phrases to describe Religion by.

I. It is very usual in the language of Scripture, to express the Whole of
Religion by some eminent Principle or part of Religion. The great Principles of
Religion are Knowledge, Faith, Remembrance, Love and Fear; by all which, the
Scripture uses to express the Whole duty of man. In the Old Testament, by the
Knowledge, Remembrance, and Fear of God. Religion is called The knowledge of the
holy, Prove. 30. 3. And wicked men are described to be such as know not God. So
likewise, by the fear of the Lord, frequently in this book of Job, and in the
Psalms, and Proverbs. And Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another. And Eccles. 12. 13. the fear of God is expressly said to
be the sum of Religion; Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the
whole of man. And on the contrary, the wicked are described to be such as have
not the fear of God before their eyes, Psalm. 36. 1. And so likewise by the
remembrance of God, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth: that is, enter upon a Religious course betimes. And on the contrary, the
Character of the Wicked is, that they forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. In the New Testament,
Religion is usually expressed by faith in God and Christ, and the love of them,
Hence it is that true Christians are so frequently called believers, and wicked
and ungodly men, unbelievers. And Romans 8. 28. Good men are described to be such
as love God, All things shall work together for good to them that love God, and
such as love the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 6. 24. Now the reason why these are
put for the Whole of Religion, is, because the belief, and knowledge, and
remembrance, and love, and fear of God, are such powerful principles, and have
so great an influence upon men to make them Religious, that where any one of
these really is, all the rest, together with the true and genuine effects of
them, are supposed to be. And so likewise the sum of all Religion is often
expressed by some eminent part of it; which will explain the second phrase here
in the Text, Departing from evil. The Worship of God is an eminent part of
Religion; and Prayer, which is often in Scripture expressed by seeking God, and
calling upon his Name, is a chief part of Religious Worship. Hence Religion is
described by seeking God, Heb. 11. 6. He is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him; and by calling upon his Name, Act. 2. 21. Whosoever calls upon the
name of the Lord, shall be saved. And so by coming to God, and by departing
from evil. In this fallen state of man, Religion begins with Repentance and
Conversion, the two opposite terms of which are God and sin; hence it is that
Religion is described sometimes by coming to God, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to
God must believe that he is; that is, No man can be religious, unless he
believe there is a God. Sometimes by departing from sin, Isa. 59. 15. And he
that departs from evil makes himself a Prey: that is, such was the bad state
of those times the Prophet complains of, that no man could be religious, but he
was in danger of being persecuted.

II. For the fitness of these two phrases to describe Religion by. 1. For the
first, The fear of the Lord; the fitness of this phrase will appear, if we
consider that very great influence which the fear of God has upon men to make
them religious. Fear is a passion that is most deeply rooted in our natures,
and flows immediately from that principle of self-preservation which God has
planted in every man. Every man desires his own preservation and happiness, and
therefore has a natural dread and horror of every thing that can destroy his
being, and endanger his happiness; Now the greatest danger is from the greatest
power, and that is Omnipotency. So that the fear of God is an inward
acknowledgment of a Holy and just Being, which is armed with an almighty and
irresistible power; God having hidin every man's conscience a secret awe and
dread of his infinite Power, and eternal Justice. Now Fear, being so intimate
to our natures, it is the strongest bond of Laws, and the great security of our
duty. There are two Bridles or restraints which God has put upon humane
nature, Shame, and Fear. Shame is the weaker, and has place only in those in
whom there are some remainders of Virtue; Fear is the stronger, and works upon
all who love themselves, and desire their own preservation. Therefore, in this
degenerate state of mankind, Fear is that passion which has the greatest
power over us, and by which, God and his Laws take the surest hold of us: Our
Desire, and Love, and Hope, are not so apt to be wrought upon by the
representation of Virtue, and the promises of Reward and Happiness as our Fear
is from the apprehensions of Divine displeasure; For though we have lost, in a
great measure, the gust and relish of true happiness, yet we still retain a
quick sense of pain and misery. So that Fear relies upon a natural love of our
selves, and is complicated with a necessary desire of our own preservation;
therefore Religion usually makes it is first entrance into us by this passion;
and hence it is that Solomon, more then once, calls the Fear of the Lord the
beginning of Wisdom. 2. As for the second phrase, departing from evil; the
fitness of it to express the whole duty of Man will appear, if we consider the
necessary connection that is between the negative and positive part of our duty.
He that is careful to avoid all sin, will sincerely endeavor to perform his
duty; for, the soul of man is an active principle, and busy, and will be
employed one way or other, it will be doing something; if a man abstain from
evil, he will do good. Now there being such a strait connection between these,
the whole of our duty may be expressed by either of them, but most fitly by
departing from evil, because that is the first part of our duty: Religion
begins in the forsaking of sin; Virtus est Vitium fugere, and Sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse; Virtue begins in the forsaking of Vice, and the first part
of Wisdom is, not to be a Fool. And therefore the Scripture, which mentions
these parts of our duty, does constantly put departing from evil first; Psalm.
34. 14. and Psalm. 37. 27. Depart from evil, and do good. Isa. 1. 16, 17. Cease
to do evil, learn to do well. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. Ephesians, 4.
23, 24. We are first to put off the old man which is corrupt according to
deceitful lusts, and then to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and to put
on the new man, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 11. Let him eschew evil, and do do good. To all
which I may add this further Consideration, That the Law of God, contained in
the Ten Commandments, consisting mostly of prohibitions, Thou shall not do such
or such a thing, our observance of them is most fitly expressed by departing
from evil, which yet includes obedience likewise to the positive Precepts
implied in those prohibitions.

From the words thus explained, the Proposition that I shall speak to is this,
viz. Doctr. That Religion is the best Knowledge and Wisdom.



Or thus, He that is truly Religious is the most wise and knowing person.



I shall first endeavor to confirm the truth of this Proposition, and then
make some Use and improvement of it.

The Confirmation of it I shall attempt these three ways.

1. By a direct Proof of it.

2. By showing on the contrary, the folly and ignorance of irreligion and
wickedness.

3. By vindicating Religion from those common Imputations which seem to charge
it with Ignorance or Imprudence.

I. I begin with the direct proof of this; And because Religion comprehends two
things, the knowledge of the Principles of it, and a suitable life and practice;
(the first of which being speculative may more properly be called knowledge, and
the latter, because it is practical, may be called wisdom or prudence) therefore
I shall endeavor distinctly to prove these two things.

1. That Religion is the best Knowledge. 2. That it is the truest Wisdom.
1. First, That it is the best knowledge. The knowledge of Religion commends its
self to us upon these two accounts.

1. It Is the knowledge of those things which are in themselves most excellent.

2. Of those things which are most useful and necessary for us to know.

First, It is the best knowledge, because it is the knowledge of those things
which are in themselves most excellent, and desirable to be known, and those
are God, and our duty. God is the sum and comprehension of all perfection. It
is delightful to know the Creatures, because they are some shadows of the
divine perfections; There are particular excellencies scattered and dispersed
among the Creatures, which it is very pleasant to contemplate; But in God all
perfections in their highest degree and exaltation meet together and are
united; how much more delightful then must it needs be, to fix our minds upon
such an object in which there is nothing but beauty and brightness, what is
amiable and what is excellent; what will ravish our affections and raise our
wonder, please us and astonish us at once? And that the finite measure and
capacity of our understandings is not able to take in and comprehend the
infinite excellencies and perfections of God, this indeed shows the excellency
of the object, but does not at all detract from the delightfulness of the
knowledge; for it is a greater pleasure for a finite understanding to be lost in
the contemplation of its object, and to view unlimited excellencies, which have
no shore nor bounds, then to look upon those perfections of which we can see
the end and utmost; as it is more pleasant to the eye to have an endless
prospect, then to be terminated; for this is that which properly causes
admiration, when we discover a great deal in an object which we understand to
be excellent, and yet we see we know not how much more beyond that, which our
understandings cannot fully reach and comprehend.

And as the knowledge of God in his nature and perfections is excellent and
desirable; so likewise to know him in those glorious manifestations of himself
in the works of Creation and Providence; and above all (though it be little
spoken of by the Saints of the Old Testament, by reason of the obscure degree
of its discovery in those times) the knowledge of God in his Son Jesus Christ,
in that stupendous manifestation of his wisdom and mercy in the contrivance of
our Recovery, which is such a mystery, and so excellent a piece of knowledge,
that the Angels desire to pry into it, 1 Pet. 1. 12.

And as the knowledge of God is excellent, so likewise of our Duty, which is
nothing else but virtue and goodness and holiness, which are the Image of God,
a conformity to the nature and will of God, and an imitation of the Divine
excellencies and perfections so far as we are capable: For to know our duty, is
to know what it is to be like God in Goodness, and Pity, and Patience, and
Clemency, in pardoning injuries, and passing by provocations, in justice and
righteousness, in truth and faithfulness, and in a hatred and detestation of
the contrary of these. In a word, it is to know what is the good and acceptable
will of God, what it is that he loves and delights in, and is pleased withal,
and would have us to do in order to our perfection, and our happiness. It is
deservedly accounted a piece of excellent knowledge, to know the Laws of the
Land, and the Customs of the Country we live in, and the Will of the Prince we
live under; How much more, to know the Statutes of Heaven, and the Laws of
Eternity, those immutable and eternal Laws of Justice and Righteousness? to
know the will and pleasure of the great Monarch, and Universal King of the
World, and the Customs of that Country where we must live for ever? This made
David to admire the Law of God at that strange rate he does in the 119th Psalm,
and to advance the knowledge of it above all other knowledge, I have seen an end
of all perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

Secondly, It Is the knowledge of those things which are most useful and
necessary for us to know. The goodness of every thing is measured by its end
and use, and that is the best thing which serves the best end and purpose; and
the more necessary any thing is to an end, the better it is: So that the best
knowledge is that which is of greatest use and necessity to us in order to our
great end, which is Eternal happiness, and the Salvation of our Souls. Curious
speculations, and the contemplation of things that are impertinent to us, and
do not concern us, nor serve to promote our happiness, are but a more specious
and ingenious sort of idleness, a more pardonable and creditable kind of
Ignorance. That man that does not know those things which are of use and
necessity for him to know, is but an ignorant man, whatever he may know
besides; Now the knowledge of God, and of Christ, and of our duty, is of the
greatest usefulness and necessity to us in order to our happiness: It Is of
absolute necessity that we should know God and Christ, in order to our being
happy: Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal (that is, the only way to it) to know
thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. It is
necessary also in order to our happiness, to know our Duty, because it is
necessary for us to do it, and it is impossible to do it except we know it: So
that whatever other knowledge a man may be endued withal, he is but an ignorant
person who does not know God, the Author of his being, the Preserver and
Protector of his life, his Sovereign, and his Judge, the giver of every good and
perfect gift, his surest refuge in trouble, his best friend or worst enemy, the
present support of his life, his hopes in death, his future happiness, and his
portion for ever; Who does not know his relation to God, the duty that he owes
him, and the way to please him who can make him happy or miserable for ever;
Who does not know the things of his peace, and the way how to get his sins
pardoned, and himself reconciled to an offended God; Who does not know the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life. So that if a man by a
vast and imperious mind, and a heart large as the sand upon the Sea shore, (as
it is said of Solomon) could command all the knowledge of Nature and Art, of
words and things; could attain to a Mastery in all Languages, and sound the
depth of all Arts and Sciences, measure the Earth and the Heavens, and tell the
Stars, and give an account of their order and motions; could discourse of the
Interests of all States, the Intrigues of all Courts, the reason of all Civil
Laws and Constitutions, and give an account of the History of all ages; could
speak of Trees, from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop
that springs out of the wall, and of beasts also, and of fowls, and of
creeping things, and of fishes; and yet should, in the mean time, be destitute
of the knowledge of God, and Christ, and his duty; all this would be but an
impertinent vanity, and a more glittering kind of Ignorance; and such a man
(like the Philosopher, who whilst he was gazing upon the Stars, fell into the
ditch) would but Sapienter descendere in infernum, be undone with all this
knowledge, and with a great deal of wisdom go down to Hell.

2. Secondly, That to be Religious is the truest Wisdom; and that likewise upon
two accounts.

1. Because it is to be wise for our selves. 2. It is to be wise as to our main
interest and concernment.
First, It Is to be wise for our selves. There Is an expression, Job 22. 21. He
that is wise is profitable to himself; and Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou
shall be wise for thy self; intimating, that Wisdom regards a man's own interest
and advantage, and he is not a wise man that does not take care of himself and
his own concernments, according to that of old Ennius, Nequicquam sapere
sapientem, qui sibi ipsi prodesse non quiret; that man has but an empty title
of Wisdom, and is not really wise, who is not wise for himself. As Self
preservation is the first principle of Nature, so care of our selves and our
own interest is the first part of Wisdom: He that is wise in the affairs and
concernments of other men, but careless and negligent of his own, that man may
be said to be busy, but he is not wise; he is employed indeed, but not so as a
wise man should be: Now this is the wisdom of Religion, that it directs a man
to a care of his own proper interest and concernment.

2. It is to be wise as to our main interest. Our chief end and highest
interest is happiness; Now this is happiness, To be freed from all (if it may
be,) however, from the greatest evils; and to enjoy (if it may be) all good,
however, the chiefest. To be happy, is not only to be freed from the pains and
diseases of the body, but from anxiety and vexation of Spirit; not only to
enjoy the pleasures of sense, but peace of Conscience and tranquill^ty of mind.
To be happy, is not only to be so for a little while, but as long as may be,
and if it be possible, for ever. Now Religion designs our greatest and longest
happiness; it aims at a freedom from the greatest evils, and to bring us to the
possession and enjoyment of the greatest good. For Religion wisely considers,
that men have Immortal Spirits, which as they are Spirits, are capable of a
pleasure and happiness distinct from that of our bodies and our senses; and
because they are Immortal, are capable of an everlasting happiness. Now our
Souls being the best part of our selves, and Eternity being infinitely the most
considerable duration; the greatest wisdom is to secure the interest of our
Souls, and the interest of Eternity, though it be with the loss, and to the
prejudice of our temporal and inferior Interests: Therefore Religion directs
us rather to secure inward peace, then outward ease; to be more careful to
avoid everlasting and intolerable torments, then short and light afflictions
which are but for a moment; to court the favor of God more then the friendship
of the World; and not so much to fear them that can kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do, as him who after he has killed can destroy
both body and soul in hell. In a word, our main Interest is to be as happy as
we can, and as long as is possible; and if we be cast into such circumstances,
that we must be either in part and for a time, or else wholly and always
miserable; the best wisdom is to choose the greatest and most lasting
happiness, but the least and shortest misery: Upon this account Religion
preferrs those pleasures which flow from the presence of God for evermore,
infinitely before the transitory pleasures of this world; and is much more
careful to avoid eternal misery, then present sufferings. This is the Wisdom of
Religion, that upon consideration of the whole, and casting up all things
together, it does advise and lead us to our best Interest.

II. The second way of Confirmation shall be by showing the Ignorance and Folly
of Irreligion and Wickedness: And this I might do by the Rule of Contraries;
for, if he that is truly Religious be the wisest and most knowing person, then
those that are irreligious and wicked are neither knowing nor wise. But because
this may sufficiently appear by applying what I have said in the direct proof
of the Proposition the just contrary way, therefore I shall not enlarge upon
this in the same method, but proceed upon other Heads to show the Ignorance and
Folly of such persons. Now all that are irreligious are so upon one of these
two accounts; Either, First, Because they do not believe the Foundations and
Principles of Religion, as, The Existence of God, The Immortality of the Soul,
and Future and Eternal Rewards; and of this kind there are but few, in
comparison, who do not in some sort believe these things: Or else, Secondly,
Men are irreligious, because though they do in some sort believe these things,
yet they act contrary to their belief; and of this kind are the far greatest
part of wicked men: The first sort are guilty of that which we call
Speculative, the latter of Practical Atheism I shall endeavor to discover the
Ignorance and Folly of both these.

1. Speculative Atheism, is First, absurd in the Theory and speculation, which
argues Ignorance; and Secondly, it is an imprudent Opinion, both because it is
against our present interest, and is also unsafe in the ultimate issue of it;
which argues Folly.

I. It is absurd in the Theory and Speculation; and that upon these five
accounts.

1. Because it gives no probable account of the Existence of things. We see a
World of Creatures, and a vast Frame of things, which we who believe a God
attribute to God as the Author, (i e.) to a Being endued with infinite
Goodness and Wisdom and Power, which is a very likely Cause to produce a World:
For, what more likely to communicate Being to so numerous a progeny of goodly
Creatures, then infinite Goodness? What more likely to create so vast a World,
that is, to stretch forth the Heavens and lay the foundations of the Earth, to
form these and all the Creatures in them out of Nothing, then infinite Power?
What so likely to contrive all these Creatures each of them so perfect in their
kind, and all of them so fitly and harmoniously suited to each other and to the
whole, as infinite Counsel and Wisdom? This seems to be a reasonable account.
But what account does the Atheist give of this? Either he must say, that the
World was Eternal, and that things always were as they are, without any first
Cause of their Being, which is the way of the Aristotelian Atheists; or else he
must ascribe the Original of the World to Chance, and the casual concourse of
Matter, which is the way of the Epicurean Atheists. But neither of these ways
gives a probable account of the Existence of things.

First, Not the Aristotelian way; For, though we may conceive the same thing
always to have been, yet it is utterly unimaginable how there should have been
an infinite orderly succession of things, that is, a third, fourth, fifth, etc.
without a first. I say, this is utterly unimaginable; But yet I will suppose
that this matter does admit of seeming and unanswerable Demonstrations both
ways, viz. both That an eternal succession of things is possible, and that it
is impossible; as the Question about the infinite divisibility of Quantity
does, and indeed all Questions about any thing that is infinite, it being but
reasonable to expect that our finite Understandings should be puzzled and lost
about any thing that is infinite. Now granting this, which is the utmost any
man can challenge in this Question, this Account of things from an Eternal
order and succession of Causes comes to just nothing; For, though it be
granted, that there are plausible Arguments for the possibility of this, yet so
long as they are countepoised by other Arguments every whit as strong and
unanswerable, they can signify nothing in the balance of Reason, because the
strength of them is wholly enervated and taken off by equal Demonstrations on
the other side; and so long as their hands are thus tied, such a supposition is
altogether useless, and nothing can be built upon it; For what man will allow
it probable that there has been an Eternal succession of things, without any
Original, or first Cause, whilst it is an even Question, whether an Eternal
succession of things be so much as possible? And besides all this, Aristotle
himself (who is supposed to be the great Patron of this Opinion of the Eternity
of the World) does elsewhere in several places of his works, own it as one of
the greatest absurdities that can be, to assert an infinite progress of Causes,
and says, that it is unworthy of a Philosopher to resolve any thing this way,
and that the mind of man can have no rest, nor any reasonable and satisfactory
account of things be given, but by staying in some first Cause. But I needed
not have said so much to this, because the Modern Atheists do generally desert
this way.

Secondly, Nor the Epicurean way, which imputes this vast pile of the World,
this regular and orderly Frame of things (which it acknowledges to have had a
beginning) not to goodness, and power, and counsel, and wisdom; but to a
fortunate chance, and happy casualty. Now there is nothing can be more
unreasonable then obstinately to impute that to Chance, which does plainly and
apparently contain in it all the Arguments and Characters of a wise design and
contrivance. Was ever any considerable work, in which there was required great
variety of parts, and a regular and orderly disposition of those parts, done by
Chance? Will Chance fit means to ends, and that in ten thousand instances, and
not fail in any one? How often might a man, after he had jumbled a set of
Letters in a Bag, fling them out upon the ground before they would fall into an
exact Poem, yea, or make a good Discourse in Prose? And may not a little Book
be as easily made by Chance, as this great Volume of the World? How long might
a man be in sprinkling colors upon Canvas with a careless hand, before they
would happen to make the exact picture of a Man? And is a Man easilier made by
chance then his Picture? How long might twenty thousand blind Men. which should
be sent out from the several remote parts of England, wander up and down before
they would all meet upon Salisbury Plains, and fall into Rank and File in the
exact order of an Army? And yet this is much more easy to be imagined, then
how the innumerabe blind parts of Matter should Rendezvous themselves into a
World. A man that sees Henry the Seventh's Chapel at Westminster, might with
as good reason maintain (yea, with much better, considering the vast difference
betwixt that little Structure, and the huge Fabric of the World) that it was
never contrived or built by any Man, but that the stones did by Chance grow
into those curious Figures into which they seem to have been cut and graven;
And that upon a time, (as Tales usually begin) the Materials of that building,
the Stone, Mortar, Timber, Iron, Lead and Glass, happily met together, and very
fortunately ranged themselves into that delicate order in which we see them now
so close compacted, that it must be a very great Chance that parts them again.
What would the world think of a man that should advance such an opinion as
this, and write a Book for it? If they would do him right, they ought to look
upon him as mad, with a little more reason then any man can have to say that
the World was made by Chance, or that the first Men grew up out of the Earth as
Plants do now. And yet they who give this account of the Original things,
assume to themselves to be the Men of Reason, the great Wits of the World, the
only cautious and wary persons, that hate to be imposed upon, that must have
convincing evidence for every thing, and can assent to nothing without a clear
Demonstration for it.

2. Because it gives no reasonable account of the Universal Consent of Mankind
in this apprehension, that there is a God. That men do generally believe a God,
and have done in all Ages, the present experience of the World, and the Records
of former times do abundantly testify. Now how comes this persuasion to have
gained so universal a possession of the mind of Man, and to have found such
general entertainment in all Nations, even those that are most barbarous? If
there be no such thing as God in the world, how comes it to pass that this
object does continually encounter our understandings? whence is it that we are
so perpetually haunted with the Apparition of a Deity, and followed with it
wherever we go? If it be not natural to the mind of Man, but proceeds from
some accidental distemper of our understandings, how comes it to be so
Universal, that no differences of age, or temper, or education, can wear it
out, and set any considerable number of men free from it? Into what can we
resolve this strong inclination of mankind to this error and mistake? how come
all Nations to be thus seduced? It is altogether unimaginable, but that the
Reason of so Universal a consent in all places and ages of the world, and among
all differences of persons, should be one and constant; But no one and constant
reason of this can be given, but from the nature of Man's mind and
understanding, which has this Notion of a Deity born with it, and stamped upon
it; or, which is all one, is of such a frame, that in the free use and exercise
of it self, it will find out God; And what more reasonable then to think, that
if we be Gods Workmanship, he should set this mark of himself upon all
reasonable Creatures, that they may know to whom they belong, and may
acknowledge the Author of their Beings? This seems to be a credible and
satisfactory account of so Universal a consent in this matter. But now what
does the Atheist resolve this into? He is not at one with himself what account
to give of it; nor can it be expected he should; For he that will overlook the
true reason of a thing, which is but one, may easily find many false ones,
Error being infinite. But there are three which he principally rellyes upon,
Fear, Tradition, and Policy of State. I shall briefly consider these.

First, He would fain make us believe that this apprehension of a God, does
spring from an infinite jealousy in the mind of Man, and an endless fear of
the worst that may happen, according to that Divine saying of the Poet, (which
he can never sufficiently admire) Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor, Fear first
made Gods. So that it is granted on both sides, that the fear of a Deity does
universally possess the minds of Men: Now the question is, whether it be more
likely that the existence of a God should be the cause of this fear, or that
this fear should be the cause why men imagine there is a God? If there be a God
who has impressed this image of himself upon the mind of Man, there is great
reason why all men should stand in awe of him; But if there be no God, it is
not easy to conceive how fear should create an universal confidence and
assurance in men that there is one. For, whence should this Fear come? it must
be either from without, from the suggestion of others, who first tell us there
is such a being, and then our fear believes it; or else it must arise from
within, viz. from the Nature of Man, which is apt to fancy dreadful and
terrible things. If from the suggestion of others who tell us so, the question
returns, who told them so? and will never be satisfied till the first Author of
this report be found out; so that this account of fear resolves it self into
Tradition, which shall be spoken to in its proper place. But if it be said,
that this fear arises from within, from the Nature of man which is apt to
imagine dreadful things, this likewise is liable to inexplicable difficulties.
For, First, the proper object of fear is something that is dreadful, that is,
something that threatens Men with harm, or danger, and that in God must either
be Power, or Justice; and such an object as this, fear indeed may create: But
Goodness and Mercy are essential to the Notion of a God, as well as Power and
Justice; Now how should fear put men upon fancying a Being that is infinitely
good and merciful? No man has reason to be afraid of such a Being as such. So
that the Atheist must join another cause to Fear, viz. Hope, to enable men to
create this imagination of a God. And what would the Product of these two
contrary Passions be? The imagination of a Being, which we should fear would do
us as much harm, as we could hope it would do us good; which would be Quid pro
Quo, and which our Reason would oblige us to lay aside so soon as we had
fancied it, because it would signify just nothing. But Secondly, Suppose fear
alone could do it; how comes the mind of Man to be subject to such groundless
and unreasonable fears? The Aristotelian Atheist will say, it always was so;
But this is to affirm, and not to give any account of a thing: The Epicurean
Atheist, if he will speak consonantly to himself, must say, that there happened
in the original constitution of the first men such a contexture of Atoms, as
does naturally dispose men to these panick fears; unless he will say, that when
the first men grew out of the earth, and afterward broke loose from their
root, finding themselves weak, and naked, and unarmed, and meeting with several
fierce creatures stronger then themselves, they were put to such a fright as
did a little distemper their understandings, and let loose their imaginatians
to endless suspicious, and unbounded jealousies, which did at last settle in
the conceit of an invisible Being, infinitely powerful, and able to do them
harm; and being fully possessed with this apprehension, (nothing being mo^e
ordinary then for crazed persons to believe their own fancies) they became
Religious, and afterward when mankind began to be propagated in the way of
generation, then Religion obliged them to instill these principles into their
Children in their tender years, that so they might make the greater impression
upon them; and this course having been continued ever since, the Notion of a
God has been kept up in the world. This is very suitable to Epicurus his
Hypothesis of the Original of Men; but if any man think fit to say thus, I
cannot think it fit to confute him. Thirdly, Whether Men were from all Eternity
such timorous and fanciful Creatures, or happened to be made so in the first
constitution of things; it seems however, that this fear of a Deity has a
foundation in Nature; And if it be natural, ought we not rather to conclude,
That there is some ground and reason for these Fears, and that Nature has not
planted them in us to no purpose, then that they are vain and groundless? There
is no Principle that Aristotle (the grand Assertor of the Eternity of the
World) does more frequently inculcate then this, That Nature does nothing in
vain; and Epicurus is forced to acknowledge, (and so will every man, who
attentively considers the frame of the World) That although things were made by
Chance, yet they have happened as well as if the greatest Wisdom had had the
ordering and contriving of them; And surely Wisdom would never have planted
such a vain principle as the fear of a Deity in the Nature of Man, if there had
not been a God in the World.

Secondly, If Fear be not a sufficient account of this Universal Consent, the
Atheist thinks it may very probably be resolved into Universal Tradition. But
this likewise is liable to great exception; For, whence came this Tradition? It
must begin some time, it must have its original from some body; and it were
very well worth our knowing, who that Man was that first raised this Spirit
which all the Reason of mankind could never conjure down since; Where did he
live, and when? In what Country, and in what Age of the World? What was his
Name, or his Sons Name, that we may know him? This the Atheist can give no
punctual account of; only he imagines it not improbable, that some body long
ago (no body knows when) beyond the memory of all Ages, did start such a notion
in the world, and that it has past for current ever since. But whatever he
imagine, that is very improbable which relies upon no stronger arguments then
his own conceit: But besides, If this Tradition be granted so very ancient as
to have been before all Books, and to be elder then any History, it may, for
any thing any body can tell, have been from the beginning; and then it is much
more likely to be a Notion which was bred in the mind of Man, and born with
him, then a Tradition transmitted from hand to hand through all generations;
especially if we consider how many rude and barbarous Nations there are in the
World which consent in the Opinion of a God, and yet have no certain Tradition
of any thing that was done among them but two or three Ages before.

Thirdly, But if neither of these be satisfactory, he has one way more; which
although it signify little to Men of sober and severe Reason, yet it very
unhappily hits the jealous and suspicious humor of the generality of men, who
from the experience they have had of themselves and others, are very apt to
suspect that every body, but especially their Superiors and Governors, have a
design to impose upon them for their own ends. In short, it is this; That this
noise about a God is a mere State Engine, and a Politic device, invented at
first by some great Prince, or Minister of State, to keep people in awe and
order. And if so, from hence (says the Atheist) we may easily apprehend, how
from such an original it might be generally propagated, and become universally
current, having the stamp of public Authority upon it; besides, that People
have always been found easy to comply with the inclinations of their Prince.
And from hence likewise we may see the Reason why this Notion has continued so
long; for being found by experience to be so excellent an Instrument of
Government, we may be sure it would always be cherished and kept up. And now he
triumphs, and thinks the business is very clear: Thus it was; some time or
other, (most probably toward the beginning of the world, (if it had a
beginning) when all Mankind was under one Universal Monarch;) some great
Nebuchadnezzar set up this Image of a Deity, and commanded all People and
Nations to fall down and worship it: And this being found a successful device,
to awe people into obedience to Government, it has been continued to this day,
and is like to last to the end of the world. To this fine conjecture I have
these four things to say: 1. That all this is mere conjecture and supposition;
he cannot bring the least shadow of proof or evidence for any one tittle of it.
2. This supposition grants the opinion of a God to conduce very much to the
support of Government and order in the World, and consequently to be very
beneficial to Mankind; so that the Atheist cannot but acknowledge that it is
great pity that it should not be true, and that it is the common interest of
Mankind, if there were but probable Arguments for it, not to admit of any
slight Reasons against it; and to prosecute all those who would seduce men to
Atheism, as the great disturbers of the world, and pests of humane society. 3.
This supposition can have nothing of certainty in it, unless this be true, That
whoever makes a politic advantage of other men's Principles, is presumed to
contrive those Principles into them; whereas it is much more common (because
more easy) for men to serve their own ends of those Principles or Opinions,
which they do not put into men, but find there; so that if the question of a
God were to be decided by the probability of this Conjecture, (which the
Atheist applauds himself most in) it would be concluded in the affirmative; It
being much more likely, that because Politicians reap the advantages of
obedience and a more ready submission to Government from men's believing that
there is a God, that they found the minds of men prepossest to their hands with
the notion of a God, then that they planted it there; and we need not doubt but
that they would be very well contented to reap where they did not sow, and to
gather where they did not strew. 4. We have as much evidence of the contrary to
this supposition as such a thing is capable of, viz. that it was not an Arcanum
Imperii, a Secret of Government, to propagate the belief of a God among the
people, when the Governors themselves knew it to be a cheat. For we find in
the Histories of all Ages of which we have any Records, (and of other Ages we
cannot possibly judge) that Princes have not been more secure from troubles of
Conscience, and the fears of Religion, and the terrors of another World, (nay,
many of them more subject to these) then other men, as I could give many
instances, and those no mean ones: What made Caligula creep under the Bed when
it thundered? What made Tiberius (that great Master of the Crafts of
Government) complain so much of the grievous stings and lashes he felt in his
Conscience? What moved that Great Emperor, Charles the Fifth, to quit his
Kingdom, and retire into a Monastery to prepare for another World? What made
Cardinal Wolsey (one of the greatest Ministers of State that ever was) to pour
forth his soul in those sad words? Had I been as diligent to please my God as I
have been to please my King, he would not have forsaken me now in my gray
hairs. What reason for such Actions and Speeches, if these Great Men had known
that Religion was but a cheat? Now if such great and politic persons (as the
three last of these were) knew nothing of this Secret, I think we may safely
conclude, that the Notion of a God did not come from the Court, that it is not
the invention of Politicians, and a juggle of State, to cozen the people into
obedience. And now from all this that has been said it seems to be very
evident, that the general consent of Mankind in this apprehension That there
is a God, must in all Reason be ascribed to some more certain and universal
Cause then Fear, or Tradition, or State Policy, viz. to this, That God himself
has stamped this Image of himself upon the Mind of Man, and so woven it into
the very frame of his Being, that (like Phidias his Picture in Minerva's
Shield) it can never totally be defaced without the ruin of humane nature.

Object. I do but know one Objection that this Discourse is liable to; it is
this: The Universal Consent of Mankind in the apprehension of a God is no more
an Argument of the Being of a God, then the general agreement of so many
Nations for so many Ages in Polytheisme and Idolatry is an Argument for these.
Answ. To this I answer, 1. That the generality of the Philosophers and wise men
of all Nations and Ages did dissent from the multitude in these things; they
believed but one Supreme Deity, which, with respect to the various benefits men
received from him, had several Titles bestowed upon him; and although they did
servilely comply with the People in worshipping God by sensible Images and
Representations, yet it appears by their Writings that they despised this way
of Worship as superstitious, and unsuitable to the Nature of God. So that
Polytheisme and Idolatry are far from being able to pretend to Universal
Consent from their having had the Vote of the multitude in most Nations for
several Ages together; because the opinion of the vulgar separated from the
Consent and Approbation of the Wise, signifies no more then a great many
Ciphers would do without Figures. 2. The gross Ignorance and Mistakes of the
Heathen about God and his Worship are a good Argument that there is a God,
because they show, That men sunk into the most degenerate condition, into the
greatest blindness and darkness imaginable, do yet retain some sense and awe of
a Deity; that Religion is a property of our Natures, and that the Notion of a
Deity is intimate to our Understandings, and sticks close to them, seeing Men
will rather have any God then none, and rather then want a Deity, they will
worship any thing. 3. That there have been so many false Gods invented, is
rather an Argument that there is a true One, then that there is none: There
would be no Counterfeits, but for the sake of something that is real; for,
though all Pretenders seem to be what they really are not, yet they pretend to
be something that really is: For, to counterfeit is to put on the likeness and
appearance of some real Excellency; There would be no Brass-money, if there
were not good and lawful Money; Bristol-stones would not pretend to be
Diamonds, if there never had been any Diamonds; Those Idols in Henry the
Seventh's time (as Sir Francis Bacon calls them) Lambert Simnell, and Perkin
Warbeck, had never been set up, if there had not once been a real Plantagenet
and Duke of York; so the Idols of the Heathen, though they be set up in affront
to the true God, yet they are a probable Argument that there is one.

3. Speculative Atheism is absurd in the Theory, because it requires more
evidence for things then they are capable of. Aristotle has long since well
observed, how unreasonable it is to expect the same kind of proof and evidence
for every thing, which we have for some things. Mathematical things, being of
an abstracted nature, are only capable of clear Demonstration; But Conclusions
in Natural Philosophy are to be proved by a sufficient Induction of
experiments; things of a moral nature, by moral Arguments; and matters of Fact,
by credible Testimony: And though none of these be capable of strict
Demonstration, yet we have an undoubted assurance of them, when they are proved
by the best Arguments that the nature and quality of the thing will bear. No
man can demonstrate to me, that there is such an Island in America as Jamaica;
yet upon the Testimony of credible persons who have seen it, and Authors who
have written of it, I am as free from all doubt concerning it, as I am from
doubting of the cleerest Mathematical Demonstration. So that this is to be
entertained as a firm principle by all those who pretend to be certain of any
thing at all; That when any thing is proved by as good arguments as that thing
is capable of, and we have as great assurance that it is, as we could possibly
have supposing it were, we ought not in reason to make any doubt of the
existence of that thing? Now to apply this to the present Case: The being of a
God is not Mathematically demonstrable, nor can it be expected it should,
because only Mathematical matters admit of this kind of evidence; Nor can it
be proved immediately by sense, because God being supposed to be a pure Spirit,
cannot be the Object of any corporeal sense. But yet we have as great assurance
that there is a God as the nature of the thing to be proved is capable of, and
as we could in reason expect to have, supposing that he were. For let us
suppose there were such a Being as an Infinite Spirit clothed with all
possible perfection, that is, as Good and Wise and Powerful, etc. as can be
imagined, what conceiveable ways are there whereby we should come to be assured
that there is such a Being, but either by an internal impression of the Notion
of a God upon our Minds, or else by such external and visible Effects as our
Reason tells us must be attributed to some Cause, and which we cannot without
great violence to our Understandings attribute to any other Cause but such a
Being as we conceive God to be, that is, One that is infinitely Good, and Wise,
and Powerful? Now we have this double assurance that there is a God, and
greater or other then this the thing is not capable of. If God should assume a
Body, and present himself before our eyes, this might amaze us, but could not
give us any rational assurance that there is an Infinite Spirit; If he should
work a Miracle, that could not in reason convince an Atheist more then the
Arguments he already has for it; If he were to ask a sign in heaven above, or
in the earth beneath, what could he desire God to do for his conviction more
then he has already done? Could he desire him to work a greater Miracle then
to make a World? Why if God should carry this perverse man out of the limits of
this World, and show him a new Heaven and a new Earth, springing out of
nothing, he might say, that innumerable parts of Matter chanced just then to
rally together, and to form themselves into this new World, and that God did
not make it. Thus you see that we have all the rational assurance of a God that
the thing is capable of, and that Atheism is absurd and unreasonable in
requiring more.

4. The Atheist is absurd, because he pretends to know that which no man can
know, and to be certain of that which no body can be certain of; that is That
there is no God, and (which is consequent upon this, as I shall show
afterward) That it is not possible there should be one. And the Atheist must
pretend to know this certainly; for it were the greatest folly in the world for
a man to deny and despise God, if he be not certain that he is not. Now whoever
pretends to be certain that there is no God, has this great disadvantage; He
pretends to be certain of a pure Negative: But of Negatives we have far the
least certainty, and they are always hardest, and many times impossible to be
proved: Indeed such Negatives as only deny some particular mode or manner of a
things existence, a man may have a certainty of them, because, when we see
things to be, we may see what they are, and in what manner they do, or do not
exist; For instance, we may be certain that Man is not a creature that has
Wings, because this only concerns the manner of his existence; and we seeing
what he is, may certainly know that he is not so, or so. But pure Negatives,
that is, such as absolutely deny the existence of things, or the possibility of
their existence, can never be proved; for after all that can be said against a
thing, this will still be true, That many things possibly are which we know not
of, and that many more things may be then are; and if so, after all our
arguments against a thing, it will be uncertain whether it be or not; and this
is universally true, unless the thing denied to be, do plainly imply a
contradiction, from which I shall afterward show the Notion of a God to be
free. Now the Atheist pretends to be certain of a pure Negative, viz. That
there is no such Being as God, and that it is not possible there should be; But
no man can reasonably pretend to know thus much, but he must pretend to know
all things that are, or can be; which if any man should be so vain as to
pretend to, yet it is to be hoped, that no body would be so weak as to believe
him.

5. Speculative Atheism is absurd, because it is self-contradictions. There are
these two great contradictions in the denial of a God. 1. He that denies a God,
says that that is impossible which he must grant to be possible. He says it is
impossible that there should be such a Being as God, in saying that de facto
there is no such Being; for Eternity being essential to the Notion of a God, if
there be not a God already, it is impossible now that there should be one;
because such a Being as is supposed to be essentially Eternal and without
beginning, cannot now begin to be. And yet he must grant it possible that there
should be such a Being, because it is possible there should be such a Being as
has all possible perfection; and such a Being as this is that which we call
God, and is that very thing which the Atheist denies, and others affirm to be;
for he that denies a God, must deny such a Being as all the world describe God
to be, and this is the general Notion which all men have of God, That he is a
Being as perfect as is possible; that is, endued with all such perfections as
do not imply a contradiction, as none of those perfections which we attribute
to God do; Not necessity of being, and self-existence, and eternity, and
immensity or unlimitedness; these the Atheist must grant possible and free from
contradiction, because he ascribes them to the World, or at least to Matter;
Not Goodness, or Wisdom, or Power, or Truth, or Justice, because he ascribes
these to Men, nor consequently the utmost degrees of these that are possible;
nor, lastly, does immateriality or the Notion of a Spirit imply a
contradiction, because the Atheist must either grant that there is a Spirit in
Man, that is, something that is not Matter, (and consequently, that an
immaterial principle is not impossible) or else give a fair and satisfactory
account how mere Matter can think and understand, and how that which moves by
certain and necessary Laws, that is, cannot move unless it be moved by another,
and cannot but move if it be impelled by another, is capable of Liberty and
Freedom; which I think is impossible to be done. 2. Another contradiction which
attends the denial of a God, is this; Atheism denies such a Being to be, as
does in the essential Notion of it include necessary existence, that is, an
impossibility of not being; And this in plain English, is to deny that thing to
be, which cannot but be. Now that the Notion of a God does essentially include
in it necessary existence, appears from the general Notion that all men have of
God, viz. that he is a Being that has all possible perfection; But that
necessary existence is a perfection, is evident, because if Being be good, it
is better to have it necessarily, then contingently; to have it secured, then
to be in danger of losing it: And that it is a possible perfection, the Atheist
cannot deny, because he ascribes it to Matter, as I showed before. So that
Atheism does finally resolve it self into these two gross Contradictions, viz.
That it is impossible that there should be such a Being as has all possible
perfections; that is, That that which may be, cannot be: And, That such a Being
as necessarily exists, does not, nor can possibly exist; that is to say, That a
thing which cannot but be, is not, nor can be.

II. Atheism, as it is an absurd, so it is an imprudent Opinion; and that upon
these two accounts.

First, It is against men's present Interest. Did but Men consider what God is,
they would see him to be so lovely a Being, and so full of goodness and all
desirable perfections, that even those very persons, who are of such irregular
Understandings as not to believe that there is a God, yet could not (if they
understood themselves) refrain from wishing with all their hearts that there
were one. For, is it not every man's interest that there should be such a Being
in the World as takes particular care of him, and loves him, and is able and
willing to do him good, and to make him happy; to supply all his wants, and to
relieve him in all his straits, when no body else can; to preserve him in the
greatest dangers, and assist him against his greatest enemies, and secure him
from misery and destruction? Is is not every man's interest that there should be
such a Being in the World, as would govern us for our advantage, and require
nothing of us, but what is highly for our interest, and what (if we rightly
understood our own concernment) we our selves would choose to do? And God is
such a Being, if he be at all. Now why should any man be aggrieved that there
is such a Being as this, or count it his interest to shut Him out of the World?
Why should any man be concerned or troubled that there is a Being as good as we
can possibly desire or imagine? I dare say, if a wise and considerate man were
left to himself and his own choice, to wish the greatest good to himself he
could devise; the sum of all his wishes would be, that there were just such a
Being as God is; nor would he choose any other Benefactor or Friend or
Protector for himself, or Governor for the whole World, then infinite Power
conducted and managed by infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice, which is
the true Notion of a God. I confess, it is not a wicked Man's interest, if he
resolve to continue such, that there should be a God; But then it is not men's
interest to be wicked: It is for the general good of humane society, and
consequently, of particular persons, to be true and just; it is for men's health
to be temperate; and so I could instance in all other virtues. But this is the
mystery of Atheism, men are wedded to their lusts, and resolved upon a wicked
course, and so it becomes their interest to wish there were no God, and to
believe so if they can; whereas if men were minded to live righteously and
soberly and virtuously in the world, to believe a God would be no hinderance or
prejudice to any such design, but very much for the advancement and furtherance
of it. Men that are good and virtuous do easily believe a God; so that it is
vehemently to be suspected, that nothing but the strength of men's lusts, and
the power of vicious inclinations, do sway their minds, and set a bias upon
their Understandings toward Atheism.

Secondly, Atheism is imprudent, because it is unsafe in the issue. The Atheist
does, as it were, lay a Wager against the Religious man that there is no God;
but upon strange inequality and odds; for he ventures his Eternal Interest:
whereas the other ventures only the loss of his Lusts, (which it is much
better for him to be without) or at the utmost, of some temporal convenience;
and all this while is inwardly more contented and happy, and usually more
healthful, and perhaps meets with more respect, and faithfuller friends, and
lives in a more secure and flourishing condition, and freer from the evils and
punishments of this world, then the Atheistical person does, (however, it is
not much that he ventures;) And after this life, if there be no God, is as well
as he; but if there be a God, is infinitely better, even as much as unspeakable
and eternal happiness is better then extreme and endless misery.

So that if the Arguments for and against a God were equal, and it were an even
Question Whether there were one or nor, yet the hazard and danger is so
infinitely unequal, that in point of prudence and interest every man were
obliged to incline to the Affirmative; and whatever doubts he might have about
it, to choose the safest side of the Question, and to make that the Hypothesis
to live by. For, he that acts wisely, and is a thoroughly prudent man, will be
provided in emnem eventum, will take care to secure the main chance, whatever
happens: but the Atheist, in case things should fall out contrary to his belief
and expectation, he has made no provision for this case; if, contrary to his
confidence, it should prove in the Issue that there is a God, the man is lost
and undone for ever; If the Atheist when he dies shall find that his soul
remains after his body, and has only quitted it is lodging, how will this man
be amazed and blank'd, when, contrary to his expectation, he shall find himself
in a new and strange place, amidst a world of Spirits, entered upon an
everlasting and unchangeable state? How sadly will the man be disappointed when
he finds all things otherwise then he had stated and determined them in this
world? When he comes to appear before that God whom he has denied, and against
whom he has spoken as despightful things as he could? Who can imagine the pale
and guilty looks of this man, and how he will shiver and tremble for the fear
of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty? How will he be surprised with
terrors on every side, to find himself thus unexpectedly and irrecoverably
plunged into a state of ruin and desperation? And thus things may happen for
all this man's confidence now: For our belief or dis-belief of a thing does not
alter the nature of the thing; we cannot fancy things into being, or make them
vanish into nothing by the stubborn confidence of our imaginations; things are
as fullen as we are, and will be what they are, whatever we think of them; and
if there be a God, a man cannot by an obstinate dis-belief of him make him
cease to be, any more then a man can put out the Sun by winking.

And thus I have as briefly and clearly as I could endeavored to show the
ignorance and folly of Speculative Atheism in denying the existence of God. And
now it will be less needful to speak of the other two Principles of Religion,
the Immortality of the Soul, and future Rewards; For no man can have any
reasonable scruple about these, who believes that there is a God; because no
man that owns the existence of an infinite Spirit, can doubt of the possibility
of a finite Spirit, that is, such a thing as is immaterial, and does not
contain any principle of self-corruption in it self; And no man that believes
the goodness of God, can doubt but that he has made some things as good as may
be, and for as long continuance as they are capable of. Nor can any man that
acknowledges the holiness and justice of God, and that he loves righteousness,
and hates iniquity, and that he is Magistrate and Governor of the World, and
consequently concerned to countenance obedience to, and punish the violation of
his Laws; and withal considers the promiscuous dispensations many times of Gods
Providence in this World, think it unreasonable to conclude, that after this
life good men shall be rewarded, and sinners punished.

And now I think I may with reason entreat such as are Atheistically inclined,
to consider these things seriously and impartially; And if there be weight in
these Considerations which I have offered to them to sway with reasonable men,
I would beg of such, that they would not suffer themselves to be by assed by
prejudice, or passion, or the interest of any lust or worldly advantage, to a
contrary persuasion.

First, I would intteat them seriously and diligently to consider these things,
because they are of so great moment and concernment to every man; If any thing
in the world deserve our serious study and consideration, these Principles of
Religion do; For what can import us more to be satisfied in, then whether there
be a God, or not? whether our Souls shall perish with our Bodies, or be
immortal, and shall continue for ever? And if so, Whether in that eternal state
which remains for men after this Life, they shall not be happy or miserable for
ever, according as they have demeaned themselves in this world? If these things
be so, they are of infinite consequence to us; and therefore it highly concerns
us to enquire diligently about them, and to satisfy our minds concerning them
one way or other. For these are not matters to be slightly and superficially
thought upon, much less (as the way of Atheistical men is) to be played and
jested withal. There is no greater argument of a light and inconsiderate
person, then profanely to scoff at Religion; It is a sign that that man has no
regard to himself, and that he is not touched with a sense of his own interest;
For, He jests with edged tools, and plays with Life and Death, and makes
nothing of his Soul. He is the very madman that Solomon speaks of, Prove. 26.
18. Who casts firebrands, arrows and death, and says, Am I not in sport? To
examine severely, and debate seriously the Principles of Religion, is a thing
worthy of a Wise man; but if any man shall turn Religion into Raillery, and
confute it by two or three bold jests, this man does not render Religion, but
himself ridiculous in the opinion of all considerate men, because he sports
with his own Life. If the Principles of Religion were doubtful and uncertain,
yet they concern us so nearly, that we ought to be serious in the examination
of them; and though they were never so clear and evident, yet they may be made
ridiculous by vain and frothy men, as the gravest and wisest Personage in the
World may be abused by being put into a Fools Coat, and the most noble and
excellent Poem may be debased and made vile by being turned into Burlesque. So
that it concerns every man that would not trifle away his Soul, and fool
himself into irrecoverable misery, with the greatest seriousness to enquire
into these matters whether they be so or not, and patiently to consider the
arguments which are brought for them; Many have miscarried about these things,
not because there is not reason and evidence enough for them, but because they
have not had patience enough to consider them.

Secondly, Consider these things impartially. All wicked men are of a Party
against Religion; Some Lust or Interest engages them against it. Hence it
comes to pass that they are apt to slight the strongest Arguments that can be
brought for it, and to cry up very weak ones against it. Men do generally and
without difficulty assent to Mathematical Truths, because it is no bodies
interest to deny them; but men are slow to believe Moral and Divine Truths,
because the Lusts and Interests of men do prejudice them against them. And
therefore you may observe, That the more virtuously any man lives, and the less
he is enslaved to any Lust, the more ready he is to entertain the Principles of
Religion.

Therefore, when you are examining these matters, do not take into
consideration any sensual or worldly Interest, but deal clearly and impartially
with your selves; Let not temporal and little advantages sway you against a
greater and more durable interest. Think thus with your selves; That you have
not the making of things true or false, but that the truth and existence of
things is already fixed and settled, and that the Principles of Religion are
already either determinately true or false, before you think of them: Either
there is a God, or there is not; either your Souls are Immortal, or they are
not; one of these is certain and necessary; and they are not now to be altered;
The truth of things will not comply with your conceits, and bend it self to
your interests. Therefore do not think what you would have to be, but consider
impartially what is, and (if it be) will be whether you will or no. Do not
reason thus; I would fain be wicked, and therefore is is my interest that there
should be no God, nor no life after this, and therefore I will endeavor to
prove that there is no such thing, and will show all the favor I can to that
side of the Question; I will bend my understanding and wit to strengthen the
Negative, and will study to make it as true as I can. This is fond, because it
is the way to cheat thy self; and that thou may do, if thou likest it: We
may cozen our selves as often as we please, but Res nolunt decipi, The nature
of things will not be imposed upon. If then thou be as wise as thou ought to
be, thou will reason thus with thy self; My highest interest is not to be
deceived about these matters, therefore setting aside all other considerations,
I will endeavor to know the truth, and yield to that.

2. Secondly, The Practical Atheist, who is wicked and irreligious
notwithstanding he does in some sort believe that there is a God, and a future
state; he is likewise guilty of prodigious Folly: The Principle of the
Speculative Atheist argues more Ignorance, but the Practice of the other argues
greater Folly. Not to believe a God and another Life, for which there is so
much evidence of Reason, is great ignorance and folly; but it is the highest
madness, when a man does believe these things, to live as if he did not believe
them: When a man does not doubt but that there is a God, and according as he
demeans himself toward him, he will make him happy or miserable for ever; yet
to live so as if he were certain of the contrary, and as no man in Reason can
live, but he that is well assured that there is no God. It was a shrewd saying
of the old Monk, That two kind of Prisons would serve for all offenders in the
World, an Inquisition, and a Bedlam; If any man should deny the Being of a God,
and the Immortallity of the Soul, such a one should be put into the first of
these, the Inquisition, as being a desperate Heretic; if any man should
profess to believe these, and allow himself in any known wickedness, such a one
should be put into Bedlam; because there cannot be a greater folly and madness,
then for a man in matters of greatest moment and concernment to act against his
best Reason and Understanding, and by his Life to contradict his Belief; such a
man does Vivus vidensque perire, perish with his eyes open, and knowingly
undoes himself; he runs upon the greatest dangers which he clearly sees to be
before him, and precipitates himself into those evils which he professes to
believe are real and intolerable; and wilfully neglects the obtaining of that
unspeakable good and happiness which he is persuaded is certain and attainable.
But of this more in the Application of this Doctrine.

III. The Third way of Confirmation shall be by endeavoring to vindicate
Religion from those common Imputations which seem to charge it with Ignorance
or Imprudence. The profane Wits of the world cast upon Religion these three
Imputations.

1. Of Credulity. 2. Of Singularity. 3. Of Making a foolish Bargain.
First, Credulity: Say they, The Foundation of Religion is the belief of those
things for which we have no sufficient Reason, and consequently, of which we
can have no good assurance; as the belief of a God, and of a future state after
this life; things which we never saw, nor did experience, nor ever spoke with
any body that did; now it seems to argue too great a facility and easiness of
belief, to assent to any thing upon insufficient grounds.

To this I answer,

1. That if there be such a Being as a God, and such a thing as a future state,
it cannot (as I said before) in reason be expected that we should have the
evidence of sense for such things: For, he that believes a God, believes such a
Being as has all perfections, among which this is one, that he is a Spirit,
and consequently, invisible, and cannot be seen: He that believes another Life
after this, professes to believe a state of which in this life we can have no
trial and experience.

2. We have the best Evidence for these things which they are capable of at
present, supposing they were.

3. Those who deny these Principles must be much more credulous, (that is)
believe things upon incomparably less evidence of Reason. The Atheist looks
upon all that are Religious as a Company of credulous Fools well met; But he,
for his part, pretends to be wiser then to believe any thing for Company; he
cannot entertain things upon those slight grounds which move other men; if you
would win his assent to any thing, you must give him a clear Demonstration for
it. Now there is no way to deal with this Man of Reason, this rigid exactor of
Demonstration for things which are not capable of it, but by showing him that
he is an hundred times more credulous; that he begs more Principles, takes more
things for granted without offering to prove them, and assents to more strange
Conclusions upon weaker grounds, then those whom he so much accuses of
Credulity. And to evidence this, I shall briefly give you an account of the
Atheists Creed, and present you with a Catalogue of the Fundamental Articles of
his Faith, or rather Unbelief. He believes, That there is no God, nor possibly
can be, and consequently that the wise as well as unwise of all ages have been
mistaken, except himself and a few more. He believes, that either all the world
have been frighted with an apparition of their own Fancy, or that they have
most unnaturally conspired together to cozen themselves; Or that this Notion of
a God is a Trick of Policy, though the greatest Princes and Politicians do not
at this day know so much, nor have done time out of mind: He believes, either,
that the Heavens and the Earth and all things in them had no original Cause of
their Being, or else that they were made by Chance, and happened he knows not
how to be as they are; and that in this last shuffling of Matter, all things
have by great good Fortune fallen out as happily, and as regularly, as if the
greatest Wisdom had contrived them; but yet he believes that there was no
Wisdom in the contrivance of them. He Believes, That that which is possible is
impossible, and that that is not, which cannot but be. He believes, That mere
Matter can Understand and Will, and most dexterously perform all those fine and
free operations which the Ignorant attribute to Spirits, and consequently, that
there are no such things as immortal Spirits, or a Resurrection of the Body, or
everlasting Life. This is his Creed. And seriously it is a wonder that there
should be found any person pretending to Reason or Wit, that can say Amen to
such a heap of absurdities, which are so gross and palpable that they may be
felt, So that I think it will fall to the Atheists share to be the most
credulous person; that is, to believe things upon the sleightest Reasons.

II. The Second Imputation is Singularity; the affectation whereof is
unbecoming a Wise man: To this charge I answer.

1. If by Religion be meant the belief of the Principles of Religion, that
there is a God, and a Providence, that our Souls are Immortal, and that there
are Rewards to be expected after this life; these are so far from being
singular Opinions, that they are the general Opinion of Mankind, even of the
most Barbarous Nations; as Tully, Seneca, and others testify; insomuch, that
the Histories of ancient times do not furnish us with the names of above three
or four at most who denied a God; And Lucretius acknowledges, that Epicurus
was the first who did oppose those great Foundations of Religion, the
Providence of God, and the Immortality of the Soul. Primum Grajus homo, etc.
meaning Epicurus.

2. If by Religion be meant a living up to those Principles, (that is) to act
conformably to our best Reason and understanding, and to live as it does become
those who do believe a God, and a future State; this is acknowledged even by
those who live otherwise, to be the part of every wise man, and the contrary to
be the very madness of folly, and height of distraction: Nothing being more
ordinary then for men who live wickedly, to acknowledge that they ought to do
otherwise.

3. Though according to the common course and practice of the World it be
somewhat singular for men truly and thoroughly to live up to the Principles of
their Religion; yet singularity in this matter is so far from being a
Reflection upon any man's prudence, that it is a singular commendation of it. In
two Cases singularity is very commendable.

1. When there is a necessity of it in order to a man's greatest Interest and
happiness. I think it to be a reasonable account for any man to give, why he
does not live as the greatest part of the world do, that he has no mind to die
as they do, and to perish with them; he is not disposed to be a fool, and to be
miserable for company; he has no inclination to have his last end like theirs
who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of his Son, and shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.

2. It is very commendable to be singular in any Excellency, and I have shown
that Religion is the greatest Excellency: to be singular in any thing that is
wise, and worthy, and excellent, is not a disparagement, but a praise: every
man would choose to be thus singular.

III. The Third Imputation is, that Religion is a foolish bargain; because they
who are Religious hazard the parting with a present and certain happiness for
that which is future and uncertain. To this I answer,

1. Let it be granted, that the Assurance which we have of future Rewards falls
short of the Evidence of sense; for I doubt not but that that saying of our
Savior, Blessed is he who has believed and not seen; and those expressions of
the Apostle, We walk by faith and not by sight; and faith is the evidence of
things not seen; are intended by way of abatement and diminution to the
Evidence of Faith, and do signify, that the report and testimony of others, is
not so great evidence as that of our own senses: And though we have sufficient
assurance of another state, yet not so great evidence as if we our selves had
been in the other World, and seen how all things are there.

2. We have sufficient assurance of these things, and such as may beget in us a
well grounded confidence, and free us from all doubts of the contrary, and
persuade a reasonable man to venture his greatest Interests in this World upon
the security that we have of another World: for

1. We have as much assurance of these things as things future and at a
distance are capable of; and he is a very unreasonable man that would desire
more: Future and invisible things are not capable of the Evidence of sense; but
we have the greatest rational Evidence for them; and in this every reasonable
man ought to acquiesce.

2. We have as much as is abundantly sufficient to justify every man's
discretion, who for the great and eternal things of another World, hazards or
parts with the poor and transitory things of this Life. And for the clearing of
this, it will be worth our considering, that the greatest affairs of this
world, and the most important concernments of this life, are all conducted
only by Moral Demonstrations: Men every day venture their lives and estates
only upon Moral assurance. For instance, Men who never were at the East or
West Indies, or in Turkey, or Spain; yet do venture their whole Estates in
Traffic thither, though they have no Mathematical demonstration, only Moral
assurance that there are such Places. Nay which is more, Men every day eat and
drink, though I think no man can demonstrate out of Euclide or Apollonius, that
his Baker, or Brewer, or Cook, have not conveyed Poison into his meat or drink;
And that Man that would be so wise and cautious as not to eat or drink till he
could demonstrate this to himself, I know no other remedy for him, but that in
great gravity and wisdom he must die for fear of death. And for any man to
urge, that though men in temporal affairs proceed upon moral assurance, yet
there is greater assurance required to make men seek Heaven and avoid Hell,
seems to me to be highly unreasonable; for such an assurance of things as will
make men circumspect and careful to avoid a lesser danger, ought in all reason
to awaken men much more to the avoiding of a greater: such an assurance as will
sharpen men's desires, and quicken their endeavors for the obtaining of a
lesser good, ought in all reason to animate men more powerfully, and to inspire
them with a greater vigor and industry in the pursuit of that which is
infinitely greater: For why the same assurance should not operate as well in a
great danger as in a less, in a great good as in a small and inconsiderable
one, I can see no reason, unless men will say, that the greatness of an evil
and danger is an encouragement to men to run upon it, and that the greatness of
any good and happiness ought in reason to dishearten men from the pursuit of it.

Use I. The Use that I shall make of this, shall be

1. To put men out of conceit with Sin. 2. To persuade men to be truly
Religious.
First, If Religion be the best Knowledge and Wisdom, this challenges wicked men
for their folly and ignorance; this conviction of the great imprudence and
unreasonableness of a wicked course should shame men out of Irreligion. Wicked
men are in Scripture described by this Character, they are those that know not
God; which argues monstrous ignorance and stupidity; for to have an
understanding, and not to know God, is in intellectual things just such an
absurdity, as it is in natural things to have eyes, and not to discern the
light; for as light is primum visibile, the first object of our sight, so God
is primum intelligibile, the plainest and most obvious object of our
understandings; He fills Heaven and Earth, every thing represents him to us;
which way soever we turn our selves, we are encountered with clear evidences and
demonstrations of a Deity; For the invisible things of him from the Creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead. So that men are without excuse, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 1. 20. (...), such men as know not God can have no Apology to make
for themselves, their ignorance is utterly inexcusable: Or if men do
understand, or believe there is such a Being as God; not to consider this, not
to attend to the proper consequences of such a principle; not to know our
Relation to him, and dependence upon him, and obnoxiousness to his Power and
Justice in case we neglect, contemn, and disobey him: not to know the duty that
we owe to him who has made us, and has an unquestionable right in us, and
title to us, and authority over us; and is therefore our supreme Lawgiver,
because he has power to make us happy or miserable for ever, to save or to
destroy us; and consequently that it is our highest interest to please him, to
know his Will and to do it; This is gross ignorance, and inconsiderateness, and
stupidity as can be imagined.

He that observes the lives and actions of the greatest part of men, would
verily think that they understood nothing of all this; therefore we find in
Scripture that when God looks down upon the wickedness of men, he pronounces
them to be without understanding, Deuteronomy. 32. 28. when God had reckoned up the
rebellions and perversnesses of the Children of Israel, he concludes, It is a
nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them. In the 14
Psalm at the beginning, the Psalmist represents God as looking down from heaven
upon the children of men; and when he saw how they had corrupted themselves,
and what abominable works they did, crying out, Have all the workers of
iniquity no knowledge? Not that wicked men are destitute of the natural faculty
of Understanding, but they have it as if they had it not; they have
Understandings, but they do not use them, which in effect and by
interpretation, is all one as if they had none; Nay, happy were it for them if
they had them not, for then they would not be liable to the Judgment of God,
nor accountable to Him as reasonable creatures; but this ignorance is wilful
and affected; men are not blind, but they wink, and shut their eyes; they can
understand, and will not; or if they do understand any thing, they imprison the
Truths of God, and detain them in unrighteousness; they thrust light into a
dungeon, and hide the candle of the Lord that is in them under a bushel, they
do not suffer those things that they know to have a due power and influence
upon their hearts and lives: And this is an Ignorance that will be so far from
excusing men, that it will aggravate their condemnation; and therefore
Irreligion is not only an argument of the greatest Ignorance, but of the
greatest Folly. I know there are great pretensions in the world to Knowledge
and Wisdom, but upon a true and just account of things, there is nothing more
familiar and ordinary then Ignorance and Folly; these ill weeds are of a
forward and plentiful growth in the nature of man; Nihil tam valde vulgar
quam nihil sapere, Nothing is more common then for men not to be wise. We talk
much of Prodigies, but, as Tully says well, Maximum portentum est vir sapiens,
One of the greatest Wonders in the World is a truly wise and knowing person; so
that it is not very easy to answer Job's Question at the 12th. Verse of this
Chapter, Where shall Wisdom be found? and where is the place of Understanding?
So many wicked men as there are in the world, so many Fools, and that I am
afraid amounts to a great number. Men generally stand upon the credit and
reputation of their Understandings, and of all things hate to be accounted
Fools, because Folly is so great a reproach to the Understanding of a man, and
so high a reflection upon his discretion: But I know no way for men to avoid
this imputation, and to bring off the credit of their Understandings, but by
being truly Religious, by fearing God, and departing from evil: For certainly,
there is no such imprudent person as he that neglects God and his Soul, and is
careless and slothful about his everlasting concernments, because this man acts
contrary to his truest Reason and best Interest; he neglects his own safety,
and is active to procure his own ruin: He flies from happiness; and runs away
from it as fast as he can; but pursues misery, and makes haste to be undone.
Hence it is that Solomon does all along in the Proverbs give the title of Fool
to a wicked man, as if it were his proper name, and the fittest character for
him, because he is eminently such; There is no such fool as the sinning fool,
who every time he sins ventures his Soul, and lays his everlasting Interest at
the stake; every time a man provokes God, he does the greatest mischief to
himself that can be imagined. A mad man that cuts himself, and tears his own
flesh, and dashes his head against the stones does not act so unreasonably as a
sinner, because he is not so sensible of what he does; wickedness is a kind of
voluntary frenzy, and a chosen distraction, and every sinner does wilder and
more extravagant things, then any man can do that is crazed and beside himself,
and out of his wits; only with this sad difference, that he knows better what
he does. And that wicked men are many of them wise as to the things of this
world, is no vindication of them any more then the more innocent actions of mad
men, (as catching at shadows, and pursuing butter-flyes) about which possibly
they may use as great an activity and diligence, as any man can do about the
most weighty affairs; but this does not vindicate them from being mad, for
because such actions are trifling and impertinent to the great concernments of
life, we account such men distracted for all that. I know the world applaud
themselves much in this wisdom, and cry it up as the only prudence; but
infinite Wisdom, which is the best Judge of wisdom, calls it folly. David, in
Psalm. 2. when he brings in the Sages and Politicians of the world consulting
about a wicked design against Christ, he tells us, that as wise as they took
themselves to be, He that sits in heaven laughs at them, and the Lord has them
in derision; and shall we account them wise at whom God laughs? Can we reckon
that to be prudence which the Lord has in derision? The Rich man, Luke 12. who
had enlarged his barns, and laid up goods for many years, no doubt took himself
for a very prudent man; but God who calls things as they are, and does not call
any body out of his name, calls this man fool, because in the midst of all this
care, he had neglected his soul; Thou fool, etc. To them who believe another
life after this, an eternal state of happiness or misery in another world,
(which is but a reasonable Postulatum, or demand among Christians) there is
nothing in Mathematics more demonstrable then the folly of wicked men; for it
is not a clearer and more evident principle that the whole world is greater
then a part, then that Eternity and the concernments of it are to be preferred
before Time.

But it is not my work to revile sinners, and to call them names, but to
convince them if it be possible, and to reclaim them. I will therefore put the
matter into a temporal Case, that wicked men who understand any thing of the
Rules and Principles of worldly wisdom, may see the imprudence of a sinful
course, and be convinced that this their way is their folly, even themselves
being judges.

Let me then propound some Cases to sinners, and ask them a few Questions. Is
that man wise, as to his body and his health, who only clothes his hands, but
leaves his whole body naked? who provides only against the Toothache, and
neglects whole troops of mortal diseases that are ready to rush in upon him?
Just thus does he who takes care only for this vile body, but neglects his
precious and immortal Soul; who is very solicitous to prevent small and
temporal inconveniences, but takes no care to escape the damnation of Hell.

Is he a wise man, as to his temporal Estate, that lays designs only for a
day, without any prospect to, or provision for the remaining part of his life?
Just thus does he that provides for the short time of this life, but takes no
care for all Eternity; which is to be wise for a moment, but a fool for ever,
and to act as untowardly and as crosly to the reason of things as can be
imagined; to regard Time as if it were Eternity, and to neglect Eternity as if
it were but a short time.

Do you think him a wise man, who is serious about trifles, but trifles about
the most serious matters? Just so is he who pursues the World and the petty
interests of it with all his might, but minds Religion and the weighty
concernments of Eternity, as if he minded them not.

Do you count him prudent, who throws himself overboard to save his goods? Just
so does he who to secure any thing in this world makes shipwreck of his
Conscience, and casts away his Soul.

Is he wise, who is wise in any thing but in his proper profession and
employment? wise for every body but himself? who is ingenious to contrive his
own misery, and to do himself a mischief; but is dull and stupid as to the
designing of any real benefit and advantage to himself? Just such a one is he
who is a good Tradesman, but a bad Christian; for Christianity is more our
proper Calling and profession then the very Trades we live upon; and just such
is every Sinner, who is wise to do evil, but to do good has no understanding.

Is he wise, who neglects and disobliges him who is his best friend, and can be
his shrewdest Enemy? who with one weak Troop goes out to meet him that comes
against him with thousands of thousands? who shes a small danger, and runs upon
a greater? Just so does every wicked man who neglects and contemns God, who can
save or destroy him; who strives with his Maker, and provokes the Lord to
jealousy; and with the small and inconsiderable Forces of a Man takes the
Field against the mighty God the Lord of Hosts; who fears them that can kill
the body, but after that have no more that they can do; but fears not him who
after he has killed can destroy both body and soul in Hell; and just such is
he who for fear of any thing in this world ventures to grieve God; for in so
doing he runs away from men, and falls into the hands of the living God; he
flies from a temporal danger, and leaps into Hell.

Is he wise, who in matters of greatest moment and concernment neglects
opportunities never to be retriv'd? who standing upon the Shore, and seeing the
Tide making haste toward him apace, and that he has but a few minutes to save
himself, yet will lay himself to sleep there, till the cruel Sea rush in upon
him, and overwhelm him? Just so does he who trifles away this day of Gods grace
and patience, and foolishly adjourns the work of Repentance and the business of
Religion to a dying hour.

And, to put an end to these Questions, Is he wise, who hopes to attain the end
without the means? nay, by means that are quite contrary to the end? Just such
is every wicked man who hopes for Blessedness hereafter without Holiness here;
to gain the favor of God by offending him, and to come to the sight of him by
sinning against him; and to be happy (that is) to find a pleasure in the
enjoyment of God, and in the company of holy Spirits, by rendering himself as
unsuitable and unlike to them as he can.

Use II. The second Use is to persuade men to be thoroughly and seriously
Religious, as ever they would acquit themselves to be truly knowing and wise.
Knowledge and Wisdom are confessed Excellencies among men, Eccl. 2. 13. Wisdom
excels Folly as much as light does darkness. There are some Virtues and
perfections that gain affection from men, as Truth, and Meekness, and Kindness;
but there are others that cause admiration and raise wonder, among these are
Knowledge and Wisdom, which if they be in any eminent degree, will cast a great
luster and glory upon a man, Eccl. 8. 1. The Wisdom of a man makes his face to
shine. Now even the shadows of these latter sort of Excellencies hit the
vainglorious nature of man more then the realities of the former, because
proud Man had rather be admired then loved. And that Knowledge and Wisdom are
generally acknowledged to be great Excellencies appears, in that men do so
generally affect the reputation of Knowledge, and are so ambitious to be
accounted Wise. There is not any thing that men value themselves more upon then
their Knowledge and Discretion: and on the contrary, Ignorance and Folly are
reckoned among the greatest defects of humane nature, so that they are
accounted generally a greater reproach and disgrace to a man then Vice and
Wickedness; and they have got so ill a report in the world, that there are not
many but had rather be accounted Knaves then Fools; hence it is that men
generally pretend to these Excellencies of Knowledge and Wisdom, even such as
are most destitute of them, and rather then want these Perfections, they will
call even their Vices and Imperfections by this name: Craft, and Silence, and
Secrecy, and Reservedness, and Formality, and affected Gravity, all these put
in for the Title of Wisdom; so ambitious is the nature of man of the reputation
of this Excellency. Job 11. 12. Vain man would be wise, though he be born like
a wild asses colt. Now this very thing that men are so forward to counterfeit
these perfections is an Argument of the Excellency of real Knowledge and Wisdom;
for (as I said before) to counterfeit is nothing else but to put on the
appearance of some real Excellency; common and ordinary things are not
counterfeited, but only things of price and value, as Gold, and Silver, and
precious Stones; And that men are so tenacious of these Excellencies, so loath
to be stripped even of the shadow and appearance of them, is an argument that
men highly esteem them. So that it seems that these Excellencies are in great
dearness among men, because we hold them so fast, that when we cannot possess
the reality of them, yet we love to enjoy the opinion of them, and rather then
be wholly disseised of them, will hold them by that slight and fantastic
tenure of Imagination.

Now if we account them such excellencies, we should labor to be possessed of
them in truth and reality, and not take up with any counterfeits of them, but
use such a care and niceness about them as men do about Jewels, and precious
stones, which because they are of great value, all mistakes about them are
shameful and intolerable. I have showed that Religion is the truest knowledge,
and most real wisdom, therefore every man that values his understanding, and
stands upon the reputation of his prudence and discretion, ought to be
Religious, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep therefore my Statutes, for this is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the nations. Those who understand and know how to
manage the petty interests of this world, we account them shrewd, and cunning,
and designing men; but if we would speak truly and wisely of things, the
Religious man is the notable man; he that contrives to be everlastingly happy,
and lays designs for all Eternity, he is a man of the deepest reach; he that
takes care of his Soul, and secures his Eternal interest, he is a shrewd man.
That man who by the assistance of Gods grace can overreach his own deceitful
heart, and defeat all the arts and wiles of the Devil, and escape those
pollutions that are in the world, and save himself from the sins, and snares,
and temptations of an untoward Generation; he is a cunning man indeed. Would
thou then be truly knowing? labor to know God, and thy self, thy interest, and
thy end, and thy happiness, and the way of attaining it. Would thou be truly
wise? be wise for thy self, wise for thy Soul, wise for Eternity; Resolve upon
a Religious course of life; Fear God and depart from evil; look beyond things
present and sensible, unto things which are not seen, and are eternal; labor
to secure the great interests of another world, and refer all the actions of
this short and dying life, to that state which will shortly begin, but never
have an end; and this will approve it self to be Wisdom at the last, whatever
the world judge of it now; for, not that which is approved of men now, but what
shall finally be approved by God, is true wisdom; that which is esteemed so by
him who is the fountain and original of all wisdom, the first rule and measure
of it, the best and most competent Judge of it.

I deny not but many that are wicked, and neglect Religion, may think
themselves wise, and may enjoy this their delusion for a while, but there is a
time a coming, when the most profane and Atheistical, who now account it a
piece of gallantry, and an argument of a great spirit, and of a more then
common wit and understanding, to slight God, and baffle Religion, and to level
all the discourses of another world, with the Poetical descriptions of the
Fairy Land: I say, there is a day a coming, when all these witty fools shall be
unhappily undeceived, and not being able to enjoy their delusion any longer,
shall call themselves fools for ever.

But why do I use arguments to persuade men to that which is so excellent, so
useful, and so necessary? The thing it self I am pressing you to, has
allurements in it beyond all arguments: For, if Religion be the best knowledge
and wisdom, I cannot offer any thing beyond this to your understandings to
raise your esteem of it; I can present nothing beyond this to your Affections
that may be attractive of your love and desire. All that can be done, is to set
the thing before men, and to offer it to their choice; and if men's natural
desire of wisdom and knowledge and happiness will not persuade them to be
Religious, it is in vain to use Arguments: if the sight of these Beauties will
not charm men's Affections, it is to no purpose to go about to compel a liking,
and to urge and push forward a a match to the making whereof consent is
necessary. Religion is matter of our freest choice; and if men will obstinately
and wilfully set themselves against it, there is no remedy, Pertinatiae nullum
remedium posuit Deus; If men will choose to befools, and to be miserable, all
that can be said is this, God will leave such persons to in herit their own
choice, to enjoy the portion of sinners.

FINIS.

