The manner of Traveling upon Dromedarys. Page 66. Lodon Printed for Nath:
Crouch


Two Journeys TO JERUSALEM, Containing, First, A strange and true account of
the Travels of Two English Pilgrims some years since, and what admirable
Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc By H. T.

Secondly The Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669. from Scand^roon to
Tripoly, Ioppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the
Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. By T. B.

With the Rare Antiquities, Monuments, and Memorable Places and Things
mentioned in holy Scripture: And an Exact Description of the Old and New
Jerusalem, etc.

To which is added, A Relation of the Great Council of the Jews Assembled in
the Plains of Ajayday in Hungaria in 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning
Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there present.

With an Account of the Wonderful Delusion of the Jews, by a Counterfeit
Messiah or false Christ at Smyrna, in 1666. and the Event thereof.

Lastly, The Fatal and Final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews throughout
Persia in 1666 and the remarkable occasion thereof.

Collected by R. B. and Beautified with Pictures.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1692.

TO THE READER.
THE following Relations containing matters very considerable and remarkable,
cannot certainly be displeasing to any good natured Reader; for it may be some
diversion to observe what Wonders are told of those once famous Places in and
about Jerusalem, and what New Legends are daily added, as it may stand with the
Interest (that is to say, the profit) of the Priests.

As to the Great Council in Hungaria, in 1650. and the strange Delusions
wherewith the Jews were possessed by a Counterfeit Messiah, or False Christ, in
and about Smyrna, and many other Countries: Likewise their utter Extirpation
out of the Kingdom and Dominions of the Emperor of Persia, in 1666. We may
with our Author observe, how signally the hand of the Almighty has been
stretched out against the Jews, so that if they were not under a Judicial
hardness of heart, certainly these continued Tokens of Divine Vengeance would
cause them to Reflect upon themselves, and by a serious Repentance and
embracing of the Doctrines of the Lord Jesus Christ, the True Messiah and
Savior of the World, to endeavor to remove that Curse which their Forefathers
wished might fall upon themselves, and their children, when they Crucified the
Son of God, and the Lord of Life and Glory, and under which they have so
severely smarted in most Nations whither they have been scattered, for above
these sixteen hundred years.

As to the Reality of these brief Relations, they were all written by several
Englishmen of undoubted Veracity and Credit, and who were upon the Places where
these remarkable things were Transacted, and therefore need not beg, but may
rather command Belief.

R. B.

A Brief Description of Palestine with an account of the Ancient and Modern
State of those Countries.
IN Former Ages, this was one of the most famous Provinces of Syria: Called, 1.
The Land of Canaan, from Canaan the Son of Cham, who by his often chasings, was
driven to possess and inhabit the same. 2. It was called the Land of Promise,
because God had promised it to the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
their Seed. 3. Israel, of the Israelites, from Jacob, who was surnamed Israel.
4. Judea from the Jews, or People of the Tribe of Judah. 5. Palestine, by
Ptolomays and others, quasi Philistini: The Land of the Philistines, a potent
Nation that dwelt there. 6. The Holy Land by the Christians, because herein was
wrought by Christ the Work of our Salvation.

This Country is situated in the midst of the World, between the Third and
Fourth Climates, the longest day being 14 hours and a quarter, between the
Midland Sea and Arabia, from which it is Bulwarked beyond Jordan with a
continual Ridge of Mountains; on the East lies Celosyria and Arabia Petrea; on
the South Idumea, the Wilderness of Pharam and Egypt; in the West a part of
Phenicia, and the rest has the Mediterranean Sea; and on the North are the
Mountains of Libanus, and a part of Phenicia: It is distant from the
Equinoctial 31 Degrees, extending to 33 so that in length from Dan unto
Beesheba, it contains not more than 400 Miles; and where it is broadest, not
50.

This famous Land was once commended above all Countries under the Sun, for the
Salubrity of the Air, being seated under a Temperate Clime, where Winter is not
too cold, nor Summer too hot; and for Fertility, a Land that flowed with Milk
and Honey, adorned with Beautiful Mountains, and delightful Valleys; the Rocks
producing excellent Waters, and no part empty of delight or profit; for the
Soil yields abundance of all fruits and increase.

This Land abounds in sweet Springs, and Pleasant Pastures, where they feed a
great many Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, and Cows, which give excellent
Milk, as is in any Country in the World: There is also brave Hunting and
Hawking for Dear, Goats, Hares, Partridges, Quails and other Birds: they have
all kind of Fowl; also there are Lions, Bears and Wolves, found in abundance.

The Land of Canaan was heretofore divided into 30 Kingdoms, and Kings, when
the Israelites conquered it; most of the Ancient Inhabitants being for their
sins by God excluded the Land, and put to the Sword by the Israelites, who
Ruled this Land, about 400 Years, by Princes and Judges till the time of
Samuel: These Princes or Judges, were not all of one Tribe, but the Best,
Gravest, and Eldest, Selected and chosen out of every Tribe. Afterward the
Israelites growing weary of this Government, at their earnest request, the Lord
appointed them a King, and so their Government was Changed into a Monarchy,
which continued many Ages; but process of time, the Israelites endured many
Miseries and Afflictions, till at last they saw the utter Ruin and subversion
of their Kingdom.

What Alterations happened to this Nation and with how many several Wars they
were Plagued either for their own stiff-neckedness, that they would not be
Obedient to their own Prince, or brook any foreign Government, or that for
their Rebellion and Sins, the Wrath of God was oftentimes Kindled against
them; or that Foreign Princes were Ambitious to Incorporate this happy Land,
Holy Writ and Historiographers VVitness the same at large, how many times were
they subdued and brought into Bondage, because of their Sins, and that they did
not behav-themselves well; for sometimes their Neck, were brought under the
Yoaks of their Neighbors, as the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians,
Macedonians and Romans; and yet they would never cease their Rebellions,
Seditions, and Conspiracies, till they had brought their Government and
Country to utter Destruction, by Persecuting, and putting to death, the Saints
and Prophets, sent them from God; yea, and at last Crucifying the Son of God,
the Lord of Glory, and the Savior of M^nkind, with their Horrible and
Mu^derous Hands, and finally, Wishing that his Innocent Blood should be on them
and their Children. Which accordingly soon after happened, to the utter
Desolation of their Country, the Romans laying waste, and levelling to the
Ground the Magnificent Structures and Buildings thereof, so that herein was
verified the Prophecy of Christ while he was upon the Earth, That one Stone
should not be left upon another. And as for the People, Divine Vengeance did
continually pursue them till the most part were destroyed, and the rest
Dispersed throughout out the World, even to this Day.

For first, the Inhabitants of Caesarea slew of the Jews in one Day, about
20000. and such as fled, were taken and Imprisoned by Florus the Lieutenant of
Judea. To Revenge this Slaughter, the Jews set upon the Syrians; in which
Skirmish 13000 of them were slain. The People of Alexandria put 50000 to the
Sword; They of Damascus 10000. and Antonius a Roman Captain ^lew in Ascalon
10000 and Cestius another Captain, ^lew 80040 Persons. And now, to come to the
Wars managed here by Vespasian;

This Vespasian, in the Seige of Aphaca, slew and took Prisoners Seventeen
Thousand, one Hundred and Thirty Persons: in Samaria 11600, and in Iosepata
42200 Persons. In Joppa so many Killed and Drowned themselves, that the Sea
threw up four Thousand two Hundred; and the rest so totally perished, that
there remained none to carry tidings to Jerusalem of the loss of the Town.

In the City of Tarichea, were Slain and made Captives, Forty five Thousand,
besides those which were given to King Agrippa: In Gamala there perished Ninety
Thousand, and none left alive but only two Women. In Gascala Five Thousand Men
died by the Sword. In the City of Gadara, were slain Thirty two Thousand two
Hundred, beside^ an infinite number that D^owned themselves. In Jerusalem it
self, there died Eleven Hundred Thousand Jews, partly by Sword and Famine, the
worse Enemy of the two; there were found 2000 in Privies and Sinks and Ninety
Seven Thousand were taken prisoners, in so much that 30 Jews were sold for a
Penny.

Now that Jerusalem was able to contain such a number of People, is evident, in
that when Cestius was Lieutenant of Jury, the High Priest at his Request,
numbered the People which came to Eat of the Paschal Lamb, and found them to be
two Millions, and Seven Hundred Thousand living Souls, all sound and Purified.
And when Titus laid Siege to the City, it was at the Feast of the Passover,
when most of the People were there assembled; God as it were thus Imprisoning
them.

All these Massacres, besides diverse others Omitted, and infinite Numbers slain
in the Fields and Villages, which drowned themselves, and were privately made
away, Amounting to almost two Millions of People, happened in the compass of
four Years, beginning in the twelfth of Nero, and ending in the second of
Vespasian.

Yet was not the whole Nation Rooted out till 136. For then this Miserable
People having stirred two notable Rebellions, First under Trajan, and afterward
under Adrian the Emperors, they were all banished their Native Country, and
never again suffered to inhabit it but as Strangers.

After this Desolation, the Jews were dispersed over the World, and especially
in Spain, where Adrian Commanded many of them to dwell; yet found every where
so little Favor, that having diverse time been put ^o grievous Mulcts and
Ransoms, they were at last quite thrust out of Europe.

The first Christian Prince that expelled the Jews out of his Territories, was
that Heroic King, Edward 1. who was such a sore Scourge also to the Scots; and
it is thought diverse Families of those Banished Jews fled then to Scotland,
where they have propagated since in great Numbers: Witness the Aversion this
Nation has above others to Hogs-Flesh.

Nor was this their Extermination for their Religion, but for their notorious
Crimes; as poisoning of Wells, Counterfeiting of Coins, falsifying of Seals,
and Crucifying of Christian Children; with other Villainies. This happened in
the Year 1291. And 16 Years after, France followed our Example. It was near 200
Years after, that Ferdinand turned them out of Spain; and five years after him,
Emanuel of Portugal did the like.

But the Countries from whence they were Last expelled, were Naples and Sicily,
in the Year 1539. In other parts of Christendom they reside yet in great
numbers, as in Germany High and Low; Bohemia, Lituania, Poland and Russia; In
Italy also they are found, but in no Country subject to the King of Spain.

They live very quietly at Rome under the Popes nose, and St. Mark makes no
scruple to entertain them at Venice: In sundry places of the Ottoman Empire
they are very numerous; so that it is thought Constantinople and Thessalonica
only, have near twenty thousand.

Asia is full of them, as Aleppo, Tripoly, Damascus, Rhodes, and indeed all
places of commerce and traffic; There are numbers also in Persia, Arabia, and
about Cranganor in India.

In Africa, they have their Synagogues and Lumbards, as in Alexandria, Grand
Cairo, Fesse, Trimesen, and diverse places in the Kingdom of Morocco: there are
about 100 Families left in Jerusalem. But the place where they are most
unmingled, is Tiberias, which the Turks gave to Mendez the Jew, for some signal
services; thither they often bring or send the bones of their dead friends, who
have left large Legacies, to be there interred from other places.

The City of Jerusalem was afterward redified by Elius Adrianus, and given to
the Christians, from whom it was taken by Cosroes, and the Persians, in the
Year 615. and from them forcibly wrested by Haumar, and the Saracens, in 637.
Next it fell into the power of Cutlu Moses, and the Turks, in 1009. under whose
oppressions, when it had long groaned, Peter the Hermit stirred up the Western
Princes to relieve the distressed Christians, whose designs attained their
wished effect, under the Banner of the Victorious Prince, Godfrey of Bullen, in
the Year 1099. This Godfrey, for his merits, was to have been invested with the
Royal Wreath of Majesty, which he denied, thinking it unfit to wear a Crown of
Gold, where his Savior had worn a Crown of Thorns; yet for the common good he
accepted the Title; after whom reigned these Christian Princes: Baldwin the 1.
Baldwin the 2. Fulk Earl of Anjou, Baldwin the 3. Almerick, Baldwin the 4.
Baldwin the 5. Guy of Lusignan, the last King of Jerusalem; during whose time,
Saladine the Sultan of Egypt, won the Kingdom, which his Successors defended
against all invasions, till the Year 1517. when Selinus the first Emperor of
the Turks, added the Holy Land together with Egypt to his Empire: And so the
whole Country of Palestine with the City of Jerusalem, are under the dominion
of the Turks to this day, and is inhabited by some Christians (who make a great
benefit of showing the Sepulcher of Christ) and of late years also by Moors,
Arabians, Greeks, Latins, Turks, Jews, nay I may say, with People of all
Nations.

The whole Land contains Four Regions, Idumea, Judea, Samaria, and Galilee.
Idumea, begins at Mount Cassius; or as some will, at the Lake Sirbon,
reaching to the Eastward of Judea; The Chief Cities are Maresa, Rhinocorura,
Rapha, Antedon, Ascalon, Azotus, and Gaza. Maresa was the birth place of the
Prophet Micah. Near unto this Town Juda^ Macchabeus overthrew Gorgias.
Rhinocorura^ Rapha, and Antedon, are Towns of no great note. Of Ascalon Sir
George Sandis writes thus in his Travels; That it is a place now of no great
Reckoning, more than that the Turk does keep there a Garrison: Venerable
heretofore amongst the Heathen for the Temple of Dagon, and the Birth of
Semiram^ begotten of the Goddess Decreta, who enflamed with the love of a
certain youth that Sacrificed unto her, and having by him a Daughte^ ashamed of
her Incontinency put him away and Exposed the Child to the deserts, and
confounded with sorrow, threw her self into a lake replenished with fish,
adjoining to the City: this Decreta is said to be that Dagon the Idol of the
Agrotonites mentioned in the Scripture, which signifies the first of sorrow:
who had her Temple close by the Lake, with her Image in the figure of a fish,
excepting the Face, which resembled a Woman; But the Infant nourished by Doves,
which brought her Milk from the pails of the Pastures, after became the wife of
Ninus, and Queen of Assyria, whereupon she was called Semiramis, which
signifies a dove in the Syrian tongue: in Memorial whereof the Babylonians did
bear a Dove in their Ensign^, confirmed by the Prophecy of Jeremiah, who
foretelling of the devastation of Judea, advises them to flee from the Sword
of the Dove.

Azotes, where was a sumptuous Temple built to the Lieutenant to Demetrius;
eight miles beyond that stands Acharon or Ekron, where Beelzebub was
worshipped, to whom Ahaziah sent to enquire of his health.

Lastly, Gaza or Aza, one of the five Principal Cities belonging to the
Palestines (called Philistines in Scripture) Gaza signifies strong, and in the
Persian language, a Treasure; so said to be called by Cambyses, who Invading
Egypt, sent thither the riches Purchased in that War; it was also called
Constantia by the Emperor Constantine, first famous for the Acts of Sampson,
who lived about the time of the Trojan Wars, whose force and fortunes are said
to have given to the Poets their Invention of Hercules, who lived not long
before him: And it was afterward famous for two Wounds there received by
Alexander the great, and was then counted the Chief of Syria.

Also there lies Joppa now Jafta, a Famous Mart Town, and a good Haven; where
Jonah took ship to fly to Tarsus, where Peter raised Dorcas from death to life,
and where he lying in the House of one Simon a Tanner was in a vision, taught
the Conversion of the Gentiles. This City they report to have been built before
the Flood. Here Reigned Cephcus the son of Phoenix, whose Daughter Andromeda was
by Perseus delivered from a Sea Monster, some of whose Bones the people had
wont to show to Strangers, even till the Flourishing of the Romans: Here lies
Gath also, the Country of the huge Giant Goliath.

Judea is the Chiefest part of Palestina, and is of the same extent now, as it
was when it was the Kingdom of Judea, and entertained the two great and
Puissant Tribes of Juda and Benjamin. It lies between the Midland Sea and
Lacus Asphaltites, or the Dead-Sea, and betwixt Samaria and Idumea: It took
this name from the Tribe of Judah, in which lies the once famous City
Jerusalem.

Besides Jerusalem also, there are in this Country diverse others Town and
famous Cities; as Jericho, Turris Stratonis, afterward named Caesarea; Hebron
formerly, now Arbea; also Mambre; and Carioth; that is to say, a Town of four
Men, the Birthplace of Judas Iscariot, who betrayed our Savior Jesus Christ;
Emaus, and diverse others; and Beyon Jordan Markherus, a Town with a strong
Castle; here stood the Towns of Sodom and Gomorrah, which for their Sodomy and
Abomination, were consumed with Fire from Heaven; and lie now buried in that
cursed Lake Asphaltites; so named of the Bitumen which it Vomiteth; called also
the Dead-Sea perhaps in that it nourishes no living Creature, or for his heavy
Waters hardly to be moved with any Wind; so extreme Salt, that whatsoever is
thrown thereinto, not easily Sinketh: Vespasian for a trial caused diverse to be
cast in bound Hand and Foot, who Floated Aloft, as if supported by some Spirit.
They say, that Birds, Flying over it, fall in, as if Enchanted or Suffocated
with the Poison of the ascending Vapors. Samaria lies in the midst, between
Judea, and Galilea; the Land is so called from the Metropolis Samaria, Built by
Omri King of Israel, and now called Sebasta; the Towns in ^t are, Sichem,
afterward Neapolis, Capernaum, Betzaida and Chorazin.

Galilea lies between Mount Labanus and Samaria, and is divided into upper and
lower Galilea; upper Galilea bordered upon Tyrus, called otherwise
Galilea-Gentium, or the Heathenish Galilea; Lower Galilea lies near unto the
Lake of Tiberius, and to Nazareth: In it are the Towns of Naim, Cana, Nazareth
and Gadara. The Holy Land is seated between two Seas, and the River Jordan; it
has within it many Navigable Lakes, and Meers, abounding with Fish; the River
Jordan is called by the Hebrews, Jordan, and runs through the midst of this
Country, dividing it into two Parts. St. Jerome Writes that this River
Springs out of two Fountains, not far distant one from the other; the one
called Jor, the other Dan, shooting out like two Horns, which meeting together,
make the great River Jordan. The Chief Mountains in the Holy Land are Mount
Hermon, lying in the East part thereof, and Mount Tabor in the West, both of
them being very Great and High, so that the other Hills about them, are but
Arms and Branches of them: For the Mountains Ebal Betheron, Mispa or Mospoa,
and Bethel are reckoned under Mount Hermon; Gilboa, Gerezin, Saron and
MountCarmel by the Sea side, are counted under Mount Tabor.

There are also about Jerusalem, Mount Sion, Moriah, Mount Olivet, Mount
Calvary, and others; with goodly Woods, and Forests, full of all kind of Deer,
and many Wild Beasts.

In this Land, especially in and about Jerusalem, there were many Stately and
Magnificent Buildings, as Namely, Mons Domus and the Castle of the Jebusites,
into which King David brought the Ark of the Lord, where it remained till
Solomon's Temple was Finished. The remainder and ruins of these Buildings, are
yet to be seen to this Day; yea, it is said, that in the very place, the Lord
Christ Eat the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples: There are also the Sepulchers
of David, and other Kings of Judah; and the House of David, which yet retains
the Name of David's Tower. Upon Mount Moriah are to be seen some remainders of
Mello. Above all, we must call to mind the most Excellent and Beautiful Temple
of King Solomon, upon which One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Men wrought Seven
Years continually till it was Finished. The Glory and Magnificency thereof you
may read in the Scripture. The Temple of the Sepulcher at the first Building
was highly Reverenced by the Christians of those parts, and even until this Day
it is much resorted to, both by Pilgrims from all parts of the Romish Church
and by diverse Gentlemen of the Reformed Churches; partly for curiosity, and
partly for Antiquity of the place. It is Farmed from the Turk and kept by the
Popes Creatures; whosoever is admitted to the sight of this Sepulcher, pays
nine Crowns to the Turkish Officers: so that this Tribute is worth to the Grand
Seignior, Eight Thousand Ducats Yearly.

And thus much briefly for the Description of the Holy Land, or Land of Promise.

A Strange and True ACCOUNT, Of the Late TRAVELS OF TWO English Pilgrims, And
what Admirable Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand
Cairo, Alexandria, etc.
ALthough it pass as a general Proverb, that Travelers may tell Romances or
untruths by authority, yet I being no way daunted thereat, but confidently
standing on the justice of my cause; my kind commendations to all you my dear
friends first presented, thus from Jerusalem I salute you. You shall
understand, that since my departure from Grand Cairo, toward the Holy Land, I
wrote you a letter from Rama; the place where the voice was heard of Rachel,
weeping for her Children; wherein I certified you of all my proceedings from
Grand Cairo, to that place; I sent it with seven other Letters to Damasco in a
Caravan, from thence to be conveyed to Constantinople: But doubting lest the
said Packet is not as yet come to your hands, I thought good to write again to
you, concerning all my aforesaid proceedings; as also the rest of my voyage to
Jerusalem, with my imprisonment and troubles in the City, and what memorable
Antiquities I saw there and else where, until my return back to Alexandria;
First, you shall know, that I Departfrom Grand Cairo the ninth of March, upon
which day I came to the place where (it is said) the Virgin Mary staid with our
Savior Christ: So far was I accompanied by Anthony Thorpe, and four others
that went to Grand Cairo with me, but there left me and I with my fellow
Traveller, Mr. John Burrel, both of us being in our Pilgrims habits, came that
night to a Town called Canko, where we were glad to take up our lodging in a
yard, having no other bed than the bar^ ground. The next day we came to a Town
in the Land of Gozan, where we met with a company of Turks, Jews, and
Christians, and about 750. Camels, all which were bound for Damascus over the
Deserts; yet was there amongst them 22. Greeks and Armenians, who purposed to
Travel to Jerusalem, which made us glad of their company. At this Town named
Philbits, we stayed two days and one night: in which time I went into a house
where I saw a very strange secret of hatching of Chickens, by artificial heat,
or warmth: the like I had seen before at Grand Cairo, but not in such numbers
as here: the manner as follows. The Country people, four or five miles
distant every way, bring their Eggs upon Asses or Camels, to this place; where
there is an Oven, or Furnace, kept temperately warm, and the Furner or Master
stands ready at a little door to receive the Eggs by tale; unless when the
number rises so high (as to ten Camels loading or more) then he fills a
measure by tale, and after that order measures all the rest. And I saw there
received by the Furner Cook, or Baker, in one day by tale, and by measure,
thirty five or forty thousand Eggs: and they told me, that for three days he
does nothing but still receive in Eggs, and at twelve days end they come again
to fetch Chickens, sometimes at ten, and sometimes (but not very often) at
seven days, according as the weather falls out. Perhaps two hundred persons
are owners of one Raungeful, some having 2000. some one more or less. The
Furner notes the names and portions of every bringer; and if he have a hundred
and fifty thousand, or two hundred thousand at one heat (as many times he has)
yet does he mingle them all together, not respecting to whom they severally
belong. Then he lays them one by one upon his Raunge, so near as they can lie
and touch each other; having first made a bed for them of Camels dung burnt;
and the place whereon the ashes are, is of a very thin matter made of earth,
but mixed with Camels and some Pigeons dung amongst it: yet herein consists
not the secret only: for there is a concave or hollow place about 3 foot breadth
under it, whereon is spread another layer of Camels dung, and under that is the
place where the fire is made. Yet can I not rightly call it fire, because it
appears to be nothing but embers: so I could not discern it but to be like
ashes, yielding a temperate heat to the next concave, and the heat being
resisted by the layer of dung next it (which dung being green, and laid upon
pieces of withered trees, or rather boughs of old dead trees) sends forth an
extraordinary vapor, and that vapor enters the hollow concave next under the
Eggs, where in time it pierces the aforesaid mixed earth, which touches the
ashes whereon the Eggs are laid, and so serves as a necessary receptacle for
all the heat coming from underneath. This Artifical heat glyding through the
embers whereon the Eggs lie, does by degrees warm through the shells, and so
infuseth life by the same proportions of heat: thus in seven, eight, nine, ten,
or sometimes twelve days, life succeeds by this artificial means. Now when
the Furner perceives life to appear, and that the shells begin to break, then
he begins to gather them: but of a hundred thousand, he hardly gathered
threescore thousand, sometime but fifty thousand, and sometime (when the day is
overcast) not twenty thousand: and if there chance any lightning, thunder, or
rain, then of a thousand he gathers not one; for then they all miscarry and
die. And this is to be remembered withal, that be the weather never so fair, the
air pure, clear, and every thing as themselves can desire, and let the Chickens
be hatched in the best manner that may be, yet have they either a Claw too much
or too little: For some have five Claws, some six, some but two before and one
behind, and seldom, very few or any in their right shape. When the people come
to receive their Eggs, that before had brought them in, the Furner gives to
every 1. Christ's Sepulcher 3 Dives House 2 David's House 4. v. Marys House Page
one proportionably according as the Furnace yields, reserving to himself the
tenth for his labor. Thus have you the secret of hatching Eggs by heat
artificially at the Town of Philbits in the Land of Gozan, which I think were
in vain to be practiced in England, because the air there is hardly ten days
together clarified, neither is there any Camels dung, though they have dung of
other beasts every way as hot: therefore when the Sun is in Cancer, Leo, or
Virgo, you may, if you please, try what may be done. Perhaps some will think
this to be a fable, but I can urge their credence no further than my faith and
truth can persuade them. And if they will not believe me, let them take pains
to make their own eyes a witness, and when they have paid as dearly as I (for
the sight of this and other things cost me 10^ Marks in fifty days) their
judgments will be better consirmed.

But now, to my journey toward the desert of Arabia, which I was of necessity
to pass before I could come to the Holy Land, we departed from the Town
Philbits, traveling all night in company with the Caravan of Damasco, and the
14th at 9 of the clock we pitched our tents at Baharo in the land of Gozan.
From thence we departed that night, and the 15 at night we pitched at Salbia,
which is to the eastward of the land of Gozan, and stands on the borders of the
Arabian Desert; there we stayed two days for fear of the wild Arabes, and
parted thence 17. We passed that night over a great bridge, under which the salt
water stands. This water comes out of the Sea from the parts of Damietta, and
by men's hands was cut out of that place, some 150 miles into the main Land, by
Ptolomoeus King of Egypt, who purposed to join the Red sea and the
Mediterranean: but when he foresaw, that if he had gone through, all his
Country had been quite drowned, he gave it over, and built a bridge there to
pas^ over. This place parts Arabia and Egypt, and no sooner had we past this
bridge, but we were set upon by the wild Arabes, and notwithstanding we were
more than 1000 persons, yet a Camel laden with Callicoes was taken from us, 4
of our men hurt and one mortally wounded, and the Arabes ran away with the
prey, we being unable to help it, because it was night. The next day we pitched
by a well of brackish water, But I forgot to tell you that my fellow Pilgrim,
Mr. John Burrel, escaped very narrowly in the last nights bickering: there we
rested our selves till 3 of the Clock in the afternoon, which they call Lasara
for the Arabians and Egyptians divide the day into four parts: we departed the
next morning to a Castle in the desert called Carga, which is one of the three
Castles which the Turks keep in the deserts, to de^end all travelers from the
wild Arabes: Therefore there we paid a certain tax, which was six^y pieces of
silver of two pence a piece value, for each man or boy, and seventy six pieces
for a Camel laden, and fourteen ^or a Mule: Having paid this imposition we
departed, and pitched again the 19. at another brackish well, from whence
setting onward, we pitched the 20. of March at the second Castle called Arris,
k^pt also by the Turks, in the said deserts, where our tax was but twenty
pieces of silver for each passenger, and thirty for a Camel. From thence we
were guided by many Soldiers to the third Castle called Rachael, making one
long Journey of 24 hours together: Here it is said that the Kings of Egypt and
Judea, fought many great Battles: which to me seemed very unlikely, because
there is nothing to relieve an army withal, except sand and salt water.

There we paid ten pieces every passenger, and 20 for a beast. So departing
thence the 22. in the morning we came to Gaza in Pa^estine, a goodly fruitful
Country, and there ^e were quitted of all the deserts. In this town ^ saw the
place where (as they told us Samp^^n pulled down the two Pillars, and slew the
^hilistins: and surely it appears to be the same town by reason of the
situation of the Country: There we paid 22 pieces for each beast, and ten each
passenger. From thence we went to a place called in Arabian Canuie, but by the
Christians Bersheba, being upon the borders of Judea, where we paid but 2
pieces of silver each one, and four for a beast. Departing thence, the 23. in
the morning, we pitched our Tents upon a Green close under the walls of Ramoth
in Gilead: there I stayed all day, and wrote eight letters for England, by the
Caravan which went for Damasco, to be conveyed to Constantinople, and so for
England. next day being the 24 in the morning, I with other Christians, set
toward Jerusalem, and the great Caravan went for Damasco, but we pitched short
that night at a place called in Arabian Cudechelanib, being 16 miles from
Hebron, where the Sepulcher of our father Abraham is, and 5 little miles from
Jerusalem. From thence departing in the morning, being our Lady day in Lent,
and 9 beforenoon, I saw the City of Jerusalem, when kneeling down, and saying
the Lords Prayer I gave God most hearty Thanks for conducting me thither, to
behold so holy a plac^ with my eyes, whereof I had read so often before. Coming
within a furlong of the gates, I with my Companion Mr. Joh^ Burral, went
singing and praising Go^ till we came to the West Gate of the City, and there
we stayed, because it is not lawful for a Christian to enter unadmitted. My
companion advised me to say I was a Greek. only, to avoid going to Mass: but I
not having the Greek tongue, refused so to do, telling him even at the entry of
the Gate. that I would neither deny my Country nor Religion; whereupon being
demanded who we were, Mr. John Burrel (answering in the Greek tongue) told them
that he was a Greek, And I an Englishman. This gave him admittance to the Greek
Patriark, but I was seized on and cast into Prison, before I had stayed a full
hour at the Gate, for the Turks absolutely denied, that they had ever heard
either of my Queen or Country or that she paid them any Tribute. The Pater
Guardian, who is the defender of all Christian Pilgrims (and the principal
procurer of my imprisonment, because I did not offer my self under his
protection, but confidently stood to be rather protected under the Turk than
the Pope) made the Turk so much my enemy, that I was reputed to be a spy, and
so by no means could I be released from the Dungeon.

Now give me leave to tell you how it pleased God that very day to deliver me
and grant me pass as a Protestant, without yielding to any other ceremony, then
carrying a Wax-candle only, far beyond my expectation. Here let me remember
you, that when I stayed at Ramoth in Gilead, where I wrote the 8 Letters for
England, having leisure, I went to a Fountain to wash my foul linen, and being
earnest about my business, suddenly there came a Moor to me, who taking my
clothes out of my hand, and calling me by my name, said he would help me.

You need not doubt but this was some amazement to me, to hear such a man call
me by my name, and in a place so far distant from my friends, country and
acquaintance: which he perceiving, boldly thus spoke in the Frank tongue, why
Captain, I hope you have not forgotten me, for it is not yet 40 days since you
set me, a-land at Alexdria, with the rest of those passengers you brought from
Argier, in your ship called the Trojan: and here is another in this Caravan,
whom you likewise brought in company with me, that would not be a little glad
to see you. I demanded of him if he dwelt there: he answered me no, saying,
that he and his fellow were going in that Caravan to Damasco (which place they
call Sham) and from thence to Begdat, which we call Babylon, and from thence to
Mecha to make a Hodge, for so they are called when they have been at Mecha:
moreover, he told me, that he dwelt in the City of Fesse in Barbary.

This man (in my mind) God sent to be the means of my immediate delivery: For
after I had taken good notice of him, I well remembered that I saw him in my
ship; though one man among 300 is not very readily known: for so many brought I
from Argier into those parts, of different Nations: as Turks, Moors, Jews and
Christians: I desired this man to bring me to the sight of his other companion,
which having washed my Linen) he did, and him I knew very readily. These two
concluded, that one of them would depart thence with the Caravan, and the other
go along with me to Jerusalem, which was the Moor before mentioned; and such
kind care had the Infidel of me, that he would not leave me unaccompanied in
this strange Land: which I cannot but impute to Gods especial providence for my
deliverance out of Prison, or else had I been left in a most miserable case.

When this Moor saw me thus imprisoned in Jerusalem, my dungeon being right
against the Sepulcher of Christ, although he wept, yet he bid me be of good
comfort, and went to the Basha of the City, and to the Saniacke, before whom he
took his oath, that I was a Mariner of a ship, who had brought two hundred and
fifty, or 300 Turks and Moors into Egypt from Argier and Tunis, their journey
being unto Mecha. This Moor (in regard he was a Mussel-man) prevailed so much
with them, that returning with six Turks back to Prison he called me to the
door, and there said unto me, that if I would go the house of the Pater
Guardian, and yield my self under his Protection, I should be forced to no
Religion but mine own, except it were to carry a Candle: to the which I
willingly condescended. So paying the charges of the Prison, I was presently
delivered, and brought to the Guardians Monastery, where the Pater coming to
me, took me by the hand, and bade me welcome, marvelling I would so much err
from Christianity, as to put my self rather under the Turks, than his
Protection: I told him, what I did was because that I would not go to Mass, but
keep my Conscience to my self: He replied, that many Englishmen had been there
but (being Catholics) went to Mass, telling the Turks at the Gates entrance
that they were Frenchmen, for the Turks know not what you mean by the word
Englishman; advising me further, that when any of my countrymen undertook the
like travel, at the Gates of Jerusalem they should term themselves either
Frenchmen or Brittans, because they are well known to the Turks.

He further asked me, how old our Queen was, and what was the reason she gave
nothing to the maintenance of the Holy Sepulcher, as well as other Kings and
Princes did: with diverse other frivolous Questions: whereto I answered
accordingly. This day being spent even to twilight, Mr. John Burrel who passed
as a Greek without any trouble came in unto us, being nevertheless confined to
this Monastery, or else he might not stay in the City; for such sway do the
Papists carry there, that no Christian stranger can have admittance there, but
he must be Protected under them, or not enter the City. Mr. Burrel and I being
together in the Court of the Monastery, 12 fat fed Friars came forth unto us,
each of them carrying a Wax candle burning, and two spare Candles beside, one
for Mr. Burrel, the other for me: Another Friar brought a great Basin of warm
water, mingled with Roses and other sweet Flowers, and a Carpet being spread on
the ground, and Cushions in Chairs set orderly for us, the Pater Guardian came
and set us down, giving each of us a Candle in our hands, then came a Friar and
pulled off our hose, and (setting the Basin on the Carpet washed our feet.

When the Friar began to wash, the twelve Friars began to sing, continuing so
till our feet were washed, which being done, they went along singing, and we
with the Guardian came to a Chapel in the Monastery, where one of them began
an Oration in form of a Sermon, tending to prove how meritorious it was for us
to visit the holy Land, and see those sanctified places where our Saviors feet
had trod. The sermon being ended, they brought us unto a chamber where our
supper was prepared; there we fed somewhat fearfully, in regard that strange
Victuals have as strange qualities: but committing our selves to God, and their
outward appearing Christian kindness, we fell to heartily, supt very
bountifully, and after (praising God) were lodged decently. Thus much for my
first entertainment in Jerusalem, which was the 25. of March, being our Lady
day in Lent. Now follows what the Friars afterward showed me, being there to
appointed by the Pater Guardian. Early the next morning we arose, and having
saluted the Pater Guardian, he appointed us seven Friars and a Trouchman: so
forth we went to see all the holy places in the City which were to be seen,
except those in Sepulchra Sancta; for that required a whole days works, and at
every place where we came we kneeled down, and said the Lords prayer.

The first place of note was the Judicial next the house of Veronica Sancta:
and demanding what Saint that was, they told me it was she that did wipe our
saviors face, as he passed by in his Agony. Descending a little lower in the
same street, they showed me the way which our Savior Christ went to
crucifying, called by them Via Dolorosa. Then on the Right Hand in the same
street, I was shown the house of the Rich Glutton, at whose Gate poor despised
Lazarus lay. Holding on our way down this street we came to a turning Passage
on the left hand, whence they told me Simon Sirenus was coming toward the
Dolorus way, when the Soldiers seeing him, called him, and compelled him
against his will, presently to help our Savior to carry his Cross. Then they
told me that in that same place the people wept, when Christ answering, said
unto them, Oh Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, etc. Next they showed
the Church where the Virgin Mary fell into an agony, when Christ passed by
carrying his Cross. Afterward they brought me to Pilates Palace, which though
it be all ruinated, yet is there an old Arch of Stone, which is still
maintained by the Christians, and standing full in the high way, we passed
under it: upon that Arch, is a Gallery which admits passage (over our heads)
from one side of the street to the other: for Pilates Palace extends over the
high way on both sides, and Pilate had two great Windows in the same Gallery,
to gaze out both ways into the street. Into this Gallery was our Savior
brought when he was shown unto the Jews, and they standing below in the street,
heard the words, Ecce Homo, Behold the man. A little from this place, is the
foot of the stairs where our Savior did first take up his Cross. Then they
brought me to the place where the Virgin Mary was Conceived and born, which is
the Church of St. Anna, and no Turkish Church. Next they showed the Pool where
Christ cleansed the Leapers, and then guiding me to St. Stevens Gate, a little
within it upon the left hand, they showed the stone wherewith St. Steven was
stoned. From hence I saw the stairs going up to Port Area, at which Port there
are diverse Relics to be seen; it was the East Gate of the Temple which
Solomon built upon Mount Moria, in which Temple was the place of Sanctum
Sanctorum, but now in that place is builded a goodly great Church belonging to
the Turks.

Thus spent I the second day, being the 26. day of March, all within the Gates
of Jerusalem, except my going to see the stone wherewith Saint Steven was
stoned. The next day being the 27. having done our Duty to God, and the Pater
Guardian, we hired Asses for the Friars and the Trouchman to ride on, and going
forth the City Gates, we mounted and rode directly toward Bythinia. By the way
as we rode, they showed the place of the fruitless Figtree, which Christ
cursed: next the Castle of Lazarus, that Lazarus whom Christ loved so well: for
his house or Castle was in Bythinia, but it was utterly ruinated, and nothing
to be seen but the two sides of the Wall. In the same Town they showed the
House of Mary Magdalen, but so ruinated, that nothing is left of it but a piece
of a Wall: there I saw likewise Martha's House, consisting of 3 pieces of Wall:
and thence they brought me to the Stone where the two Sisters told Christ that
Lazarus was dead, from whence passing on, they showed the place where our
Savior raised Lazarus from death, after he had layen three days in the ground,
and where he was buried afterward when he died. This place has been notably
kept from the beginning, and is repaired still by the Christians: but yet in
poor and very bare sort: And this is all that I saw in Bythinia.

From hence we rode to Mount Olivet, and passing by Bethphage, they brought me
to the place where our Savior took the Ass and Colt when he rode to Jerusalem
upon Palm Sunday. Riding from Bethphage, directly North, we came to the foot of
Mount Olivet, where they showed the place Benedicta of the Virgin Mary's
Annunciation: and ascending to the top of the mount we saw the place of our
Saviors Ascension: At the sight whereof we said our Prayers, and were
commanded to say 5 Pater Nosters, and 5 Ave Mary's, but we said the Lords
Prayer, took notice of the place and departed. This is the highest part of
Mount Olivet, and hence may be discerned many notable places: as first, West
from it is the prospect of the new City of Jerusalem: South-west the prospect
of Mount Sion which is adjoining to new Jerusalem: also in the valley between
Sion and the Mount whereon I stood, I saw the Brook Cedron, the Pool Silo, the
Garden wherein our Savior Prayed, the place where he was betrayed, and diverse
other notable things in this valley of Gethsemanie: as the Tomb of Absalom,
King David's son, the Tomb of Iehoshaphat, and others. Full South from Mount
Olivet I could see the places we came last from, as all Bythinia and Bethphage:
also East North-east from this Mount, may be seen the River of Jordan which is
15 Miles off, and Jericho, which is not far, because Westward of Jordan.

From Mount Olivet East and East-Southeast, may be seen the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, which is some 100 Miles long, and 8 Miles over: all these places I
set with the Compass, when I was on Mount Olivet: for I stayed on the top of it
some two hours and a half, having a little Compass about me. Descending hence
toward the foot Westward, we came to a place where the Friars told me, that a
woman called St. Pelagia, did Penance in the habit of a Friar: whereat I
smiling, they demanding why I did so? I answered that to believe Pelagia, was a
Saint, stood out of the Compass of the Creed: they told me, when I came home at
night they would show me sufficent Authors for it: but when I came home I had
so much to do in writing my notes out of my table book, that I had not leisure
to urge their Authors for St. Pelagia. By this time they brought us to the
place where our Savior did foretell the judgment, then where he made the Pater
Noster or Lords Prayer, and then where the Apostles made the Creed.

From hence we came to the place where Christ wept for Jerusalem, and from
thence to the place where the Virgin Mary gave the Girdle to St. Thomas; and
then where she Prayed for St. Steven. All these last were coming down Mount
Olivet, toward the Valley of Gethsemanie, where by the way we came to our
Ladies Church, wherein is her Sepulcher, and the Sepulcher of her Husband
Joseph, with the Sepulcher of Anna, and many others. This Church stands at
the foot of Mount Olivet, and was built (as they say) by Helena the mother of
Constantine the Great: Here the Friars went into the Virgin Mary's Sepulcher,
and there either said Mass or Prayers while we in the mean time went to Dinner.
In this Church is a Fountain of exceeding fine Water, in regard we went down
into a Vault, as it were it gives a mavelous loud echo or sound. Hence we
came to the Cave whither Judas came to betray Christ when he was at Prayer, and
thence to the Garden where our Savior left his Disciples, commanding them to
Watch and Pray, but found them sleeping at his return: then they brought me to
the Garden where Christ was taken: these last three were in the Valley
Gethsemanie. Riding into the Town (whereof the Valley bears the Name) on the
left hand I saw the before remembered Sepulchers of Absalom and Iehoshaphat, and
on the right the Brook Cedron, which at my being there had not one drop of
water in it, for indeed it is but a ditch to convey the water to Mount Olivet,
and Mount Sion when store of Rain falls. And this ditch, or brook Cedron, is
in the Valley between both those Hills. Hard by they showed me a stone marked
with the Feet and Elbows of Christ, in their throwing of him down when they
took him, and ever since (say they) have those prints remained there.

From thence we rode to the place where St. James the younger hid himself and
afterward was buried there: there also they showed where Zechariah the Son of
Barachiab was buried, and brought me to another place, where they say the
Virgin Mary used often to Pray. Then came we to the pool of Silo, wherein Mr.
Burrel and I washed our selves, and hence we were shown the place where the
Prophet Esaias was sawn in pieces: thence they guided us to an exceeding deep
Well, where the Jews (as they say) hid the holy fire in the rhyme of
Nebuchadnezzar. Here we ascended from the Valley to a hill side, which lies
just South from Mount Sion; but there is a great Valley between, called
Gehemion, and there they showed the places where the Apostles hid themselves,
being a Cave in a Rock. Ascending higher they brought me to the field, or
rather to the Rock, where the common burial place is for strangers, being the
very same as they say which was bought with the 30 pieces of silver, that Judas
received as the price of his Master, which place is called Aceldama, and is
fashioned as follows. It has 3 holes above, and on the side there is a vent,
at the upper holes they use to let down the dead bodies, to the depth of about
some fifty foot. In this place I saw two bodies, new or very lately let down,
and looking down (for by reason of the three great holes above, where the dead
bodies lie, it is very light) I received such a savor into my head, as made me
very sick, so that I entreated the Friars to go no further, but return home to
the City.

Then we went through the valley of Gehemion, and at the foot of Mount Sion
having a little bottle of water which I brought from the Pool Silo I drank, and
rested an hour eating a few Raisins and Olives which we brought with us from
Jerusalem. After I had rested and refreshed my self, we began to ascend Mount
Sion, and a little way up the hill, they showed me the place where Peter having
denied Christ, and hearing the Cockcrow, went out and wept. Ascending higher,
they showed the house where the Virgin Mary dwelt, which was near the Temple:
then they brought me to the place where the Jews setting on the blessed Virgin
Mary to take her, she was conveyed away by miracle. Hence we went to the house
of Cajaphas, which was somewhat higher upon Mount Sion, and therein I saw the
Prison wherein our Savior was detained. Passing on still higher, they guided
me to a little Chapel which is kept by the Armenians whereinto entering, at the
high Altar they showed the Stone which was upon our Saviors Sepulcher (as they
say) it is near the place where Peter denied Christ: for there they showed me
the Pillar whereon the Cock stood when he crowed. Hence was I brought to the
place where our Savior made his last Supper, and thence came where the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles: whence passing on, they showed me the place
where Christ appeared to his Disciples the eighth day after his Resurrection,
where St. Thomas desired to see his wounds.

Near this place upon Mount Sion, the Virgin Mary died, and hard by, they
showed a place bought by the Pope of the Turks, for the burial of the European
Christians, because he would not have them cast into Aceldama: They told us the
year before, five Englishmen were buried in that place, whether by the Friars
poisoning them, or how else it happened, but we thought it strange that all
five should die in one week. Thence came we to the house of Annas the high
Priest, now only two very old walls: at the side of one is an old Olive Tree,
whereto they told me our Savior was bound: and demanding the reason, they said
that when he was brought unto his house, Annas being asleep, his people would
not awake him: so during their stay, they bound him to that Olive Tree, and
when he awaked, then he was brought in and examined. Departing hence toward the
South Gate of the City, which stands likewise upon Mount Sion, we alighted
from our Asses, and entering, I noted it well: for I had seen three of the four
Gates. And being desirous to see the North-Gate also, they brought me to the
Church of St. Thomas, which is within the Wall all ruinated: then to the Church
of St. Mark, where Peter came being delivered out of Prison by the Angel that
brake open the Gate. Then they showed me the house of Zebedeus, whence we came
to a place kept by the Abassines, and there ascending first by a dark way, led
on by a line or Cord, we attained to a high place near to the Sepulchra Sancta,
where I paid two pieces of silver to go in, and being entered I demanded what
place it was; the same (quoth they) where Abraham would have sacrificed his son
Isaac. Thence went we to the Prison whence St. Peter and St. John were, being
the next door to the prison wherein I was put before: which made me the
sorrier, that it was not my fortune to have gone into it, being so near it.
Hence we came to the North-gate, being on Mount Calvary side, where having well
viewed the Gate, and perceiving it grew late, we went directly home: this was
my third days work, in and about Jerusalem, wearied not a little with often
alighting to pray: for at each several place before recounted, we dismounted
and said the Lords Prayer on our knees. On the morrow being the 28th day, early
in the morning, we took our Asses, riding forth at the West Gate, through which
I first entered, and passing South, we left mount Sion on the left hand: at the
foot whereof they showed the house of Uriah, and the Fountain where Bathsheba
washed her self when King David espied her out of his Turret. Thence went we to
the place where the Angel took up Habakkuk by the hair of the head, to carry
meat to Daniel in the Lions Den. Next came we to the place where the wise men
found the Star when it was lost, and then where the Virgin Mary rested her self
under a tree as she came from Bethlehem to Jerusalem, which tree they still
repair by setting another close to the root of it. Hence rode we to the house
of Elias the Prophet, where they showed his usual place of sleeping, and his
house stands so upon a hill, as from thence I saw Bethlehem afar off.

Thence we went to an old ruinated house, which they told me was Jacobs: which
may the better appear to be so, for in the field thereto adjoining, is the tomb
of Rachel, Jacobs Wife: and some two Miles from this tomb is a Town in the same
field called Bethesula, the Inhabitants whereof are all Christians. In this
great field (being between Jerusalem and Bethlehem) did lie the camp of
Senacherib when he besieged Jerusalem. From hence we rode to the field where
the Angels brought Tidings of great joy to the Shepherds, which is two Miles
from Bethlehem: and thence we rode to Bethlehem to the M^nastery, wherein were
about ten Friars; who welcomed me very kindly and brought me first into a great
Church, then into a large Entry wherein I saw the name of Mr. Hugo Stapers
twice set, one above another, and between them both I set my name. Then they
guided me down the stairs into a Vault, where was a Chapel built in the place
of our Saviors Nativity, enclosing both it and the Manger wherein Christ was
laid, and also the place wh^re he was presented with gifts by the wisemen. Over
thi^ Chapel is a great Church, ^uilt by Queen Helena mother to Constantine ^he
Great (as they say) and further I saw di^ers Tombs of holy men and others.
Going up to the top of the Church, I saw upon the ^eads the name of Mr. Hugo
Stapers again in^raven, which made me look the more ear^estly for some other
Englishm^ns names, but ^inding none, I graved my name and came ^way: then went
we in and dined with the ^riars. After Dinner, they brought me to a ^lace where
the Virgin Mary hid her self, ^hen search was made to kill the Children. ^o
taking my leave of Bethlehem, giving the ^riars three pieces of Gold for my
Dinner and my company with me being Eight in ^umber, mounting our Asses, we
rode to the ^ell, where King David's three Captains ^etched water for him,
through the whole ^ost of the Philistines: which stands a little ^ay from
Bethlehem, toward Jerusalem, and has three places to draw water up. Hence
went we presently back to Jerusalem, entering the gate at four a clock
afternoon, and at five the Turks let us into the Sepulchra Sancta, each of us
paying nine pieces of Gold for our entrance. No sooner were we in, but they
locked the Gates; so there I stayed till 11 of the clock the next day, and then
came we forth: Now follows what I saw in Sepulchra Sancta. First I observed
hanging without the Gate, at least 100 lines or strings, and in the Gate is a
great hole, whereat a little Child may easily creep in: whereof demanding the
reason, they told me that the hole served to give victuals at, for them which
lie within the Church, which are above 300 persons, men and women, all
Christians, and there they live continually night and day, and can have no
passage in or out, but when the Turks open the Gate for some Pilgrim: which
happens not sometimes in 14 days: Wherefore these Christian Lodgers in the
Church have their whole household there, and boarded lodgings built for them.
The strings hanging at the Gate, have each one a Bell, fastened at the lodgings,
and when their servants (which are without bring them any meat, each rings the
Bell belonging to his household, and so come accordingly (each knowing hi^ own
Bell) for the receipt of his food. The several sorts of Christians which I saw
in this Church, I will in order describe. 1. The Romans who bear the greatest
sway. 2. The Greeks, for they be next in number to the Romans, yet little
better then slaves to the Turk. 3. The Armenians, who have been so long
Servants to the Turk, that having forgot their own Language, they use all their
Ceremonies in the Arabian Tongue. The 4th sort of Christians are Nestorians,
who are likewise slaves to the Turk, and have no other Language than the
Arabian. The 5th Abassines, being People of the Land of Prestor John. The sixth
Iacobites that are Circumcised Christians, but slaves likewise to the Turk. All
these (Christians in name) have bought their several places in the Church, and
by-rooms for ease, being never fewer of all these six sorts than 250 or 300
continually there lying, and Praying after their manner. The places where they
ordinarily go to their Devotions are thus as the Roman Friars brought me to
them. 1. The Pillar whereat our Savior was whipped. 2. The place where he was
imprisoned, while they were preparing or making his Cross. 3. Where the
Soldiers divided his Garments. 4. Where the Cross was found by Q. Helena,
which is at the foot of Mount Calvary, and hard by that is the Chapel of the
Queen. 5. The place where Christ was Crowned with Thorns: which I could not see
till I give the Abassines that kept it two pieces of Silver. 6. The place where
the Cross being laid on the ground, our Savior was nailed unto it. 7. The
place on the top of Mount Calvary, where the Cross stood when he suffered. 8.
The Rock that rent at his crucifying, which is worth observation, for it is
slit like as if cleft with Wedges and Beetles, from the top to the two third
parts downwards, as it were through the brow and breast of the Rocks: The rent
is so great in some places, that a Man might hide himself in it, and grows
downward less and less. 9. The place where the three Mary's Anointed Christ
after he was dead. 10. Where he appeared to Mary Magdelen like a Gardener* And
thence we came to the Sepulcher it self, which is the last place where they use
Prayers. From whence I went to see the Tomb^ of Baldwin and Godfrey of
Bulloigne: An^ returning back to the Sepulcher, I measure^ the distance between
place and place, from five of the Clock before night, until next da^ at Eleven
at my coming forth, writing dow^ all things I thought worth notice: My
Companion Mr. John Burrel and I went thence (...) the Pater Guardian to Dinner,
where we hear^ that five Englishmen were arrived at the City Gates, traveling
toward Aleppo, their names were Mr. William Bedle, Preacher to the English
Merchants at Aleppo: Mr. Edward Abbot, Servant to Sir John Spencer: Mr. Ieffery
Kerbie Servant to Mr. P. Banning, and Leigiers for them in Aleppo; with two
other young men John Elkins, and Jasper Tymme: These five hearing of my being
there, came all to the House, and (though they saw not my Imprisonment, nor
were with me at the sight of those things, in and about Jerusalem) can witness
that they were acquainted therewith at the Gates, and with other truths beside.
These with my Companion Mr. John Burrel, I left behind in Jerusalem, departing
thence to see other places in the Country of Palestine: But let me first tell
what I observed in the Cities Situation, because I was informed before I came,
that it was all ruinated, though I found it otherwise, having a little Compass
about me, to set such places as I could easily come by.

The very heart of the old City was seated on Mount Sion and Mount Moria: On
the North part whereof was Mount Calvary, without the Gates of the old City,
about a stones cast, and no further. But now I find this new City situated so
far in the North part, that it is almost quite off Mount Sion, but yet not off
Mount Moria, which was between Mount Sion and Mount Calvary; so that now
(undoubtedly) the South Wall of the City are plackd on the N. foot of the Hill
of Sion. The East Walls which confronts Mount Olivet, is a great part of the
Ancient Wall from the S. E. angle North, a quarter of a mile behind Mount
Calvary, so that Mount Calvary which was formerly a stones cast without the
City, and the appointed place for ordinary execution, I find ^o be now seated
in the middle of the new City. This Mount Calvary is not so high as to be
called a Mount, but rather a piked or spired Rock: For I noted the Situation,
both when I was at the top, and when I came to the Sepulcher, being distant
from the foot of it 173 foot, as I measured it: Whereupon I conclude, that the
place of Burial, which Joseph of Arimathea made for himself, was from the foot
of Mount Calvary, 173 foot West, in which place is the Sepulcher of our
Savior, which is two foot and a half high, eight foot in length, and four foot
broad wanting three inches, covered with a fair white stone. Over the Sepulcher
is a Chapel, the North Wall whereof is joined close with the North side of the
Sepulcher: And of like stone as the Sepulcher is, consisting of fifteen foot in
breadth, five and twenty foot in length, and above forty foot in height. In
this Chapel are always burning thirty or forty Lamps, but upon Festival days
more, maintained by Gifts given at the death of Christians in Spain, Florence,
and other parts, to be kept continually burning, and the givers of these Lamps
have their names engraven about the upper edges of them, in Letters of Gold,
standing in a band of Gold or Silver. This Chapel is enclosed with a Church,
and yet not that only, but therewith is circled in all the forenamed holy
places, viz. where Christ was whipped: Where he was in Prison: Where his Garments
were divided: Where the Cross was found: Where he was Crowned with Thorns:
Where he was Nailed on the Cross: Where the Cross stood when he suffered* Where
the Vail of the Temple rent: Where the three Mary's Anointed him: Where he
appeared to Mary Magdalen: And in brief, all the notable things, either about
Mount Calvary, or Ios^phs field of Arimathea, are enclosed within the compass
of this Church, which was built by Q. Helena, Mother to Constantine the Great,
she being (as I have read in some Authors) an English Woman, and Daughter to
King Coel, that built Colchester: Which being urged to them, they denied it. I
measured this Church within, and found it to be 422 Fathoms about: The one side
of it likewise I found to be 130 Fathoms: Thus much for Mount Calvary, now in
the midst of the City.

From the North-east angle, to the North-west is the shortest way of the City,
and from the North-west angle, to the South-west, is as far as from the
South-east, to the North-east: But from the South-west to the South-east, which
is the South-wall that stands on the foot of Mount Sion, I measured, and
found it to be 3775 foot, which is about three quarters of a mile. Upon this
South side of the City, is a great Iron Gate, about which are laid 17 Pieces of
Brass Ordinance: This Gate is as great as the West Gate of the Tower of London,
and exceeding strong, the Walls being very thick, and on the South side 50 or
60 foot high. The North Wall is not altogether so long, but much stronger, for
on the North side it has been often surprised, but on the South Side never:
and on the East Side it is impregnable, by reason of the edge of the Hill which
it stands on, which is five times as high as the Wall. On the North side are
25 Pieces of Brass Ordinance near the Gate, which is of Iron also, but what are
in other places, as at the corners or angles, I could not come to see, and
inquire I durst not. The East Wall containing the Gate where St. Stephen was
stoned a little without, and to this day called St. Stephens Gate, I saw but
five Pieces of Ordinance there, and they were between the Gate and the ruins of
Port Aurea, which is to the South, the West side of the City, at the Gate
whereof I entered at my first Arrival, it is very strong likewise, and has
fifteen Pieces of Ordnance lying together, and all of Brass: This Gate is also
of Iron, and this West Wall is as long as the East Wall; But stands upon the
higher ground: So that coming from the West to the West Wall, you can see
nothing but the bare Wall, but upon Mount Olivet, coming toward the City, from
the East, you have a very goodly prospect, by reason the City stands all on
the edge of the Hill. To conclude, Jerusalem is the strongest of all the Cities
that I have yet seen in my Journey, since I departed from Grand Cairo: But the
rest of the Country is very easy to be surprised: Yet in Jerusalem are three
Christians for one Turk, and many Christians in the Country round about, who
all live poorly under the Turk.

Now how the Country about Jerusalem lies, for your more easy understanding, I
will familiarly compare several places, with some of our Native English Towns
and Villages, according to such true estimation as I have made of them. Imagine
I begin with London, I mean about that distance. The City of Bethlehem, where
our Savior was born, is from Jerusalem as Wansworth is from London, I mean
much that distance. The plain of Mamre is from Jerusalem, as Guilford is from
London: In which place, or near to it, is the City of Hebron, where our Father
Abraham lies buried. Beersheba is from Jerusalem, as Alton is from London:
Ramoth Gilead is from Jerusalem, as Reading is from London, Gaza, which is the
South west part of Palestine, is from Jerusalem as Salisbury is from London.
Ascalon is from Gaza North-east. Ioppa is from Jerusalem as Alisbury is from
London. Samaria is from Jerusalem, as Royston is from London. The City of
Nazareth is from Jerusalem, as Norwich is from London. From Nazareth to Mount
Tabor and Hermon is five Miles North-east: These two stand very near together,
Tabor being the greater. From Tabor to the Sea Tiberias, is eight Miles
North-east. From Jerusalem to Mount Sania, is ten days Journey and North-east
thence. These places last spoken of, beginning at Samaria, I was not in, but
the other five Englishmen that met me in Jerusalem from Galilee, came through
them, of whom I had this Description: they received of me likewise the
Description of my Journey through Palestine. The place where Christ fasted 40
days and 40 nights, called Quarranto, is from Jerusalem as Chelmsford is from
London, The River Jordan (the very nearest part thereof) is from Jerusalem as
Epping is from London. Jericho, the nearest part of the plain thereof, is from
Jerusalem as Lowton Hall (Sr. Robert Wroths house) is from London. The Lake of
Sodom and Gomorrah, is from Jerusalem as Gravesend is from Lon-don. The River
Jordan runs into the Lake, and there is swall^wed up; which is one of the
greatest secrets (in my mind) in the World, that a fresh water should run
continually into this salt Lake, and have no issue out, but there is lost: And
the Lake continuing still so salt, as no weight of any reasonable substance
will sink into it, but floateth upon it, so that a Man or dead Beast will never
go down* And further note, that what fifth soever was brought into it by the
River Jordan, or any other substance, it swims continually upon the water, and
being tossed thereon by the Weather, in time it becomes a congealed froth,
which being cast upon the Banks, and there dried by the extreme heat of the
Sun, becomes black like Pitch, which in that Country is called Bitumen, whereof
I have brought some with me from thence. This Lake is about eight or nine Miles
broad, and about a 100 Miles long from the North, where the River Jordan
falls into it, to the Southward, and has no farther issue.

The fields where the Angels brought Tidings to the Shepherds, lie from
Jerusalem as Greenwich from London. Mount Olivet lies from Jerusalem as Bow
from London. Bethania is from Jerusalem as Black-wall from London. Bethphage is
from Jerusalem as Mile-end from London. The Valley Gethsemany is from
Jerusalem, as Ratcliff Fields lie from London. Brook Cedron is from Jerusalem,
as the Ditch without Algate from London. Mount Sion is near adjoining to
Jerusalem, as Southwark to London. Thus have I described the City of Jerusalem,
as it is now built, with all the notable places therein, and near the same, and
the Country about it: By which comparisons you may well understand the
situation of most places near it: And thereby you may perceive that it was but
a small Country, and a very little plat of ground, which the Israelites
possessed in the Land of Canaan, and is now very barren: For within fifteen
Miles from Jerusalem, it is wholly barren, full of Rocks, and stony: And unless
it be about the Plain of Jericho, I know not any part of the Country at present
fruitful: What is has been in time past, I refer you to the Holy Scriptures:
My opinion is, that when it was fruitful, and a Land that flowed with Milk and
Honey, in those days God Blessed it, and that then they followed his
Commandments, but now being inhabited by Infidels (that profane the name of
Christ, and live in a filthy and beastly manner) God cursed it, and it is made
so barren that I could get no bread when I came near it: For one night as I
lodged short of Jerusalem, at a place called in the Arabian Tongue, Cuda
Chenaleb, I sent my Moor to a house (not far from the place where we had
pitched our Tents) to get some bread, and he brought word there was none to be
had, and that the man of that house did never ^at bread in all his life, but
only dried Dates, nor any of his household: whereby you may partly perceive the
barrenness of the Country at this day, only as I suppose, by the curse that God
laid upon the same: For they use the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah very much in
that Country, so that the poor Christians there are glad to marry their
Daughters at twelve years of Age, unto Christians, lest the Turks should ravish
them. And to conclude, there is not that sin in the World, but it is used
amongst those Infidels who now inhabit therein, and yet it is called Terra
Sancta, and in the Arabian Tongue Cuthea, which is the Holy Land, bearing the
name only and no more: For all holiness is banished from thence by those
Thieves, filthy Turks and Infidels that inhabit the same. Having my Certificate
sealed by the Quadrian and a Letter delivered me, to show that I had washed my
self in the River of Jordan, I departed from Jerusalem, in the company of the
Moor that helped to get me out of Prison, leaving Edward Abbot, Ieffery Kerbie,
John Elkins, Jasper Tymme and Mr. Bedle the Preacher, whom I met there by
chance, behind me in Jerusalem, and which grieved me most, the Gentleman of
Middleborough, Mr. John Burrel, that I met with at Grand Cairo, who had born me
company thence to Jerusalem, forsook me there, and stayed with the other five
Englishmen, and so was I left alone to the mercy of my Moor that never left me
till I came to Grand Cairo. Now what happened to me in my Traveling from
Jerusalem to Cairo, and from thence to Alexandria, where my ship lay, I will
hereafter declare.

Departing from Jerusalem, we got safe to Rama, and from thence to Ascalon, and
so to Gaza, which lies upon the Borders of the Deserts of Arabia: At one of
those two places I hoped to have some passage by Water, either to Alexandria,
or to Damietta, but failing thereof, I was in a maze, and knew not whether I
were best go back again to Jerusalem, or put my self desperately into the hands
of the Wild Arabians, to be by them conducted to Grand Cairo: One of those
courses I must take, there was no hope of passage, and yet I hoped I should
find it at Ioppa. And for that cause stayed at Gaza, and sent my Moor to Ioppa
to seek for passage, but there was none to be had. At last considering with my
self that my haste into Egypt was great; for I had left my man Waldred in
Cairo, with my stock of 1200 l. and my ship lay in the Road of Ale^andria, with
sixty men in her, and whether they would depart without me, or no, I knew not:
For when I went from them to go up to the River of Nilus to Cairo, I had no
intent to go for Jerusalem. I was forced in this extremity, to make away all
the money I had about me, and to put my self into the hands of two wild
Arabians, who undertook to carry me and my Moor (without whom I durst not go)
to the City of Cairo, in four days if I would pay them 24 Sultans of Gold, when
I came to the Materia near Cairo, and upon that Condition, they would deliver
me safely there, otherwise would carry me Prisoner with them, or cut my Throat;
And so agreeing with them, by my Moor who sp^ke for me, and withal warranted me
to go safely, swearing that he would not leave me by any means; the two Wild
Arabians provided two good Dromedaries for us, I and the Moor riding before,
and the Arabians behind us, two upon each Dromedary, and so departed from Gaza,
about two in the afternoon, and rode apace: those kind of beasts going so hard,
that within four hours I was so weary, that I desired them to suffer me to
alight down to rest me; which we did about six in the evening, and being
alighted, the Arabians tied the Dromedaries two forefeet together, as their
manner is, making them kneel down: which done, we sat down to eat a few Raisins
and Biscuit which we carried in our Alforges; but in the mean time, one of our
Dromedaries brake his halter and ran back toward Gaza, whereupon one of the
Thieves took the other Dromedary, and made after him, until both he and the
other that broke loose, were out of our sight: then the other Arabian that
stayed behind with us, ran after them, and we were left alone in the wild
Deserts of Arabia: at last, night approaching, and both our guides, and
Dromedaries being gone, we were in no small fear what would become of us: In
which case, leaving my Moor with the Alforges (wherein we carried our Victuals)
I went to the top of a sandy hill, not far from thence, to see if I could espy
our two Thieves; I was no sooner upon the top of the Hill, but I saw four wild
Arabians come running toward me, from the other side of the sandy Hill: which
I perceiving, ran in great haste to my Moor, yet not so fast, but one of the
Thieves was at my heels, and drawing out his Sword, bad my Moor deliver me, but
the Moor bad him search me, for he knew I had nothing about me of worth, only
my hair cloth Coat, and said farther to him, this Cuar (which is as much as
unbeliever) is to be conducted to Cairo in four days, by two of your
companions, whom he named, whereunto they all answered, that if it were true,
they would do me no hurt, but if their companions came not again with their
Dromedaries, then they would carry us away with them; but within two hours
after in the night, my two Arabians came again with their Dromedaries, and then
they were all fellow Thieves. And we gave them a few Raisins and a little
water, and so departed, and the fourth day at night we came to a place where
the Arabians had Tents, and there they gave me some Camels Milk, and beheld ^e
so earnestly, as if they had never seen a white man before: From thence we
departed, and the next night we came to Salhia, where being sore shaken in my
body (notwithstanding I was swathed with rollers) I was constrained to give
over my Dromedaries, and to get Horses, which they procured there of some of
their acquaintance. This Dromedary is a beast like a Camel, but has a lesser
head, and a very small neck: but his legs are as long, and there is no more
difference between a Camel and a Dromedary, then there is between a Mastiff-dog
and a Greyhound: these beasts eat little, and drink less, for they drank not
while I was with them; and it is said that they will not drink in eight or ten
days together, but cannot abstain so long from meat. And by this you see I went
as far in 4 days, as in 12 before: I think a good horse will run as fast, but
not continue it: their pace is a reaching trot, but very hard and quick. From
the edge of Salhia on the East side of Gozan, I took horse: But the reason why
the Arabians did get me horses, was not because they pittyed me for my
weariness, but that they durst not go any nearer to the inhabited Country with
their Dromedaries, and there one of them stayed, the other went with me to
Materia, from whence I sent my Moor to Cairo, to fetch me their Hire, and there
I paid them that let me the Horses, six pieces of Gold, and gave the two wild
Arabians 24 pieces of Gold, an^ ^hen they delivered me safe into the Custody of
my Moor, within three Miles of the City Cairo, where I was welcomed by the
Consul and others there resident, I paid my honest Moor six pieces of Gold, and
bought diverse Provisions to furnish him to Mecha, in which Journey as he
returned again he dyed.

In Cairo I staid two days, and the seventh night after I came to Bullac, and
there took Boat, and in 3 days I got down the River Nilus to Rossetta, and
there taking Horse with a Ianisary, fell into greater danger than during my
Journey; for between that Town and Alexandria, there were diverse Great
Ianisaries, who came from Constantinople, and newly landed at Alexandria, who
having tired their Horses, would have taken our two Mules from us, which my
Ianisary refused them, and drew his Sword, and they to be revenged, came
running to take me, and having laid hands upon me, four of them beat me
cruelly, and drove me to the passage hard by, and there would have killed me;
which my Ianisary perceiving, and seeing that nothing could appease them but
our two Mules, after he had been sore wounded, he delivered them unto the other
Ianisari^^, or I had there been sl^in, after my long and weary Journey, being
within five Miles of my Ship, that lay in the Rode at Alexandria: And so he
being wounded, and I well beaten, at last we got to the gates of Alexandria,
but it was so late, that we could not get in, but were forced to stay all that
night upon the hard stones, and in the morning I got aboard of my ship, when I
had been from it fifty days: And so I ended my Pilgrimage.

A JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM. OR, THE TRAVELS OF Fourteen English Men to Jerusalem,
in the Year. 1669.
Aleppo. Honored Sir.
THese serve to Accompany an Account of my Journey to Holy Land, for which I
might refer you to others, who have given ^ most exact Relation of that
Pilgrimage, yet according to your desire, I present you with this my
Description.

TUesday, May 3. 1669. we set Sail from Scanderoon, with a N.E. Wind on the
Margaret, Tho. Middleton Commander, being fourteen English Men, (of the Factory
of Aleppo) in Company; but being force^ to return three times, by contrary
Winds, by May 10. we arrived at Trippoly, whose Por^ is guarded with six small
Castles, near the Sea, and one great Castle upon the Land; defended from
Tempests on the West wit^ Islands, and on the East with a Cape of Land^ so that
none but a North Wind can be prejudicial to Ships in this Port: the Ground i^
stony, which forced the Captains to buoy u^ their Cables, the Ships riding in
six or seve^ Fathom Water. The Town is about a Mil^ from the Marine, situate
upon the shelf of (...) Hill, and has one good Castle for its defence^ the
Town is ruinate, and there were few t^ be seen, it being the time of making
whit^ Sild, and most o^ the People in their Garden^.

May 13. after three days Treatment b^ the Consul (for English, French and
Dutch (...) with extraordinary Civility, about four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, we set forward for Mount Lebanon, and two hours Riding from
Tri^poly, we pitched our Tent at the Villag^ Coffersinue; the Inhabitants are
Christians, an^ ^ive in Houses made of Reeds, and covered with Bushes; the Rode
to this Village is very pleasant, through a Forest of Olive Trees; and in the
Valleys, are Gardens of Mulber^ies, with which they f^ed their Silkworms,
Friday May 14 we departed from Coffersinue, about four in the morning, passing
in a good Rode, and through Plains sowed wi^^ Wheat: about six of the Clock, we
passed over seve^al Mountains resembling Marble, if not real^y so, from which
we had a fine Prospect of the ^ruitfulness of the Valleys: between these
Mountains; upon the ascent of an Hill, we ^ame to a Fountain, where we break
fasted; ^t seven we rose from the Fountain, and ha^ing passed a very dangerous
ragged Moun^ain, about nine of the Clock we came to Eden, a small Village, and
very pleasantly seat^d, being surrounded with Mulberries, Wal^uts, and other
sorts of Trees; Walnus es^ecially we found very common in this Mount: we went
to the Bishops House, a most misera^le ruinated Cottage, who coming to bid us
^elcom, appeared more like a Dunghill-raker ^han a Bishop. We enquired whence
this Vil^^ge had its name, the M^ronites who inhabit ^he Mountains say, this
was the place where Adam committed the sin of Eating the For^idden Fruit; but
the Bishop told us, it was in Heaven, where were three Trees, Adam being
forbidden to eat of one of them which was the fig tree: but having eaten, he
fel^ down from Heaven, among those Cedars (...) which are some two hours riding
from the Bishops House, and there he began to till the Ground. But the Bishop
being very Ignoran^ of these things, we forbear to enquire farther* The Bishop
have great respect showed him (...) every one Kissing his hand on their knees
bare^ headed: in his House he has a ruinate Church (...) with an Altar in it;
and a little beyond, is (...) little Chapel, near the head of the Rivule^ that
feeds his House with Water, where w^ found many men with Frank names, which had
continued there from the Year 1611.

Midday coming, the Bishop made wha^ Preparation his House would afford for
Dinner, killing two Kids, and a Goat, and givin^ us the best Wine the Mountain
did afford (...) being a well relished Red and White Win^ Night coming, after
Supper, we kissed (...) Hand,; and the next morning being now (...) twelve in
Company, went to take our leav^^ and made him a Present of Livers, besid^
something to the Servants, as is usual (...) Pilgrims that take this Voyage;
two of (...) Company waiting our return at Trippol^ Saturday May the 15. about
five a Clo^^ in the Morning, we rose from thence, and about eight of the Clock
we came to the Cedars; all that remain of them, being in a very small compass:
We spent some time in cutting sticks, and setting our Names on the great Trees.
At this place came to us the Captain of a Village, called Upshara, an hours
riding from the Cedars. In our way, as we returned; he invited us to Dinner at
his Village, which we accepted of, and after Dinner made him a Present, This
man is a Maronite, and takes Caeffar or Toll of the Turks, which pass that way
with their Sheep and Oxen; he has a hundred Soldiers under his Command, who
are all Christians. About two a Clock we mounted, and after three hours riding,
we came to a mighty deep Descent, winding in and out, which is the way to the
Patriark of the Maronites House, called Caunibene ^t is a very good Convent,
and lies under the Rock, they have a Bell in the Church as in Eu^ope, and go to
their Devotions Morning and Evening: After we had kissed the Patriarks Hand, we
demanded what was to be seen, and the Druggarman carried us to see St. Marren's
Cross, of whom they recount this Story.

That a Venetian in the time that the Franks had the Country, came with his
Wi^e and one Daughter to live there; and after* some years his Wife dying, he
was resolved to go into the Convent and live a Religious Life, and would
therefore have his Daughter to leave him; but his persuasions could not prevail
with her; but rather than leave her Father, she would put on man's Apparel, and
live a Devoted Life with him also; which at last (though unwillingly) he
assented to (she being young and handsome;) there they lived very strictly for
several years; afterward her Father dyed: And the Lay Brothers and Fathers
going out, as usually, to till the Ground; She seldom went with them, the Chief
of the Convent keeping her at home (being much taken with such a handsome young
man as he thought) whereupon they began to grumble, that St. Marrena did not go
with them; so that at last, to satisfy the Fratres, he was sent out to work
among them near the Village Tursa: presently after one of the young Virgins of
that Village proving with Child, she came to the Convent, and laid it to the
charge of St. Marrena; who was thereupon presently Excommunicated, and lived a
Religious Life in the Grot near the Convent for the space of 7 years; and being
then again admitted into the Convent, and still continuing to live a very
strict Life, he at length dyed; and the Fathers coming according to their
Custom, to anoint the Body, found that he was a Woman; whereupon they began to
Cross themselves, and to beg Pardon for excommunicating her; and have built an
altar in the Grot, and call it by the Name of St. Marrena, as they have also in
several Grots thereabouts, in remembrance of the Religious Relics of those
that dwelt therein; and when they carry any Body to see them, they presently
fall down to prayers.

About a League from the Convent, are two French men that live a Hermits Life,
having Bread and Wine allowed them by the Patriark: Night coming on, we went to
Supper with the Patriark, the B. of Aleppo* and two other Bishops, with what
the Place afforded; At Supper they brought out a great Glass, which held near
two Quarts, with which the Old Man soon made himself merry, it being their
custom to drink freely; He telling us, that that Glass had belonged to the
Convent more than one hundred Years, and that the Turks coming once to Ransack
the Convent, seeing this Glass, told one of the Fratres, if he could drink off
that full of pure Wine, he would save the Convent; which one of them doing, the
Turks went away, admiring what sort of People they were. May 16. We took our
leave of the Patriarks, and presented him with some Livers, as also to the poor
Fratres, and others belonging to the Convent, and so took our Journey to
Trippoly, having had a review of those Mountains, and the Country adjacent,
overspread with many fair Villages, and fruitful Valleys sown with Corn, and
great quantity of Mulberry Gardens; it being the general employment of the
Inhabitants to make Silk.

We Returned to Trippoly to the Consuls House that Night, where after two days
repose, and having been extraordinary well Treated, we took our leave of the
Consul May 18. about midnight, we set sail for Ioppa, with a good Wind; in the
Morning we came in sight of Cape-Blanco, where the Wind proving contrary, we
were forced to bear up and down for two days, before we could weather the Cape;
the Wind coming good, we weathered the Cape, and came in sight of Cape-Carmel,
which Two Cape^ make the Bay of Aerica, on which there is a Convent of White
Friars, and there they showed us Elisha's Tomb. And three or four hours Sail
further, we came in sight of Cesarea, now Ruinate and Inhabited by a Company of
Savage Arabs. May 23. we Arrived at Ioppa, which has no Harbor to defend
Ships from Storms, but has very good Ground to Anchor in, about ten Fathom
Water: It is a poor Town, and has one Castle: to defend those Ships that come
in close to the Shore; the chief Trade thereof is Potashes for Soap, Cottons,
and Cotton-Yarn, which the Franks bring from thence. May 24, We arrived at
Ramah, a pleasant Village; the Trade of the Inhabitants is in Fillado's; the
People are poor, and the livelihood of the Women is to Spin it: We were
Treated there at the Convent, till a Messenger was dispatched to the Convent at
Jerusalem, for our Admittance to pass thither, because of some extravagant
Stories that flew abroad, of the Plague raging in the place from whence we
came; our Messenger returned back that night.

May 25. in the morning, we mounted to take our Journey for Jerusalem, and
baited at St. Ieroms Church about twelve of the Clock, to Eat what small
provisions we had with us: and the heat of the Day being passed, we proceeded
on our Journey; and about four of the Clock in the afternoon we arrived at
Jerusalem, at Ioppa Gate; where we tarried till the Druggerman of the Convent
went to the Caddy for License for us to enter the City; which having obtaine^,
and delivering up our Swords, and what other Arms we had, to be carried to the
Convent; we entered the City on Foot, and were conducted by the Druggerman to
the Latins Convent, with two or three Fathers; we found them at their
Devotion, and afterward all went into the Father Guardians Chamber, who
embraced, and bid us welcome; We were carried to our Lodgings, and the Father
Procurator came to us, and passed a Complement on us, bringing two or three
bottles of the best Wine, and desiring us to call for what we wanted; this was
our first entertainment. But I should have told you that our Druggerman,
Mallanis Salley, who conducted us from Ioppa, through the Mountains up to
Jerusalem, was formerly a Robber himself, and could therefore the better carry
us through the Arabs, who molest those Mountains and live all upon Purchase; he
was a Greek by Nation and Religion. Now to our further Entertainment at
Jerusalem; the next morning Father Tomaso, a Lay-Brother, mighty Serious, and
Religious in their way, came to our Chamber with Milk, Wine and ^ruit, (with a
Blessing in his Mouth) the season being very hot: and about twelve of the Clock
we went to Dinner* two or three Lay-Brothers attending at the Hall door, with a
Basin and Ewer for us to wash; and then entering the Hall, the Fathers stood all
on one side near one another, saying Grace in Latin, and then singing the Lords
Prayer altogether; and afterward bowing toward the Picture of our Savior at
Supper with his Apostles, which is placed over the Guardians Head, adorned with
silver Crosses about it, etc. The Guardian has his Table alone in the middle
of the Room and two long Tables stand of each side, one for the Pilgrims, and
the other for the Fathers; after they had kissed the ground, we all sat down,
and had every one his allotment brought in a little dish, never wanting three
or four Courses of several sorts of Meat: our Wine, Water, and Fruit, was set
ready; the Wine about a Quart, the Water something less, which was the
allowance of two men, and had two Glasses belonging to it: about the middle of
Dinner, the Frater came, and changed our Water, that it might drink the
fresher. Dinner being ending, the Father Guardian knocks, and the Fraters rise
and kneel with their faces toward the Picture of our Savior with his Disciples
at Supper, and mumbling something to themselves, they kiss the Ground, and then
begin to take away; one taking away the Dishes, another the Knives, every one
having his appointment; and then give Thanks in the same manne as before
Dinner; then washing at the door, they go into the Church to Prayer, for a
quarter of an hour; this they do daily, rising always early, and in the Night
also, to go to Mass.

At this time there were two or three Christians come from Bethlehem, whose art
is to make the Figure of our Saviors Sepulcher, or what Holy Story you please,
upon your Arm; they make it of a blew color, and it is done by the continually
pricking of your Arm with two Needles; they began presently to go to work on
some of us, and having presented us the Patterns of abundance of Prints, every
one took his Fancy.

The next day, May 27. we all agreed to go into the Temple, and about four
afternoon we went: ten or twelve Fathers live there continually, and have their
Church there: The door is sealed with the Caddys Seal, and when any man goes
in, he pays fourteen Livers; we being entered the Temple, the Fathers came and
saluted us, and conducted us to their Lodgings; where after we had been about
an hour, they prepared to go in Procession to all the holy places, presenting
us every one a Book of Holy Songs, for every place in Latin.

And so we set out, the Fathers being dres^ed in White Surplices; and the Chief
among them with Cloth of Silver over his Surplice, with two more dressed in the
like Garb to lead him: there was a great Silver Crucifix carried before him,
and two men going on each side of it, with Incense Pots, to perfume every holy
place, that we came to. And so we went to the places following.

1. The Pillar to which our Savior was bound when he was scourged. 2. The
Prison, wherein our Savior was put. 3. The place where the Soldiers divided
our Saviors Garments. 4. The place where St. Helena found our Saviors Cross.
5. The Pillar to which our Savior was bound when he was Crowned with Thorns.
6. To Mount Calvary, where he was Crucified. 7. The place where our Savior was
Nailed to the Cross. 8. To the place where he was Anointed. 9. To the Sepulcher
of Christ. 10. The place where our Savior appeared to Mary Magdalen in the
shape of a Gardener. 11. The Chapel of the Virgin Mary, where our Savior
first appeared to her after his Resurrection. I might give you a particular
description of the Adornment of these places; but to be short, every one have
Lamps burning at them; some are paved with Marble, others are hung with
Pictures; the place where our Savior was laid down to be nailed to the Cross,
is paved with Marble also; but in the exact place where the Cross stood, the
Marble is covered over with Silver, with Silver Lamps, and Wax candles
continually burning; and our Savior Crucified standing on it: the Sepulcher
also is covered with Marble, with Silver Lamps continually burning on it; so
has the Anointing Stone: you must go into the Sepulcher bare foot, as also on
Mount Calvary.

Here all sorts of Christians have their Churches: The Greeks have the best,
the Latins* the Armenians, the C^pty's and the Syrians, have each of them
Churches here. The Greeks and Latins are the two powerful Religions in the
Temple, and with great Sums of money, and the credit they have at Stambul or
Constantin^ple, buy these Holy Places out of one another hands; the other
Parties are poor; and squeezed into a small part of the Temple; The Latins
once offered ten thousand Livers for a piece of the Cross, which the Greeks
bought out of their hands. These Religious People bear little respect one to
another, speaking very basely each of other. After our Procession, we went to
view all the places and Churches again; the Greeks have a place in the middle
of their Church, which they say, is the middle of the World: they have another
place by the Prison of Christ, with two holes to put the Feet in: there is also
a Narrow Passage between two Pillars, which is in imitation of the streightness
of the Path to Heaven, which the Greeks Creep through. In the Church of the
Syrians, is the intended S^pulchre of Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus: And
near the Anointing Stone, is a Tomb, where Godfrey and Baldwin, Kings of
Jerusalem, are buried. In the same place is the Rent of the Rock which begins
above, near the place where our Savior was Crucified, and in that Rent they
say, Adams Head was found, when our Savior gave up the Ghost. Thus having seen
the Temple, we returned to the Convent.

May 28. we went out of the City at Damascus Gate, and turning on the right
came to one of the Fish Ponds of the old City, and a quarter of a Mile further,
to the Gro^ where Jeremiah lived when he Wrote his Lamentations; on the left
hand in the entrance, is a Led^ in the Rock, about a Story high, where they say
Jeremiah slept; and below over against the Door, is a hole intended for his
Sepulcher; and passing through a Ruinate Door, you come into the Y^rd, where
his Well is, being a very good Spring of sweet Water; there you pay one Liver;
afterward passing along the side of a Mountain, that lies level with the City,
a little beyond Ieremiahs Tomb, we came to the Sepulcher of the Kings; the
entrance into the first Room was so small and low, that we were forced to creep
in, in which there were seven Sepulchers cut out of the Rock: in the second
Room, were eight; and in the third Room twenty six; and many more in several
other Rooms: One of the Rooms has a Door of Stone, Cut out of the Rock, and
shuts and opens as a Door with Hinges; this Door belongs to the Room, wherein
Iehosaphat was Buried; his Coffin is of Stone with a Cover to it, and is very
neatly Wrote on the sides with Flowers, as several of them are also in the
first Room, but they know not what Kings they are; there is also one ^ther
Chamber into which we crept; so that there are in all 42 Burying places under
Ground, to which there is but one door to enter, all adorned with Admirable
Workmanship; which I being unskilled in, am unfit to express in proper Terms:
and so we returned to the Convent, entering the City at the same Gate. May 29.
we reposed, some of our company being a Marking. May 30. we took Horse to go
for Bethlehem, and went out at the West Gate called Ioppa Gate, and turning on
the left hand, and taking the lower Path, we passed along the Road that the
Virgin Mary brought our Savior, when She came to offer him at the Temple; and
half a mile from the City is the place where the Tree Tirabintha Grew which the
Virgin Mary sat under to give him Suck; but the Tree being Cut down, the place
is encompassed with a Wall. On the left hand you see David's house, when he
spied Bathsheba washing her self; on the right a little out of the Road, is old
Simeons and Elias House; and a quarter of a Mile further is a Well where the
Wise Men first saw the Star; a little further is the Ground where the Reapers
were at work, when Habakkuk coming to bring them Meat, the Angel took him up by
the Hair of the Head, and carried him into Babylon to Daniel in the Lions Den:
afterward we saw Jacobs House; and a hill like a Sugar Loaf: where the Franks
remained forty Years, after they were driven out of Jerusalem; next is a
Monastery of Monks of the Order of St. Tavola Paula Romana, who when they die,
are Buried at the Convent in Bethlehem.

A Mile further is the place where the Angels appeared to the Shepherds, and
cried, Gloria in Excelsis, etc. When our Saviou^ was Born, where there has
been a Convent; but now there only remains an Arched Vault, where we paid Money
to the Arabs; who when they espy any Franks going thither, Ride Post before to
take Possession of the place, and get something from them; A quarter of a Mile
from hence, in the way to Solomon's Cisterns, is the Village of the Shepherds,
on the back part whereof is a Well, of which they say, the Virgin Mary desired
to Drink; but the Inhabitants denying to draw her any Water, it presently
Overflowed for her to Drink: a little way from this Village, is Joseph's House,
and a while after, we came to Solomon's Gardens lying shelving: At the bottom of
them is the Road from Grand Cairo, and round the Top passes the Aqueduct, which
feeds Jerusalem with Water (from thence we saw Tekoa standing on a high Hill;)
the water comes from the Fountains which feed Solomon's Cisterns; passing a Mile
along by the Aqueduct, we came to Solomon's Cisterns, which are Three; the first
had no Water in it, and might be about 250. Yards long, sixty broad, and of a
great depth; the second had little water, something less in Compass; the third
was full of Water and as big as the first: they run one into another, and are
fed by the Spring that feeds the City. The Fathers say, that they were made ^o
Swim in, they being built with steps for a Man to go down, but seem rather
intended for a reserve of Water for the City or the Gardens, having passage to
both; near the Gardens, is an ill contrived Castle, where a few Villains
inhabit, to whom we paid one Liver per Man, for leave to go into the Grot,
where the Springs are that feed the City, and the Cisterns; it is large, and
has three Springs, and a large passage cut through the Rock, toward the
Cisterns, passable by a Man, but we went not to the end of it.

We mounted our Horses to proceed on our Journey, leaving the Castle on the
Right Hand, and at a distance we saw St. Georges Church, where the Fathers say,
the Chains remain wherewith St. George was bound, which will presently cure a
Madman if he be bound therewith. After an hour and a halfs Riding, we came
near to Bethlehem, where passing through a narrow Lane, the Guard consisting of
four or five Musqu^tiers, received five Livers of every one of us, and our
Druggerman that went with us, received three: and arriving at the Convent, we
paid one for our entrance; and after our being welcomed by the Fathers, we took
our repose till five of the Clock in the Evening; and then we prepared to go in
Procession to the Holy Places in the same manner as we did at the Temple in
Jerusalem; the Places we Visited were these.

1. The Place where our Savior was Born. 2. The Tomb of St. Joseph to whom the
Virgin Mary was espoused. 3. St. Innocents Tomb. 4. The place where St. Ierom
lived, when he translated the Bible into Latin. 5. St. Ieroms Praying place. 6.
St. Ieroms Tomb. 7. St. Paul's Tomb. 8. St. Eustachias her Daughter. 9. The
S^pulchre of St. Eusebius, Abbot of Bethlehem. 10. We return to the Chapel of
St. Catherena, built by St. Paula. Next is the great Church without the
Convent, which has 48 Pillars of Marble about three Yards long, all in one
Piece. At Evening we went to visit the place of our Saviors Birth, formerly
belonging to the Latins, till the Greeks bought it out of their Hand^; so that
now the Latins, when they go their Procession, Pray at that Door by which they
formerly entered. The Precipio has two Doors, one over against the other, which
are well lined with Carved Iron, and strengthened with Iron Spikes: We went in
barefoot; on the Right hand in the entrance, is the place they say where our
Savior was Born, which is lined with Marble; and in the middle of the Room
there is a little place covered with Silver, by which they set a Dish to
receive your Charity: On the left Hand is the Manger where the Virgin Mary laid
our Savior; which is Lined with Marble; and at the end of the Manger on the
Right Hand, is the Picture of St. Ierom naturally in the Marble, which the
Fathers esteem as a Miracle, Over against this Manger, is the place where the
three wise Men stood, when they came to Worship our Savior: at the end of this
place in a corner, is a hole made up with Marble, wherein they say, the Virgin
Mary put the Water, when she had washed her hands: Over which a Lamp Burns
continually: and a great many in other places. Over this Precipio, in the great
Church is the Altar of Circumcision, where our Savior was Circumcised.

Having seen what was Rare at Bethlehem, May 31. early in the Morning, we rose
to proceed in our Journey, in which we saw these Places following. 1. The Grot
where the Virgin Mary hid her self, when she was warned to Fly into Egypt, and
her Milk running out of her Breasts there made the Earth turn White; which
Earth the Catholics do very much esteem. 2. David's Cisterns. 3. The Grot
wherein the Virgin Mary and Joseph lived, before they could get a House. 4. The
Tomb of Rachel, Jacobs Wife, which the Turks do also much esteem. 5. The Field
of Sennacherib, where the Angel of the Lord slew in one Night, One hundred
eighty five thousand of the Syrians; in this Place is a Village, which is
called Botechelle, where the Fathers affirm no Turk can live. 6. The place
where the Pillars of the Convent of Ramah were built. 7. The Vineyard whence
the Spies of the Land of Canaan took the Cluster of Grapes, to show the
fruitfulness of it; also the Fountain where Philip Baptized the Q. of Sheba's
Eunuch. 8. The Deserts of John Baptist; and after an hours Riding we came to
John ^aptists Fountain, where was his Chamber, and a Rock, wherein there was a
place cut out like a Bench for his Bed; to break off any bit of this Rock, is
Worthy Excommunication. 9. Zacharias House, where the Virgin Mary came to
salute her Cosen Elizabeth; for the Angel that told her she should conceive,
told her also, that her Cosen was with Child; and upon her salutation, the
Child leaped in the Womb; Near this is House a Fountain with two Cisterns,
which is called Elizab^ths Fountain. 10. A Stone where John Baptist Preached,
which the Fathers say, the Turks have endeavored to break in pieces, but could
not. 11. The place where John Baptist was Born, now a Stable, but formerly a
Church, where the Fathers upon John Baptists day carry their Organs thither,
and Adorn the place for their Prayers. 12. The Tombs of the Maccabees, which we
saw at a distance, and being ruinated, appear as so many Arches. 13. We passed
by a Village, where the Men are all Turks, and the Women Christians; for the
people being poor, the Turks were very severe with them for their Harach; who
not being able to pay all at once, turned Turks, etc. 14. We came to the
Mountain Crupil, where part of the Wood whereof our Saviors Cross was made,
was cut down, and over the place where they say the Tree stood, is a stately
Church, in the possession of the Greeks, the just place wh^re the Tree grew is
inlaid with Silver, by which they set a D^sh for Charity: The Floor of this
Church is well Wrought with Mosaic Work, and painted with Scripture Stories;
and instead of a Bell they knock upon a board, that hangs up, which sounds
somewhat like a Bell.

And now we go forward to the Convent at Jerusalem, passing by M^unt Gihon
where Solomon was Anoin^ed King, and about night we came to our Lodgings,
having made two days journey to see the Holy places, and Traverse the Mountains
of Judea; we slept very well that night, but still we have mere Pilgrimages.
June 1. We lay still to recover our selves of our Bethlehem Journey, But Father
Tomasa out of his Zeal, is very importunate with us to be walking to see other
places, which is very Meritorious in the Roman Church; and had we been of their
Religion, it had been impossible to have mist Heaven; for we had received
indulgences for all our Lives; which fancy I wish do not deceive too many. June
2. We began to search for the Holy places, which are these following. 1. The
Immolation of Isaac near the Temple, called Mount Moriah, inlaid with Silver,
and a dish set by for your Offering. 2. Peter's Prison, still made a Prison by
the Turks: at the end of which, is a hole in the Wall, where they say the Chain
was fastened, with which St. Peter was Chained; little remembering, how often
Jerusalem has been destroyed, and the stones of that Old Wall are now probably
as far under Ground, as these are above. 3. The Monastery of the Knights of
Malta; a very fair Building, one Room has several Partitions for Beds, with a
hole in the middle, that if any of them are Sick or Fluxitive, they are laid
there to which the water, being Bad and the Air unwholesome, does very much
incline them. 4. Solomon's Temple; which, if any Christian go into, or but up
the stairs, he must Turn Turk, or be burnt: The Rarity of which I shall give
you an Account of, when I come to a Prospect. 5. St. Hellen's Hospital where
there are seven great Caldrons, in which she used to have Proivsions dressed
for the Poor, where we pay one Liver for entranc^. 6. The Judgment Gate, at
which our Savior was brought in: and near the Gate, is the place where he was
Condemned. 7. The Dolorous Way, which Christ went, when he went to be
Crucified; and in the way is the House of St. Veronica, who gave our Savior a
Napkin to wipe his Face, as he passed by: there is also Lazarus's House, and
the House of the Rich Glutton; and the place where our Savior Fainted (as they
say) and Simon took up the Cross; and near that, is the Church, where the
Virgin Mary stood to see him pass by, and swounded with Grief; now called the
Virgin Mary's Church. 8. Herod's Palace, now ruinated, and is now the Bashah's
Seraglio; in one Room is the place where they Clothed our Savior with Purple.
9. Pilates House, where they show the place, where our Savior was Crowned with
Thorns, and the Pillar to which he was bound, which was brought from thence,
and put into the Temple: next, we enter the Hall, where Pilate washed his
Hands, and declared himself Innocent of our Saviors Blood: out of which place
we had a fair Prospect of Solomon's Temple; which is built within the middle of
a spacious Yard very well Paved; there are several Arches, good Walks, and
Buildings about it: The Temple is Wrought with Mosaic Work, and by the Turks
r^port, is very Rich within, it being one of th^^r Mosques; and though they
have a Halt Moon upon all their Temples or Mosques, yet this only has a Cross
through the middle; The Fathers reporti^g it would not stand till the Cross was
made. 10. The place where Christ was Scourged, now a Sh^p for Linen Cloth; but
the Pillar to which o^ur Savior was bound, is brought thence and put into the
Temple. 11. The House of Annas, where our Savior being hurried with Violence
down a steep place, to prevent falling he laid hold of the corner of a Wall,
where there is a place in one of the Stones, fit for a Man's Hand, which the
Fathers account a great Miracle. 12. Simon the Pharisees House* where there is
a Stone, with the print of a Foot, which they said our Savior made when he
stood to pardon Mary Magdale^ her Sins: The Fathers say, the Turks have
endeavored often times to remove thi^ Stone, but still it comes into the same
plac^ again. 13. The House of Joakim and Anna^ a fair high Building; and in an
Under Room, cut out of the Rock, is the plac^ where they say the Virgin Mary
was Bor^ 14. The Pool of Bethesda, where the Sic^ lay to be healed; the Angel
coming to trouble the Water, and he that entered in first, was healed; but it is
now dry, and half filled with Earth. 15. S^. Stephens Gate and a little out of
the City, is the place where Stephen was Stoned: and the Fathers fancy, that
there is the print of his hands, Face and and Knees, when he fell down. 16. The
Valley of Jehosaphat, at the bottom of the Hill, between the Mountain on which
Jerusalem stands, and Mount Olivet. 17. The Place where the Virgin Mary is
Buried; where going down a great many stone steps, you come into a large
Vault, where all the Christians have their Altars apart, all being of several
Opinions, and the Turks, and Christians, both burn Lamps, over her Grave; here
we pay One Liver for entrance; and 48 Stone Steps upvvard, is Joseph's Tomb;
and against that, the Tombs of Joakim and Anna. 18. The place where Christ
svvate Blood, and the Angel appeared to Comfort him, is near the bottom of
Mount Olivet. 19. The place where our Savior Prayed, that This Cup might pass
from him; and near that place, is the Rock on which his Disciples sat, when
he went to Prayer, betvveen which two places he was taken; it is now
bordering on the Garden of Gethsemana, but might formerly be part of the
Garden, and is on the Ascent of the Mount Olivet; where the Multitude going to
Carry our Savior away, Peter smote off Malchus his Ear. 20. The Place where
they say the Virgin Mary Prayed for St. Stephen, while he was stoning. 21.
The place where Christ Wept over Jerusalem, it is almost at the Top of Mount
Olivet. 22. The Place whence our Savior Ascended into Heaven having as they
say, left the Print of his Foot on a stone; it has now a Chapel built over
it, with 14 Marble Pillars; it is at the Top of Mount Olivet, and a little
way off, is the Place where the Men of Galilee stood, when the Angel asked
them, Why stand ye gazing up? 23. The Place where the Angel told the Virgin,
she should be Raised in three Days. 24. Pelagius his Grot; whence we savv
Bethphage, where the Asses Colt was tied. 25. The Tree under which our
Savior stood, when he Preached the Judgment Sermon. 26. The place where he
made the Lords Prayer. 27. The Place where the Apostles made the Creed; being
a Grot of twelve Arches. 28. The Sepulchers of the Prophets, 47 in Number, cut
out of the Rock; and entering in at a Door, we came into a large Grot, where
there were several places to cut out, fit to contain a Coffin: here we paid
one Liver. 29. The Tree where Judas Hanged himself. 30. The Sepulcher which
Jehosaphat intended for himself; but being a King, he was buried in the
Sepulcher of the Kings. 31. Absoloms Pillar or Sepulcher, which is cut out of
the Rock, and about the bigness of a small Chamber, with Pillars round about;
like a Room built for some single Person: it is of a good Height, and has some
Carving about it. 32. They say hereby is the Print of Christ's Feet; for when
he was Carried to Jerusalem he stopped at the Brook Cedron, and desired to
Drink: This Brook is now but a small Channel and had no Water, but in the
Winter time, the Water comes down from the Hills, and makes a small Current*
33. Next is the place where S^. James hid himself three days, and three
Nights; it is a place cut out of the Rock, which must needs have been made for
a dwelling place; near this is the Sepulcher of Zacharia^s the Son of
Barachias, cut out of the Rock. 34. On the side of the Hill on which Solomon
Worshipped Moloch, are Chambers cut out of the Rock, which they say was the
place, wherein the Three hundred Wives, and One thousand Concubines of Solomon
were kept. 35. The Fountain of the Virgin Mary, which you go down to by
stone steps; the Water whereof is so Svveet, that were a man blind-folded, he
could not think it to be any thing but Milk and Water. 36. The Place where the
Prophet Isaiah was Savvn asunder: his Sepulcher is under a Rock near the same.
37. The Fountain of Siloa, by which is a Cistern, wherein formerly the
Pilgrims used to Wash, but now Ruined, and filled with Stones and Mud, yet is
its Water still accounted good for the Eyesight; and near this is Golgotha.
38. Next in a bottom, is a Well, wherein they say Nehemiah hid the Holy Fire,
when the Children of Israel were carried Captive; and when they returned 40
Years after, they say they found the same Fire in the Well. 39. Ascending up
the Mount we came to the Tombs of Annas and Cajaphas, who were High Priests.
40. And near it is the place where the Apostles hid themselves; where entering
a straight passage, we came into a Room under Ground, out of which there go
several holes wherein they say, the Apostles lay. 41. We then came to
Aceldama, a Grot, now held by the Armenians for a Burying place: it is said,
the Earth thereof will consume the Body of a Man in Forty Eight Hours: there
are several Vents on the Top to let out the smell: We went down under a Rock,
to a place where we could look into it, and there savv the form of a Man
entire, they being only laid in, but not covered with Earth. 42. We came to the
Fountain of Beersheba, at the bottom of Mount Sion, in which there is now
little Water, we being forced to tarry a quarter of an hour for one Draught.

Having seen all that was Remarkable in these Parts, we made toward the
Convent, having got a great deal of Credit with Father Tomaso; that we should
be such Zealous Pilgrims as to walk from five a Clock in the morning till
Midday; but he to encourage us, would still be foremost; and told us always,
there was some place more worth our seeing, than any before; and though he was
old, and the Weather hot, yet at the going up of a Hill, he would run, that he
might be foremost: and gave all the good Words that could be, to encourage us
Protestants who never hoped or thought, that we Merited any thing by it: but at
length we came to the Convent again well weary, every one retiring to his
Lodgings.

June 3. we reposed at the Convent; after Dinner, one of the Fathers came and
told us, that the Father Guardian would wash our Feet; which Honor we
accounted too great for us, and desired to be excused, but we were forced to
comply with the Orders of the Convent; The Basin, which was as big as a Tub,
was placed by a Chair, there were Rose-Leaves and Herbs put into the Water; the
Fathers all stood in a Row, Singing Godly Hymns; we sat down, and the Fath^^
Guardian wrapped a Towel about our Knees, to save our Clothes; then they began to
scrub our Legs and Feet, (being Masters of their Art;) there were two Fratres
attending, one on one Leg, and another on the other; having first dried the
left Foot, the Frater kisses it, and puts on our Slipper; then he dryes the
Right Foot, and wraps the Towel about the Sole of the Foot, and setting it on
his Knee, covers the Toes with his Hand, and then come all the Fratres, and
Kiss it; he gives us a little Candle, in taking which, we kiss his Hand, and so
rise and stand by, till all our Company are Washed in like manner. Then went we
in Procession, round their Chapel, they saying several Prayers, at their three
Altars, and so we returned to our Chambers. June 4. After Dinner we went into
the Kitchen, where we found all the Fathers, with Napkins before them, washing
the Dishes, every one taking his part, even to the Father Guardian himself;
some were cleaning, some handing away; but all the while with one consent, they
say some Prayer; it seeming to be their endeavor, that all that they do, may
be done to the Glory of God; this being done they go all to Prayers, and you
shall never see the Chapel without some of them; yea, and two or three times
in the Night they Rise to Prayers. On Whitsunday the Chapel was Adorned
something Extraordinarily, a very Rich Canopy being set on the Right Hand of
the high Altar, for the Father Guardian to sit under; when the Prayers began,
the Father Guardian came into the Chapel, and sat under this Canopy: There
were three or four Fathers Dressed in Cloth of Silver, like Heralds, two whereof
attend on each side of the Guardian, and two stand over against him. Then they
began to dress the Father Guardian in his Festival Robes, and having read two
or three Lines, put a piece of Linen laced about his Neck, and then his
Surplice, Reading still between every Robe that was put on. Then they cover him
with a Garment of Rich Satin, and Cloth of Silver; the two that stand over
against him, bowing at some words. His body being thus dressed, the two Fathers
put a Myter on his head, with all the Respect Imaginable; after a short Prayer,
they take the Father Guardian by the hand, and lead him to the Altar, he
standing in the middle of the four Fathers, adorned as aforesaid; the other
Fathers have their Surplices on, and the Organs go; then making a short Prayer
at the Altar, they lead the Guardian to his place again; and after a little
reading they take off his Myter, and he sits bare till the Prayer be done: then
they put on another Myter; the first was of Cloth of Silver, and the second of
Cloth of Gold^ set full of Rubies, and Diamonds, and other sorts of Stones;
they afterward took off that also, and put on a third Myter, of Cloth of Gold,
differing in shape from the others. The Guardian being led to and from the
Altar, a great while, at length, when they came to read where ^he Holy Ghost
came down upon the Apostles assembled together, a Father upon the Terrass, was
appointed to throw down a white Pidgeon dressed up with Ribbons, in imitation of
the Holy Ghost, but he met with some difficulty; for the Window was so fast
shut that he could not open it a great while, so that we had like to have gone
away without their Holy Ghost: but this difficulty overcome, he made the Dove
descend among us, which being done, after a Prayer, they began to undress the
Father Guardian again, reading all the while his Robes were taking off; and so
that days service was done.

Now we began to think of going to the Dead Seas, and the River Jordan,
demanding what our expense would be; the Fathers say, 25 Livers, but we all
agreed not to give above 20. The Fathers sent our resolution to the Bassa, and
he returned answer, That if we would go, we should pay 22 Livers; and if we
would not, he would have ten Livers a man; we thinking our selves under his
command, were not willing to embroil the Convent, who bear all damages, as they
have done for several; but thanks be to God, none happened in our time. We all
resolved to go except Mr. T. H. and one Englishman more, and a Dutchman, not
thinking the Bassa had been in earnest; but because they went not, they were
forced to pay ten Livers for nothing; we then came to Bethany, now a small
Village, where entering into a Grot under ground, we saw a Tomb; from whence
they say our Savior raised Lazarus, after he had been dead so many days; here
we had the Bassa's guard to wait upon us, for fear of the Arabs, who are on the
other side Jordan in the Land of Moab, and often make Incursions, and have
sharp disputes, at the end of the Lance, with those that live on this side, in
the land of Promise; The Bassa pretended, he must send fifty men with us, but
it proved but fourteen or sixteen. Having reposed a little on the ground, about
Nine at night, we mounted our Horses, and passing through the turning and
winding of the Mountains, came in the Morning to the foot of the Quarantine
Mountain, where we dismounted; and making the cold Earth our Bed, slept two or
three hours, having our Horses made fast to our Hands; and the Sun rising, we
rose also, and walked to Elisha's Fountain, a stones thro^ off; and before the
Sun was too hot, we mounted our Horses at the foot of the Mountain, and so
began to ascend, it being very steep; having ascended a great height, we came
to the place where they say our Savior slept, when he fasted forty days; and
from that the Mountain received its name; this place is near the height of the
Mountain but the passage to the top is known only to the Arabs; here is a
Church over this place, where some Fathers have lived, till they were murdered
by the Arabs. Below are several Cisterns of water, and Frontis pieces of
Chapels, but the passage to them is cut off; as we were going up, the thoughts
of the danger of descending, enters into our heads, and the E. of Germanies
Druggerman for these Country Languages, being fearful, got two Turks to conduct
him down, and so having all had a safe descent, we rode cheerfully back to
Elisha's Fountain, formerly bitter; but he throwing in a handful of salt, the
waters became sweet. Here we lay till four a Clock, and the heat of the Sun
being over, made for Jericho, arrived about five, where there are now only a
few poor Cottages: we pitched by Zacheus Tree. The Inhabitants are most
Arabians, and some few Greeks: here the Captain of the Village came to welcome
our Bassa and his people mounted upon a Mare, valued at a Thousand Livers,
Mares being only in esteem among them; here we reposed under a rotten hedge,
till about four next morning, having little pleasure in our companions, the
Gnats and other stinging creatures.

We proceed for the River Jordan arriving by day light, and tarried about an
hour to swim in the River; the stream is strong and rapid; and the force of a
Man can scarce resist it; it runs into the Dead Sea. Our Guard were very hasty
for us to be gone, being afraid their Enemies should find them; therefore we
all made ready and set forward for the Dead Sea; about two hours after in our
way to the Sea we passed through a most cursed, barren place, not having so
much as a green herb, or grass, and the face of the Earth was covered with
Salt; and though it was dry, yet our Horses sunk up to the Knees. We come now
to the Dead Sea, being about seventy or eighty Miles in breadth, and about
Eighteen over: There is no place Visible from whence the Water, which comes
into it, runs out again, except it be under the Earth; neither does it seem to
increase with the water of the River Jordan, and of several other Waters that
run into it: It was once a fruitful Valley, and compared, for delight, unto
Paradise, and called Pen^apolis, of her five Cities, but afterward destroyed
with fire from Heaven, and turned into this filthy Lake, and barren desolation
which does encompass it: and to try the virtue that is reported to be in the
water, wherein they say a man cannot sink, some of our Company went into the
Sea, and found it impossible to get their bodies under water, yea could hardly
keep their legs under; The Water is sulphury, and the extremity of the saltness
not to be expressed; when they came out, there was a perfect Oil upon their
bodies. Our Eyes being satisfied with Curiosities, and Rarities, we make what
haste we can back to Jerusalem: The Ruins of one of the Cities, that were
destroyed for Sodomy, now lies good part out of the water, and is supposed to
be Zeboim.

Now the Sun gets strength, and by reflection on the ground, makes the heat so
violent, that our faces looked as if the skin were flead off, by riding in the
Sun, from Morning till four afternoon; but the Fathers being accustomed, to
meet with tender faced Travelers, soon provided something to mitigate our
pain, which was much increased, by the saltness of the water of the Dead Sea:
this night we took little pleasure in eating, but more in sleeping, having had
but little in this Voyage. Having now visited all the places in the Holy Land,
which Pilgrims usually do, we prepare for our return.

June 9. We being resolved to set forward in the Morning, the Father Guardian
came and gave us his blessing, and sprinkled us with Holy Water, desiring us to
excuse our Bad Treatment, and that if at any time we had been distasted we
would pass it over; but we knew it was a complement, for we had the Civilest
Entertainment imaginable, and very far from disgusting us; for they were not
only ready to be our servants, but our slaves, yea, my honest name sake Father
Tomaso, never ceased from Morning to Night, from bringing us either Victuals or
Drink, or asking us whether we wanted any thing; and now for this his fourteen
days service, we were no ways capable to recompense him; for they would take no
money, but for our Victuals, and some other small services; we therefore
presented to the Convent, thirty Livers a piece, and some that had servants
more. The Father Procurator receiving it, they entered all our names in a Book,
and the sums we gave: the Book where the names only were written we had a view
of, and took a Copy of all the English-mens that were in it, from the year
1661. to this day, being 158 in number.

Now taking our leaves of the Fathers, they all showed great affection to us,
weeping, and expressing their desires, to enjoy our company longer; and our
desires were as much to be nearer home, to have an Account of our Friends.

June 4. we departed, our Mulletteers having provided us Horses; intending to
take Emaus in our way, but night drawing on, we made St. Ieroms Church our
sleeping place; formerly Fathers lived in it, but the Arabs came upon them in
the night, and cut all their Throats; The Church is well built, and has been
adorned with Pictures on the Wall, of which some remain to this day. About two
hours riding from Jerusalem, we passed over the brook, out of which they say,
David gathered the Pebble stones, to slay Goliath. June 5. we arrived at the
Convent in Ramah about ten in the Morning; where we tarried till midnight, at
which time there was a Ship to depart, and some of us intended to embarque; the
rest took a Boat like a Gravesend Barge; we put our provisions of Bread and
Wine aboard, and so put to Sea, keeping always near the shore for fear of a
Storm. After three days Sail, we arrived at Aerica, formerly called Ptolemais,
always coming to Anchor at night; this place is famous for nothing but the
ruins, the Road being so bad, that all the Art Captains have, can but keep
their Cables together. The Commodities in this place are only Cottons,
Potashes, and some Filletto's. Two days after we arrived at Trippoly, where we
made bold at our old House; the Consul receives us very gladly, and our design
was to depart next day, but the Plague still raging at Aleppo, the Consul
forced us to stay 12 or 14 days; all which time we were treated like Princes,
and then by his leave we imbarqued on a Dutch Ship for Scanderoon; the rest of
our Company (whom we left at Aerica to go to see the Sea of Galilee) being
arrived. June 26. we arrived at Scanderoon, where some were dead, and others
dying, and one flying from another. We tarried upon the Mount and aboard the
Ship for some time: and July 2d. we arrived at Aleppo: where there died at that
time, Seventy or Eighty of a day of the Plague. And thus ended our Journey.

A True Relation OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE GREAT COUNCIL OF THE JEWS, Assembled
in the Plains of Ajayday, in Hungaria, about 30 Leagues distant from Buda; to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. On the 12 th. of October, 1650. By
Samuel Brett (an Englishman) there present.
IT has been much desired by many honest Christians, that this Relation of the
Jews Council should be Published, which I did intend to Communicate only to my
private Friends. The chief Argument which persuaded me to do it, was, because
they conceived it to be a preparation, and hopeful sign of the Jews Conversion:
And that will be glad-Tydings to the Church of Christ: therefore I yielded to
satisfy their desires. And thus it was.

At the place abovesaid, there assembled about 300 Rabbis (called Jews) from
several parts of the World, to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. It
seems this place was thought most convenient for this Council, in regard, that
part of the Country is not much Inhabited, because of the continual Wars
between the Turk, and the King of Hungaria. There they have Fought formerly two
bloody Battles. Yet, both these Princes notwithstanding their own Differences,
did give leave to the Jews to hold their Council there. The Jews for their own
Accommodation, made diverse Tents for their repose, and had plenty of Provision
brought them, from other parts of the Country, during the time of their
sitting. The Jews making (as we said) diverse Tents, they set up one Large Tent,
only for the Council to sit in, being made almost apiece: the North and
South, not altogether so large, as the East and West part. It had but one Door,
and that opened to the Ea^t. In the middle of the Tent there stood a Table, and
a Stool for the Propounder to sit on, with his face toward the Door of the
Tent. The Propounder was of the Tribe of Levi, named Zacharias. And within this
Tent, round about, were placed Forms on which stood the rest of the Council.
They were enclosed with a Rail, at a distance from them; to prevent all
Strangers, and all such as could not prove themselves to be Jews by Record, or
dispute in the Hebrew Tongue: which many had forgotten, that lived in such
Countries, where they were not allowed their Synagogues: As in France, Spain,
and those parts of Italy, that belong to the K. of Spain, and the K. of Naples;
with the Province of Apulia, Sicilia, Calabria, and Sardinia: In which places,
if a Jew be found, and denies the Popish Religion, he is condemned, and
Executed for it: And yet Profit and Benefit allure them to dwell in those
Countries, notwithstanding their fears and dangers: And, they are willing
themselves to forget and neglect to teach their Children their Native Language,
rather than lose their opportunity of Profit. And again, some of those Jews
have burned the Ancient Records of their Tribes and Families, that they might
not be discovered, by searching, or otherways. And for this defect that they
could not prove their Tribe and Family, they were not permitted to come within
the Rails, in the time of their Council; but commanded to remain with the
Strangers that attended to see the Event of this Assembly. We conceive, the
Number of the People that attended, to see the Issue of their Proceedings, were
about Three Thousand Persons: the most part of them Germans, Almains,
Dalmatians, with some Greeks, and a few Italians, but not one Englishman more
than my self: For, I was informed that the K. of Hungary, not favoring the
Reformed Religion, did give no no Encouragement to any Protestant Churches, to
send any Divines thither. But, he did allow there should be some Assistants
sent from Rome; and, their coming thither proved a great unhappiness to this
hopeful Assembly or Council.

The FIRST Day, When the Assembly first met, they spent some time in mutual
Salutations, and as their manner is, kissed one another Cheeks: expressing
great joy for this their happy Meeting. And now, all things being prepared for
their Accommodation, they Considered of the Jews that were to be admitted for
Members of this Council; For they only were admitted to be Members, that could,
by Record, prove themselves to be Native Jews. And I observed, there were about
five hundred refused, and put by, though doubtless, they were true Jews yet
they could not, by Record, prove themselves so to be. And, for this were not
admitted to be Members of this Council, but commanded to abide without, among
the Strangers that attended there. The number of them that could prove
themselves Jews, by Record, were three hundred; who were accepted to sit in the
Council. And this was all that was done the first day.

The SECOND Day, the Assembly being full, the Propounder Zacharias, of the
Tribe of Levi stood up, and made a Speech, concerning the End of their Meeting.
And this (said he) is, To examine the Scriptures concerning Christ; whether he
be already come; or, whether we are to expect his coming? In examining this
Question, they searched the Old Testament, with great Care, and Labor, most
part of that day, to be resolved in the Truth; having many Bibles to that end.
About which Point began a dispute, that lasted many hours; which, at last,
drove to this Conclusion, That the Major part of this Assembly were of Opinion,
That Christ was not Come. But, some others of the Assembly, having strictly
Examined the Scriptures, and finding them so plain for his coming, were
inclined to think that Christ was come. Being the rasher moved so to think, by
the consideration of the great Judgment that has been upon them these 1600.
years. By reason whereof, they have been as a Cast-off and Vagabond People:
which consideration, pr^vailed so far upon many others, as drove them not only
to think, but to conclude, That Christ was come. I remember one of them in
Conference with others, seemed to be very apprehensive of the great and long
desolation of their Nation, ever since their Destruction by the Roman Empire;
and imputed their Afflictions to their Non-repenting of such a wickedness, as
to kill the Lord from Heaven. And comparing their present, with other
Judgments, which their Nation had suffered, he ingenuously confessed, he did
believe it was for some wickedness that their Nation was guilty of. And that
one of their great Sins he thought, was the spilling of the Blood of the
Prophet sent from God to their Nation, and so many Massacres that have been
committed by the several Sects, and Factions among them. For, said he, we are
no Idolaters, nor are we guilty of Idolatry: And therefore I think, we have not
had this heavy Judgment upon us for that; but, surely it is the spilling the
Blood of Jesus, the Prophet sent from God, and for Massacring those that loved
him. And this was the sum of what was Disputed the Second Day of their Meeting,
and so they ceased until the next morning.

The THIRD Day being Assembled together again, the Point chiefly agitated, was
concerning the Manner of Christ's Coming. And that (they said) should be like a
Mighty Prince, in the Power and Authority of a King: Yea, in greater power than
ever King had, And that he will deliver their Nation out of the Power of their
Adversaries; and restore them to their Kingdom again. And that the Nations
should be of their Religion; and Worship God after their Manner. For they held,
that the Messiah will not alter their Religion, whenever he comes. And
therefore began to conclude, That Christ was not come. For Jesus (said they)
the great Prophet, when he came, began to alter our Religion: therefore he was
not the true Messiah. And farther, when Jesus came, whom some call the True
Messiah, he began presently to pluck down our Religion, and set up his own:
therefore he was not the True Messiah. Thus some of them concluded. But some
did not. But they went from this Dispute to another, concerning his Parentage:
They did all agree in this, That he shall be born of a Virgin, according to the
Praedictions of the Prophets in the Old Testament. And in this also, That he
should be born of a Virgin, of mean Note and Parentage, among their Nation, as
was the Virgin Mary, that bare Jesus, the great Prophet from God. And, upon
this, many of them seemed to incline to think that Christ was come: but left it
to the next Day, when they should again Meet together.

The FOURTH Day; The Assembly being met, the Propounder demanded what they
thought, Whether Christ was come, or no? They said, They thought he was come.
But they Answered thus; That if he were come, he was no other than Elias:
because, Elias came formerly in great power, and with great power he declared
it, in slaying the Priests of Baal, and for fulfilling the Scriptures he was
opposed by Ahab and Iezebel. And so they esteemed this Man, whom they called
Jesus, to be that same Elias. Moreover, others said; That they thought he was
more than a Mortal Man in that he so strangely Ascended up into Heaven, which
some of our Forefathers saw; and this was all that was done on the Fourth Day.

The FIFTH Day, The Assembly being Met, they went about the same Question that
was Controverted the day before, and took it into Examination again to answer
them, that said Elias was not the Messiah. They of the contrary Opinion, did
argue the love and care of Elias, for the good of their Nation: That he left
them Elisha his Disciple, to teach, and instruct the People: And this they took
to be the care of the Messiah. These were their chief Arguments to maintain
their Opinion. The same day toward night, came into Question among them, what
then he was, that said, He was the Son of God: and was Crucified by their
Ancestors? But, because this was a Great Question among them they deferred the
farther Consideration thereof until the next day.

The SIXTH Day, there were some Pharisees, that stood up, who were the great
Enemies of Christ, and said, they would undertake to answer the last Question:
And would by no means yield, that he was The Christ. And these are the Reasons
they gave for their Opinion, viz. 1. Because he came into the World like an
ordinary and inferior Man; not with his Scepter, and Royal Power. For, they
affirmed, That the coming of Christ would be Glorious. 2. Reason they pleaded
against him, was the meanness of his Birth, in that his Father was a Carpenter,
and this (they said) was a dishonor of which, when Christ comes, he will not
be capable. 3. Reason; They accused him to be a False Christ, and an Enemy to
Moses Law, in doing, and suffering his Disciples to do unlawful Works on the
Sabbath Day. For, they believed (they said) that the True Messiah will exactly
keep the Law of Moses. Now, though it were replied, that the Gospel does
testify of Christ, that he did fulfill the Law of Moses; yet they rejected that
answer, because they did not believe, and own the Gospel. But these reasons did
not satisfy the Council, there still remaining doubts in them concerning
Christ.

So that, after the Pharisees had done speaking, there stood one up Rabbi
Abraham, and objected against the Pharisees, The Miracles that Christ wrought,
while he was upon the Earth, viz. The Raising of the Dead to life again; his
making the Lame to walk; the Blind to see; the Dumb to speak; by what Power I
pray you, my Brethren, did he them? With that the Pharisees arose, and desired
to answer him; and this is the answer they returned before the Council:
Perhaps, said they, this Jesus was an Impostor, and Magician, and so was
enabled to do those Miracles. And for our parts, we believe, that all the
Miracles he did, were done by Magic and Charms, whereby they were restored to
their former condition again. But, this answer gave little satisfaction to the
Council: and especially to Abraham: Whereupon Abraham stood up, and replied,
how could this Christ Charm them Blind, Lame and Dumb, etc. When they were so
born, before Jesus Christ himself was born; as it appeared some of them were.
This seemed a Paradox to the Pharisees. And truly, the prosecuting of this
Argument, almost put the Pharisees to a Nonplus: But, at last they began to
speak again, and gave this answer (though a weak and vile one) perhaps (say
they) the said Impotent Persons were made so, by other Magicians, and conjured
to be Lame, Blind, and Dumb, etc. And though himself were not then born, when
they were born with those evils, yet, this Jesus being a greater Dissembler,
and more cunning than any Magician before him, Power was given him by the
Devil, to remove those Charms which others had placed. But, there was one
Pharisee among the rest, named Zebedee, who, among all the Pharisees there
assembled, did most Opprobriously, and Blasphemously revile Christ; and
vehemently urged those things to the Council, against him: But, I conceive not
to the well liking of any that heard him, even of the Members of the Council,
or of the Pharisees. And, as the Pharisees played their part against Christ, so
did the Sadduces likewise: For, some of the Council were of that Sect, who did
endeavor to render Christ vile and odious to the the rest of the Jews.

I observed it to be with the Pharisees and Sadduces, as once it was with Herod
and Pilate: Though these two could not agree at other times, yet they could
agree together to Crucify Christ. So, the Pharisees and Sadduces, though they
be much divided in Opinion, among themselves, yet did they, at this time, too
too well agree to disgrace Christ, with their Lies, Clamours, and Blasphemies,
For, the Sadduces as well as the Pharisees, accused him for a Grand Impostor,
and Magician, in that, in his Gospel he taught the Resurrection from the Dead,
which (say they) we deny. But, it is no Miracle to see Factions agree in some
evil design against others, as I found by experience in 1650. (which was the
year of their Iubile.) At which time there was a great Strife between the
Jesuits, and the Friars of the Order of St. And though their Dissension has
been, by the care and vigilance of Pope, smothered over, that the World then
took not much notice; yet this Fire broke out again into a Flame, greater (as
they informed me) tha^ before; even to Public Disputations, and bitter
Wranglings, one against another, opening the deluge of Errors, and one another
Factions. Thus seeking to disgrace one another, the Pope threatened to
Excommunicate the Authors of all such black Libellous Books, tended to the
dishonor of the Clergy (as he called them) to make them infamous to the World.
But these things by the way.

The SEVENTH Day. We are now come to the Seventh day of their meeting; on which
this was the main Quaery, Whether if Christ were come, what Rules and Orders
has he left for his Church to walk by? This was a great Question among them,
because they did not believe the New Testament, and so would not be guided by
it: But demanded some other Instructions, to Direct them in this Point.
Whereupon six of the Roman Clergy, who were on purpose sent thither by the
Pope, to Advise in the Council, (two of which were Jesuits, and four were
Friars, two of the Order of St. Augustine, and two of the Order of St.
Francis,) being admitted into the Council, began to open to them the Doctrine,
and Rules of the Holy Church of Rome; which they Magnified to them for the Holy
Catholic Church of Christ and their Doctrines to be the Infallible Doctrine of
Christ, and their Rules to be the Rules which the Apostles left to the Church,
for ever to be observed. And that the Pope is the Holy Vicar of Christ, and the
Successor of St. Peter. For Particulars, they affirmed the Real Presence of
Christ in the Lords Supper; The Great Council of the Jews in Hungaria 1650.
Page.
the Religious Observation of their Holy Days the Invocation of Saints for
their Prayers to the Virgin Mary, and her commanding Power in Heaven over her
Son; the Holy use of their Cross and Images; with the rest of their Idolatrous
and Superstitious Worship: All which they recommended, for the Doctrine and
Rules of the Apostles.

But, so soon as the Assembly of the Jews: heard these things from them, they
were all exceedingly troubled thereat, and fell into high Clamours against
them; crying out, No Christ, No Virgin Mary, No Woman Gods, No Intercession of
the Saints, No Holy Crosses, No Worshipping of Images, etc. Their Grief and
Trouble was so great, that it would have troubled an hard heart to have seen,
and heard it: For, they rent their Clothes, and tore their Hair, and cast dust
upon their heads, and cried out, Blasphemy; Blasphemy, Blasphemy against
Jehovah, and Christ our King. And in this great Confusion, and Perplexity, the
Council brake up.

But being willing to do something, being yet unresolved, they assembled again
upon ^he EIGHTHDAY. And, all that was done upon that Day, was to agree upon
another meeting of the Jews which was to be ^hree years after; which was then
concluded upon, before their final departing.

I believe (says the Relater) there were many Jews there who would have been
easily persuaded to own the Lord Jesus Christ. And I assure it for truth (to
the hono^r of our Protestant Religion, and for the encouragement of our
Divines) that one of the Rabbis, eminent among them, did deliver unto me, in
conference, his opinion in this wise. 1. That he found at first that they who
were sent from Rome, would cause an unhappy prejudice to their Council. 2. That
(as he professed to me) he much desired the presence of some Protestant
Divines, at their Assembly; and especially of our English Ministers of whom he
had a greater liking than of any in the World beside. For, he did believe, we
had a great love to their Nation: And the Reason for his good opinion of our
Ministers* was (as he told me) That he had often heard that they do Pray
ordinarily for the Conversion of their Nation; which he did acknowledge to be a
great Token of their love toward them. Especially he commended the Ministers
of London, for their excellen^ Preaching, and for their Charity toward their
Nation, as he had heard by many Trave^lers. Moreover, he said, that he did
a^compt the Church of Rome to be an Idol^trous Church: And therefore will not
ow^ their Religion. But, by conversing with (...) other of the Jews, I found
they thought there was no other Christian Religion, in the World, than that of
the Church of Rome, and by the Romish Idolatry, they took offense at all
Christian Religion. Whence it does appear, that Rome is the greatest enemy of
the Jews Conversion.

Now, for the place of the Jews next Meeting, it was appointed to be in Syria:
In which Country I also was, and did converse with the Sect of the R^chabites:
who still observe their old Rules and Customs. They neither Plant, nor Sow, nor
Build Houses; but live in Tents; and often remove from place to place, with
their whole Families, Bag and Baggage. The Italian Tongue is much spread in the
World: And the Jews as frequently discourse in that Language, as their own. And
therefore I did converse with them, as well as if I could have spoken their own
Language. And if God give me leave and opportunity, I shall be willing to
attend their next Council, which will be in the year 1653. The Lord Prosper it.

Written by Me Samuel Brett.

A Brief Chronology Concerning the JEWS, From the Year of Christ 1650 to 1666.
HAving evidently seen in the foregoing Relation, what was Solemnly Acted (not
done in a Corner) in 1650, toward the Call of Israel; and how far many of the
said Council were brought over to acknowledge Christ our Messiah: And how much
further They and many Others of the Council, might have acknowledged Christ,
had not the Jesuits and Friars given them an Irreconcilable offense; pretending
the Rubbish of the Popish Religion, and Idolatrous Worship, to be the
Ordinances of Christ; there being not one Protestant Divine present to Balance
against them.

Ye have also heard what was Resolved upon, of the same Nature, to be Acted in
the year 1653. Of which though we cannot give a Relation (not knowing whether
Mr. Samuel Brett lived to that day, and had liberty to keep his Promise of
being there; or if he lived, whether he Wrote the Relation of that years
Meeting; or, whether the Man be yet alive) yet we have little cause to doubt
but the said Meeting (so Publicly and Solemnly appointed, and of so a grand
matter) was punctually Observed and Celebrated, according to the set Time and
Place; though we so remotely distant from them have not heard thereof. Yet this
we have heard, about that time, or presently after, That some ancient Rabbis
Cautioned their Countrymen, That, if their expected Messiah did not come in a
few years, thence following, they should embrace the Christian Messiah for the
True Messiah. And this also we can Affirm, that whatever came to pass about
that time, in order to the Call of the Jews, may well Comport with the Compute
of 1290 years, ( Dan. 12.) from the Ceasing of the Daily Sacrifice, if we place
that utter Cessation of that Sacrifice (at the foot of the Account, whence to
Commence) as Learned Bucholcerus does at the year 363. And ^hen (according to
this Compute) the 1290 ^ears expire, in the year of Christ 1653.

In the year 1658 April 19. We received Letter from a Religious and Learned
Hand, that one Rabbi Nathan Sephira, sent from Jerusalem to the Christian
Protestant Churches in Europe, to receive their Free Benevolence toward the
Relief of the Jews, then in distress, spoke as follows, I Profess (says he)
that the 53. of Isaiah is meant of the Messiah, who bare our Sins ever since
Adam. And for that of Christ's Doctrine, in the fifth, sixth, seventh, Chapters
of Matthew, he said, I acknowledge it to be the Head of all Wisdom: And whoever
walk according to it, are more Just than we. Of the Spirit of Messiah, he said,
it has appeared diverse times, as in Hezekiah, in Habakkuk; in our Jesus, whom
our Forefathers wrongfully put to Death; and that Sin lies upon us to this
day. And this profession (said he) I make, not only for my self, but for others
at Jerusalem, where the most Pious Jews are Dwelling: who with Fastings,
Watchings and other exercises of Penitency strive to Reconcile themselves and
the whole Nation to God. Thus far R. Nathan Sephira. Now this, and whatsoever
else happened about that year 1658, in order to the Jews Call, may also
competently Comport with the Compute of the 1290 years ( Dan. 12.) if we put
(as Learned Alsted does) the beginning of the said 1290 at the year of Christ
367. His words are these, Anno 367, Terrae motus ingens totum fere, etc. That
is to say; In the 367 year an huge Earthquake shook almost all the World. A
Deluge destroys Nicaea, and many Islands. A mighty Hail at Constantinople beats
down flat to the Earth many Men, and destroys them. Moreover the Temple at
Jerusalem Re-edifi^d by Julian the Apostate, Falls down, and is Burned by Fire
from Heaven. According to which Account, the 1290 years expire in the 1657. At
the heels whereof follows the story aforesaid, etc. in the year 1658.

Learned Functius puts the said Earthquake, Inundation, and Fiery Tempest
(destroying the Temple, and causing the utter Cessation of the daily Sacrifice)
at the year of Christ 369, which being added to 190 makes 1659.

If it be questioned, how Learned Men take this liberty, according to Truth, to
put the Cessation of the Daily Sacrifice so variously, as aforesaid; and so
make the Calculations, by the numbers added thereunto, to period so
differently? We Answer: It may be, in respect of the Cessation of the Daily
Sacrifice, caused by the Prodigious Judgments aforesaid, demolishing the New
Buildings of the Temple: both which must of necessity require a Latitude of
time, viz. A considerable time for the Re-building of the Temple so far, as
that it was (among Historians) accounted a Re-building. And a considerable time
is required for the fulfilling of those Judgments; as that consuming of the
Timber-Work, the overturning all the Stone-Work, and the making of the way
inaccessible by many other prodigious Judgments (as Bucholcerus asserts) which
ever and anon, at several times, detterred the Workmen from that Work. All
which must measure out a long time, from the Beginning of that Cessation, since
their Repulse at Mamre, and while preparing for, and Re-building that
structure, till with the destruction thereof, their utmost hope ever to
Sacrifice there any more, was totally and finally destroyed. And upon this
Account some may Calculate from the beginning of the Cessation, others from the
end thereof.

April. 13. 1663, came a Letter to me, from a Pious and Learned Hand, that he
had seen Letters from a Professor of the Hebrew Tongue, in a Famous Protestant
University: declaring, that certain Men of Note came to him, professing
themselves to be Jews in Blood, Nation, and Religion; saving that they did
acknowledge Jesus to be the Messiah: Asking Council of the said Professor,
about taking upon them Circumcision; who advising them, that his Nation (being
Protestants) would not suffer a Judaical Christian Religion among them: they
departed, and went to another Protestant Nation, where such a mingled Religion
is tolerated, though not approved.

In the same year 1663. September the fourth I received a Letter from a Learned
Man, who much converseth with many Jews and Rabbis; That how contemptible
soever the Jews may seem to be in their present miserable condition, yet for
all that, they are Witnesses unto the World, That there is indeed a God; yea,
and that there was a Christ, whom their Forefathers Crucified. A Man that did
great Miracles: And whom his Disciples held, was raised from the Dead, etc.

In the same year 1663, December I received a little Book, sent to me from the
Mart at Franckfort, called Judaeorum Excitabulum Matutinum; containing much
matter of the Call of the Jews approaching, as the said Title shows.

May 12. 1664. I received from a worthy Friend as follows: A certain Jew a
Rabbin, in whose company I was, does from that place of Isaiah 34.8. It is the
day of the Lords Vengeance, and the year of Recompenses, for the controversy
of Zion, infer, that therein seems to be pointed out the Year wherein the Lord
will begin to take in hand the cause of Zion; that he may render double to them
who have hitherto afflicted her. The Hebrew Word (says he) to express
Recompenses, is (...) Shillumim. It might have been sufficient to have said,
This is the day of Vengeance; unless the Holy Spirit had had a mind, couchedly
to Presignifie the year, viz. in what year of the Six Thousand, should begin
the great Sabbatism. And this the Holy Spirit Presignifies while it adjoyneth
to the word year, the word Shillumim the Numeral Letters of which word written
in Hebrew make 426. The present year 1663, from the Creation, is numbered by the
Jews to be 5424; to which, if ye add two years, ye have in the sixth Millenary
426. And if we number from the Birth of Christ, we have, after two years, the
number of the Beast. viz. 666. If any should say, This wants Solidity: I
Answer; This suits with my Purpose, viz. The expectation of the Jews Call ere
long. For, the occasion of this Calculation was that he undertook to praedict,
(as with a Prophetic Spirit, that, within two years a very great change would
befall the Jews, for good, or for ill. And being asked; whence he did collect
this, In answer to my question, he showed me the said place of Isa. 34.8. and
made upon it the aforesaid Calculation.

And thus I have brought the Reader down from 1650, to the brink of 1665;
giving him all along some Glimpses of the approaching call of the Jews (how
near we cannot positively say.) As for the present year 1665 (within 5 days now
expiring) I have not meddled with the occurrences thereof, because of them, Men's
Pockets are full of Letters; their Hands full of Gazets; their Ears full of
Reports and Tidings; and their Eyes sufficiently perceive the Jews cease
Trading, pack up, and are marching. Upon the consideration of the whole, I
conclude with Daniel in relation to Isreal's Call, Chapter 12.10. The wise shall be
purified and shall understand: But the Wicked shall do wickedly, and none of
them shall understand. Therefore I bid thee, Reader, Farewell, with this;

Be not DECEIVED; one lately did advise*
Beware, say I, Christ's Day does none SURPRISE
Postscript.
AS by the preceding Account we may observe what thoughts and expectations
diverse well meaning Christians had of the call and return of the Jews in the
year 1666. and particularly of the noise that was made in the World by the
pretended Messiah Sabatai Sevi, who just about that time impudently assumed to
himself that title, and declared that he was come to deliver the Jews from
slavery, and carry them to Jerusalem, there to reign over them; so the
following Relation gives a Clear and Impartial Account of the actions, and
death of that vain Impostor, and the Scandal which the Jews brought upon
themselves by their fond and easy Credulity, and it may likewise serve as a
remembrance to all sober men that secret things belong only to God, and
Revealed to man, that we may keep his Laws. The Author hereof is an English
Gentleman of Quality, and a Person who was in that Station, as to be capable of
thoroughly informing himself of the truth of all Particulars and it may
therefore Challenge the Credit of the most Captious Reader.

THE Counterfeit Messiah OR False Christ OF THE JEWS AT SMYRNA, In the year
1666. written by an English Person of Quality there Resident.
ACcording to the Predictions of several Christian Writers, especially of such
who Comment on the Apocalypse, or Revelations, this Year 1666, was to prove a
Year of Wonders, and strange Revolutions in the World, and particularly of
Blessings to the Jews, either in respect of their Conversion to the Christian
Faith, or of their Restoration to their Temporal Kingdoms: This Opinion was so
dilated, and fixed in the Countries of the Reformed Religion, as to the downfall
of the Pope and Antichrist, and the greatness of the Jews, in so much, that
this subtle People judged this Year the time to stir, and to fit their Motion
according to the season of the Modern Prophecies; whereupon strange Reports
flew from place to place of the March of Multitudes of People from unknown
parts into the remote Deserts of Arabia, supposed to be the Ten Tribes and
half, lost for so many Ages. That a Ship was arrived in the Northern parts of
Scotland with her Sails and Cordage of Silk. Navigated by Mariners who spoke
nothing but Hebrew; with this Motto on their Sails, The Twelves Tribes of
Israel. These Reports agreeing thus near to former Predictions, put the wild
sort of the World into an expectation of strange Accidents, this year should
produce in reference to the Jewish Monarchy.

In this manner Millions of People were possessed, when Sabatai Sevi first
appeared at Smyrna and published himself to the Jews for their Messiah,
relating the greatness of their approaching Kingdom, the strong hand whereby
God would free from bondage and gather them from all parts of the World. It was
strange to see how the fancy took, and how fast the report of Sabatai and his
Doctrine flew through all parts where Turks and Jews inhabited, the latter of
which were so deeply Possessed with a belief of their new Kingdom, and Riches,
and many of them with promotion to Offices of Government, Renown, and
Greatness, that in all parts from Constantinople to Buda (which it was my
fortune that year to Travel) I perceived a strange transport in the Jews, none
of them attending to any business unless to wind up former negotiations, and to
prepare themselves and Families for a Journey to Jerusalem: All their
Discourses, their Dreams and disposal of their Affairs tended to no other
Design but a re-establishment in the Land of Promise, to Greatness, Glory,
Wisdom, and Doctrine of the Messiah, whose Original, Birth, and Education are
first to be recounted.

Sabatai Sevi was Son of Mordechai Sevi an Inhabitant, and Natural of Smyrna,
who gained his Livelihood by being Broaker to an English Merchant in that
place; a person who before his death was very decrepit in his Body and full of
the Gout, and other Infirmities, but his Son Sabatai Sevi addicting himself to
Study, became a notable Proficient in the Hebrew and Metaphysics; and arrived
to that point of Sophistry in Divinity and Metaphysics, that he vented a New
Doctrine in their Law, drawing to the Profession of it so many Disciples as
raised one day a Tumult in the Synagogue; for which afterward he was by a
Censure of the Chochams (who are Expounders of the Law) banished the City.

During the time of his Exile, he Traveled to Thessalonica, now called
Salonica, where he Married a very handsome Woman; but either not having that
part of Economy as to govern a Wife, or being Impotent toward Women, as was
pretended, or that she found not favor in his Eyes, she was divorced from him:
Again he took a second Wife, more beautiful than the former, but the same
causes of discontent raising a difference between them, he obtained another
Divorce from this Wife also. And being now free from the Encumbrances of a
Family, his wandering head moved him to Travel through the Morea thence to
Trippoly in Syria, Gaza, and Jerusalem; and by the way picked up a Ligorness
Lady, whom he made his third Wife, the Daughter of some Polonian or German, her
Original and Parentage not being very well known. And being now at Jerusalem he
began to Reform the Law of the Jews, and Abolish the Fast of Tamuz (which they
keep in the Month of June) and there meeting with a certain Jew called Nathan,
a proper Instrument to promote his Design, he communicated to him his
Condition, his Course of Life, and Intentions to Proclaim himself Messiah of
the World, so long expected and desired by the Jews. This Design took
wonderfully with Nathan; and because it was thought necessary according to
Scripture, and Ancient Prophesies, that Elias was to precede the Messiah, as
St. John Baptist was the forerunner of Christ, Nathan thought no man so proper
to Act the part of the Prophet as himself; and so no sooner had Sabatai
declared himself the Messiah, but Nathan discovers himself to be his Prophet,
forbidding all the Fasts of the Jews in Jerusalem, and declaring, that the
Bridegroom being come, nothing but Joy, and Triumph ought to dwell in their
Habitations: Writing to all the Assemblies of the Jews, to persuade them to the
same belief.

And now the Schism being begun, and many Jews really believing what they so
much desired, Nathan took the courage and boldness to Prophecy, That one Year
from the 27th of Kisleu, (which is the month of June) the Messiah shall appear
before the Grand Signior, and take from him his Crown, and lead him in Chains
like a Captive.

Sabatai also at Gaz^ Preached Repentance to the Jews, and Obedience to himself
and Doctrine, for that the coming of the Messiah was at hand: which Novelties
so affected the Jewish Inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up themselves
wholly to their Prayers, Alms, and Devotions; and to confirm this belief the
more, it happened, that at the same time News hereof, with all particulars were
dispatched from Gaza, to acquaint the Brethren in Foreign Parts: The Rumor of
the Messiah was flown so swift, and gained such reception, that intelligence
came from all Parts and Countries where the Jews inhabited by Letters to Gaza,
and Jerusalem, Congratulating the happiness of their Deliverance, and
expiration of the time of their Servitude, by the Appearance of the Messiah. To
which they adjoined other Prophesies, relating to that Dominion the Messiah was
to have over all the World: that for 9 Months after he was to disappear; during
which time the Jews were to suffer, and many of them to undergo Martyrdom: but
then returning again Mounted on a Celestial Lion, with his Bridle made of
Serpents with seven heads, accompanied with his Brethren the Jews, who
Inhabited on the other side of the River Sabatian, he should be acknowledged
for the Sole Monarch of the Universe; and then the Holy Temple should descend
from Heaven already built, framed, and beautified, wherein they should offer
Sacrifice for ever.

And here I leave you to consider, how strangely this deceived People was
Amused, when these Confident, and vain Reports, and Dreams of Power, and
Kingdoms, had wholly transported them from the ordinary course of their Trade,
and Interest.

This noise and rumor of the Messiah, having begun to fill all places; Sabatai
Sevi resolved to Travel toward Smyrna, the Country of his Nativity; and thence
to Constantinople the Capital City, where the principal Work of Preaching was
to have been performed: Nathan thought it not fit to belong after him, and
therefore Travels by the way of Damascus, where resolving to continue some time
for better Propagation of this new Doctrine; in the mean while Writes the
following Letter to Sabatai Sevi.

22. Kesvan of this year.
To the King, our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the Dispersed of Israel,
who Redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the height of all sublimity,
the Messiah of the God of Jacob, the true Messiah, the Caelestial Lion, Sabatai
Sevi, whose Honor be exalted, and his Dominion raised in a shor^ time, and for
ever, Amen. After having kissed your hands, and swept the Dust from your Feet,
as my Duty is to the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted and his Empire
enlarged: These are to make known to the Supreme Excellency of that Place,
which is Adorned with the Beauty of your Sanctity, that the Word of the King,
and of his Law, has enlightened our Faces: that day has been a solemn day
unto Israel and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we applied our
selves to perform your Command, as our duty is. And though we have heard of
many strange things, yet we are courageous, and our heart is as the heart of a
Lion; nor ought we to enquire a reason, of your doings, for your Works are
mavelous, and past finding out, and we are confirmed in our Fidelity without
all exception, resigning up our very Souls for the holiness of your Name: And
now we are come as far as Damascus, intending shortly to proceed in our Journey
to Scanderoon, according as you have commanded us; that so we may ascend and
see the Face of God in light, as the light of the Face of the King of Life: And
we, servants of your servants, shall cleanse the dust from your feet,
beseeching the Majesty of your Excellency and Glory to vouchsafe from your
habitation to have a care of us, and help us with the Force of your Right Hand
of strength, and shorten our way which is before us: And we have our Eyes
toward Iah, Iah, who will make haste to help us, and save us, that the
Children of Iniquity shall not hurt us, and toward whom our hearts pant, and
are consumed within us: who shall give us Tallons of Iron to be worthy to stand
under the shadow of your Ass. These are the words of the servant of your
servants, who prostrates himself to be trod on by the soles of your feet,

Na^han Benjamine.


And that he might Publish this Doctrine of himself, and the Messiah more
plainly, he Wrote from Damascus this following Letter, to the Jews at Aleppo,
and parts thereabouts.

To the Residue or Remnant of the Israelites, Peace without end.
THese my words are to give you notice, how that I am arrived in peace at
Damascus, and behold I go to meet the Face of our Lord, whose Majesty be
exalted, for he is the Sovereign of the King of Kings, whose Empire be
enlarged. According as he has Commanded us and the 12 Tribes to elect unto him
12 Men, so have we done: And we now go to Scanderoon by his command, to show
our faces together with part of the principal of those particular Friends to
whom he has given License to assemble in that same place* And now I come to
make known unto you, that though you have heard strange things of our Lord, yet
let not your hearts ^aint, or fear, but rather, fortify your selves in your
Faith, because all his Actions are Miraculous, and Secret, which Humane
understanding cannot comprehend; and who can penetrate into the depth of them.
In a short time all things shall be Manifested to you clearly in their Purity:
and you shall know, and consider, and be instructed by the Inventor himself;
Blessed is he who can expect, and arrive to the Salvation of the true Messiah,
who will speedily publish his Authority and Empire over us now, and for ever.

Nathan Benjamine.


And now all the Cities of Turkey where the Jews Inhabited were full of the
expectation of the Messiah; no Trade nor course of Gain was followed; every one
imagined that daily Provisions, Riches, Honors, and Government, were to
descend upon them by some unknown and Miraculous manner: an Example of which is
most observable in the Jews at Thessalonica, who now full of Assurance that the
Restoration of their Kingdom, and the accomplishment of the time for the coming
of the Messiah was at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their
Devotions, and Purify their Consciences from all Sins and Enormities which
might be obvious to the scrutiny of him who was now come to Penetrate into the
very Thoughts and Imaginations of Mankind: In which Work certain Chochams or
Priests were appointed to direct the People how to Regulate their Prayers,
Fasts, and other Acts of Devotion. But so forward was every one now in his Acts
of Penance, that they stayed not for the Sentence of the Chocham, or
prescription of any Rules, but applied themselves immediately to Fasting: And
some in that manner beyond the abilities of Nature, that having for the space
of seven days taken no sustenance, were famished to death. Others buried
themselves in their Gardens, covering their naked Bodies with Earth, their
heads only excepted, remained in their Beds of dirt until their Bodies were
stiffned with the cold and moisture: others would endure to have mel^ed Wax
drop^ upon their shoulders, others to roll themselves in Snow, and throw their
Bodies in the Coldest season of Winter into the Sea, or Frozen Waters. But the
most common way of Mortification was first to prick their Backs and Sides with
Thorns, and then to give themselves thirty nine Lashes. All business was laid
aside, none wrought, or opened Shop, unless to clear his Warehouse of
Merchandise at any Price: who had superfluity in Housholdstuff, sold it for
what he could; but yet not to Jews, for they were Interdicted from Bargains or
Sales on the pain of Excommunication, Pecuniary Mulcts, or Corporal
Punishments; all Business and Employment was esteemed for the Test, and
Touchstone of their Faith. It being the general Tenent, that in the days that
the Messiah appears, the Jews shall become Masters of the Estates and
Inheritance of Infidels; until when they are to content themselves with matters
only necessary to maintain and support Life; but because every one was not
Master of so much Fortune and Provision, as to live without daily Labor,
therefore to quiet the Clamours of the Poor, and prevent the Enormous lives of
some, who upon these occasions would become Vagabonds, and desert their Cities,
due order was taken to make Collections, which were so liberally bestowed that
in Thessalonica only, 400 Poor were supported by the mere Charity of the
Richer. And as they endeavored to purge their Consciences of Sin, and to apply
themselves to good Works, that the Messiah might find the City prepared for his
Reception; so lest he should accuse them of any omission in the Law, and
particularly in their neglect of that Ancient Precept of Increase and Multiply;
they married together Children of ten years of age, and some under, without
respect to Riches, or Poverty, Condition or Quality: But, being promiscuously
joined to the number of 6 or 700 Couple, upon better and cooler thoughts, after
the deceit of the false Messiah was discovered, or the expectation of his
Coming grew cold, were Divorced, or by Consent separated from each other.

In the heat of all this Talk and Rumor comes Sabatai Sevi to Smyrna, the City
of his Nativity, infinitely desired there by the common Jews; but by the
Chochams, or Doctors of their Law, who gave little or no credence to what he
pretended, was ill received, not knowing what mischief or ruin this Doctrine
and Prophecy of a New Kingdom might produce. Yet Sabatai bringing with him
testimonials of his Sanctity, Holy Life, Wisdom and gift of Prophecy, so
deeply fixed himself in the heart of the Generality, both as being Holy and
Wise, that thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into Dispute with
the Grand Chocham (who is the head, and Chief Expositor of the Law and
super-intendent of their Will and Government) between whom the Arguments grew
so high, and Language so hot, that the Jews who favored the Doctrine of
Sabatai, and feared the Authority of the Chochams, doubtful what might be the
issue of the Contest, appeared in great numbers before the Cadi of Smyrna, in
justification of their New Prophet, before so much as any Accusation came
against him. The Cadi (according to the Custom of the Turks,) swallows Money on
both sides, and afterward remits them to determination of their own Justice.
In this manner Sabatai gains ground daily; and the Grand Chocham with his
Party, losing both the affection and obedience of his People, is displaced from
his Office, and another Constituted, more affectionate, and ^^greeable to the
New Prophet, whose power daily increased by those confident Reports, That his
Enemies were struck with Phrensies and Madness, until being restored to their
former temper and wits by him, they became his Friends, Admirers, and
Disciples. No Invitation was now made in Smyrna by the Jews, nor Marriage, or
Circumcision solemnized, where Sabatai was not present, accompanied with a
multitude of his followers, and the Streets covered Carpets, or fine Cloth for
him to tread on; but the Humility of this Pharisee appeared such that he would
stoop and turn them aside, and so pass. And having thus fixed himself in the
Opinion and Admiration of the People, he began to take on himself the Title of
Messiah, and the Son of God, and to make this following Declaration to all the
Nation of the Jews, which being writ Originally in Hebrew is thus translated
into English.

THE only, and firstborn Son of God, Sabatai Sevi, the Messiah and Savior of
Israel, to all the Sons of Israel, peace. Since that you are made worthy to see
that great Day of Deliverance, and Salvation unto Israel, and Accomplishment of
the word of God, Promised by his Prophets, and our Forefathers, and by his
beloved Son of Israel: let your bitter sorrows be turned into Joy, and your
Fasts into Festivals, for you shall weep no more, O my Sons of Israel, for God
having given you this unspeakable comfort, rejoice with Drums, Organs, and
Music, giving thanks to him for performing his Promises from all Ages; doing
that every day, which is usual for you to do upon the New Moons; and, that Day
Dedicated to affliction and sorrow convert you into a Day Mirth for my
appearance: and fear you nothing, for you shall have Dominion over the Nations,
and not only over these who are on Earth but over those Creatures also which
are in the depth of the Sea: All which is for your Consolation and Rejoicing.

Sabatai Sevi.


Notwithstanding the Disciples of Sabatai Sevi were not so numerous, but many
opposed his Doctrine, publicly avouching that he was an Impostor, and
Deceiver of the people, amongst which was one Samuel Pennia, a man of a good
estate and reputation in Smy^na, who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present
signs of the coming of the Messiah were not apparent, either according to
Scripture, or the Doctrine of the Rabbis, raised such a sedition and tumult
amongst the Jews, as not only prevailed against arguments, but had also against
his life, had he not timely conveyed himself out of the Synagogue, and thereby
escaped the hands of the multitude, who now could more easily endure Blasphemy
against the Law of Moses, and the profanation of the Sanctuary, than
contradiction, of mis-belief of the doctrine of Sabatai. But howsoever it fell
out, Pennia in a short time becomes a Convert, and pr^^ches up Sabatai for the
Son of God, and Deliverer of the Jews: and not only he, but his whole family;
his daughters prophecy, and fall into strange ecstasies; and not only his own
House, but four hundred men and women prophecy of the growing Kingdom of
Sabatai, and young infants who could yet scarce stamm^ out a syllable to their
mothers, repeat and pronounce plainly the name of Sabatai the Messiah, and Son
of God. For thus far had God permitted the Devil to delude this people, that
their very children were for a time possessed, and voices heard to sound from
their stomachs, and intrails: those of riper years fell first into a trance,
foamed at the mo^th, and recounted the future prosperity, and deliverance of
the Isra^lites, their visions of the Lion of Judah, and the triumphs of
Sabatai, all which were certainly true, being effects of Diabolical delusions:
as the Jews themselves since have confessed unto me.

With these concomitant accidents, and successes, Sabatai Sevi growing more
presumptuous, that he might correspond with the Prophesies of the greatness,
and dominion of the Messiah, proceeds to an Election of those Princes which
were to govern the Israelites in their march toward the Holy Land, and to
dispense Judgment and Justice after their Restoration. The names of them were
these which follow, men well known at Smyrna, who never (God knows) had
ambition to aspire to the ti^le of Princes, until a strange spirit of deceit
and delusion had moved them, not only to hope sor it as possible, but to expect
it as certain.

Isaac Silvera. King David. Solomon Lagnado. was Solomon. Salom. Lagn^do jun.
named Quovah. Joseph Cophen. Vzziah. Moses Galente. Iosaphat. Daniel Pinto.
Hilkiah. Abraham Scandale. Iotham. Mokiah Gaspar. Zedekiah.
The Counterfeit Messiah of the Jews at Smyrna 1666 Page.


Abraham-Leon. Achas. Ephraim Arditi. Ioram. Salom. Carmona. Achab. Mat^ssia
Aschenesi. Asa. Meir Alcaira. Rehoboam. Jacob Loxas. Ammon. Mordecai Iesserun.
Iehoachim. Chain Inegna. Jeroboam. Joseph Scavilla. Abia Conor Nehemias. was
Zorobabel. Joseph del Caire. named Ioas. Elcukin Schavit. Amasia. Abraham
Rubio. Josiah.
Elias Sevi had the title of the King of the Kings of Kings.

Elias Azar his Vice king, or Vizier. Joseph Sevi, the King of the Kings of
Judah. Joseph Inernuch his Vice-king.
In this manner things ran to a strange height of madness amongst the Jews at
Smyrna, where appeared such pageantry of grea^ness, that no Comedy could equal
the mock-shews they represented; and though none durst openly profess any
scruple, or doubt of this common received belief, yet for confirmation of the
Jews in their Faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, it was judged no less
than necessary that Sabatai should show some miracles whereby to evince to all
the World that he was the true Messiah: and as the present occasion seemed to
require an evidence infallible of this truth, so it was daily expected by the
vulgar, with an impatience suitable to humors disposed to Novelty; who out of
every action and motion of their Prophet began to fancy something extraordinary
and supernatural. Sabatai was now horribly puzzled for a Miracle, though the
imagination of the people was so vitiated that any Legerdemain or slight of
hand would have passed more easily with them for a wonder than Moses striking
the rock for water, or dividing the Red Sea: And an occasion happening that
Sabatai was, in behalf of his Subjects, to appear before the Cadi, or Judge of
the City, to demand ease, and relief of some oppressions which aggrieved them:
It was thought necessary a Miracle should now or never, when Sabatai appearing
with a formal and Pharisaical gravity, which he had starcht on: Some on a
sudden avouched to see a Pillar of fire between him and the Cadi, which report
presently was heard through the whole room, filled with Jews that accompanied
Sabatai, some of whom, who strongly fancied it, vowed, and swore they saw it;
others in the outward yard, or that could not come near to hear, or see for the
crowd, as speedily ^ook the Alarm, and the rumor ran, and belief received by
the Women and Children at home in a moment, so that Sabatai Sevi returned to
his House Triumphant, fixed in the hearts of his People, who now needed no
surther Miracles to confirm them in their Faith* And thus was Sabatai exalted,
when no man was thought worthy of communication, who did not believe him to be
the Messiah: others were called Kophrim, Infidels, or Heretics, liable to the
Censure of Excommunication, with whom it was not lawful so much as to eat:
every man produced his Treasure, his Gold and Jewels, offering them at the feet
of Sabatai, so that he could have commanded all all the wealth of Smyrna, but
he was too subtle to accept their money, lest he should render his design
suspected by any act of covetousness. Sabatai Sevi having thus fully fixed
himself in Smyrna, and filled other places with rumors of his fame; declared
that he was called by God to visit Constantinople, where the greatest part of
his work was to be accomplished; in order whereunto, he privately ships himself,
with some few Attendants in a Turkish Saick, in the Month of January 1666. lest
the crowd of his Disciples, and such who would press to follow him, should
endanger him in the Eyes of the Turks, who already began to be scandalized at
the reports and Prophesies concerning his person. But though Sabatai took few
into the Vessel to him, yet a multitude of Jews traveled over land to meet him
again at Constantinople, on whom all their Eyes and Expectations were intent.
The Wind proving Northernly, as commonly it is in the Hellespont and Propontis;
Sabatai was thirty nine days in his Voyage, and yet the Vessel not arrived, so
little power had this Messiah over the Sea and Winds, in which time news being
come to Constantinople that the Jews Messiah was near, all that people prepared
to receive him with the same Joy and Impatience as was expressed in other parts
where he arrived; the great Vizier (then also at Constantinople, being not yet
departed on his expedition for Candia) having heard some rumors of this man,
and the disorder and madness he had raised amongst the Jews; sent two Boats,
whilst the Saick was detained by contrary winds, with commands to bring him up
Prisoner to the Port, where accordingly Sabatai being come, was committed to
the most loathsome and darkest Dungeon in in the Town, there to remain in
farther expectation of the Viziers sentence, The Jews were not at all
discouraged at this ill treatment of their Prophet, but rather confirmed in
their belief of him, as being the accomplishment of the prophecy of those
things which ought to precede his glory and dominion; which consideration
induced the chiefest persons amongst the Jews to make their visits and
addresses to him with the same ceremony and respect in the Dungeon as they
would have done had he then sat exalted on the throne of Israel: several of
them, with one Anacago, by name, a man of great esteem amongst the Jews,
attended a whole day before him* with their Eyes cast down, their Bodies
bending forward, and Hands crossed before them (which are postures of humility,
and service in the Eastern Countries) the undecency of the place, and present
subjection, not having in the least abated their high thoughts, and reverence
toward his person. The Jews in Constantinople were now become as mad and
distracted as they were in other places, all trade and traffic forbidden, and
those who owed money, in no manner careful how to satisfy it: amongst which
wild crew some were indebted to our Merchants at Galata, who not knowing the
way to receive their money, partly for their interest, and partly for curiosity
thought fit to visit this Sabatai complaining that such particular Jews, upon
his coming, took upon them the boldness to defraud them of their right, desired
he would signify to these his Subjects, his pleasure to have satisfaction
given: whereupon Sabatai with much affectation took Pen and Paper, and wrote to
this effect.

TO you of the Nation of the Jews, who expect the appearance of the Messiah,
and the Salvation of Israel, Peace without end. Whereas we are informed that
you are indebted to several of the English Nation: It seems right unto us to
enorder you to make satisfaction to these your just debts: which if you refuse
to do, and not obey us herein: Know you, that then you are not to enter with us
into our Joys and Dominions.

In this manner Sabatai Sevi remained a Prisoner at Constantinople for the
space of two Months; at the end of which the Vizier having designed his
expedition for Candia; and considering the rumor and disturbance the presence
of Sabatai had made already at Constantinople* thought it not secure to suffer
him to remain in the Imperial City, whilst both the Grand Signior and himself
were absent: and therefore changes his Prison to the Dardanelli, otherwise
called the Castle of Abydos, being on the Europe side of the Hellespont
opposite to Sestos, places famous in Greek Poetry. This removal of Sabatai from
a worse Prison to one of a better air, confirmed the Jews with greater
confidence of his being the Messiah, supposing that had it been in the power of
the Vizier, or other Officers of the T^rks, to have destroyed his person, they
would never have permitted him to have lived to that time, in regard their
Maxims enforce them to quit all jealousies and suspicions of ruin to their
state by the death of the party feared, which much rather they ought to execute
on Sabatai, who had not only declared himself the King of Israel, but also
published Prophesies fatal to the Grand Signior and his Kingdoms.

With this consideration and others preceding, the Jews flock in great number
to the Castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the neighboring parts,
but also from Polana, Germany, Legorn, V^nice, Amsterdam, and other places
where the Jews reside: on all whom, as a reward of the expense, and labors of
their pilgrimage, Sabatai bestowed plenty of his benedictions, promising
increase of their store and enlargement of their Possessions in the Holy Land.
And so great was the confluence of the Jews to this place, that the Turks
thought it requi^ite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only raised
the price of their Provision, Lodgings, and other Necessaries, but also denied
to admit any to the presence of Sabatai, unless for money, setting the price
sometimes at five, sometimes at ten Dollars, or more or less a^cording as they
guessed at their abilities, or zeal of the person, by which gam and advantage
to the Turks no complaints or advices were carried to Adrianople, either of the
concourse of people, or arguments amongst the Jews in that place, but rather
all civilities, and liberty indulged unto them, which served as a farther
Argument to ensnare this poor people in the belief of their Messiah.

During this time of confinement, Sabatai had leisure to compose and institute
a new method of Worship for the Jews, and principally the manner of the
celebration of the day of his Nativity, which he prescribed in this manner.

BRethren and my People, men of Religion inhabiting the City of Smyrna the
renowned, where live men, and women, and families; Peace be unto you from the
Lord of Peace, and from me his beloved Son, King Solomon. I command you that
the ninth day of the Month of Ab (which according to our account answered that
year to the Month of June) next to come, you make a day of Invitation, and of
great joy, celebrating it with choice meats and pleasing drinks, with many
Candles and Lamps, with Mu^ick and Songs, because it is the day of the Birth of
Sabatai Sevi, the high King above all Kings of the Earth. And as to matters of
labor, and other things of like nature, do, as becomes you, upon a day of
Festival, adorned with your finest Garments. As to your Prayers, let the same
order be used as upon Festivals. To converse with Christians on that day is
unlawful, though your Discourse be matters indifferent, all labor is
forbidden, but to sound instruments is lawful. This shall be the method and
substance of your Prayers on this day of Festival: After you have said, Blessed
be thou, O holy God! then proceed and say thou have chosen us before all
people, and have loved us, and have been delighted with us, and have humbled us
more than all other Nations, and have sanctified us with thy Precepts, and have
brought us near to thy service, and the service of our King. Thy holy, great,
and terrible Name thou have published amongst us: and have given us, O Lord
God, according to thy love times of joy, of Festivals, and times of Mirth, and
this day of Consolation for a solemn Convocation of Holiness, for the Birth of
our King the Messiah, Sabatai Sevi thy servant, and first born son in love,
through whom we commemorate our coming out of Egypt. And then you shall read
for your lessons, 1, 2, and 3. Chapters of Deuteronomy. to the 17. verse, appointing
for the reading thereof five men in a perfect and uncorrupted Bible, adding
thereunto the Blessings of the Morning, as are prescribed for days of Festival,
and for the Lesson out of the Prophets usually read in the Synagogue every
S^^bath; you shall read the 31 Chapter of Jeremiah. To your Prayer called
Mustas (used in the Synagogue every Sabbath and solemn Festival) you shall
adjoyn that of the present Festival; In stead of the Sacrifice of Addition, of
the returning of the Bible to its place, you shall read with an Audible Voice,
Clear Sound, the Psalm 95. And at the first Praises in the Morning, after you
have sung Psalm 91. and just before you sing Psalm 98, you shall repeat Psalm
132. but in the last Verse, where it is said, As for his Enemies I shall cloth
them with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish; in the place of (
upon himself) you shall read upon the most High: after which shall follow the
126. Psalm, and then the 113. to the 119.

At the Consecration of the Wine upon the Vigil, or Eve, you shall make mention
of the Feast of Consolation, which is the day of the Birth of our King the
Messiah Sabatai Sevi thy Servant, and first born Son, giving the Blessing as
follows: Blessed be thou our God, King of the World, who have made us to
live, and have maintained us, and have kept us alive unto this time. Upon the
Eve of this day you shall Read also the 81 Psalm, as also the 132. and 126.
Psalms, which are appointed for the Morning Praises. And this day shall be unto
you for a Remembrancer of a Solemn Day unto eternal Ages, and a perpetual
testimony between me, and the Sons of Israel.

Audite Audiendo and manducate bonum.
In hearing hear, and enjoy good.
Besides which Order, and Method of Pray^^s for Solemnization of his Birth, he
prescribed other Rules for Divine Service, and particularly published the same
Indulgence and Privilege to every one who should Pray at the Tomb of his
Mother; as is he had taken on him a Pilgrimage to Pray, and Sacrifice at
Jerusalem.

The Devotion of the Jews toward this pretended Messiah increased still more
and more, so that not only the Chief of the City went to attend, and proffer
their service toward him in the time of his Imprisonment, but likewise decked
their Synagogue with S. S. in Letters of Gold, making for him on the Wall a
Crown, in the Circle of which was wrote the 91 Psalm at length in fair and
legible Characters; attributing the same titles to Sabatai, and Expounding the
Scriptures in the same manner in favor of his Appearance, as we do of our
Savior. However some of the Jews rem^ined in their Wits all this time, amongst
which was a certain Chocham at Smyrna, one zealous of his Law, and of the good
and safety of his Nation: and observing in what a wild manner the whole People
of the Jews was transported with the groundless belief of a Messiah, leaving no
tonly their Trade, and co^rse of living, but publishing Prophesies of a speedy
Kingdom, of rescue from the Tyranny of the Turk, and leading the Grand Signior
himself Cap^ive in Chains; matters so dangerous and obnoxious to the State
wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of Treason and Rebellion, and
leave them to the mercy of that Justice, which on the least jealousy and
suspicion of Matters of this nature, uses ^o extirpate Families, and subvert
the Mansion hou^es of their own People, much rather of the Jews, on whom the
Turks would gladly take occasion to despoil them of their Estates, and condemn
the whole Nation to perpetual slavery. And indeed it would have been a greater
wonder than ever Sabatai showed, that the Turks took no advantage from all
these extravagances, to drain the Jews of a considerable Sum of money, and set
their whole Race in Turkey at a Ransom, had not these Passages yielded them
matter of Pastime, and been the Subject of the Turks Laughter and Scorn;
supposing it a Dissparagement to the greatness of the Ottoman Empire, to be
concerned for the R^^ors and Combustions of this dispersed People. With these
considerations this Choch^m, that he might clear himself of the blood and guilt
of his Contrymen, and concerned in the common destruction, goes before the
Cadi, and there protests against the present Doctrine; Declaring, that he had
no hand in setting up of Sabatai, but was an Enemy both to him and to his whole
Sect. This freedom of the Chocham so enraged and scandalized the Jews that they
judged no Condemnation or Punishment too severe against such an Offender and
Blasphemer of their Law, and Holiness of the Messiah; and therefore with Money
and Presents to the Cadi, accusing him as disobedient in a Capital nature to
their Government, obtained sentence against him, to have his Beard shaved, and
to be condemned to the Galleys. There wanted nothing now to the appearance of
the Messiah, and the solemnity of his coming, but the presence of Elias, whom
the Jews began to expect hourly; and with that intention and earnestness, that
every Dream or Phantasm to a weak head was judged to be Elias; it being taught,
and averred, that he was seen in diverse forms and shapes, not to be certainly
discovered or known, before the coming of the Messiah; for this superstition is
so far fixed amongst them, that generally in their Families they spread a Table
for Elias the Prophet, to which they make an Invitation of Poor People, leaving
the chief place for the Lord Elias, whom they believe to be invisibly present
at the entertainment, and there to Eat and Drink, without diminution, either of
the Dishes, or of the Cup. One person amongst the Jews commanded his Wife after
a supper of this kind, to leave the Cup filled with Wine, and the Meat standing
all night, for Elias to Feast, and Rejoice alone; And in the morning arising
early, affirmed, that Elias took his Banquet so kindly, that in token of
gratitude, and acceptance, he had replenished the Cup with Oil, in stead of
Wine. It is a certain Custom among the Jews on the Evening of the Sabbath, to
repeat certain Praises of God (called Havaila) which signifies a distinction,
or separation of the Sabbath from the profane days (as they call them) which
praises they observe to perform in this manner; One takes a Cup filled with
Wine, and drops it through the whole House, saying, Elias the Prophet, Elias
the Prophet, Elias the Prophet, come quickly to us with the Messiah, the Son of
God, and David; and this they affirm to be so acceptable to Elias, that he
never fails to preserve that family, so devoted to him, and augment it with the
blessings of Increase. Many other things the Jews avouch of Elias, so
ridiculous, as are not fit to be declared, amongst which this one is not far
from our purpose that at the Circumcision there is always a Chair set for
Elias, and Sabatai Sevi being once Invited at Smyrna to the Circumcision of the
Firstborn Son of one Abraham Gutiere, a Kinsman of Sabatai, and all things
ready for the Ceremony, Sabatai Sevi exhorted the Parents of the Child to
expect a while until his farther Order: After a good half hour, Sabatai ordered
them to proceed and cut the Prepuce of the Child, which was instantly performed
with all joy and satisfaction to the Parents: and being afterward demanded the
reason why he retarded the performance of that Function, his answer was, That
Elias had not as yet taken his Seat, whom as soon as he saw placed, he ordered
them to proceed; and that now shortly Elias would discover himself openly, and
proclaim the news of the general Redemption.

This being the common Opinion amongst the Jews, and that Sabatai Sevi was the
Messiah, being become an Article of Faith, it was not hard to persuade them,
that Elias was come already, that they met him in their Dishes, in the dark, in
their Bed-chambers, or any where else invisible, in the same manner as our
common People in England believe of Hobgoblins and Fairies. For so it was, when
Solomon Cremona, an Inhabitant of Smyrna, making a great Feast, to which the
Principal Jews of the City were Invited, after they had eaten and drank freely,
one starts from his Seat, and avouches that he saw Elias upon the Wall, and
with that bows to him, and Complements him with all Reverence and Humility:
Some others having in like manner their Fancies prepossessed, and their Eyes
with the fume of Wine ill prepared to distinguish shadows, immediately agreed
upon the Object, and then there was not one in the Company who would say he did
not see him: at which surprise every one was struck with reverence and awe; and
the most Eloquent amongst them, having their Tongues loosed with Joy, and Wine,
directed Orations, Encomiums, and acts of Thankfulness to Elias, courting and
complementing him, as distracted Lovers do the supposed presence of their
Mistresses. Another Jew at Constantinople reported that he met Elias in the
Streets, habited like a Turk, with whom he had a long Communication; and that
he enjoined the Observation of many neglected Ceremonies, and particularly the
Zezit, Numb. 15. v. 38. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and bid them that
they make Fringes in the Borders of their Garments, throughout* their
Generations, and that they pu^ upon the Fringe of the Border a Ribbon of blue.
Also the Peos, Levit. 19. v. 27. Ye shall not round the corners of your Head,
nor mar the corners of your Beard: This Apparition of Elias being believed as
soon as published, every one began to obey the Vision, by Fringing their
Garments* and for their Heads, though always shaved, according to the Turkish
and Eastern Fashion, and that the suffering Hair to grow, to men not
accustomed, was heavy, and incommodious to their healths and heads; yet to
begin again to renew as far as was possible, the Ancient Ceremonies, every one
nourished a lock of hair on each side, which might be visible beneath their
Caps; which soon after began to be a Sign of distinction between the Believers
and Kophrims, a name of dishonor, signifying as much as Unbelievers; or
Heretics, given to those who confessed not Sabatai to be the Messiah; which
particulars, if not observed, it was declared, as a Menace of Elias, that the
People of the Jews, who come from the River Sabation, as is specifyed in the
second of Esdras, Chap. 13. shall take vengeance of those who are guilty of
these Omissions.

But to return again to Sabatai Sevi himself, we find him still remaining a
Prisoner in the Castle of Abydos upon the Hellespont, admired and adored by his
Brethren, with more honor than before, and visited by Pilgrims from all parts
where the fame of the coming of the Messiah had arrived; amongst which one from
Poland, named Nehemiah Cohen, was of special ^ote and renown, learned in the
Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldee, and versed in the Doctrine and Kabal^ of the
Rabbis, as well as Sabatai himself, one (of whom it was said) had not this
Sevi anticipated the Design, esteemed himself as able a Fellow to Act the Part
of a Messiah as the other; Howsoever, it being now too late to publish any such
Pretense. Sabatai having now eleven Points of the Law by Possession of the
Office, and with that the hearts and belief of the Jews, Nehemiah was contented
with some small appendage, or relation to Messiah; and therefore to lay his
Design the better, desired a Private Conference with Sabatai: These two great
Rabbis being together, a hot Dispute arose between them; For Cohen alleged
that according to Scripture, and Exposition of the Learned thereupon, there
were to be two Messiahs, one called Ben Ephraim, and the other Ben David, the
first was to be a Preacher of the Law, poor, and despised, and a Servant of the
Second, and his Forerunner; the other was to be great and rich, to restore the
Jews to Jerusalem, to sit upon the Throne of David, and to perform and act all
those Triumphs and Conquests which were expected from Sabatai. Nehemiah was
contented to be Ben Ephraim, the afflicted and poor Messiah and Sabatai (for
any thing I hear) was well enough contented he should be so: but that Nehemiah
accused him for being too forward in publishing himself the latter Messiah,
before Ben Ephraim had first been known unto the World. Sabatai took this
reprehension so ill, either out of pride, and thoughts of his own
infal^ibility, or that he suspected Nehemiah, being once admitted for Ben
Ephraim, would quickly (being a subtle and learned person) persuade the World
that he was Ben David, would by no means understand or admit of this Doctrine
or of Ben Ephraim for a necess^ry Officer: And thereupon the Dispute grew so
hot, and the Controversy so irreconcilable, as was taken notice of by the
Jews, and controverted amongst them as every one fancied: But Sabatai being of
greater Authority, his Sentence prevailed, and Nehemiah was rejected, as
Schismatical, and an Enemy to the Messiah, which afterward proved the ruin and
downfall of this Imp^stor.

For Nehemiah being thus baffled, and being a person of Authority, and a
haughty Spirit, meditated nothing but revenge; to execute which to the full, he
takes a Journey to Adrianople, and there informs the Chief Ministers of State,
and Officers of the Court, who (by reason of the gain the Turks made of their
Prisoner at the Castle on the Hellespont) heard nothing of all this Concourse
of People, and Prophesies of the Rovolt of the Jews from their Obedience to the
Grand Signior; and taking likewise to his Council some certain discontented and
unbelieving Chochams. Who being zealous for their Nation, and jealous of the
ill consequences of this long continued, and increasing Madness, took liberty
to inform the Chimcham (who was Deputy of the great Vizier then at Candia) that
the Jews, Prisoner at the Castle, called Sabatai Sevi, was a Lewd Person, and
one who endeavored to debauch the minds of the Jews, and divert them from
their honest course of livelihood, and Obedience to the Grand Signior; and that
therefore it was necessary to clear the World of so Factious and dangerous a
Spirit: The Chimcham being thus informed, could do no less than acquaint the
Grand Signior with all particulars of this Man's Condition, Course of Life, and
Doctrine; which were no sooner understood, but a Chiaux, or Messenger, was
immediately dispatched, to bring up Sabatai Sevi to Adrianople. The Chiaux
executed his Commission after the Turkish fashion in haste, and brought Sabatai
in a few days to Adrianople, without further excuse or ceremony; not affording
him an hours space to take a solemn farewell of his Friends, his Followers and
Adorers; who now were come to the vertical point of all their hopes and
expectations.

The Grand Signior having by this time received diverse informations of the
madness of the Jews, and the pretenses of Sabatai, grew big with desire and
expectation to see him: so that he no sooner arrived at Adrianople, but the
same hour he was brought before the Grand Signior: Sabatai appeared much
dejected, and failing of that courage which he showed in the Synagogue; and
being demanded several Questions in Turkish by the Grand Signior, he would not
trust so far to the virtue of his Messiah-ship, as to deliver himself in the
Turkish Language; but desired a Doctor of Physic, (who had from a Jew turned
Turk,) to be his Interpreter, which was granted to him; but not without
reflection of the standers by; that had he been the Messiah, and Son of God, as
he formerly pretended, his tongue would have flown with variety as well as with
the perfection of Languages. But the Grand Signior would not be put off without
a Miracle, and it must be one of his own choice: which was, that Sabatai should
be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his dexterous Archers: if the Arrows
pierced not his body, but that his flesh and skin was proof like armor, then
he would believe him to be the Messiah, and the person whom God had designed to
those Dominions, and Greatness, he pretended. But now Sabatai not having faith
enough to stand to so sharp a trial, renounced all his title to Kingdoms and
Governments, alleging that he was an ordinary Chocham, and a poor Jew, as
others were, and had nothing of Privilege, or Virtue above the rest. The Grand
Signior notwithstanding, not wholly satisfied with this plain confession,
declared, that having given public scandal to the Professors of the Mohammedan
Religion, and done dishonor to his Sovereign authority, by pretending to draw
such a considerable portion from him, as the Land of Palestine; his Treason and
Crime was not to be expiated by any other means then by a conversion to the
Mahum^tan faith, which if he refused to do, the stake was ready at the gate of
the Seraglio to empale him. Sabatai being now reduced to extremity of his
latter game; not being in the least doubtful what to do; for to die for what he
was assured was false, was against nature, and the death of a mad man: replied
with much cheerfulness, that he was contented to turn Turk, and that it was not
of force, but of choice, having been a long time desirous of so glorious a
Profession, he esteemed himself much honored, that he had opportunity to own
it first in the presence of the Grand Signior. And here was the non plus ultra
of all the bluster and noise of this vain Impostor. And now the Reader may be
pleased to pause a while, and contemplate the strange point of consternation,
shame, and silence to which the Jews were reduced, when they understood how
speedily their hopes were vanished, and how poorly and ignominiously all their
fancies and promises of a new Kingdom, their Pageantry, and Offices of
Devotion, were past like a tale, or a midnights Dream: And all this was
concluded, and the Jews sunk on a sudden, and fallen flat in their hopes,
without so much as a line of comfort, or excuse from Sabatai, more than in
general, to all the brethren: That now they should apply themselves to their
Callings and Services of God* as formerly, for that matters relating unto him
were finished and the sentence past. The news that Sabatai was turned T^rk, and
the Messiah to a Mahumetan, quickly filled all parts of Turkey. The Jews were
strangely surprised at it, and ashamed of their easy belief of the arguments
with which they had persuaded one the other, and of the Proselytes they had
made in their own families. Abroad they became the common derision of the Towns
where they inhabited: the Boys hou^ed after them, coining a new word at Smyrna
(Ponslai) which every one seeing a Jew, with a finger pointed out, would
pronounce with scorn and contempt: so that this deceived people for a long time
after remained with confusion, silence, and dejection of Spirit. And yet most
of them affirm that Sabatai is not turned Turk, but his shadow only remains on
earth, and walks with a white head, and in the habit of a Mahumetan: but that
his natural Body and Soul are taken into Heaven, there to reside until the
time appointed for accomplishment of these wonders; and this opinion began so
commonly to take place, as if this people resolved never to be undeceived,
using the Forms and Rules for Devotion prescribed them by their Mahumetan
Messiah: Insomuch that the Chochams of Constantinople, fearing the danger of
this error might creep up and equal the former, condemned the belief of Sabatai
being Messiah, as damnable, and enjoined them to return to the ancient Method
and Service of God upon pain of Excommunication. The style and tenure of them
was as follows,

To you who have the power of Priesthood, and are the knowing learned, and
magnanimous Governors and Princes, residing in the City of Smyrna, may the
Almighty God protect you, Amen: for so is his will.

THese our Letters which we send in the midst of your habitations, are upon
occasion of certain rumors and tumults come to our cars from that City of your
Holiness. For there is a sort of men amongst you, who fortify themselves in
their error, and say, let such a one, our King, live, and bless him in their
public Synagogues every Sabbath day: And also adjoyn Psalms and Hymns,
invented by that man for certain days, with Rules and Methods for Prayer, which
ought not to be done, and yet they will still remain obstinate therein; and now
behold it is known unto you, how, many swelling Waters have passed over our
Souls for his ^^ke, for had it not been for the Mercies of God, which are
without end, and the merit of our foref^^^ers, which have assisted us, the foot
of Israel had been (...) out by their enemies. And yet you conti^u^ ob^ti^ate
in things which do not help, but rather do mischief, which God avert. Turn you
therefore, for this is not the true way, but restore the Crown to the ancient
custom and use of your Forefathers, and the Law, and from thence do not move;
We command you that with your authority, under pain of Excommunication, and
other Penalties, that all those Ordinances and Prayers, as well those delivered
by the mouth of that man, as those which he enjoined by the mouth of others, be
all abolished and made void, and to be found no more, and that they never enter
more into your hearts, but judge according to the ancient commandment of your
Forefathers, repeating the same Lessons and Prayers every Sabbath, as has been
accustomary, as also Collects for Kings, Potentates, and Anointed, etc. And
bless the King, Sultan Mahomet, for in his days has great Salvation been
wrought for Israel, and become not Rebels to his Kingdom, which God forbid. For
after all this which is past, the least motion will be a cause of jealousy,
and you will bring ruin upon your own persons, and upon all which is near and
dear to you, wherefore abstain from the thoughts of the man, and let not so
much as his name proceed out of your mouths. For know if you will not obey us
herein, which will be known, who, and what those men are, who refuse to conform
unto us, we are resolved to prosecute them, as our duty is. He that does hear,
and obey us, may the blessing of God rest upon him. These are the words of
those who seek your Peace and Good, having in Constantinople, on Sunday the
fifth of the Month Sevat, under-wrote their names.

Joam Tob son of Chananiah Ben. Jacar. Isaac Alnacagna. Joseph Kazabi. Manasseh
Barndo. Kalib son of Samuel. Eliezer Castie. Eliezer Gherson. Joseph Accohen.
Eliezer Aluff.



During the time of all these transactions and passages at Constantinople,
Smyrna, Ahydos upon the Hellespont, and Adrianople, the Jews leaving their
Merchantly course, and advices, what prizes commodities bear, and matters of
Traffic, stuffed their Letters for Italy and other parts, with nothing but
wonders and miracles wrought by their false Messiah. As then when the Grand
Signior sent to take him, he caused all the Messengers immediately to die, upon
which other Ianizaries being again sent, they all fell dead with a word only
from his mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled
them to life; but of them only such who were true Turks, and not those who had
denied that faith in which they were born, and had professed. After this they
added, that he went voluntarily to Prison, and though the gates were barred and
shut with strong looks of Iron, yet that Sabatai was seen to walk through the
streets with a numerous attendance, and when they said Shackles on his neck and
feet, they not only fell from him, but were converted into Gold, with which he
gratified his true and faithful believers and disciples. Some Miracles also
were reported of Nathan, that only at reading the name of any particular man or
woman, he would immediately recount the story of his, or her life, their sins
or defaults, and accordingly impose just correction and penance for them. These
strong reports coming thus confidently into Italy and all parts, the Jews of
Casel di Montserrato resolved to send three persons in behalf of their society,
in the nature of extraordinary Legates to Smyrna, to make inquity after the
truth of all these rumors, who accordingly arrived in Smyrna, full of
expectation and hopes, intending to present themselves with great Humility and
Submission before their Messiah and his Prophet Nathan, were entertained with
the sad news, that Sabatai was turned Turk, by which information the Character
of their Embassy in a manner ceasing, every one of them laying aside the
formality of his function, endeavored to lodge himself best to his own
convenience. But that they might return to their brethren at home, with the
certain particulars of the success of these affairs, they made a visit to the
brother of Sabatai; who still continued to persuade them, that Sabatai was
notwithstanding the true Messiah, that it was not he who had taken on him the
habit and sorm of a Turk, but his Angel or Spirit, his body being ascended into
Heaven, until God shall again see the season, and time to restore it; adding
further, that an effect hereof they should see by the Prophet Nathan,
certified, now every day expected, who having wrought Miracles in many places,
would also for their Consolation, reveal hidden secret^ unto them with which
they should not only remain satisfied, but astonished. With this only hope of
Nathan, these Legates were a little comforted, resolving to attend his arrival,
in regard they had a Letter to consign into his hands, and according to their
instructions, were to demand of him the grounds he had for his Prophesies, and
what assurance he had, that he was divinely inspired, and how these things were
revealed unto him, which he had committed to Paper, and dispersed to all parts
of the World. At length Nathan arrives near Smyrna, on Friday the third of
March, toward the Evening, and on Sunday these Legates made their visit to
him: But Nathan, upon news of the success of his beloved Messiah, began to grow
sullen and reserved; so that the Legates could scarce procure admittance to
him; all that they could do was to inform him, that they had a Letter to him
from the brotherhood of Italy* and commission to confer with him concerning
the foundation and authority he had for his prophesies; but Nathan refused to
take the Letter, ordering Kain Abol^sio a Chocham of the City of Smyrna to
receive it; so that the Legates returned ill contented, but yet with hopes at
Nathans arrival at Smyrna to receive better satisfaction.

But whilst Nathan intended to enter into Smyrna, the Chochams of
Constantinople, being before advised of his resolution to take a Journey into
their parts, not knowing by which way he might come, sent their Letters and
Orders to Smyrna, Prussia, and every way round, to hinder his passage, and
interrupt his journey; fearing that things beginning now to compose, the Turks
appeased for the former disorders, and the minds of the Jews in some manner
settled, might be moved, and combustions burst out afresh, by the appearance of
this new Impostor; And therefore dispatched this Letter as follows.

To you who are the Shepherds of Israel, and Rulers, who reside for the great
God of the whole World, in the City of Smyrna, which is Mother in Israel* to
her Princes, her Priests, her Judges, and especially to the perfect wise men
and of great experience, may the Lord God cause you to live before him, and
delight in the multitude of Peace, Amen, so be the will of the Lord.

THese our Letters are dispatched unto you, to let you understand, that in the
place of your Holiness, we have heard the learned man, which was in Gaza,
called Nathan Benjamin, has published vain Doctrines, and made the World
Tremble at his Words and Inventions: And that at this time we have received
Advice, that this man some days since, departed from Gaza, and took his Journey
by the way of Scanderoon, intending there to Imbark for Smyrna, and thence to
go to Constantinople or Adrianople: And though it seem a strange thing unto us,
that any Man should have a desire to throw himself into a place of Flames and
Fire, and into the Sparks of Hell; notwithstanding we ought to fear, and
suspect it; For the Feet of Man always guide him to the worst: Wherefore we
underwritten do Advertise you, that this Man coming within the compass of your
Jurisdiction, you give a stop to his Journey, and not suffer him to proceed
farther, but presently to return back. For we would have you know, that at his
coming, he will again begin to move those Tumults, which have been caused
through the Imaginations of a New Kingdom; And that Miracles are not to be
Wrought every day.

God forbid that by his coming the People of God should be destroyed in all
places where they are, of which he will be the first, whose Blood be upon his
own Head: For in this Conjuncture, every little Error or Fault is made Capital.
You may remember the Danger of the first Combustion: And it is very probable
that he will be an occasion of greater, which the Tongue is not able to express
with words. And therefore by Virtue of ours, and your own Authority, you are to
hinder him from proceeding farther in his Journey, upon pain of all those
Excommunications which our Law can Impose, and to force him to return back
again, both he and his Company. But if he shall in any manner Oppose you, and
Rebel against your Word, your Endeavors and Law are sufficient to hinder him,
for it will be well for him and all Israel.

For the Love of God, let these Words enter into your Ears, since they are not
vain things; for the Lives of all the Jews and his also, consist therein. And
the LordGod behold from Heaven and have pity upon his People Israel, Amen. So
be his holy Will: Written by those who seek your Peace.

Joam Tob, Son of Chanania Jacar, Caleb Son of Chocham, Samuel deceased. Moise
Benveniste, Isaac Alce-nacagne, Joseph Kazabi, Samuel Acaz sine, Moise Barndo.
Elihezer Aluff. Jehoshuah Raphael. Benveniste.





By these means Nathan being disappointed of hi^ Wandering Progress, and partly
ashamed of the even of things, contrary to his Prophecy, was resolve^ without
entering Smyrna, to return again: Howsoeve^ he obtained leave to visit the
Sepulcher of his Mother, an^ there to receive Pardon of his Sins (according to
the Institution of Sabatai before mentioned) but first washed himself in the
Sea, in manner of Purification, and said his Tephilla, or Prayers, at the
Fountain, called by us the Fountain Sancta Veneranda, which is near to the
Cymetry of the Jews, and then departed for Xio, with two Companions, a Servant,
and three Turks to conduct him, without admitting the Legates to Audience, or
answering the Letter which was sent him, from all the Communitie^s of the Jews
in Italy. And thus the Embassy of these Legates was concluded, and they
returned from the place from whence they came, and the Jews again to their
Wits, following their Trade of Merchandise and Brokage as formerly, with more
quiet and advantage, than the means of regaining their Possessions in the Land
of Promise. And thus ended this mad Phre^sie amongst the Jews, which might have
cost them dear, had not Sabatai Renounced his Messiahship at the Feet of
Mabom^t.

These matters were transacted in the years 1665 and 1666, since which Sabatai
has passed his time devoutly in the Ottoman Court educated at the feet of the
learned Gamaliel of the Turkish Law that is, Vanni Effendi, Preacher to the
Seraglio, or as we ^ay so term him Chaplain to the Sultan, one so literate as
to be esteemed the Grand Oracle of their Religion, so precise and conceited of
his own sanctity as a Pharisee and so Superstitious that nothing seemed more to
unhallow his worship than the touch or approach of a Christian. To this master
Sabatai was a most docil Scholar, and profited, as we may Imagine, beyond
measure in the Turkish Doctrine, so that in exchange of such Impr^ssions, Vanni
thought it no disparagement from so great a Rabbin as his new disciple, to
learn something of the Jewish Rites and rectify those crude notions he had
conceived of the Mosaical Law; in this manner Sabatai passed his days in the
Turkish Court, as some time Moses did in that of the Egyptians, and perhaps in
imitation of him, cast his eyes, often on the Afflictions of his brethren, of
whom during his life he continued to profess himself a Deliverer, but with that
care and caution of giving Scandal to the Turks, that he declared unless their
nation became like him, that is, renounce the shadows, and imperfect Elements
of the Mosaical Law, which will be completed by adherence to the Mahumetan,
and such other additions as his inspired wisdom should suggest, he should never
be able to prevail with God for them, or conduct them to the holy Land of their
Forefathers: hereupon many Jews flocked in, some as far as from Babylon.
Jerusalem and other remote places, and casting their caps on the ground in
presence of the Grand Signior, voluntarily professed themselves Mahumetans:
Sabatai himself by these proselytes gaining ground in the esteem of the Turks,
had privilege granted him to visit familiarly his Brethren, which he employed
in Circumcising their Children the 8 h day according to the precept of Moses,
preaching his new Doctrines by which he confirmed many in their faith of his
being the M^ssiah and ^tar^led all with expectation of what these strange ways
of Enthusiasm may produce, but none durst publicly own him, lest they should
displease the Turks, and the Jews, and incur the danger of Excommunication from
one, and the Gallows from the other.

Howsoever in January 1672 appeared another bold Impostor amongst the Jews in
Smyrna from Morea, as it was said, or not known from whence, who in despite of
Sabatai, and his own Governors, pretended to be the Messiah; but with so petty
and inconsiderable a Deluder as this, the Jews thought to make quick work, but
being ashamed at first to bring another Messiah on the Stage by help of money
they accused him of Adultery, and procured a sentence from the Kadi, condemning
him to the Galleys; in order unto which, and i^ proof of his good behavior, he
remained some time in Prison, in which interim he found means to clear himself
of that crime by open evidence to the contrary, and had for the present escaped
out of the power of the Synagogue had not their Authority and Money prevailed
more than the friends and Disciple of this Impostor; so that he was still
detained in Prison, and Sabatai Sevi continued in the house of Pharaoh or the
Grand Sign^or, where he remained till the year 1676, and then died.

The fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews out of the Empire
of Persia, begun in 1663. and continuing till 1666, and the occasion thereof.
YOU have heard in the foregoing Story from what Glorious Expectations the
whole Nation of the Jews were precipitated by the Impostorious* but
Improsperous Villainy of their late pretended Messiah: You will in this Relation
perceive farther, how Signally the hand of Almighty God (about the same time)
went out to their yet greater shame and extermination: And if any thing were
capable to reduce that miserably deluded People* certainly one would think
these continued Frowns, and Accents of his displeasure against all their
Interprises; as, it ought to confirm the Truth of the Christian Profession so
it should even constrain them to hasten to it; For* the Wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost.

In the Reign of the famous Abas, Sophy of Persia, and Grandfather to the
present Emperor, the Nation being low, and somewhat exhausted of Inhabitants,
it entered into the mind of this Prince (a Wise and Prudent Man, and one who
exceedingly studied the Benefit of his Subjects) to seek some expedient for the
Revival and Improvement of Trade, and by all manner of Privileges and
Immunities to encourage other contiguous Nations to Negotiate and Trade amongst
them* and this Project he fortified with so many Immunities, and used them so
well who came, that repairing from all Parts to his Country, in a short time
the whole Kingdom was filled with multitudes of the most Industrious People and
Strangers that any way bordered on him.

It happened, that amongst those who came, innumerable Flocks of Jews ran
thither from all their Dispersions in the East; attracted by the gain, which
they universally make where evere they set footing, by their innate Craft.
Sacred Avarice, and the excessive Extorti^ns which they continually Practice.
And it was not many years but by this means, they had so impoverished the rest,
and especially the natural Subjects of Persia, that the Clamor of it reached to
the Ears of the Emperor; and indeed it was Intolerable, for even his own
Exchequer began to be sensible of it, as well as his Peoples Purses, and
Estates, which they had almost Devoured.

How to repress this Inormity, and remedy this Inconvenience, without giving
Vmbrage to the rest of those profitable strangers now settled in his Dominions,
by falling severely upon the Jews on the sudden, he long consulted; and for
that end called to his Advice his Chief Ministers of State, the Musti, and
expounders of the Law. After much dispute 'twas at last found, that the Jews
had already long since forfeited their Lives by the very Text of the Alcoran;
where it is expressed, That if within 600 years from the promulgation of that
Religion, they did nor u^iversally come in, and Profess the Mahumetan Faith,
they should be destroyed. The Zealous Emperor would immediately have put this
Edict in Execution; but, by the Interc^ssion of the Musti, and the rest of the
Doctors, 'twas thought fit to suspend it for the present: But that these
growing Evils might in time have a period; his Majesty Commanded that all the
Chochammi, Rabbis, and Chief amongst the Jews, should immediately appear
before his Tribunal, and make Answer to some Objections that were to be
propounded to them.

The Jews being accordingly convened, the Sophy Examines them about several
Passages of their Law, and particularly concerning the Prophet Moses, and those
Rites of his which seemed to have been so long annihilated amongst them, since
the coming of Isai (for so they call Jesus) after whom they pretend their
Mahomet was to take place, and all other Predictions to determine.

The Jews much terrified with the manner of these Interrogatories, and dubious
what the meaning and drift of them might signify, told the Emperor; That for
Christ they did not believe in him, but that they expected a Messiah of their
own to come, who should by his Miraculous power deliver them from their
Oppressors and subdue all the World to his Obedience.

At this Reply the Sophy appe^red to be much Incensed: How! says he, Do you not
then believe Christ, of whom our very Alcoran makes so Honorable mention? as
that he was the Spirit of God, sent down from him, and returning to him, etc.
If we Believe him, Why do not you? What say you for your selves, you
Incredulous Wretches? The Confounded Jews perceiving the Emperor thus
provoked, immediately prostrated themselves on the ground, humbly supplicating
him to take pity on his Slaves, who acknowledged themselves altogether unable
to Dispute with his Majesty, That for the Christians, they seemed indeed to
them to be gross Idolaters? Men who did not Worship God but a C^ucified
Malefactor, and a Deceiver, which still the more displeased the Sophy; not
enduring they should so Blaspheme a Person for whom their Alcoran had so great
Reverence: However, for the present he dis^embles his resentmemt; It Is well says
he, you do not believe, the God of the Christians: But tell me, What think you
(...) our Great Prophet Mahomet* This Demand exceedingly perplexed them, not
knowing what to Reply: and indeed it was contrived on pu^pos^ that convincing
them of Blasphemy (as they esteemed it) against their Prophet the Sophy might
find a specious and legal pretense toruine and destroy them without giving any
jealousy or suspicion to the rest of the strangers, who were Trafficking in
his Country, of several other Religions, but who were not in the least
obnoxious to his displeasure.

After along pause and secret conference with o^ne another, it was at last
resolved among them, That though they had denied Christ, they would yet say
nothing Positively against Mahomet: Therefore they told the Emperor; though
their Religion forbad them to believe any Prophet save Moses, etc. yet they did
not hold Mahomet for a false Prophet, in as much as he was descended of Ismael
the Son of Abraham; and that they desired to remain His Majesty's humble
Vassals and Slaves, and craved His pity on them.

The Sophy easily perceiving the Cunning and wary Subterfuge of their Reply
told them; This should not serve their turn: That they were a People of
dissolute Principles, and that under pretense of their long expected Messiah
they persisted in a false Religion, and kept off from Proselyting to the true
Belief; and therefore required of them to set a positive Time when their
Messiah was to appear; for that he would Support them no longer who had imposed
on the World and Cheated his people now so many Years; But withal assuring them
that he would both Pardon and Protect them for the time they should Assign,
provided they did not go about to abuse him by any incompetent
Procrastinations, but assign the Year precisely of his Coming; when if
accordingly he did not Appear, they were Sons of Death, and should all of them
either Renounce their Faith, or be certainly Destroyed, and their Estates
Confiscated.

The poor Jews, though infinitely Confounded with this unexpected Demand, and
Resolution of the Sophy; after a second Consultation among themselves, (which
the Emperor granted,) contrived to give him this answer: That according to
their Books and Prophecies, their Messiah should infallibly Appear within
Seventy years; prudently (as they thought) believing, that either the Emperor
or They should be all of them Dead before that time; and that, in the interim,
such Alterations might emerge, as all this would be forgotten, or averted; and
that at the worst, a good sum of Money would reverse the Sentence. But that
something was of necessity to be promised to satisfy his present humorous Zeal.

The Emperor accepts of the Answer, and immediately causes it to be Recorded
in form of a solemn Stipulation between them; That in case there were no news
of their Messiah within the Seventy years assigned (to which of Grace, he added
five more) they should either turn Mahumetans, or their whole Nation utterly be
destroyed throughout Persia, and their Substance confiscated: but with this
Clause also inserted; That if their Messiah did Appear within that Period, the
Emperor would himself be obliged to become a Jew, and make all his Subjects so
with him; this drawn (as we said) in form of an Instrument, was reciprocally
signed and sealed on both parts, and the Jews for the present dismissed; with
the payment yet of no less than two Millions of Gold (as my Author affirms) for
the favor of this long Indulgence.

Since the time of this Amperor Abas, to the present Sophy now Reigning there
are not only these 70 years past but 115 expired; during which the Persians
have been so molested by the Turks and by continual War in the East Indies,
etc. that the succeeding Princes no more minded this Stipulation of their
Predecessors, till by a wonderful Accident in the Reign of the second Abas,
(Father of him who now governs) ^ person extremely curious of Antiquities,
searching one day amongst the Records of his Palace. there was found this
Writing in the Iournal of his Father, intimating what had so solemnly passed
between him and the Chiefs of the Jews in the Name of their whole Nation.

Upon this the Sophy instantly summons a Council, produces the Instrument
before them, and requires their advice, what was to be done; and the rather,
for that there began now to be great Whispers, and some Letters had been
written to them from Merchants out of Turkey of the motions of a pretended
Messiah, which was the famous Sabatai: This so wrought with the Emperor and his
Council, that with one Voice, and without longer pause, they immediately
conclude upon the destruction of the Jews, and that this wicked Generation of
Impostors and Oppressors of his People were no longer to be endured upon the
Earth.

In Order to this Resolution Proclamations are issued out and published to the
People, and to all that were Strangers and Inhabitants amongst them, impowering
them to fall immediately upon the Jews in all the Persian Dominions, and to put
to the Sword Man, Woman and Child, but such as should forthwith turn to the
Mahumetan Belief: and to seize on their Goods and Estates without any remorse
or pity.

This cruel and bloody Arrest was accordingly put ^n Execution first at
Ispahan, and suddenly afterward in all the rest of the Cities and Towns of
Persia. Happy was he that could escape the fury of the enraged People, who by
virtue of the public Sentence grounded upon the declared Stipulation, and now
more encouraged by the dwindling of their pretended Messiah, had no
commiseration on them, but slew and made havoc of them, wherever they could
find a Jew through all their vast Territories; falling upon the spoil, and
continuing the Carnage to their utter Extermination; Nor did the Persecution
cease for several Years, beginning from about Sixty three till Sixty six, at
Ispahan, the Cities and Countries of Seyra, Ghelan, Humadan, Ardan, Tauris, and
in sum, through the whole Empire, without sparing either Sex or Age; excepting
(as was said) such as turned Mahumetans, or escaped through the Deserts into
Turkey, India, and other far distant Regions, and that without hopes of ever
Re-establishing themselves for the future in Persia, the hatred of that People
being so deadly and irreconcilable against them. And in truth this late Action
and Miscarriage of their pretended Messiah has rendered them so universally
despicable, that nothing but a determined Obstinacy, and an evident and
Judicial Malediction from Heaven could possibly continue them in that
prodigious Blindness out of which yet, GOD, of his infinite Mercy, one day,
deliver them, that they may at last See and Believe in Him whom they have
Pierced; and that so both Jew and Gentile may make One Flock under that One
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, Jesus Christ the True MESSIAH. Amen.

The Epistle OF KING AGBARUS To our Savior Jesus Christ, with our Saviors
Answer.
I Know not how better to fill up the following vacant Pages, than by adding
this notable Relation mentioned by the famous Historian, Eusebius in his first
Book of Ecclesiastical History which follows in these words.

After the Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was made manifest to
all men, by the working of Miracles, he drew unto him an innumerable Company of
Strangers, who dwelt far distant from Judea, and were afflicted with diverse
diseases, and Maladies, hoping of him to recover their health; among which
number king Agbarus Governor of the famous Nations inhabiting beyond the River
Euphrates, being grievously diseased in body, and judged incurable by the skill
of men, hearing the renowned fame of Jesus, and the wonderful works that he
wrought in all places he petitioned to him by Letters, humbly desiring
deliverance from his disease, Jesus (though not Presently) yielding to his
Petition vouchsafed to answer him by an Epistle, that he would shortly send one
of his Disciples who should cure his malady, and not only his but all that
belonged to him, which promise he in a short time performed; for after his
Resurrection from the dead and ascension into Heaven, Thomas one of the Twelve
Apostles sent his Brother Thaddeus (who was reckoned among the seventy
Disciples of Christ) by Divine Inspiration unto the City of Edessa, to be a
Preacher and Evangelist of the Doctrine of Christ by whom all things which
concerned the promise of our Savior were performed; and for the further
confirmation hereof, the Letters themselves are recorded in the Monuments of
the Princely City of Edessa, and enrolled in the Public Registry there among
things of Antiquity acted about the time of King Agbarus, and Preserved unto
this day; and I know no reason why we may not give you the very Letters
themselves, as they were copied out of the Registry; and translated by us out
of the Syrian Tongue.

The Epistle of Agbarus to our Savior.
AGbarus, Governor of Edessa unto Jesus the good Savior showing himself in
Jerusalem, sends Greeting. I have heard of thee and thy Cures, which thou
have done without Medicines or Herbs; for as the report goes, thou make the
blind to see, the lame to go, the Lepers thou cleansest, evil Spirits and
Devils thou castest our, the long diseased thou restorest to Health, and
raisest the dead to life. When I heard these strange tidings concerning thee, I
imagined with my self, one of these two things; that thou art either a God come
from Heaven and performest these matters, or else the Son of God that bring
these things to pass. Wherefore by these my Letters, I beseech thee, to take
the pains to come unto me, and that thou will cure me of this my grievous
malady wherewith I am sore vexed. I have heard moreover that the Jews murmur
against thee, and go about to destroy thee, I have here a little City and an
honest, which will suffice us both.


Our Saviors Answers to Agbarus.
AGbarus blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me when thou saw me
not, for it is written of me, that they which see me shall not believe in me,
that they which see me not may believe and be saved; concerning what thou
writest unto me that I should come unto thee, I let thee understand that all
things touching my message are here to be fulfilled, and after the fulfilling
thereof, I am to return again to him that sent me; But after my Assumption I
will send one of my Disciples unto thee, who shall cure thy malady, and restore
life unto thee, and them that be with thee.


These Epistles Eusebius affirms he translated out of the Records of Edessa
written in the Syrian Tongue, in which Records it afterward followed; that
when Jesus was taken up, Judas who is also called Thomas, sent unto him
Thaddeus the Apostle, one of the seventy, who when he arrived remained with one
Tobias the Son of Tobias; when the fame of him was spread abroad, and that he
was made manifest by the Miracles which he wrought, it was signified to
Agbarus, that Thaddeus the Apostle of Jesus, of whom he wrote in his Epistle was
come, and that this Thaddeus through the power of God began to cure every
disease and malady, so that all men greatly marvelled; Agbarus hearing of the
mighty and wonderful works which he wrought, and that he healed in the name and
power of Jesus, was confirmed that this was he of whom Jesus had written
saying, after my Ascension I will send one of my Disciples unto thee who shall
Cure thy Malady. He then sent for Tobias where Thaddeus lodged, and said unto
him, I hear say that a certain mighty man who came from Jerusalem so journeth
with thee, and cures many in the name of Jesus; Tobias replied, yea my Lord,
there came a certain Stranger and lodged at my house who has done many
Wonderful things; to whom the King said, bring him unto me. Tobias returning to
Thaddeus said unto him, Agbarus the Governor sent for me, and commanded me to
bring thee unto him, that thou may cure his Disease; Thaddeus answered I go,
for it is for his sake that I am sent thus mightily to work; Tobias rising
betimes the next day went with him to Agbarus. As he came in even upon his
entrance, the countenance of Thaddeus appeared very glorious to Agbarus, in the
presence of his Chief men, upon which the King gave him so much reverence that
all there present marvelled thereat, for none of them saw the glory save
Agbarus only, who discoursed with Thaddeus, and said, Art thou of a truth a
Disciple of Jesus the Son of God, who made me this promise, I will send unto
thee one of my Disciples who shall cure thy Disease, and show Life unto thee
and all thine? To whom Thaddeus answered, because thou have greatly believed in
the Lord Jesus that sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee, and if thou still
continue to believe in him, thou shall obtain thy hearty Petitions according to
thy Faith; Agbarus replied, I have so firmly believed in him that I could have
found in my heart utterly to have Destroyed the Jews who Crucified him, were
not the Roman Empire an hindrance to my design, Thaddeus said. Our Lord and
God, Jesus Christ, fulfilled the will of his Father, which being finished he is
Ascended unto him; Agbarus answered, And I have believed in him and in his
Father; therefore, said Thaddeus, in the name of the same Lord Jesus, I lay my
hand upon thee; which when he had done he forthwith cured him of his Malady,
and delivered him from the pain wherewith he was sore afflicted; Agbarus was
hereat astonished, and that as it was reported to have of Jesus, so he now
found it true by his Disciple and Apostle Thaddeus; that he was cured without
the Virtue of Herbs or Medicines, and not only he, but also Abdus the Son of
Abdus grieved with the Gout, who falling at the feet of Thaddeus recovered his
former Health by the laying on of hands? he likewise cured many more of his
Fellow Citizens, and wrought sundry miraculous things, preaching the Word of
God.

Then Agbarus proceeded to discourse with him saying, Thou Thaddeus through the
power of God dos^ these things, and we have thee in admiration, I pray thee
therefore further to expound unto me the coming of Jesus how he was made man
and by what Might and power he brought such things as we have heard of to pass;
at this season, replied Thaddeus, I will be silent, though I am sent to Preach
the word, but to morrow call together all thy people and citizens, and I will
then Preach and show to them the word of God, and Sow the word of Life; and
teach them the manner of his Coming, how he was made man, of his Message, and
to what end he was sent from the Father, of his Miracles and Mysteries declared
to the world, and his Power in bringing mighty things to pass; likewise his new
Preaching, and how low mean and humble he seemed as to outward appearance, how
he Humbled himself, Died, and veiled his Divinity, what great things he
Suffered of the Jews* how he was Crucified and Descended into Hell, ren^ that
hedge and midwall which was never severed before, and raised the dead who of a
long time had slept, how he Descended alone, but Ascended to the Father
accompanied with many, how he fi^eth in Glory at the Right Hand of God the
Father in Heaven, and last of all, how he shall come again with Glory and Power
to Judge both the quick and the Dead.

When the morning was come, Agbarus commanded his Citizens to be Assembled, to
hear the Sermon of Thaddeus, which being ended, he ordered that Gold both
Coined and uncoined should be given unto him; but he received it not, saying,
Insomuch as we have forsaken our own, how can we receive the goods of other
men? These things, says Eusebius, were done in the Forty third year after
Christ; which being translated word for word out of the Syrian Tongue, he
thought good to Publish.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near
Cheapside.
History.
I. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; Adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to the Third year of
K. William and Q Mary. With a List of the Nobility; The Knights of the Garter;
The number of the Lords and Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of
Parliament: And many other useful particulars. Price One Shilling

II. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; containing a particular and
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration; The
illegal Trial of K Charles I at large, with his last Speech at his Suffering.
And the most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several
A^cidents. Price One Shilling.

III. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Wes^minster; showing the Foundations. Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these (ities, to the year
1681. Illustrated with Pictures, and the Arms of 65 Companies of London, and
the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

IV. ADmirable Curiosities, ^arities and Wonders in England Scotland and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Seiges, prodigious E^rthquakes, Tempests, (...), Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other considerable Occurrences and Ac^^^ents
for, many hu^^^^^ years past. Together with the natural and artifi^^^^ Rarities
in every County in England, with several cu^ious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

V. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An
A^count of the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for
above 1200 years past, during the Reigns of 68 Kings, from 424. to K. James the
first in 1602. 2. The History of Ireland from the Conquest thereof to this
time; with the Miraculous Persons and Places, Strange Accidents, etc. And a
List of the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated
with several Pictures of some extraordinary Observables. Price One Shilling.

VI. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New found-land, New England, New York, New-Iersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carol^na, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Iamaica; with an Account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product; The Religion and manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries; To which is Prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of this
New-World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Capt. Weymouth, Capt. Hall, Captain
Hudson, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and
Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and
Mon^^^^^ found in those parts of the World. Price One Shilling.

VII. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an unusual and extravagant style; The cruel Executions in
those Parts; With the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a Description of the Isle of St. Helena; And the Bay of
Souldania where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies.
Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with Pictures. Price one
Shilling.

VIII. THE English Hero: or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account
of the Dangerous Voyages, Admirable Adventures, Notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near seventy foot long, ten foot broad, and twelve foot high. II
His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in Two years and
Ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Iago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and
St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the
manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected, very much enlarged, reduced
into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with Pictures. By R. B. Price One
Shilling.

IX. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An Account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admi^able Accidents befell them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Ioppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews assembled in the Plains of Ajayday in Hungary 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there
present: With the notorious Delusion of the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or
false Christ at Smyrna in 1666* and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extirpation
of the Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of King Agba^us to our Savior
with our Savior's Answer; Beautified with Pictures. Price One Shilling.

X. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; Being an Account of a multitude of stupendous
revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States, and Provinces
throughout the whole world. With Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XI. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World; Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of
Macedon and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome.
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a Valiant Jewish Commander against the
Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of ^rittain, who
courageously defended his Country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great K.
of France and Emperor of Germany; 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being
an account of their Glorious Lives, Worthy Actions, renowned Victories and
Deaths, Illustrated with Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. Price
One Shilling.

XII. FEmale Excellency or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
and Memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor in several Ages of the World: As, I. Deborah the Prophetess.
II. The Valiant Judith. III. Queen Esther. IV. The Virtuous Susanna. V. The
Chaste Lucretia. VI. Voadicia Queen of Britain in the reign of Nero Emperor of
Rome. Containing an Account of the Original Inhabitants of Britain. The
History of Danaus and his Fifty Daughters who murdered their Husbands in one
night. Of the arrival of Brute. Of the Two Giants Corineus and Gogmagog; Of
King Lear and his three Daughters; Of Belin and Brennus who took the City of
Rome; Of the manner of Julius Caesar's invading Britain, and of the Valor of
Voadicia under whose conduct the Britains slew seventy thousand Romans, with
many other remarkable particulars. VII. Mariamne Wife to King Herod. VIII.
Clotilda Queen of France. IX. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned
with Poems and Pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

XIII. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains, 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers, and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state after this Life. Imbellished
with diverse Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIV. Unparalled Varieties, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage, and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance, and Humility, And on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity, and Treachery. 6* Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with proper Figures. Pr. 1. s.

XV. THE Kingdom of Darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats, and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near Fourscore memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both Ancient and
Modern. Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible
Evidences, and asserted by Authors of Undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface
obviating the common Objections and Allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of
the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several
memorable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

XVI. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in 2 parts containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages; as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. Pr. 1 Shilling.

XVII. THE carlet Whore, or the wicked Abominations, and horrid Cruelties and
Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome displayed. Being a brief Relation
of their Bloody Practices, and Inhumane Tortures inflicted upon Protestants for
many hundred years past to this present, in all Countries where they had
Authority and Dominion; namely, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland,
Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Holland, Scotland, Ireland, and
England; Containing among many other particulars; The Original and Practices ^f
the Spanish Inquisition; The Massacre at Paris; The bloody Massacre in Ireland
1641. wherein above two hundred Thousand innocent Protestants were barbarously
murdered, and the Prophecy thereof by Archbishop Usher Forty years before it
happened; The Spanish Invasion; The Gun-powder-Treason, with the several Plots
and Contrivances of the Priests and Jesuits for Extirpating the Protestant
Religion, till the time of our Glorious Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, by
the Accession of their most Excellent Majesty's King William and Queen Mary to
the Throne of these Kingdoms. With an Abstract of the Cruel Persecutions lately
exercised upon the Protestants in France and Savoy, in the years 1686, and
1687. Together with a short Account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors.
Published for a Seasonable warning to all Protestants, to inform them what they
must expect from that bloody Generation of Antichristians. Price One Shilling.

Miscellanies^
XVIII. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiousl^ Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty delightful Poems and L^ts, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by an
honest and pleasant Recreation, To which is perfixed, An incomparable Poem
entitled Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings written by
his late Majesty, K. Charles I with his own Hand during his Captivity in
Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of wight 1648. With a curious Emblem. Collected
by R. B. Pr. 25. 6 d.

XIX EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A. L. Capel Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him: With his pious
Advice to his Son. Price 1 s.

XX. WInter Evenings Entertainments in 2 Parts Containing, 1 Ten Pleasant
Relations of man^ R^^e and Notable Accidents and Occurrences; with brief
Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Rid^les, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to
the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful Society and Conversation.
Price One Shilling.

XXI. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors; with Pictures and proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very pertinent and applicable to the
present times. Published as a means which in all Ages has been found for
pleasure and likewise for instruction in the prudent conduct of our Lives and
Actions. By R. B. Price Bound One Shilling,

Divinity.
XXII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely Accused, Smitten, B^ffe^ed and
Spit upon before Caiaphas the high priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging,
Crowning with T^o^^s, and being delivered to be Cruc^fi^d by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his C^oss to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion. 7.
Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important Duty. With Eight curious Sculptures proper to the
several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land. a
Sacris. Price One Shilling.

XXIII. A Guide to eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts; As
I. Saving Faith discovered in three Heavenly Conferences between our Blessed
Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian. II. The
Threefold state of a Christian. 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. III.
The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True
Christian. V. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty
of Self-Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations, Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul.
VIII. The Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrances
and Pious thoughts. IX. History Improved or Christian Applications and
Improvements of diverse remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling.

XXIV. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d.

XXV. THE Young Man's Ca^ling or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to al^ young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their ^^^th. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mo^^^^. Of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse (...) Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of King Ed^^rd VI. Queen Jane, Queen Elizabeth in her youth, Prince Henry
Eldest son of King James, and the young Lord Harrington* etc. With twelve
curious Pictures, Illustrating the several Histories. Price 1. s. 6. d.

XXVI. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. To which is
added, Verses upon several Subjects and Occasions, Containing, The History of
the cruel Death of Cassianus Bishop and Schoolmaster of Brescia in Italy, who
suffered Martyrdom for the Profession of the Christian Faith by the hands of
his own Scholars in the Bloody Reign of Dioclesian an Heathen Emperor (...)
Rome; With diverse other Poems compiled by Mrs. Ann Askew and Mr. John Rogers
whilst they were Prisoners in Newgate, and afterward burnt in Smithfield, In
the bloody Reign of Queen Mary. By R B. Licensed and Entered. Price Eight Pence.

XXVII. MOunt Sion, or a Draught o^ that Church that shall stand for ever.
Together with a view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believers
Golden Chain. Price One Shilling.

XXVIII. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are Discovered the grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680 to 1688. As the Lord Russel, Colonel
Sydney, Alderman Cornish, and diverse others; With a Relation of the cruel
proceedings, of the late Lord Chancellor Iefferys in the West. Together with an
account of the late Admirable and Stupendous Providence which (...) wrought
such a sudden and wonderful Delivera^^^ for this Nation, and Gods Sion therein.
Conclud^^^ with the Trial and Condemnation of Mystery Baby^^^ the Great Whore;
and diverse Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving: with Sighs for Ireland Humbly
Dedicated to their Present Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book
called, Sion in Distress, or the Groans of the True Protestant Church. Price
One Shilling.

XXIX. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon
the Great Whore, Revel. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers about the Mystical Numbers
in Daniel and Revelations, concerning the rise and final (...) of the Beast and
Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age. Together with an Account of
the Two Witnesses, who they are, their Slaying, Resurrection and Ascension,
with the probability of their being now upon their Rising; showing also what
their Ascension is, and the glorious Effects thereof. With an Account of many
strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By Benjamin Keach. Price
One Shilling.

XXX. THE D^vout Soul's Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R.P. D.D. Price bound Six Pence.

XXXI. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Io. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Pr. 1. s.

FINIS.

