Some REMARKS upon the BANK and other pretended Banks, with Reasons humbly
offered to the Consideration of the Present Parliament for establishing a REAL
LAND-FUND, or a MONEY AND LAND BANK; under a regular Managery, with
unquestionable Controuls and Checks upon them: By Philalethes.
THE Bank of England crept into the World, not being in any Votes by that Name;
but an Act for grantting to their Majesty's several Duties upon Tunnage of
Ships, Beer, Ale, etc. for securing certain Recompenses to such as should
voluntarily advance 1200000 l. on a Fund 8 l. per Cent. perpetual if not
redeemed by Parliament: This was for the King to pay dear for the Money; as he
does to T. P. H.C.A.S.B. who will not account for what they have received, etc.
Whereas, if it had been in the Votes, That such a Bank was intended, there were
those that would have given the King as much for it, or lent a Million gratis
for 7 years; which by a more regular Managery, might have redressed Grievances,
done Acts of Charity, and have been more advantageous to the Kingdom: and since
the Settlement of that Bank many Stock-jobbers, etc. being excluded, consulted
with Dr. Chamberlain, with whom they pretended to join in his Land-Credit, but
robbed him of some Notions he had, and afterward set up for themselves, one for
a Land-Bank, the other for a National Land-Bank. Then they and the Usurers
having no more Wit, quarreled, and expose themselves in Print to that degree,
that they appeared most notorious in their Principles and Practices. Besides
their Art of Stock-jobbing, by which many Families have been ruined; and one
was to have part of the Prosits, and the other 1000 l. per an. for ever, above
what he could make by his Art in Managery and Stock-jobbing (the same Persons
telling the Landed-Men they should have ^/4 of the Value of their Land at 3 l.
10 s. or 3 l. per cent. Interest) and to get in Money-Subscribers, told them if
they came in with their Money in a short time, they would make 30 if not 40 l
per Cent. if they made haste, least their Books were filled and shut up in such
a time, and they excluded. This mighty Prospect of Advantage they were to make
out, telling the Monied-Men that in a short time 100 l. would circulate 1000 l.
made several Persons subscribe both Money and Land; though many of their Gang
that did so, to help the work on, had neither, except some worthy Members of
Parliament, that subscribed, intending for a Public Good; which gave them both
Life and Reputation. Then the Usurers, by Jerry-Squirt, and a Rod for the
Fool's Back, were whipped about, as in truth they deserved it; for by their
geting Subscriptions, and making People keep up their Money, and pay nothing
but clipped or bad, on purpose to make their Bills pass, on little Land and less
Money. Now we may hope by their quarrelling they will make good the Proverb,
That when Knaves fall out, honest Men will come by their own; and that their
joining together, will not give them more Credit, but rather less: for the two
John's in Nubibus in Conjunction in the House of Venus, being filled with
Mercury, are run retrograde into the Square of Saturn: Latet anguis in herba.

That the King may be served with 2 Millions and upon his Terms on the Fund
proposed; but not by the General Land-Bank; or National Land-Bank, by the
Projectors contrived: but upon a Real Land-Fund, or a Money and Land-Bank; by
Reconciling the Monied and Landed-Men, Increasing Trade, Supplying the Defects
of Money, the Improvement of Land, to the great Benefit of the Public, and of
every individual Member of it, grounded upon the Reasons following, viz.

As all natural Bodies are the best Directors for the Establishing the most
regular and most certain Effects; so all other Bodies, whether Politic or
Artificial, which are the Contrivances of Men, are most sure, when they are
best suited to that of the Natural. As for Example:

If the Monied and Landed-Men mutually agree, by a regular and honest Managery
they may let the Landed-Men have Money on their Freehold-Estates at 3 l. 10 s.
or 3 l. per Cent. per Annum, they being Trustees for their own Money; and their
own and others Lands, makes all others that deal with them safe, and get 10 if
not 20 l. per Cent. by the Money-Stock, and ^nrich and make the Landed-Men easy
by the improving their Estates. A Demonstration of this is plain.

If the printed Calculations of the Value of the Land of England be true, that
it is worth between 3 and 400 Millions, and the Money of the Kingdom about 6
Millions, and not 3 Millions good; but suppose the Land to be 300 Millions,
then there is but 3 Millions of good Money that might circulate, which is but 1
Million to 100; which with some difficulty of late, has served turn: then in
proportion we may well admit that one will negotiate or circulate ten; so that
if the Money-Stock give 6 l. per Cent. to the Usurers or Widows, etc. that live
upon the Use of their Money, or all that can be lent, and you lend it on
Land-Bills at 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. per Annum, then you get 29 l. per Cent. but
if you find your own Money in Stock or Bank, by what you subscribe, then you
have 35 l. per Cent. for your Stock, and this will be but for 2 or 3 years,
till the Value of your Bills is understood, and then they will circulate
themselves, when so you will have the Interest of 2 or 3 Millions for nothing;
which is 105000 l. per Ann. to enrich your Bank, and supply the Defects of
Money; and that these few Millions we are like to have of Milled Money, or
truly valuable Gold, may be employed in our Trade, and attend our Manufactures
and Growth, and circulate them for the Benefit of the Public, and to improve
your Lands to above 30, if not 40 years Purchase. This Method may serve the
Government; but then this is by one sort of a Money and Land-Bank, and on a
better Basis than any Banks now in being, which may lend 2 or 3 Millions on a
good Fund at 6 l. per Cent. and in a short time get as much: But if we are 12
Millions of People, as is presumed we are no less, then there may be 11
Millions 992 thousand Persons that have little advantage by it. But it will
enrich those that engage in it, which may be about 8000 Families, because Money
in such wise and rich hands, 100 l. in time may negotiate ten, which will be at
least 20 or 30 l. per Cent. but in 3 or 4 years after much more, being their
Bills will pass more current than Money; but at first must be negotiated with
Money, till it is better understood and put in Practice: But for these few years
last past the Badness of our Money made the Bills of very ordinary Goldsmiths
as well as Bankers, that set up the Scotch- East India Company, pass, and
better approved than either Silver or Gold, except Mill'd-Money, though 5 years
ago it was foreseen by Capt. A. Stamp, who offered a Million to have all the
Money and Plate recoined and milled to prevent Counterfeiting and Clipping,
abating 2 d. weight of the Ounce but Sterling Silver. But if Tallies or Bills
were made current by Parliament upon a Real Land-Fund at 3 l. per Cent. it
would be more valuable and advantageous to all, by having Trustees chosen to
the People's entire Satisfaction; let the Profits, which is the Interest, go
toward the Charge of the War, when once understood, will be more preferrable
than Money; but it being a new thing, it will require 3 or 4 years to put it in
Practice, as the Penny-post did, which is of Public use. Now, says the Country
Gentleman, or the Freeholder, (Philalethes) you said enough of the Profits to
make the People that live upon high Interest, and the rich Monied and
Landed-Men, to join their Stocks to let us have Money at 3 l. 10 s. or 3 l. per
Cent. but at the same time tell us, that Tallies or Bills on a Real Land-Fund
is most advantageous to all: But without Money to make them circulate, it will
not easily be put in practice under 2 or 3 years; in which time the Usurers,
and the Money and Landed-Men, may be hard upon us though we pay but 3 l. 10 s. or
3 l. per Cent. If it fall into the hands of those rich or cunning Sparks that
are joined, who have called one another in Print impudent K --, Libellers,
Stock-jobbers, or those cunning Men that got the King's Money, T.P.H.C.A.S.B.
If the Parliament cannot get them to account, how shall we, that have no Money
but Land, do it, if they exclude us the Managery?

For that Reason I will show you Landed-Men, though not in debt, and have no
Money to spare, how to improve your Land, and have Money for almost no use; and
also the Landed-Men that are in Debt, to be made easy, if not grow rich, by
letting both them and you, into the Profits and Managery of the Money and
Land-Bank till a real Land-Fund can be settled: If the Money and Land-Bank do
not answer your Ends, as I am sure it will, if you keep out the Stock-jobbers,
in Print, and the Kn --; and be careful in the Managry (as I can show how if
commanded or desired): For the Practick part is beyond the Theorick.

Therefore I will demonstrate here the Landed-men as well as the Monied may
have their Shares in the Managery, and in the Profits of a Money and Land-Bank,
which the Monied-men of the Bank will accept of. As Instance,

Suppose a Landed-man, not in Debt, or one in Debt, takes up or 1500 l. on 100
l. per An. good Land, at 3 l. or rather 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. from this Bank; he
may have 1000 l. in Money, to use or pay Debts, and 500 l. in Bills, which you
are to note are as good, if not better than Money, being on a Land-Fund; and
the Bank will thankfully accept them as Money in Stock, if you please: So then
you have in Bank-Stock, that is 500 l. which in time may make you 10 l. if not
20 l. per cent. but suppose at present but 6 l. 10 s. or if 7 l. per Cent. then
you have the use of your 1000 l. for nothing. So every Man that wants Money
that borrows of his Land, may if he please, by this Method, put into the Bank,
and then he has the use of the other for nothing; or he may put in, or what he
pleases, into the Bank, and then he does not only get the other for nothing,
but may have great Profits from the Bank, as well as share in Managery; and
this is true and honest without Tricks, etc. Or if those Gentlemen that borrow
upon their Estates, at 3 l. per cent. will (as I could demonstrate it is their
Interest they should) land or supply the King with a part of what they take up
(On a Real Land-Fund made Current): He will then have no occasion to borrow two
Millions any other way; and their Land will be improved in five Years time to a
much greater value than what they lend the King. But if the Honorable House do
not incline to it, then by Subscriptions, as the Bank of England, for
Recompenses, etc. To a Money and Land-Bank will do well, as aforesaid.

And whereas at first the Bank of Eng. gave 3 l. per cent. for Money to
negotiate their Bills, 1 d. per day is sufficient, or rather to abate 10 s. per
cent. of Interest Money will please.

I will not omit telling you what the Stock-Jobbers, or others, have said in
their printed Papers; sometimes the Land of England is worth 3 or 400 Millions,
and that one half of it is Mortgaged, or at least (...), which Calculation is
false, and a Sham: Though we may presume that a 30th or 40th part may be
engaged. Then we will suppose a short Scheme of ten Millions, at 3 l. 10 s. per
cent. which is a 40th part, to be sunk from 6 l. per cent. to 3 l. 10 s. will
save them near 300000 l. per An. which well employed will be a great
Improvement to their Estates; and also, by letting that interest go toward the
defraying the Charge of the War, will save them near 350000 l. per Annum, which
will be a good Annual Fund to raise Three Millions and a half, to pay at time;
or a Fund to pay Interest for above 5 Millions and, besides all Charges of
Offices and Officers. As Instance,

Pro bono Publico.
Admit 10 Millions, which is the 40th part, at 3 l. 10 s. per cent. per An.
that is, 350000 l. per An. to continue for 10 years, will raise and pay 3
Millions and a half. But suppose 50 Millions, which some call an 8th. but we
will admit a 6th part, which is much short of what some Projectors pretend to
know there is occasion for, the Interest of which 50 Millions, at 3 l. 10 s.
per cent. is 1750000 l. per An. which in ten years pays 17 Millions and a half
Debt. By this Scheme the Freee holders get almost as much as they give the
Public: But if it save their Land from being Taxed, then they get by this
Trust-Security of the Real Land-Fund, 17 Millions and a half, in ten years
time; which will enable the King and his Subjects to carry on the War with
Vigor, until his Majesty becomes Conqueror.

Collumba Dianae Philalethes.

Note, There has been much Giddiness in Print about the Subjects of Banks; and
there may be Counterfeit-Money, Bills, and Bad Titles: Those are Bug-Beats to
fright Children, but there are Men of Understanding can prevent all these
Fooleries, by Managery. The Parliament, in their great Wisdom, may for the
present settle Methods as they please, if nothing in this is approved; but it is
humbly prayed that no Bank be so established, but redeemable by Parliament, and
not to prevent better ways and means that may be offered by any other for the
future, or Proposed by

March 2. 1695. William Tindall.

London, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall,, 1695.


