An Account of A Pleasant Liquor, WHICH Dissolves the STONE IN THE Bladder or
Kidneys; And brings it away visibly, AS LIKEWISE Whatever Gravel may be
generated in those Parts; also eases the Pain of the Cholick; it being a mild
Anodyne, presently alleviating, and soon taking away all these Pains, without
the least Defect.

Only prepared by William Tipping and to be Sold by Mr. Benjamin James, in
(...) Passage in Three King Court in Lumbard ^^^eet (...) Mr. John Wakefeild,
in Watling Street, the (...) of Friday Street; and by no other. (...) the half
Pint, and proportionably to a (...)

An Account of a Pleasant Liquor, which Dissolves the Stone in the Bladder or
Kidneys, and brings it away visibly.
THE Author does not make this Publication, either to get himself a Name, or to
Amuse the World with a Fiction, of what has been thought Impossible; he relates
only Matter of Fact, with such clear and sensible Evidence as is undeniable. He
is no Physician, nor does he know any thing of Physic, more than the
Experience he has had by this Medicine, and by Providence discovered this rare
Secret, unknown to all the World besides; for he has reason to believe some
things in the Composition were never used in Physic. Its Virtues are as
follows.

For the Stone.
Any Person that is troubled with either Stone or Gravel in the Bladder or
Kidneys, upon taking this Medicine, receives immediate Ease from all Pains
attending those Distempers; unless it be from a Stone either in the Pelvis of
the Kidneys, or at the Neck of the Bladder or otherwhere, fretting the Parts,
or obstructing the Urinary Passages, and so fixed, that it is not to be removed
without Force, or dissolved without time; in which case, it may require 2 or 3
Hours time to loosen it, which it generally does in that time effectually, and
so mitigates the Pain by degrees, and in a short time after, according to the
Magnitude of the Stone, being constantly taken as directed, makes a perfect
Cure; and daily and visibly shows its Effects, by bringing away with the Urine,
the Stone dissolved, which plainly appears to be such, if it be suffered to
settle at the Bottom of a Vial, and the Water be poured off gently by
Inclination; for when the Matter that remains at the bottom has stood till it
is dry, you will find it to be a hard concreted Substance; the same with the
Calculi or Stones usually extracted from the Bladder by Lithotomists. This may
be seen likewise if you filtrate the Urine through a brown Paper.

Because the Author would give undeniable Satisfaction to any that should doubt
hereof, he desires that any Patient, who has been searched and found to have a
Stone, would try his Medicine, and they will quickly see a Dissolution of the
same, and in a short time after a perfect Cure.

The Medicine is so certain, that where there is no such Dissolution, it may be
concluded there is no Stone, for many have fancied they have had a Stone, when
they have had none, there be^^g some other Distempers that have like Symptoms.

The Stone has been observed to come away generally of a light Buff Color,
sometimes of a dark Color inclining to Red, sometimes of a Blood Red, but this
very seldom; sometimes like fine white Sand, shining. When it comes in any of
these Manners, it will appear full of little shining Particles like Silver.
Sometimes it comes very much like Chalk. Sometimes likewise the Water being
very foul, there will be nothing seen but a muddy Sediment, either of a White
or Reddish Color, of which likewise some Particles will shine when dried. But
this white Foulness will be seen in the Water of some Persons, though they have
not taken this Medicine.

Also some have a plain Dissolution of the Stone, but that is only when there
is a soft Stone after a Fit, but when this is taken, it comes away in greater
Quantities, it never ceasing to bring it away more or less every day.

Sometimes a large Stone in the Kidneys has been accompanied with a great black
Foulness in the Urine; and in this Case, the Dissolution of the Stone has not
been visible for some time; nay, some have taken the Medicine three Months
before it had its visible ^^fect, though it generally does in a few days.

Neither will the Dissolution be very visible, where there is an Ulcer caused
by a ragged Stone fretting the Part; but the Matter that comes from the Ulcer,
will be something changed in its Color, upon taking this Medicine; and
sometimes you will see large streaks of the Stony Substance.

Some Stones will be perfectly dissolved and brought away in a few days;
others, according to their Hardness and Largeness, may require as many Months;
but there has been none so hard, or so large, but have been brought away in
time; the Patient generally having Ease at the first taking of this Medicine,
and the Satisfaction of seeing a Quantity of the Stone, more or less, coming
from him daily.

Gravel.
In all sudden Fits of the Gravel, without any other Matter or Cause, I ever
observed that five Doses at most completed the Cure, though some that have been
afflicted a considerable time, full of crude Matter mixed with Gravel, and
perhaps a Stone, may take up a longer time.

The Cholick.
As for the tormenting Pain of the Cholick, I ever found it went off on the
first taking, except it proceeded from the Stone or Gravel, and then it may
require a longer time. A great many think they have the Cholick when really the
Grievance is occasioned from the Stone and Gravel. I have known a great many
afflicted with that Distemper at times, for some Years. Though this Water takes
off their Pains for the present, yet it often returns again. Several would not
allow it was occasioned by the Stone or Gravel, though through my Persuasion,
they kept to it, as for those Distempers which they then found to be their
Grievance; and by its clearing those Passages, they were wholly delivered from
that miserable Distemper. I am satisfied, that the Obstruction of the Passages
by Stone or Gravel, is generally the occasion of the Cholick.

Likewise those who are constantly afflicted, must take it not only for present
Ease, but take as directed for the Stone; which if it be their Grievance, it
will be perceived in their Water. I am well assured, if this is observed by
People, thousands will be delivered from those miserable Pains, both in Stomach
and Bowels, which they have groaned under for many Years.

Rheumatism and Gout.
As to the Rheumatism and Gout, I cannot but take notice of the wonderful
Effect it has upon them, in giving immediate Ease, and restoring soon after the
use of Limbs to those that before were Helpless. I must confess, as to these
two Particulars, I have had no great Experience, though for certain several have
been cured, therefore for that reason I recommend it to the World, not
questioning but it will prove Effectual, to the Good of many.

Directions to take it.
Those that are troubled with Stone or Gravel, are to take two Spoonfuls every
other Morning Fasting, or if there be Occasion, every Morning in as much
White Wind. Those whose Water is wholly stopped, may take it every hour, or once
in 2 hours the same quantity each Dose, except Children, who are to take a less
Quantity. And in a few hours they will see the Effects of it in their Water,
either by perfect Stone, or a thick Sediment, (for some Stones come away no
otherwise) or else Gravel, which will be reddish, not unlike to Brickdust. This
generally comes away in great Quantities, and for the most part the first time
of taking the Medicine.

For other Distempers it may be taken alone.

For the Cholick, take two large Spoonfuls in the Fit, and if it does not go
off in an hours time, then take two or three Spoonfuls more; I have very rarely
known it miss at first taking.

For a Rheumatism, Gout, or other Pains either in the Limbs or Bowels, take
three Spoonfuls Morning and Evening, or oftener if there be occasion.

I have in my foregoing Discourse given an Account in general of the Water
working on the Stone, and other Grievances; but as there are several different
Concurrences in Nature, so consequently it will not have the same Effect on
all. I design to speak to some of them, and some other things, which I really
believe will be for the public Good.

As I have said, it gives Ease for the Stone, at the first taking, which it
certainly does, if the Pains are occasioned by Wind, which is usually the cause
of Fits.

Some Stones are so placed, that it is not always entirely effectual; some are
very much afflicted with the Stone, as to be laid up some Months or Years,
being full of crude Matter, and subject to Vomit; which Illness, in time, this
Remedy will remove, and give them almost, if not entire, Ease, and soon after a
Cure. To those that are thus afflicted, it generally gives two or three Stools
a day, their Excrements being of an oily Substance, which will so continue till
their Distemper is gone off: They will find in this case, their Strength to
increase. This kind of Laxativeness affects none but what are so afflicted.

I have found several to whom it has given Ease, that have imagined they have
been cured, and have left it off; for which reason it soon after ^^^urned again
as violent as ever. Therefore, my Advice to such, is not to leave it off, as
long as there is any appearance of the Stone in their Water; for if there be
any remainder of the Stone, it will soon contract again, which otherwise it
may not do.

Now, all the ill Convenience that in any case can be found in taking this
Water, is this, it will set into some Stones, (...) as to make them rough,
which may cause for a time some little Pain; also in lessening the Stone, it
presses near the Neck of the Bladder, which likewise may cause Pain, yet thi^
rarely happens, for most Stones dissolve without Pain. I^ also couches the
Stone, by taking away the Wind, that might otherwise force it into the Neck of
the Bladder, where it usually causes much Pain.

For the Stone or Gravel, for which I gave a general Direction before, but not
finding it so agreeable in some Particulars, take these following Hints as an
Addition, In some Cases where the Cause is violent, take it Morning and
Evening, and oftener if you see occasion; by some it is found best to take it
in the Evening, though many Acidents may fall out, a particular Direction for
taking it cannot so nicely be given; where fore I recommend it to be taken as
the Party grieved finds it best to answer his End, in operating on the Stone,
etc. It is found by Experience that a Dose taken, will work upon the Stone five
or six hours before it looses its Virtue, though the Particles of the Stone do
not come away presently, yet in some Cases it will so do three or four days
together after the Dose is taken: And they that take it when the Fit is upon
them, to take away the Fit, may do it as often as they please, according as
they find the Effect of it answer their Purpose. But when this is done, they
may take it in a much less Proportion, as to their usual Dose: If White Wind be
too sharp or distastful to any one, it may be taken alone, or in any Liquor not
subject to cause Windyness, or binding the Body; and not to Eat or Drink in an
hour or two after, yet may safely go about any Business abroad, or stay at home
at their Pleasure.

FINIS.

