SIXTEEN SERMONS, Preached on Several Subjects.

By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The THIRD VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chilwell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVI.

The most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.


THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. GALAT. I. 8, 9. But though We, or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. Page 1.
SERMON II, III, IV. JOHN VII. 17. If any Man will do his Will^ he shall know of
the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. p. 31, 55,
85. SERMON V, VI, VII, VIII. LUKE XII. 15. And he said unto them, Take heed and
beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of the
things which he possesses. p. 109, 139, 165, 193. SERMON IX, X. MATTHEW. VI. 33.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you. p. 223, 253. SERMON XI. PSALM. CXIX. 96. I have
seen an end of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. p. 285.
SERMON XII, XIII. 2 PETER. I. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious Promises; that by th^se ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature. p.
319, 345. SERMON XIV, XV. 1 PETER IV. 19. Wherefore, let them that suffer
according to the will of God^ commit the keeping of their Souls to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. p. 367, 415. SERMON XVI. JOHN IX. 4. I
must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night comes when
no Man can work. p. 445.
A SERMON ON GALAT. I. 8, 9.
But though We, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before,
so say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye
have received, let him be accursed.
BEfore I come to handle the words, for our better understanding of them, I
shall give a brief account of the occasion of them, which was this. Some false
Apostles had made a great disturbance in the Churches planted by the Apostles
of Christ, by teaching that it was necessary for Christians, not only to
embrace, and entertain the Doctrines and Precepts of the Christian Religion;
but likewise to be Circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses. Of this disturbance
which was raised in the Christian Church, you have the History at large, Acts
15. and as in several other Churches, so particularly in that of Galatia, these
false Apostles and Seducers had perverted many, as appears by this Epistle; in
the beginning whereof St. Paul complains, that those who were seduced into this
Error of the necessity of Circumcision, and keeping the Law of Moses, had by
this new Article of Faith, which they had added to the Christian Religion,
quite altered the frame of it, and made the Gospel another thing from that
which our Savior delivered, and commanded his Apostles to teach all Nations.

For he tells us, ver. 6. of this Chapter, that he marvelled, that they were so
soon removed from him that called them by (or through) the grace of Christ,
unt^ another Gospel, that is, so different from that which they had been
instructed in by those who first preached the Gospel unto them: For the making
of any thing necessary to Salvation, which our Savior in his Gospel had not
made so, he calls another Gospel. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him
that called you by the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which is not
another, (...), which is no other thing, or by which I mean nothing else, but
that there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ;
as if he had said, when I say that ye are removed to another Gospel, I do not
mean, that ye have renounced Christianity, and are gone over to another
Religion, but that ye are seduced by those who have a mind to pervert the
Gospel of Christ, by adding something to it, as a necessary and essential part
of it, which Christ has not made so: This the Apostle calls a perverting or
overthrowing of the Gospel; because by thus altering the Terms and Conditions
of it, they made it quite another thing from what our Savior delivered it.

And then at the 8 th and 9 th verses he denounces a terrible Anathema against
those, whoever they should be, yea though it were an Apostle, or an Angel from
Heaven, who by thus perverting the Gospel of Christ (that is by making any
thing necessary to be believed or practiced, which our Savior in his Gospel
had not made so) should in effect preach another Gospel; but though we, or an
Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be Anathema, an accursed thing. And then to express
his confidence and vehemence in this matter, and to show that he did not speak
this rashly, and in a heat, but upon due consideration, he repeats it again in
the next verse, As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed.

From the words thus explained by the consideration of the Context, and of the
main scope and design of this Epistle, these following Observations do
naturally arise.

First, That the addition of any thing to the Christian Religion, as necessary
to be believed and practiced in order to Salvation, is a perverting the Gospel
of Christ, and preaching another Gospel.

Secondly, That no pretense of Infallibility is sufficient to authorize and
warrant the addition of any thing to the Christian Doctrine, as necessary to be
believed and practiced in order to Salvation.

Thirdly, That Christians may judge and discern when such additions are made.

Fourthly, and consequently, That since the declaration of the Gospel, and the
confirmation of it, there is no Authority in the Christian Church, to impose
upon Christians any thing as of necessity to Salvation, which the Gospel has
not made so.

Fifthly, That there is no visible Judge (how Infallible soever he may pretend
to be) to whose definitions and declarations in Matters of Faith and Practice,
necessary to Salvation, we are bound to submit, without examination, whether
these things be agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, or not.

Sixthly, and Lastly, Whosoever teaches any thing as of necessity to
Salvation, to be believed or practiced, besides what the Gospel of Christ has
made necessary, does fall under the Anathema here in the Text; because in so
doing, he perverteth the Gospel of Christ, and preaches another Gospel. Now
the Apostle expressly declares, that though we (that is, he himself, or any of the
Apostles) or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than what
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: As we said before, so say I now
again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received,
let him be accursed.

I. That the addition of any thing to the Christian Religion, as necessary to
be believed or practiced in order to Salvation, is a perverting the Gospel of
Christ, and preaching another Gospel.

This is evident from the Instances here given in this Epistle; for the Apostle
charge the false Apostles, with perverting the Gospel of Christ, and
preaching another Gospel, upon no other account, but because they added to the
Christian Religion, and made Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law of Moses,
an essential part of the Christian Religion, and imposed upon Christians the
practice of these things, and the belief of the necessity of them, as a
Condition of Eternal Salvation.

That this was the Doctrine of those false Teachers, we find expressly, Acts 15.
1. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught the Brethren, and said,
except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, y^ cannot be saved; and
ver. 24. in the Letter written by the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, to the
Churches abroad, there is this account given of it; forasmuch as we have heard,
that certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words, subverting
your Souls, saying ye must be circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom we gave no
such Commandment. Where you see that this Doctrine is declared to be of
pernicious consequence, tending to subvert the Souls of Men, and likewise to be
an addition to the Doctrine of the Gospel which was delivered by the Apostles,
who here with one consent declare, that they had given no such commandment;
that is; had delivered no such Doctrine as this, nor put any such yoke upon the
necks of Christians; but on the concontrary had declared, that the death of
Christ having put an end to the Jewish Dispensation, there was now no
obligation upon Christians to observe the Law of Moses.

And from the Reason of the thing it is very plain, that the addition of any
thing to the Christian Religion, as necessary to be believed or practiced in
order to Salvation, which the Gospel has not made so, is preaching another
Gospel; because it makes an essential change in the Terms and Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, which declares Salvation unto Men upon such and such Terms,
and no other. Now to add any other Terms to these, as of equal necessity with
them, is to alter the Condition of the Covenant of the Gospel, and the Terms of
the Christian Religion, and consequently to preach another Gospel, by declaring
other Terms of Salvation, than Christ in his Gospel has declared, which is to
pervert the Gospel of Christ.

II. No pretense of Infallibility is sufficient to Authorize and Warrant the
addition of any thing to the Christian Doctrine, as necessary to be believed or
practiced, in order to Salvation. After the delivery of the Gospel by the Son
of God, and the publication of it to the World by his Apostles, who were
Commissioned and Inspired by him to that purpose, and the confirmation of all,
by the greatest and most unquestionable Miracles that ever were, no person
whatever, that brought any other Doctrine, and declared Salvation to Men upon
any other terms than those which are declared in the Gospel, was to be
credited, what pretense soever he should make to a Divine Commission, or an
Infallible Assistance. The Apostle makes a Supposition as high as can be, though
we (says he) or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be an Anathema. If the Apostles
themselves, who were Divinely Commissioned and Infallibly assisted in the
Preaching of the Gospel, should afterward make any addition to it, or declare
any other Terms of Salvation, than those which are declared in the Gospel which
they had already published to the World, they ought not to be regarded.

And the Reason is plain; because what claim soever any Person may make to
Infallibility, and what demonstration soever he may give of it, we cannot
possibly believe him, if he contradict himself, and deliver Doctrines which do
plainly clash with one another: For if he spoke true at first, I cannot believe
him declaring the contrary afterward: And if he did not speak true at first, I
cannot believe him at all; because he can give no greater proof of his Divine
Commission, and Infallible Assistance and Inspiration, than he did at first.

And the Reason is the same, if an Angel from Heaven should come and preach a
contrary Doctrine to that of the Gospel, he were not to be believed neither;
because he could bring no better Credentials of his Divine Commission and
Authority, than Those had who published the Gospel, and consequently he ought
not to be credited in any thing contrary to what they had published before. For
though a Man were never so much disposed to receive a Revelation from God, and to
submit his Faith to it; yet it is not possible for any Man to believe God
against God himself; that is, to believe two Revelations, plainly contradictory
to one another, to be from God; and the reason of this is very obvious; because
every Man does first and more firmly believe this Proposition or Principle,
That Contradictions cannot be true, than any Revelation whatsoever; for if
Contradictions may be true, then no Revelation from God can signify any thing,
because the contrary may be equally true, and so truth and falsehood be all one.

The Apostle indeed only makes a Supposition, when he says, though we, or an
Angel from Heaven, preach any other Doctrine unto you; but by this Supposition
he plainly bars any Man, or Company of Men, from adding to the Christian
Religion any Article of Faith or Point of Practice, as of necessity to
Salvation, which the Gospel has not made so; I say any Man, or Company of Men,
whatever Authority or Infallibility they may lay claim to, because they cannot
pretend to a clearer Commission, and greater Evidence of Infallible Assistance,
than an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven, and yet the Text tells us, that would
not be a sufficient warrant to preach another Gospel; it might indeed bring in
question that which they had preached before, but could not give Credit and
Authority to any thing plainly contrary to it, and inconsistent with it.

III. Christians may judge and discern when another Gospel is preached, when
new Articles of Faith, or Points of Practice, not enjoined by the Gospel, are
imposed upon Christians. This the Apostle supposes every particular Church,
and for ought I know every particular Christian, that is duly Instructed in the
Christian Religion, to be a competent Judge of, and to be sufficiently able to
discern when another Gospel is preached, and new Terms and Conditions, not
declared in the Gospel, are added to the Christian Religion; for if they be not
able to judge of this, the Apostle does in vain caution them against the
seduction of those who perverted the Doctrine of Christ, and endeavored to
remove them from him that had called them by the grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel.

It may perhaps be said, that there was no need that they should be able to
discern and judge of the Doctrines of those false Teachers, it was sufficient
for them to believe the Apostle concerning the Doctrines of those Seducers,
when he declared to them the falsehood and pernicious consequence of them. But
the Apostle speaks to them upon another supposition, which does necessarily
imply, that they were able to discern and judge what Doctrines were agreeable
to the Gospel, and what not; for he puts the Case, that if he himself, or any
of the Apostles, or an Angel from Heaven, should preach to them another
Doctrine, contrary to that of the Gospel, they ought to reject it with
detestation; but this does necessarily suppose them able to judge, when such
Doctrines were preached, and consequently that all things necessary to be
believed and practiced by all Christians are clearly and plainly declared in
the Gospel; all the Doctrines whereof are now contained in the Holy Scriptures,
in which all things necessary to Faith and a good Life are so plainly
delivered, that any sober and inquisitive Person may learn them from thence,
and the meanest Capacity, by the help and direction of their Guides and
Teachers, may be Instructed in them.

And this is not only the Principle of Protestants, but the express and
constant Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers of the Church, whatever the Church of
Rome, for the maintaining of her usurped Authority over the Consciences of Men,
pretends to the contrary. And if this were not so, that Men are able to discern
and judge which are the Doctrines of the Gospel, and what is contrary to them;
the Doctrine of the Gospel was in vain preached, and the Holy Scriptures
containing that Doctrine were written to no purpose.

Some things in Scripture are granted to be obscure and difficult, on purpose
to exercise the Study and Enquiries of those who have leisure and capacity for
it: but all things necessary are sufficiently plain; otherwise it would be
impossible to judge when another Gospel is preached, which the Apostle here
supposes the Galatians capable of doing. For if the Revelation of the Gospel
be not sufficiently plain in all things necessary to be believed and practiced,
then Christians have no Rule whereby to judge what Doctrines are agreeable to
the Gospel, and what not: for an obscure Rule is of no use; that is, in truth
is no Rule to those to whom it is obscure.

I proceed to the IVth Observation, which is plainly consequent from those laid
down before; namely, that since the Declaration of the Gospel, and the
Confirmation given to it, there is no Authority in the Christian Church to
impose upon Christians any thing, as of necessity to Salvation, which the
Gospel has not made so.

The Commission given by our Lord and Savior to his Apostles, was to preach
the Gospel to all Nations, or (as St. Matthew expresses it) to go and teach all
Nations, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them; and this is
that which we call the Gospel, viz. that Doctrine which Christ commanded his
Apostles to preach and publish to the World; and if the Apostles themselves had
exceeded their Commission, and added any other points of Faith or Practice to
those which our Savior gave them in charge to teach and publish to the World,
they had in so doing been guilty of that which St. Paul here in the Text
charge the false Apostles with, viz. of preaching another Gospel: And if the
Apostles had ^o Authority to add any thing to the Gospel, much less can any
pretend to it; since they have neither so immediate a Commission, nor such a
miraculous power to give testimony to them, that they are Teachers come from
God.

Now this Doctrine of the Gospel, which the Apostles preached to the World, is
that which Christians are so often, and so earnestly by the Apostles in all
their Epistles Exhorted to continue in, and not to suffer themselves to be
shaken in mind, by every wind of new Doctrine, because that which the Apostles
had delivered to them, was the entire Doctrine of the Gospel, which was never
to receive any addition or alteration. This is that which St. Peter calls the
Holy Commandment which was delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2. 21. It had been
better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they
have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them speaking
in all probability of those who were seduced by the errors of the Gnostics,
from the purity of the Christian Doctrine delivered to them by the Apostles.
This likewise St. Paul calls the common Faith, Titus 1. 4. and St. Jude ver. 3.
the common Salvation; that is, the Doctrine which contains the common Terms of
our Salvation, and the Faith w hich was once delivered to the Saints, that is,
by the Apostles of our Lord, who published the Gospel; once delivered, that is,
once for all, so as never afterward to admit of any change or alteration. This
Faith he exhorts Christians earnestly to contend for, against those several
Sects of Seducers, which were crept into the Christian Church, and did
endeavor by several Arts to pervert the Gospel of Christ, and to deprave the
Faith delivered by the Apostles.

So that the Doctrine of the Gospel published by the Apostles, is fixed and
unalterable, and there can be no Authority in the Church to make any change in
it, either by taking from it, or adding any thing to it, as necessary to be
believed or practiced in order to Salvation.

V. It follows likewise from the foregoing Observations, that there is no
visible Judge (how much soever ^e may pretend to Infallibility) to whose
determination and decision in matters of Faith and Practice necessary to
Salvation, Christians are bound to submit without examination, whether those
things be agreeable to the Doctrine of the Gospel, or not.

When our Savior appeared in the World, though he had Authority enough to exact
belief from Men, yet because there was a standing Revelation of God made to the
Jews, he appeals to that Revelation, as well as to his own Miracles, for the
truth of what he said, and offered himself, and his Doctrine, to be tried by
the agreeableness of it to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and the
Predictions therein concerning him. And this was but reasonable, it being
impossible for any Man to receive two Revelations, as from God, without liberty
to examine whether they be agreeable to, and consistent with one another. In
like manner the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, though they were guided and
assisted by an Infallible Spirit, and had an immediate Commission from Christ
to preach the Doctrine of the Gospel, did not require from Men absolute
submission to their Doctrines and Dictates, without examination of what they
delivered, whether it were agreeable to that Divine Revelation which was
contained in the ancient Scriptures.

This was St. Paul's constant custom and way of teaching among the Jews, who
had received the Revelation of the Old Testament; he did not dictate to them by
virtue of his Infallibility, but reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, and
required their belief no further, than what he said, should upon examination
appear agreeable to the Scriptures. So we find Acts 17. 2, 3. And Paul, as his
manner was, went in unto them (speaking of the Jews) and three Sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging, that Christ
must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus
whom I preach unto you, is the Christ. And Chap. 18. 28. he mightily convinced
the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Script^res, that Jesus was the
Christ. And St. Paul was so far from reproving them for examining his Doctrine
by the Scriptures, that he commended it, as an argument of a Noble and Generous
mind in the Bereans, that they did not give full assent to his Doctrine, 'till
upon due search and examination they were satisfied that what he had said was
agreeable to the Scriptures. Chap. 17. 11, 12. Where speaking of the Bereans,
it is said, That these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word, with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so; therefore many of them believed; that is,
because upon search they found what he delivered to be agreeable to the
Scriptures; and it was not a slight, but diligent and deliberate search, they
took time to examine things thoroughly; for it is said they searched the
Scriptures daily. And here in the Text St. Paul puts the case, that if he, or
any other of the Apostles, concerning whose Divine Commission and Assistance
they were so fully satisfied, should deliver any thing to them contrary to the
Gospel which they had formerly preached, they were to reject it with the
greatest abhorrence and detestation; and this necessarily supposes a liberty
to examine what was delivered, even by those whom they believed to be
Infallibly assisted, and a capacity to discern and judge whether what they said
was agreeable to the Gospel at first delivered to them, or not.

And after this, shall any Person or Church (what Claim soever they may make to
Infallibility) assume to themselves an Authority to dictate in matters of
Faith, and that their Dictates ought to be received with an absolute
submission, and without liberty to examine whether they be agreeable to the
Faith once delivered to the Saints; and though they add new Articles to the
Christian Faith, and of which there is not the least foot-step or intimation in
any of the Ancient Creeds of the Christian Church, and do plainly impose upon
Christians the Practice and Belief of several things as necessary to Salvation,
which the Gospel never declared to be so, yet no body shall judge of this, but
every Man ought without more ado, to believe blindfold, and to resign up his
Understanding and Judgment to the directions of this visible Infallible Judge?

But surely this is not the reasonable Obedience of Faith, but the forced
submission of Slaves to the Tyranny of their Masters. Christians are expressly
forbid to call any Man Father or Master upon Earth, because we have one Father
and Master in Heaven. Now to make an absolute submission of our Understandings
to any upon Earth, so as without examination to receive their Dictates in
Matters of Faith, is surely, if any thing can be so, to call such a Person
Father and Master, because a greater submission than this we cannot pay to our
Father who is in Heaven, even to God himself. I come now to the

Sixth, and last Observation from the Text; That whosoever teaches any thing
as of necessity to Salvation, to be believed or practiced, besides what the
Gospel of Christ has made necessary, does fall under the Anathema here in the
Text; because they that do so, do according to the mind of St. Paul, pervert
the Gospel of Christ, and Preach another Gospel. For the Reason why he charge
the false Apostles with Preaching another Gospel, and those that were seduced
by them, as being removed from him that called them by the Grace of Christ unto
another Gospel, is plainly this; that they had changed the Terms of the
Christian Religion, by adding new Articles to it, which were not contained in
the Gospel; that is, by making it necessary to believe it to be so, because
they taught so. Now St. Paul expressly declares this to be Preaching another
Gospel, because they plainly altered the Terms of Salvation declared in the
Gospel, and made that to be necessary to the Salvation of Men, which the Gospel
had not made so.

And whatever Person or Church does the same, does in^ur the same guilt, and
falls under the Anathema and Censure here in the Text; yea, though he were an
Apostle, or an Angel: And I am sure no Bishop or Church in the World can
pretend either to an equal Authority or Infallibility with an Apostle, or an
Angel from Heaven.

Let us then hear what St. Paul declares in this Case, and consider seriously,
with what earnestness and vehemence he declares it; though we (says he) or an
Angel from Heaven preach any ^her Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him b^ accursed. As we said before, so say I now again,
If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let
him be accursed. St. Paul you see is very earnest in this matter, and very
peremptory, and therefore I cannot but think this Declaration of his to be more
considerable, and every way more worthy of our regard and dread, than all the
Anathema's of the Council of Trent, which in direct affront and contempt of
this Anathema of St. Paul, has presumed to add so many Articles to the
Christian Religion, upon the counterfeit warrant of Tradition, for which there
is no ground or warrant from the Scripture, or from any Ancient Creed of the
Christian Church.

And for the truth of this, I appeal to the Creed of Pope Pius the IV th,
compiled out of the Definitions of the Council of Trent; by which Council the
Pope only is Authorized to Interpret the true sense and meaning of the Canons
and Decrees of that Council; and consequently his interpretations must be of
equal force and authority with that of the Council it self. So that whatsoever
he has put into ^is new Creed for an Article of Faith, ought to be received
with the ^ame pious affection and veneration, as if the Creed had been compiled
by the Council it self; because the Pope, it seems, and no body else
understands the true meaning of that Council, at least is thought fit to
declare it. And therefore one may justly wonder at the presumption of those,
who after this Declaration of the Council, have taken upon them to Expound the
Catholic Faith, and to represent that Religion to us, as it is defined in that
Council; because if there be any Controversy about the meaning of its
Definitions (as there have been a great many, even betwixt those who were
present at the Council when those Definitions were made) none but the Pope
himself can certainly tell the meaning of them.

Now in this Creed of Pope Pius there are added to the Ancient Creed of the
Christian Church twelve or thirteen new Articles, as concerning Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints, the
Communion in one kind, and that the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress
of all Churches, and that there is no Salvation to be had out of it; and
several other Points, all which have either no foundation in Scripture, or are
plainly contrary to it, and none of them ever esteemed as Articles of Faith in
the Ancient Christian Church for the first five hundred years; and yet they are
now obtruded upon Christians, as of equal necessity to Salvation, with the
Twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, and this under a pretense of
Infallibility, which St. Paul tells us would not have justified an Apostle, or
an Angel from Heaven, in making such additions to the Christian Religion, and
the imposing of any thing as necessary to Salvation, which is not so declared
by the Gospel of Christ.

And all that they have to say for this, is, That We do not pretend to be
Infallible; but there is a necessity of an Infallible Judge to decide these
Controversies, and to him they are to be referred. Which is just as if in a
plain matter of Right, a contentious and confi^^nt Man should desire a
reference, and contrive the matter so as to have it referred to himself, upon a
sleeveless pretense, without any proof or evidence, that he is the only Person
in the World that has Authority and Infallible Skill to decide all such
differences. Thus the Church of Rome would deal with us in Things which are as
plain as the noonday; as Whether God has forbidden the Worship of Images in
the second Commandment? Whether our Savior did Institute the Sacrament in both
kinds? Whether the People ought not to read the Scriptures, and to have the
public Service of God in a known Tongue? These, and the like, they would have
us refer to an Infallible Judge; and when we ask who he is, they tell us that
their Church, which has imposed these things upon Christians, and made these
additions to the Gospel of Christ, is that Infallible Judge. But if she were as
Infallible as she pretends to be, even as an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven,
St. Paul has denounced an Anathema against her, for preaching another Gospel,
and making those things necessary to the Salvation of Men, which are not
contained in the Gospel of Christ.

The Inference from all this Discourse in short, is this; That we should
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and not suffer
our selves by the confident pretenses of Seducers, to be removed from him that
has called us through the grace of Christ unto another Gospel. The necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and the common Terms of Salvation are so
plain, that if any Man be ignorant of them, it is his own fault; and if any go
about to impose upon us any thing as of necessity to be believed and practiced
in order to Salvation, which is not declared to be so in the Holy Scriptures,
which contain the true Doctrine of the Gospel, what Authority soever they
pretend for it, yea, though they assume to themselves to be Insallible; the
Apostle has plainly told us what we are to think of them; for he has put the
Case as high as is possible here in the Text, when he says, Though We, or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed.

I will conclude all with that Counsel which the Spirit of God gives to the
Churches of Asia, Revel. 3. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received and
heard, and hold fast; and Chap. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou
shall suffer: be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

A SERMON ON JOHN. VII. 17.
If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self.
SINCE there are so many different Opinions and Apprehensions in the World
about Matters of Religion, and every Sect and Party does with so much
confidence pretend that they, and they only, are in the truth; The great
difficulty and question is, by what means Men may be secured from dangerous
Errors and Mistakes in Religion. For this end some have thought it necessary
that there should be an Infallible Church, in the Communion whereof every Man
may be secured from the dangers of a wrong Belief. But if seems God has not
thought this necessary: If he had, he would have revealed this very thing more
plainly than any particular Point of Faith whatsoever. He would have told us
expressly, and in the plainest terms, that he had appointed an Infallible Guide
and Judge in Matters of Faith, and would likewise have told us as plainly who
he was, and where we might find him, and have recourse to him upon all
occasions; because the sincerity of our Faith depending upon him, we could not
be safe from mistake in particular Points, without so plain and clear a
Revelation of this Infallible Judge, that there could be no mistake about him;
nor could there be an end of any other Controversies in Religion, unless this
Infallible Judge (both that there is one, and who he is) were out of
Controversy. But neither of these are so: It is not plain from Scripture that
there is an Infallible Judge and Guide in Matters of Faith; much less is it
plain who he is; and therefore we may certainly conclude, that God has not
thought it necessary that there should be an Infallible Guide and Judge in
Matters of Faith, because he has revealed no such thing to us; and that
Bishop, and that Church who only have arrogated Infallibility to themselves,
have given the greatest evidence in the World to the contrary; and have been
detected, and stand convinced of the greatest Errors: And it is in vain for any
Man, or Company of Men, to pretend to Infallibility, so long as the evidence
that they are deceived is much greater and clearer than any proof they can
produce for their Infallibility.

If then God has not provided an Infallible Guide and Judge in Matters of
Faith; there is some other way whereby Men may be secured against dangerous and
damnable Errors in Religion, and whereby they may discern Truth from Imposture,
and what Doctrines are from God, and what not; and this our Savior declares to
us here in the Text, namely, That an honest and sincere mind, and a hearty
desire to do the Will of God, is the best Preservative against fatal Errors and
Mistakes in Matters of Religion; (...), If any Man desire to do his Will, he
shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

There are two dangerous mistakes in Religion: To reject any thing which really
comes from God; and To receive and entertain any thing as from God, which does
not really come from him.

First, To reject any thing which really comes from God. This mistake the Jews
frequently fell into, when they rejected the true Prophets which God from time
to time sent to them, slighting their Message, and persecuting their Persons:
but they miscarried most fatally and remarkably in their contempt of the true
Messiah, that great Prophet whom they had so long expected, and whom God sent
at last, to bring Salvation to them; but when he came, they knew him not, nor
would receive him, but used him with all the despite and contempt imaginable,
not as a Teacher come from God, but as a Deceiver, and Impostor.

Now the danger of rejecting any thing that comes from God, consists in this,
that it cannot be done without the highest Affront to the Divine Majesty. To
reject a Divine Message, or Revelation, is to oppose God, and fight against
him. So our Savior tells the Jews, that in despising him, they despised him
that sent him.

Secondly, There is also another dangerous mistake on the other hand, in
entertaining any thing as a Revelation from God, which is not really from him.
And this likewise the Jews were frequently guilty of, in receiving the false
Prophets which spoke in the name of the Lord, when he had not sent them. And
this is commonly the temper of those who reject the truth, greedily to swallow
error and delusion. So our Savior tells us of the Jews, John 5. 43. I am come
in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive. This Prediction of our Savior's concerning the
Jews, was fully accomplished; for after they had rejected him, who gave such
abundant evidence that he was the true Messiah, and a Teacher sent from God,
they received others, who really came in their own names, and ran after those
who pretended to be the Messiah, and were in great numbers destroyed with them.
And this is very just with God, that those who receive not the truth in the
love of it, should be given up to strong delusions, to believe lies.

No^ these being the two great dangerous Mistakes in Religion which Men are
liable to, my Work at this time shall be to show, how a sincere desire and
endeavor to do the Will of God, is a security to Men against both those
dangers; and it will appear to be so, upon these two accounts.

I. Because he who sincerely desires and endeavors to do the Will of God, is
hereby better qualified and disposed to make a right Judgment of Spiritual and
Divine things.

II. Because God's Providence is more especially concerned to secure such
Persons from dangerous Errors and Mistakes in things which concern their
Eternal Salvation. These shall be the two Heads of my following Discourse.

First, Because he who sincerely desires and endeavors to do the Will of God,
is hereby better qualified and disposed to make a right Judgment of Spiritual
and Divine Things, and that for these two Reasons.

I. Because such a Person has a truer notion of God, and Divine Things.

II. Because he is more impartial in his search and enquiry after Truth.

First, Because such a Person has a truer notion of God, and Divine Things. No
Man is so likely to have clear and true apprehensions of God, as a good Man,
because he has transcribed the Divine perfections in his own mind, and is
himself in some measure and degree what God is. And for this Reason it is, that
the Scripture so often lays the foundation of all Divine Knowledge in the
practice of Religion. Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to
depart from Evil, is Understanding; and Psalm. 111. 10. The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of Wisdom (that is) the Principle and Foundation of it; a good
understanding have all they that do his Commandments: Whereas the Vices and
Lusts of Men darken their Reason, and distort their Understandings, and fill
the Mind with gross and sensual apprehensions of Things, and thereby render Men
unfit to discern those Truths which are of a Spiritual Nature and tendency, and
altogether indisposed to receive them. For though the Vices of Men be properly
seated in their Wills, and do not possess their Understandings; yet they have a
bad influence upon them, as Fumes and Vapors from the Stomach are wont to
affect the Head.

Nothing indeed is more natural to the Mind and Understanding of Men, than the
knowledge of God; but we may abuse our Faculties, and render them unfit for the
discerning even of their proper Objects.

When Men by wicked Practices have rendered themselves unlike to God, they will
not love to retain the knowlenge of him in their Minds, but will become vain in
their imaginations concerning him. What Clouds and Mists are to the Bodily Eye,
that the Lusts and Corruptions of Men are to the Understanding; they hinder it
from a clear perception of Heavenly Things; the pure in Heart, they are best
qualified for the sight of God.

Now according as a Man's Notions of God are, such will be his apprehensions of
Religion. All Religion is either Natural, or Revealed: Natural Religion
consists in the belief of a God, and in right conceptions and apprehensions
concerning him, and in a due reverence and observance of him, and in a ready
and cheerful obedience to those Laws which he has imprinted upon our Nature;
and the Sum of our Obedience consists in our conformity to God, and an
endeavor to be like him. For, supposing God to have made no external
Revelation of his Mind to us, we have no other way to know his Will, but by
considering his Nature, and our own; and if so, then he that resembles God
most, is like to understand him best, because he finds those perfections in
some measure in himself, which he contemplates in the Divine Nature; and
nothing gives a Man so sure a notion of things, as practice and experience:
Every good Man is in some degree partaker of a Divine Nature, and feels that in
himself, which he conceives to be in God: So that this Man does experience what
others do but talk of; he sees the Image of God in himself, and is able to
discourse of him from an inward sense and feeling of his Excellency, and
Perfections.

And as for Revealed Religion, the only design of that is, to revive and
improve the Natural Notions which we have of God; and all our Reasonings about
Divine Revelation, are necessarily gathered by our Natural Notions of Religion:
And therefore he that sincerely endeavors to do the will of God, is not apt to
be imposed upon by the vain and confident pretenses of Divine Revelation; but
if any Doctrine be proposed to him, which pretends to come from God, he
measures it by those steady and sure Notions which he has of the Divine Nature
and Per^ections, and by those he will easily discern whether it be worthy of
God, or not, and likely to proceeed from him: He will consider the nature and
tendency of it, and whether it be (as the Apostle expresses it) a Doctrine
according to Godliness, such as is agreeable to the Divine Nature and
Perfections, and tends to make us like to God: If it be not, though an Angel from
Heaven should bring it, he will not receive it: If it be, he will not reject it
upon every idle pretense, and frivolous exception that prejudiced and ill
minded Men may make against it; but after he is satisfied of the reasonableness
and purity of the Doctrine, he will accept of such evidence and confirmation of
it, as is fit for God to give to his own Revelations; and if the Person that
brings it, has the attestation of Miracles (which is necessary in case it be a
new Doctrine) and if he carry on no Earthly Interest and Design by it, but does
by his Life and Actions make it evident that he aims at the glory of God, and
the good of Men, in this case, a good Man, whose mind is free from passion and
prejudice, will easily assent, that this Man's Doctrine is of God, and that he
does not speak of himself. This was the Evidence which our Savior offered to
the Jews, in vindication of himself, and his Doctrine, Joh. 7. 18. He that
speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that
sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him; as if he had
said, hereby may you distinguish one that really comes from God, from an
Impostor: If any Man seek his own glory, you may conclude that God has not
sent him, but whatever he pretends, that he speaks of himself; but he who by
his Life, and the course of his Actions demonstrates that he seeks the honor
of God, and not any interest and advantage of his own, the same is true, and
there is no unrighteousness in him; that is, no falsehood or design to deceive
(for so the word (...) does sometimes signify); you may conclude such an one
to be no Deceiver, or Impostor. And if any Man sincerely desires and endeavors
to do the will of God, he may by such Marks and Characters as these, judge of
any Doctrine that pretends to be from God, whether it be so or not. This is the
first Reason; because he that sincerely desires and endeavors to do the will
of God, has the truest notion of God, and of Divine Things.

Secondly, Such a Person is more impartial in his search and enquiry after
Truth, and therefore more likely to find it, and to discern it from Error. He
that has an honest mind, and sincerely endeavors to do the will of God, is
not apt to be swayed and biassed by any Interest or Lust: for his great
Interest is to please God, and he makes all his other Interests and
concernments to stoop and yield to that. But if a Man be governed by any
earthly Interest or Design, he will measure all things by that, and is not at
liberty to entertain any thing that crosses it, and to judge equally of any
Doctrine that is opposite to his Interest. This our Savior gives for a Reason,
why the great Rabbis and Teachers among the Jews did not believe and embrace
his Doctrine, John 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of
another? If Men have any other design in Religigion than to please God, and to
advance his Honor and Glory in the World, no wonder if they be apt to reject
the most Divine Truths; because these are Calculated, not to approve us to Men,
but to God.

And as Vainglory, and a desire of the Applause of Men; so likewise does every
other Lust make a Man partial in his Judgment of things, and clap a false Biass
upon his Understanding, which carries it off from Truth, and makes it to lean
toward that side of the Question which is most favorable to the Interest of
his Lusts. A vicious Man is not willing to entertain those Truths which would
cross and check him in his course: He has made the Truth his Enemy, and
therefore he thinks himself concerned to oppose it, and rise up against it: The
light of it offends him, and therefore he shuts his Eyes that he may not see
it. Those holy and pure Doctrines, which are from God, reprove the Lusts of
Men, and discover the Deformity of them; and therefore no wonder if bad Men be
so hard to be reconciled to them. This account our Savior likewise gives of
the fierce Enmity of the Jews to him, and his Doctrine, Jo^. 3. 19, 20. Light
is come into the World, and Men loved darkness rather than light, because their
deeds were evil; for every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

The vicious Inclinations of Men are a dead weight upon their Understandings,
and able to draw down the Scales against the clearest Truths: For though it be
absolutely in no Man's power to believe, or to dis-believe what he will; yet
Men's Lives have many times a great influence upon their Understandings, to
make Assent easy, or difficult; and as we are forward to believe what we have
a mind to, so are we very backward and slow in yielding our Assent to any thing
that crosses our Inclinations. Men that allow themselves in ungodliness and
worldly lusts, will not easily believe those Doctrines, which charge Men so
strictly with all manner of Holiness, and Purity.

This is the way which the Devil has always used to blind the eyes of Men,
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ might not shine into them. And
certainly the most effectual way to keep Men in Infidelity, is to debauch them
in their Lives; therefore the Apostle gives this as the reason of the
Infidelity of Men in the last times, 2 These. 2. 12. They believed not the
Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness. When Men once abandon themselves to
lewd and vicious practices, Infidelity becomes their Interest; because they
have no other way to defend and excuse a wicked Life, but by denying the Truth
which opposes it, and finds fault with it.

That Man only stands fair for the entertainment of Truth, who is under the
Dominion of no Vice, or Lust; because he has nothing to corrupt or bribe him,
to seduce him, or draw him aside in his enquiry after Truth; he has no
interest but to find the Truth, and follow it: He is enquiring after the way to
Heaven, and Eternal Happiness, and he has the indifferency of a Traveller,
which is not inclined to go this way rather than another; for his concernment
is to find out the right way, and to walk in it: Such an indifferency of Mind
has every good Man, who sincerely desires to do the will of God; he stands
ready to receive Truth, when sufficient Evidence is offered to convince him of
it; because he has no manner of concernment that the contrary Proposition
should be true. As in Mathematics, a Man is ready to give his Assent to any
Proposition, that is sufficiently demonstrated to him, because he has no
inclination or affection to one side of the Question more than to the other;
all his design and concernment is to find out the Truth, on which side soever
it lies; and he is like to find it, because he is so indifferent, and
impartial. But if a Man be biased by any Lust, and addicted to any vicious
Practice, he is then an interested Person, and concerned to be partial in his
Judgment of Things, and is under a great temptation to Infidelity, when the
Truths of God are proposed to him; because whatever the Evidence for them be,
he cannot but be unwilling to own the truth of that Doctrine, which is so
contrary to his Inclination and Interest. If the Affections and Interests of
Me^ were as deeply concerned, and as sensibly touched in the truth of
Mathematical Propositions, as they are in the Principles of Morality, and
Religion, we should find, that when a Proposition stood in their way, and lay
cross to their Interest, though it were never so clearly demonstrated, yet they
would raise a dust about it, and make a thousand cavils, and fence even against
the evidence of a Demonstration; they would palliate their Error with all the
Skill and Art they could and though the absurdity of it were never so great and
palpable, yet they would hold it fast against all Sense and Reason, and face
down Mankind in the obstinate defense of it; for we have no reason to doubt,
but that they who in Matters of Religion will believe directly contrary to what
they see, would if they had the same interest and passions to sway them in the
case, believe contrary to the clearest Mathematical Demonstration; for where
there is an obstinate Resolution not to be convinced, all the Reason and
Evidence in the World signifies nothing.

Whereas he that is biassed by no Passion or Interest, but has an honest Mind,
and is sincerely desirous to do the Will of God, so far as he knows it, is
likely to judge very impartially concerning any Doctrines that are proposed to
him: For if there be not good Evidence that they are from God, he has no
reason to deceive himself, in giving credit to them; and if there be good
Evidence that they are Divine, he has no interest or inclination to reject
them; for it being his great design to do the will of God, he is glad of all
opportunities to come to the knowledge of it, that he may do it.

Thus you see how a sincere desire and endeavor to obey the Will of God, does
secure Men against fatal Errors and Mistakes in Matters of Religion; because
such Persons are hereby better disposed to make a right Judgment of Divine
Things, both because they have truer and surer notions of God and Religion, and
are more impartial in their search and enquiry after Truth. This is the first
Account.

Secondly, Another Reason why they who sincerely desire to do the Will of God,
have a great security in discerning Truth from Error, is, because the
Providence of God is more especially concerned to preserve such Persons from
dangerous Errors and Mistakes in Things which concern their Eternal Salvation.
When Men are of a teachable Temper, God loves to reveal himself and his Truth
to them; and such is an humble and obedient frame of Mind. Psalm. 25. 9. The
meek will he guide in Judgment; the meek will he teach his way. The proper
disposition of a Scholar, is to be willing to learn; and that which in Religion
we are to learn, is what is the good and acceptable will of God, that we may do
it; for Practice is the end of Knowledge. If you know these things (says our
Blessed Lord) happy are ye if ye do them. It is necessary to know the will of
God; but we are happy only in the doing of it: and if any Man be desirous to do
the Will of God, his Goodness is such, that he will take effectual care to
secure such an one against dangerous and fatal Errors. He that has an honest
Mind, and would do the will of God, if he knew it, God will not suffer him to
remain ignorant of it, or to be mistaken about it, in any necessary Points of
Faith, or Practice.

St. Paul is a wonderful Instance of the Goodness of God in this kind. He was
undoubtedly a Man of a very honest Mind; he had entertained the Jewish
Religion, as revealed by God, and been bred in it; and out of a blind reverence
and belief of his Teachers, who rejected Christ and his Doctrine, he likewise
opposed and persecuted them with a mighty Zeal, and an honest intention, being
verily persuaded (as he himself tells us) that he ought to do what he did,
against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth; he was under a great prejudice upon
account of his Education, and according to the heat of his natural Temper,
transported with great Passion: But because he did what he did, ignorantly, and
in unbelief; God was pleased to show mercy to him, and in a miraculous manner
to convince him of the Truth of that Religion which he persecuted. He was
sincerely desirous to do the will of God, and therefore God would rather work a
Miracle for his Conversion, than suffer him to go on in so fatal a Mistake
concerning the Christian Religion.

And as the Providence of God does concern it self to secure good Men from
dangerous Errors and Mistakes in Matters of Religion; so by a just Judgment he
gives up those who allow themselves in vicious practices, to Error, and
Infidelity. And this is the meaning of that passage of the Prophet Esa. Chapter 6.
10. so often cited by our Savior, and applied to the Jews, of making the heart
of that People fat, and their Ears heavy, and closing their Eyes, lest they
should Understand, and be Converted. So again, Isa. 66. 3, 4. God threatens the
People of Israel, That because they were wicked and abominable in their Lives,
he would abandon them, and give them over to a Spirit of Delusion; they have
chosen their own ways, and their Soul delights in their Abominations; I also
will choose their delusions. God is said to choose those things for us, which he
permits us to fall into: So Romans 1. 28. God is said to give over the abominable
Heathen to a Reprobate Mind. As they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over (...), to an Injudicious and Undiscerning Mind.
When Men abandon themselves to Wickedness and Impiety, God withdraws his Grace
from them; and by his secret and just Judgment they are deprived of the Faculty
of discerning between Truth and Error, between Good and Evil. 2 These. 2. 10,
11, 12. It is said, that the Man of Sin should come with all deceiveableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
Truth, that they might be Saved: And that for this Cause, God would send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be Damned,
who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness. And it is just
with God, that Men of Vicious Inclinations and Practices should be exposed to
the Cheat of the grossest and vilest Impostors. God's Providence is concerned
for Men of honest Minds, and sincere Intentions: But if Men take pleasure in
Unrighteousness, God takes no further care of them, but delivers them up to
their own hearts Lusts, to be seduced into all those Errors, into which their
own vain Imaginations, and their foolish hearts are apt to lead them.

Thus have I endeavored, as briefly as I could, to show that an honest Mind,
that sincerely desires and endeavors to do the Will of God, is the best
security against fatal Errors and Mistakes in Matters of Religion; both because
it disposes a Man to make a true Judgment of Divine Things, and because the
Providence of God is more especially concerned for the security of such Persons.

There remains ^an Objection to be answered, to which this Discourse may seem
liable; but this, together with the Inferences which may be made from this
Discourse, I shall referr to another opportunity.

The Second SERMON ON JOHN. VII. 17.
If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self.
I Made entrance into these words the last Day; in which our Savior declares
to us, that an honest and sincere Mind, and an hearty Desire and Endeavor to
do the Will of God, is the best Security and Preservative against dangerous
Errors and Mistakes in Matters of Religion; (...), if any Man desire to do his
Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak
of my self.

Now there are (I told you) two great Mistakes in Religion: To reject any thing
which really is from God; and to receive and entertain any thing as from God,
which is not really from him. And therefore I proposed from this Text to show
how a sincere Desire and Endeavor to do the Will of God, is a security to Men
against both these Dangers, namely, upon these two Accounts.

First, Because he who sincerely Desires and Endeavors to do the Will of God,
is hereby better qualified and disposed to make a right Judgment of Spiritual
and Divine Things; and that for these two Reasons.

I. Because such a Person has a truer Notion of God, and Divine Things. He
that resembles God most, is like to understand him best, because he finds
those Perfections in some measure in himself, which he Contemplates in the
Divine Nature; and nothing gives a Man so sure a Notion of Things, as Practice,
and Experience.

II. Because such a Person is more Impartial in his search and enquiry after
Truth, and therefore more likely to find it, and to discern it from Error. That
Man only stands fair for the entertainment of Truth, who is under the Power and
Dominion of no Vice, or Lust; because he has nothing to corrupt or bribe him,
to seduce him, and draw him aside in his enquiry after Truth: He has no manner
of concernment that the contrary Proposition should be true, having the
indifferency of a Traveller, and no other Interest, but to find out the right
way to Heaven, and to walk in it. But if a Man be biased by any Lust, and
addicted to any vicious Practice, he is then an interested Person, and
concerned to make a partial Judgment of Things, and is under a great Temptation
to Infidelity, when the Truths of God are proposed to him; because whatever the
Evidence for them be, he cannot but be unwilling to own the Truths of those
Doctrines, which are so contrary to his inclination, and interest.

Secondly, Another Reason why they who sincerely desire to do the Will of God,
have a greater security in discerning Truth from Error, is, because the
Providence of God is more especially concerned to preserve such Persons from
dangerous Errors and Mistakes, in Things which concern their Eternal Salvation.
When Men are of a teachable Temper, of an humble and obedient frame of Mind,
God loves to reveal himself, and his Truth to them. Psalm. 25. 9. The Meek will
he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach his way. The proper
disposition of a Scholar, is to be willing to Learn; and that which in Religion
we are to Learn, is, what is the good and acceptable Will of God, that we may
do it; for Practice is the end of Knowledge; If ye know these Things (says our
Savior) happy are ye if ye do them. It is necessary to know the Will of God;
but we are only happy in the doing of it; and if any Man be desirous to do the
Will of God, his Goodness is such, that he will take effectual care to secure
such a one against dangerous and fatal Errors. He that has an honest Mind, and
would do the Will of God, if he knew it, God will not suffer him to remain
ignorant of it, or to be mistaken about it, in any necessary Point of Faith, or
Practice. Thus far I have gone.

I shall now proceed to remove an Objection, to which this Discourse may seem
liable, and then draw some Infer^nces from the whole.

After all that has been said, some perhaps may ask, Is every good Man then
secure from all Error and Mistake in Matters of Religion? This is a mighty
Privilege indeed: But do not we find the contrary in Experience? That an
honest Heart, and a weak Head, do often meet together?

For answer to this, I shall lay down these following Propositions.

First, That if there were any necessity, that a good Man should be secured
from all manner of Error and Mistake in Religion, this Probity of Mind, and
sincere desire to do the Will of God, is the best way to do it; because such a
Temper and Disposition of Mind gives a Man the best advantages to discern
betwixt Truth, and Error; and God is most likely to reveal his Will to such
Persons. But there is no necessity of this; because a Man may be a good Man,
and go to Heaven, notwithstanding a great many Mistakes in Religion about
things not necessary. For while we are in this imperfect State, we know but in
part, and see many Things very imperfectly: But when we shall come into a more
perfect State, that which is imperfect shall be done away; the Light of Glory
shall scatter all those Mists and Clouds, which are now upon our
Understandings, and hinder us from a clear Sight and Judgment of Things; we
shall then see God, and other Things, as they are; and be freed from all that
Ignorance, and those many Childish Mistakes, which we are liable to here below;
and till then, it is not necessary that we should be secured from them.
Humility under a sense of our Ignorance is better for us, than Infallibility
would be.

Secondly, This Temper and Disposition of Mind which I have been speaking of,
is a certain security against Fatal Mistakes in Religion, and a final
continuance in such Errors as would prove Damnable; and this is all that this
Discourse pretends to, or our Savior has promised in this Text. And
considering the Goodness of God, nothing is more improbable, than that an
honest Mind that seeks impartially after Truth, should miss of it; in Things
that are Fundamentally necessary to Salvation. And if we could suppose such a
Man to fall into such an Error, either it would not be Fundamental to him,
having not been perhaps proposed to him with sufficient Evidence, and would be
forgiven him upon a general Repentance for all Sins and Errors known, or
unknown; or he would not be permitted to continue in it; but the Providence of
God would find out some way or other to convince him of his Error, and to bring
him to the acknowledgment of the Truth, that he might be saved. God would
rather speak to him immediately from Heaven (as he did to St. Paul) than suffer
him to continue in such an Error, as would infallibly carry him to Hell.

Thirdly, There is no such depth of Judgment, and subtilty of Wit required, to
discern between gross and Damnable Errors in Religion, and Necessary and Saving
Truth, but that an ordinary Capacity may be able to do it. There is so plain a
Line drawn between great Truth, and gross Errors, that it is visible to every
Capacity; and an ordinary Understanding, that is not under a violent Prejudice,
or blinded by some Vice or Fault of the Will, may easily discern it. Indeed, in
Matters of lesser Moment and Concernment, and which have no such considerable
and immediate Influence upon the practice of an Holy Life, the difference
betwixt Truth and Error is not always so gross, and sensible, as to be obvious
to every unprejudiced Eye. But we have all the Reason in the World to believe,
that the Goodness and Justice of God is such, as to make nothing necessary to
be believed by any Man, which by the help of due Instruction may not be made
sufficiently plain to a common Understanding. God has so tender a Care of good
Men, who sincerely love him and his Truth, that we may reasonably presume, that
he will not leave them under an unavoidable Mistake, concerning those Matters
upon which their Eternal Salvation does depend. The Judge of all the World will
do right; and then we may certainly conclude, that he will not Condemn any Man
for no Fault, and make him for ever miserable, for falling into an Error, which
with all his Care and Diligence he could not possibly either discern, or avoid.

Fourthly, God has made abundant Provision for our security from Fatal and
Dangerous Errors in Religion, by these three ways.

I. By an an Infallible Rule, sufficiently plain in all Things necessary.

II. By sufficient means of Instruction, to help us to understand this Rule.

III. By an Infallible Promise of Security from Dangerous Errors and Mistakes,
if with an honest Mind, and due Diligence we will apply our selves to
understand this Rule, and make use of the Means of Instruction, which God has
provided for that purpose.

First, God has given us an Infallible Rule, sufficiently plain in all things
necessary. He has given us the Holy Scriptures, which were given at first by
Divine Inspiration, i. e. by Men Infallibly assisted in the Writing of them,
and therefore must needs be an Infallible Rule; and all Scripture Divinely
Inspired, is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, as St. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 3. 16. speaking
there of the Books of the Old Testament; and there is the same Reason as to the
Inspired Writings of the New.

Now if the Scriptures be an Infallible Rule, and profitable for Doctrine and
Instruction in Righteousness, i. e. to teach us to believe, and do; it follows
of necessity, that they are sufficiently plain in all Things necessary to
Faith, and a good Life; otherwise they could not be useful for Doctrine and
Instruction in Righteousness; for a Rule that is not plain to us in these
Things, in which it is necessary for us to be Directed by it, is of no use to
us; that is in truth, it is no Rule. For a Rule must have these two Properties;
it must be Perfect, and it must be Plain. The Scriptures are a perfect Rule,
because the Writers of them being Divinely Inspired, were Infallible: and they
must likewise be Plain; otherwise, though they be never so perfect, they can be
of no more use to direct our Faith and Practice, than a Sun-Dial in a dark Room
is, to tell us the hour of the Day. For though it be never so exactly made,
unless the Sun shine clearly upon it, we had as good be without it. A Rule that
is not plain to us, what ever it may be in it self, is of no use at all to us,
'till it be made plain, and we understand it.

II. God has likewise provided sufficient means of Instruction to help us to
understand this Rule. It is not necessary that a Rule should be so plain, that
we should perfectly understand it at first sight; it is sufficient, if it be so
plain, that those of better Capacity and Understanding may, with due diligence
and application of Mind, come to the true Knowledge of it; and those of a lower
and more ordinary Capacity, by the Help and Instruction of a Teacher. Euclid's
Elements is a Book sufficiently plain to Teach a Man Geometry: but yet not so
plain that any Man at first Reading should understand it perfectly; but that by
diligent Reading, by a due Application, and steady Attention of Mind, a Man of
extraordinary Sagacity and Understanding may come to understand the Principles
and Demonstrations of it, and those of a more ordinary Capacity, with the help
of a Teacher, may come to the Knowledge of it. So when we say that the
Scriptures are plain in all Things necessary to Faith, and a good Life, we do
not mean that every Man at first Hearing or Reading of these Things in it,
shall perfectly understand them; but by diligent Reading and Consideration, if
he be of good Apprehension and Capacity, he may come to a sufficient Knowledge
of them; and if he be of a meaner Capacity, and be willing to Learn, he may by
the help of a Teacher, be brought to understand them without any great pains;
and such Teachers God has appointed in his Church for this very purpose, and a
Succession of them to continue to the end of the World.

In a word, when we say the Scriptures are plain to all Capacities, in all
Things necessary, we mean, that any Man of ordinary Capacity, by his own
Diligence and Care, in Conjunction with the Helps and Advantages which God has
appointed, and in the due Use of them, may attain to the Knowledge of every
Thing necessary to his Salvation; and that there is no Book in the World more
plain, and better fitted to Teach a Man any Art or Science, than the Bible is,
to Direct and Instruct Men in the Way to Heaven; and it is every Man's fault if
he be ignorant of any Thing necessary for him to believe, or do, in order to
his Eternal Happiness.

III. Good Men are likewise secured from Fatal Errors in Religion, by the
Infallible Promise of God, if so be that with honest Minds and due Diligence
they apply themselves to the understanding of this Rule, and make use of the
Means of Instruction which God has provided for that purpose. God has
promised to Gaide and Teach the Humble and Meek; that is, such as are of a
Submissive and Teachable Temper, desirous and diligent to be Instructed in the
Truth. Prove. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. If thou incline thine Ear to Wisdom, and apply
thine Heart to Understanding; yea, if thou cryest after Knowledge, and liftest
up thy Voice for Understanding, if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest
for her, as for hid Treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the Knowledge of God. And here in the Text our Savior assures us,
that If any Man be desirous to do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether he spoke of himself; i. e. he shall be able to
discern the Doctrines which are from God.

This is the Provision which God has made for our security from Fatal Mistakes
in Religion; and this is in all Respects a better Security, and more likely to
Guide and Conduct us safely to Heaven, than any Infallible Church, and that for
these Reasons.

First, Because it is much more certain that God has made this Provision which
I have mentioned, than that there is an Infallible Church appointed and
assisted by him to this Purpose. That the Scriptures are an Infallible and
Adequate Rule, and sufficiently plain in all Things necessary, I have already
proved; and I add further, that this was the constant Judgment of the Ancient
Church, and so declared by the Unanimous Consent of the Fathers of it for many
Ages; and that all Councils in their Determination of Faith, proceeded upon
this Rule, 'till the Second Council of Nice.

I have likewise proved, That God has provided a Succession of Pastors and
Teachers in his Church, to Instruct us in this Rule; and that we have God's
Infallible Promise for our security from dangerous Errors and Mistakes, if with
an honest Mind and due Diligence we apply our selves to understand this Rule,
and make use of the Means of Instruction which God has provided for that
Purpose.

But that there is an Infallible Church Appointed and Assisted by God, to
Declare and Determine Matters of Faith, and to be an Infallible Interpreter of
Scripture, is not certain, because there is no clear and express Text of
Scripture to that purpose, that any Church whatsoever, much less that the
Church of Rome has this Power, and Privilege.

Nay, I add further, That it is Impossible, according to the Principles of the
Church of Rome, that this should be proved from Scripture; because, according
to their Principles, we cannot know either which are the true Books of
Scripture, or what is the true Sense of Scripture, but from the Authority and
Infallible Declaration of that Church. And if so, then the Infallibility of the
Church must be first known, and proved, before we can either know the
Scriptures, or the sense of them; and yet 'till we know the Scriptures, and the
sense of them, nothing can be proved by them. Now to pretend to prove the
Infallibility of their Church by Scripture, and at the same time to declare,
that which are the true Books of Scripture, and what is the true sense of them,
can only be proved by the Infallible Authority of their Church, is a plain and
shameful Circle, out of which there is no way of escape; and consequently that
God has appointed an Infallible Church is Impossible, according to their
Principles, ever to be proved from Scripture, and the Thing is capable of no
other Proof. For that God will Infallibly Assist any Society of Men, is not to
be known, but by Divine Revelation. So that unless they can prove it by some
other Revelation than that of Scripture (which they do not pretend to) the
Thing is not to be proved at all. Yes, they say, by the Notes and Marks of the
True Church; but what those Marks are, must either be known from Scripture, or
some other Divine Revelation, and then the same Difficulty returns; besides
that one of the most Essential Marks of the true Church must be the profession
of the true Faith; and then it must first be known which is the True Faith,
before we can know which is the True Church; and yet they say that no Man can
learn the True Faith, but from the True Church; and this runs them unavoidably
into another Circle as shameful as the other. So that which way soever they go
to prove an Infallible Church, they are shut up in a plain Circle, and must
either prove the Scriptures by the Church, and the Church by the Scriptures; or
the True Church by the True Faith, and the True Faith by the True Church.

Secondly, This Provision and Security which I have mentioned, is more Humane,
better Accommodated and Suited to the Nature of Man; because it does not
suppose and need a standing and perpetual Miracle, as the other way of an
Infallible Church does. All Inspiration is Supernatural and Miraculous, and
this Infallible Assistance which the Church of Rome claims to her self, must
either be such as the Apostles had, which was by immediate Inspiration, or
something equal to it, and alike Supernatural: but God does not work Miracles
without need, or continue them when there is no occasion for them. When God
delivered the Law to the People of Israel, it was accompanied with Miracles,
and the Prophets which he sent to them from time to time, had an immediate
Inspiration; but their Supreme Judicature, or their General Council, which they
call the Sanhedrim, was not Infallibly assisted in the Expounding of the Law,
when Doubts and Difficulties arose about it; no, nor in judging of True and
False Prophets; but they determined this, and all other Emergent Causes, by the
standing Revelation and Rule of their Written Law; and that they were not
Infallibly Assisted, is evident from the great Errors they fell into, in making
void the Commandments of God by their Traditions, and in their Rejecting and
Crucifying the true Messiah, and the Son of God.

In like manner the Apostles and first Teachers of the Christian Religion, were
immediately Inspired, and Miraculously Assisted in the Publishing of the
Christian Doctrine, and for the speedy and more effectual Propagating and
Planting of it in the World, in despite of the violent Prejudices that were
against it, and the fierce opposition that was made to it. But when this was
done, this Miraculous and Extraordinary Assistance ceased, and God left the
Christian Religion to be preserved and continued by more Humane and Ordinary
ways, the Doctrines of it, being committed to Writing for a standing Rule of
Faith and Practice in all Ages, and an Order of Men appointed to Instruct
People in those Doctrines, with a Promise to secure both Teachers and People,
that sincerely desire to know and do the Will of God, from all Fatal Errors and
Mistakes about Things necessary to their Eternal Salvation; and this is a
Provision more likely to be made by God, and better suited to the Nature of
Man, than the perpetual and needless Miracle of an Inspired, or any otherwise
Infallible Church.

Thirdly, This way is likewise more agreeable to the Nature of Religion, and
the Virtue of Faith. The Design of an Infallible Church is to secure all that
continue in the Communion of it, against all possibility of Error in Matters of
Faith. The Question now is not, whether an Infallible Church would do this? but
whether that Church which arrogates Infallibility to it self, does not pretend
to do this? And if they could do it, it would not be agreeable to the Nature of
Religion, and the Virtue of Faith. For Faith, which is the Principle of all
Religious Actions, would be no Virtue, if it were necessary. A true and right
Belief can be no Virtue, where a Man is Infallibly secured against Error. There
is the same Reason of Virtuous and Criminal Actions, and as there can be no
Crime or Fault in doing what a Man cannot help; so neither can there be any
Virtue. All Virtuous Actions are Matter of Praise and Commendation, and
therefore it can be no Virtue in any Man; because it deserves no Commendation,
to believe and own that the Sun shines at Noonday, when he sees it does so. No
more would it be a Virtue in any Man, and deserve Praise, to Believe aright,
who is in a Church wherein he is Infallibly secured against all Error in
Matters of Faith. Make any thing necessary, and impossible to be otherwise; and
the doing of it ceases to be a Virtue. God has so framed Religion, and the
Evidence of Truth, and the Means of coming to the Knowledge of it, as to be a
sufficient Security to Men of honest Minds, and teachable Tempers, against all
Fatal and Final Mistakes concerning Things necessary to Salvation; but not so,
that every Man that is of such a Church, should be Infallibly secured against
all Errors in Matters of Faith; and this on purpose to try the Virtue and
Disposition of Men, whether they will be at the pains to search for Truth, and
when it is proposed to them with sufficient Evidence, though not by an Infallible
Hand, they will receive it in the love of it, that they may be Saved.

Fourthly, This is as much security against Error in Matters of Faith, as God
has provided against Sin and Vice in Matters of Practice; and since a right
Belief is only in order to a good Life, a Man would be hard put to it, to give
a Wise Reason, why God should take greater Care for the Infallible Security of
Men's Faith, than of their Obedience. The Reason pretended why God should make
such Infallible Provision for a right Faith, is, for the better security of
Men's Eternal Salvation, and Happiness. Now the Virtues of a good Life, have a
more Direct and Immediate influence upon that, than the most Orthodox Belief.
The end of the Commandments, (i. e) of the Declaration of the Gospel, is
Charity. In the Christian Religion that which mainly avails to our
Justification and Salvation is, a Faith that works by Charity, and the
keeping of the Commandments of God. He that hears these Sayings of mine, and
does them (says our Blessed Lord) I will liken him to a Wise Man that Built
his House upon a Rock; and again, not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
(i. e.) makes Profession of Faith in me, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven; and again,
if ye know these Things, happy are ye, if ye do them. And the Apostle St. Peter
Exhorts Christians to add to their Faith and Knowledge, Virtue, and Godliness,
and Brotherly Kindness, and Charity, that so an abundant entrance may be
ministered to them, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. So that the Virtues of a good Life have the greatest Influence upon our
Salvation, and the main stress of Christianity is to be laid there. And
therefore whatever Reason can be assigned, why God should provide for the
Infallible security of our Faith, is much stronger, why an equal Provision
should be made to secure Holiness, and Obedience of Life; because without this,
Faith cannot Infallibly attain its End, which is the Salvation of our Souls.
But this it is granted God has not done, and Experience shows it; and
therefore it is unreasonable to suppose that he has done the other. It is
sufficient, that in both kinds he has done that which is sufficient to make us
capable of Happiness, if we be not wanting to our selves; the rest he has left
to the sincerity of our Endeavors; expecting that We on our part, should work
out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and give all Diligence to make our
Calling and Election sure. And if God has made such Provision by the Gospel,
for all that enjoy the Light and Advantage of it, that none can miscarry
without their own fault; then both his Goodness and Wisdom are sufficiently
acquitted, without an Infallible Guide and Judge in Matters of Faith, and that
Irreverent way of Arguing in the Canon Law, might well have been spared; that
of necessity there must be an Infallible Judge of Controversies in Religion;
aliter Dominus non videretur fuisse discretus, otherwise God would not seem to
have Ordered Matters discreetly.

But what Infallible Security soever they have in the Church of Rome, as to
Matters of Faith, they are certainly the worst provided of wholesome and safe
Directions for the Consciences and Lives of Men, of any Church in the World. No
Religion that I know of in the World, ever had such Lewd and Scandalous
Casuists. Witness the Moral Divinity of the Jesuits, which has been so exposed
to the World, not only by those of our Religion, but by their own Writers also.
Nor is this mischief only confined to that Order; their Casuists in general,
and even the more Ancient of them, who writ before the Order of Jesuits
appeared in the World, have given such a Liberty, and loose, to great
Immorality in several kinds, as is infinitely to the reproach of the best and
purest Religion in the World. Insomuch that Sir Tho. Moor himself, who was a
great Zealot for that Religion, could not forbear to make a loud Complaint of
it, and to pass this severe Censure upon the generality of their Casuists: That
their great Business seemed to be, not to keep Men from Sin, but to Teach them
quam prope ad pec^atum liceat accedere sine peccato; how near to Sin they might
lawfully come without Sinning. In the mean time the Consciences of Men are like
to be well directed, when instead of giving Men plain Rules for the Government
of their Hearts and Lives, and clear Resolutions of the Material Doubts which
frequently occur in Humane Life, they entangle them in Niceties, and endless
Scrupulosities, teaching them to split Hairs in Divinity, and how with great
Art and Cunning they may avoid the committing of any Sin, and yet come as near
to it as is possible. This is a thing of a most dangerous Consequence to the
Souls of Men; and if Men be but once encouraged to pass to the utmost Bounds of
what is Lawful, the next step will be into that which is Unlawful.

So that unless Faith without Works will save Men, notwithstanding the
Infallible Security which they pretend to give Men of a sound and right Belief
(if it were really as much as they talk of) the Salvation of Men would still be
in great hazard and uncertainty, for want of better and safer Directions for a
good Life, than are ordinarily to be met with in the Casuistical Writings of
that Church; especially if we consider that the Scriptures are locked up from
the People in an unknown Tongue, where the surest and plainest Directions for a
good Life are most plentifully to be had; insomuch, that a Man had better want
all the Volumes of Casuistical Divinity, that ever were written in the World,
than to be without the Bible; by the diligent studying of which Book alone, he
may sooner learn the way to Heaven, than by all the Books in the World without
it.

Fifthly, and Lastly, This Provision which God has made, is, when all is done,
as good a Security against Fatal Errors and Mistakes in Religion, as an
Infallible Church could give, if there were one; and it is as good a way to
prevent and put an end to Controversies in Religion, so far as it is necessary
that they should be prevented, and have an end put to them: And these are the
two great Reasons why an Infallible Judge is so importunately demanded, and
insisted upon. I shall speak to these distinctly, and severally; but because
they will require a longer Discourse than the time will allow, I shall not
enter upon them at present, but refer them to another Opportunity.

The Third SERMON ON JOHN VII. 17.
If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self.
WHEN I made entrance into these W^^ds, I proposed from this Text, First, To
show that an honest and sincere Mind, and a hearty Desire and Endeavor to do
the Will of God, is the greatest Security and best Preservative against
dangerous Errors and Mistakes in Matters of Religion.

In the next place, I proceeded to remove an Objection, to which my Discourse
upon this Subject might seem liable. Some perhaps might ask, Is every good Man
then secure from all Error and Mista^e in Ma^ters of Religion? This is a mighty
^riviledge i^deed. But do we not find the contrary in experience, that an
honest Heart, and a weak Head do often meet together? For Answer to this, I
laid down several Propositions.

By the Last of which I showed, that God has made abundant Provision for our
Security from fatal and dangerous Errors in Religion, both by the Infallible
Rule of the Holy Scripture, and by sufficient means of Instruction to help us
to understand this Rule, and by his Infallible Promise of assisting us, if with
honest Minds, and a due Diligence we apply our selves to the understanding of
this Rule, and the use of these Means. And this, I told you, was in all
Respects a better Security, and more likely to Conduct us safe to Heaven, than
any Infallible Church whatsoever; and that for Five Reasons; Four of which I
have already treated of, and now proceed to the Fifth, and last, viz.

Because this Provision which I have shown God has made, is both as good a
security against Fatal Errors and Mistakes in Religion, as an Infallible Church
could give, if there were One: And it is likewise as good a way to prevent and
put an end to Controversies in Religion, so far as it is necessary they should
be prevented, or have an end put to them. And these are the two great Reasons
why an Infallible Judge is so importunately demanded, and insisted upon. I
shall speak to these two Points, distinctly, and severally.

First, Because this is as good a security against Fatal Errors and Mistakes in
Religion, as an Infallible Church could give if there were one. For an
Infallible Church, if there were such an one upon Earth, could not Infallibly
secure particular Christians against Errors in Faith, any other way, than by
the Definition and Declaration of those who are Infallible in that Church. And
there are but three that pretend to it; either the Pope, or a Council General,
or the Pope and a General Council agreeing in the same Definitions. Not the
Pope by himself, nor the General Council without the Pope; because the Church
which pretends to Infallibility, is not agreed, that either of these alone is
Infallible, and therefore their Definitions can be no certain, much less
Infallible Foundation of Faith; no, not to that Church which pretends to
Infall^bility. So that if there be an Infallible Oracle in that Church, it must
be the Pope and Council in Conjunction, or the Definition of a Council
confirmed by the Pope. Now in that Case, either the Council was Infallible in
its Definitions, before they had the Pope's Confirmation, or not. If the
Council was Infallible in its Definitions, before they had the Pope's
Confirmation; then the Council alone and of its self was Infallible (which a
great part of the Church of Rome deny) and then it needed not the Pope's
Confirmation to make it Infallible: Or else a General Council is not Infallible
in its Definitions, before they receive the Pope's Confirmation; and then the
Pope's Confirmation cannot make it so: For that which was not Infallibly
Defined by the Council, cannot be made Infallible by the Pope's Confirmation.

But there is another Difficulty yet: It is a Maxim generally received, and
that even in the Roman Church, That the Definitions of a General Council,
confirmed by the Pope, are not Obligatory, unless they be received by the
Universal Church. From whence these two great Inconveniences will unavoidably
follow.

I^ That no Man is obliged to believe such Definitions, 'till he Certainly know
that they are received by the Universal Church; which how he should Certainly,
much less Infallibly know, I cannot understand; unless he either speak with all
the Christians in the World, or the Representatives of all particular Churches
return back and meet again in Council, to declare that the Universal Church
has received their Definitions; which I think was never yet done.

II. It will follow, that the Definitions of a General Council, confirmed by
the Pope, are not Infallible, 'till they be received by the Universal Church.
For if they were Infallible without that, they would be Obligatory without it;
because an Infallible Definition, if we know it to be so, lays an Obligation to
believe it, whether it be received by the Universal Church, or not. And if such
Definitions are not Infallible 'till they be received by the Universal Church,
they cannot become Infallible afterward; because if the Definitions were not
Infallible before, they cannot be received as such by the Universal Church, nor
by the mere reception of them, be made to be Infallible Definitions, if they
were not so before.

But if we should pass over all these Difficulties, there is a greater yet
behind, and that is, Supposing the Definitions of General Councils confirmed by
the Pope to be Infallible, particular Christians cannot be secured Infallibly
from Error without the Knowledge of those Definitions. And there are but two
ways imaginable of conveying this Knowledge to them: Either by the living voice
of their particular Pastors, whom they are implicitly to believe in these
Matters; but particular Pastors are Fallible (as they themselves grant) and
therefore their words can neither be an Infallible Foundation of Faith, or an
Infallible means of conveying it; and it is unreasonable, they say, for Men
that own themselves to be Fallible, to require an implicit Belief to be given
to them: Or else the Knowledge of the Definitions of Councils must be conveyed
to particular Christians by Writing; and if so, then there will only be an
Infallible Rule, but no living Infallible Judge. And if an Infallible Rule will
serve the turn, we have the Scriptures, which we are sure are Infallible, and
therefore at least as good as any other Rule. But they say, that the
Definitions of Councils give us an Infallible Interpretation of Scripture, and
therefore are of greater advantage to us. But do not the Definitions of
Councils sometimes also need Explication, that we may know the certain Sense of
them, without which we cannot know the Doctrines defined? Yes certainly, they
need Explication as much as Scripture, if there be any difference about the
meaning of them; and there have been, and still are great Differences among
those of their own Church about the meaning of them. And if the Explications of
General Councils need themselves to be explained, then there is nothing got by
them, and we are but where we were before: For Differences about the meaning of
the Definitions of General Councils, make as great Difficulties and
Uncertainties in Faith, as the Differences about the meaning of Scripture.

Well, but the People have the living voice of their particular Pastors to
explain the Definitions of Councils to them. But this does not help the Matter
neither, for these two Reasons.

First, Because particular Pastors have no Authority to explain the Definitions
of General Councils. The Council of Trent has by express Decree, reserved to
the Pope, and to him only, the Power to explain the Definitions of the Council,
if any difference arise about the meaning of them. So that if there be any
difference about the true sense and meaning of any of the Definitions of the
Council, particular Pastors have no Authority to explain them; and where there
is no doubt or difference about the meaning of them, there is no occasion for
the explication of them.

Secondly, But suppose they had Authority to explain them, this can be no
Infallible Security to the People that they explain them right; both because
particular Pastors are fallible; and likewise because we see in experience,
that they differ in their Explications; witness the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition of the Catholic Faith, and of the Definitions of the Council of
Trent, which is in many Material Points very different from that of Bellarmine,
and many other Famous Doctors of that Church. And which is more, witness the
many differences betwixt Ambro^ius Catharinus, and Dominicus Asoto, about the
Definitions of that Council, in which they were both present, and heard the
Debates, and themselves bore a great part in them. Now if they who were present
at the framing of the Definitions of that Council, cannot agree about the
meaning of them, much less can it be expected from those that were absent.

Secondly, This Provision which I have mentioned, is likewise as good a way to
prevent and put an end to Controversies in Religion, so far as it is necessary
they should be prevented, or have an end put to them, as any Infallible Church
would be, if there were one: And this is another Reason why an Infallible
Church is so much insisted upon, that there may be some way and means for a
final decision of Controversies, which the Scriptures cannot be, because they
are only a dead Rule, which can end no Controversy without a Living Judge
ready at hand, to interpret and apply that Rule upon emergent Occasions.

It is not necessary that all Controversies in Religion should either be
prevented, or decided: This the Church which pretends to be Infallible, cannot
pretend to have done; because there are manifold Controversies, even in the
Church of Rome her self, concerning Matters of Religion, which still remain
undecided; and in their Commentaries upon Scripture, many Differences about the
sense of several Texts, concerning which she has not thought fit to give an
Infallible Interpretation. And where their Popes, and several of their General
Councils have thought fit to meddle with Scripture, they have applied and
interpreted Texts more improperly and absurdly, than even their private
Doctors. And which is more, in Differences about Points of Faith, which are
pretended on both sides to be fundamental, this Church has not thought fit to
put an end to them by her Infallible Decision, after two hundred years
brangling about them. For instance, in that fierce and long Difference about
the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, which on both sides is
pretended to be an Article of Faith, and for which, contrary Revelations of
their Canonized Saints are so frequently pretended; and yet neither Pope, nor
General Council, have thought fit to exert their Infallibility for the decision
of this Controversy. So that if their Church had this Talent of Infallibility
ever committed to them, they have with the slothful Servant, laid it up in a
Napkin; and according to our Savior's Rule, have long since forfeited it, for
not making use of it.

And whereas it is pretended, that the Scripture is but a dead R^l^, which can
end no Controversies without a Living Judge ready at hand, to interpret and
apply that Rule upon emergent Occasions; the same Objection lies against them,
unless a General Council, which is their Living Judge were always sitting. For
the D^finitions of their Councils in Writing are liable to the same, and
greater Objections, than the Written Rule of the Scriptures.

The Sum of all is this. In Differences about lesser Matters, mutual Charity
and Forbearance will secure the Peace of the Church, though the Differences
remain undecided; and in greater Matters, an Infallible Rule searched into with
an honest Mind, and due Diligence, and with the help of good Instruction, is
more likely to extinguish and put an end to such Differences, than any
Infallible Judge, if there were one; because an humble and honest Mind is more
likely to yield to Reason, than a perverse and cavilling Temper is to submit to
the Sentence of an Infallible Judge, unless it were backed with an Inquisition.
The Church of Rome supposes her self Infallible, and yet notwithstanding that,
she finds that some question and deny her Infallibility, and then her Sentence
signifies nothing. And of those who own it, many dispute the sense and meaning
of her Sentence; and whether they deny the Infallibility of her Sentence, or
dispute the Sense of it, in neither of these Cases will it prove effectual to
the deciding of any Difference.

But after all this Provision which we pretend God has made for honest and
sincere Minds, Do we not see that Men fall into dangerous and damnable Errors,
who yet cannot, without great Uncharitableness, be supposed not to be sincerely
desirous to know the Truth, and to do the Will of God?

To this I shall briefly return these Two Things.

I. That the same Errors are not equally damnable to all. The innocent and
(humanly speaking) almost invincible Prejudices of Education in some Persons,
even against a Fundamental Truth; the different Capacities of Men, and the
different Means of Conviction afforded to them; the greater and lesser degrees
of Obstinacy, and a faulty Will in opposing the Truths proposed to them; all
these, and perhaps several other Considerations besides, may make a great
difference in the guilt of Men's Errors, and the danger of them.

II. When all is done, the Matter must be left to God, who only know^th the
Hearts of all the Children of Men. We cannot see into the Hearts of Men, nor
know all their Circumstances, and how they may have provoked God to forsake
them, and give them up to Error and Delusion, because they would not receive
the truth in the love of it, that they might be saved. And as on the one hand
God will consider all Men's Circumstances, and the Disadvantages they were under
for coming to the knowledge of the Truth, and make allowance to Men for their
invincible Errors, and forgive them upon a general Repentance: So on the other
hand, he who sees the insincerity of Men, and that the Errors of their
Understandings did proce^d from gross Faults of their Lives, will deal with
them accordingly. But if Men be honest and sincere, God, who has said, if any
Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, will certainly be as good
as his word.

It now remains only to draw some Inferences from this Discourse, and they
shall be these three.

First, From this Text, and what has been Discoursed upon it, we may infer how
slender and ill-grounded the pretense of the Church of Rome to Infallibility
is; whether they place it in the Pope, or in a General Council, or in both. The
last is the most general Opinion; and yet it is hard to understand how
Infallibility can result from the Pope's Confirmation of a General Council,
when neither the Council was Infallible in framing its Definitions, nor the
Pope in Confirming them. If the Council were Infallible in framing them; then
they needed no Confirmation: If they were not; then Infallibility is only in
the Pope that confirms them, and then it is the Pope only that is Infallible.
But no Man that reads these words of our Savior, if any Man will do his will,
he shall know of the Doctrine, would ever imagine that the Bishop of Rome
(whoever he shall happen to be) were secured from all fatal Errors in Matters
of Faith, much less that he were Endowed with an Infallible Spirit, in Judging
what Doctrines are from God, and what not: For it cannot be denied, but that
many of their Popes have been notoriously Wicked and Vicious in their Lives:
Nay Bellarmine himself acknowledges, that for a Succession of Fifty Popes
together, there was not one Pious and Virtuous Man that sat in that Chair; and
some of their Popes have been Condemned and Deposed for Heresy; and yet after
all this, the Pope, and the governing part of that Church, would bear the World
in hand that he is Infallible. But if this Saying of our Savior be true, that
if any Man will do his will, he shall know of his Doctrine, whether it be of
God; then every honest Man that sincerely desires to do the Will of God, has a
fairer pretense to Infallibility, and a clearer Text for it, than is to be
found in the whole Bible for the Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. What
would the Church of Rome give, that the^e were but as express a Text in
Scripture for the Infallibility of their Popes, as this is for the security of
every good Man, in his Judgment of Doctrines (which makes Infallibility
needless)? What an unsufferable Noise, and what endless Triumphs would they
make upon it, if it had been any where said in the Bible, That if any Man be
Bishop of Rome, and sit in St. Peter's Chair, he shall know of my Doctrine
whether it be of God? Had there been but such a Text as this, we should never
have been troubled with their impertinent citation of Texts, and their remote
and blind Inferences from Pasce Oves, and super hanc Petram; Feed my Sheep; and
upon this Rock will I build my Church; to prove the Pope's Infallibility. And
yet no Man of Sense or Reason ever extended the Text I am speaking to, so far
as to attempt to prove from it the Infallibility of every good Man; but only
his security from ^atal Errors and Mistakes in Religion. The largest Promises
that are made in Scripture of security from Error and Mistake about Divine
Things, are made to good Men, who sincerely desire to do the Will of God. And
if this be so, we must conclude several Popes to have been the furthest from
Infallibility of any Men in the World. And indeed there is not a more
compendious way to persuade Men that the Christian Religion is a Fable, than to
set up a Lewd and Vicious Man for the Oracle of it.

Nay, I will go farther yet; That there are no other Promises made in
Scripture, of Direction, or Assistance, or Security from Mistake, to any
Church; but the same are made in as full and express Terms to every good Man
that sincerely desires to know the Truth, and to practice it. Is it promised to
the Church, or to the Pastors of it, I will be with you always? And has not
our Savior promised the same to every one that is obedient to his word? John
14. 23. If a Man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And does not the
Apostle apply the same Promise to every good Christian, Heb. 13. 5. I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee? For where is the difference between these
Expressions? I will be with you, and I will make my abode with him? I will be
with you always, and I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee? Is it promised
to the Church, that the Spirit shall lead her into all Truth? and is not the
same Promise made to every good Man? John 14. 21. He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me: And he that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him; that
is, God will reveal his Will to those that love him, and keep his Commandments.
Has God promised to build his Church upon a Rock? And does not our Savior use
the same Metaphor concerning every Man that does the Will of God? Mat. 7. 24.
Whosoever hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, is like a Wise Man that
built his House upon a Rock. So that if to be built upon a Rock signifies
Infallibility, it belongs to every good Man, who sincerely practices what he
knows, as much as to any Church.

When Men are enabled by God to work Miracles for the confirmation of the
Doctrines which they deliver, there is great Reason to believe that they are
Infallibly assisted in the delivery of those Doctrines: But without this, it is
the vainest thing in the World, for any Person or Church to pretend to it;
because they offer no Evidence ^it to satisfy any Man, that they are so
assisted: And I do not hear that the Pope, among all his Privileges, does
pretend to the Power of Miracles.

Secondly, From hence likewise we may infer the great Reason of Error and
Infidelity in the World. If any Man be an Infidel, it is not the fault of his
Understanding, but of his Will; it is not because there is not sufficient
Evidence that the Christian Religion is from God, but because Men's Interests
and Lusts make them partial and incompetent Judges of Matters of Religion. The
Evidence of the Christian Religion is such, as recommends it to every Man's
Reason and Conscience; so that (as St. Paul argues) if the Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost; In whom the God of this World has blinded the minds
of them that believe not, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

If Men did but stand indifferent for the entertainment of Truth, and were not
swayed by the interest of any Lust or Passion, I am confident that no Man that
has the Gospel fairly proposed to him, would continue an Infidel. If Men did
but truly live up to the Principles of Natural Religion, they would easily be
convinced, that the Christian Religion, which is so suitable thereto, is from
God.

Thirdly, and Lastly, What has been said, is a great Argument and
Encouragement to Obedience, and Holiness of Life. Do we desire not to be
mistaken about the Mind of God? Let us heartily endeavor to do his Will. If we
would not be seduced by the Error of the Wicked; let us take heed of their
Vicious Practices. The best way certainly to preserve a right Judgment in
Matters of Religion, is to take great care of a good Life. God's Goodness is
such, that he will not suffer any Man's Judgment to be betrayed into a Damnable
Error, without some Vice and Fault of his Will. The Principles of Natural
Religion are born with us, and imprinted upon our Minds, so that no Man can be
ignorant of them, nor need to be mistaken about them; and as for those
Revelations which God has made of himself to the World, he has been pleased
to accompany them with so much Evidence, that an honest and sincere Mind may
easily discern them from Error, and Imposture. So our Savior has assured us,
That if any Man desire to do his Will; he shall know of the Doctrine, whether
it be of God.

On the other hand, if we see any oppose the clear Truth, or to depart from it,
and to embrace gross Errors and Delusions, we may almost certainly conclude
that there is some Worldly Interest or Lust at the bottom of it. So our Savior
has likewise told us, that the Reason why Men love Darkness rather than Light,
is, because their Deeds are Evil; and every one that does Evil hates the
Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved. I will
Conclude this whole Discourse with St. Peter's Exhortation, the 2 d of Pet. 3.
17, 18. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these Things before, beware, lest
ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: To him be Glory, both now, and for ever.

Amen.
A SERMON ON LUKE XII. 15.
And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
AMong all the irregular Appetites of Men, there is none that is more common
and unreasonable, and of a more Universal bad Influence upon the Hearts and
Lives of Men, than this of Covetousness; and therefore in speaking of this
Vice, I shall strike at the Root of a great many others; even of Apostasy from
God's Truth and Religion, of which Covetousness, and the Love of this present
World, is one of the most common Causes. So that if I can contribute any thing
to the Cure of this great Distemper of Men's Minds, I shall in so doing remove
that, which is the Cause and Occasion of a great part of the Evils and
Mischiefs which are in the World. And to this end I have pitched upon these
Words of our Blessed Savior to his Hearers; And he said unto them, Take heed
and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of
the Things which he possesses.

In Which Words are these Thre^ Things Observable.

First, The Manner of the Caution which our Savior here gives, Take heed and
beware; he doubles it, to show the great Need and Concernment of it.

Secondly, The Matter of the Caution, or the Vice which our Savior here warns
his Hearers against, and that is Covetousness; Take heed and beware of
Covetousness.

Thirdly, The Reason of this Caution, Because a Man's Life consists not in
the abundance of the Things which he possesses. Humane Life is sustained by a
little, and therefore abundance is not necessary, either to the Support or
Comfort of it. It Is not a great Estate and vast Possessions that make a Man
happy in this World; but a Mind that is equal to his Condition, whatever it be.

I. The Manner of the Caution which our Savior here gives, Take heed and
beware. This is a peculiar kind of Caution, and no where else, or upon any
other Occasion, that I know of, used in Scripture; in which, for the greater
Emphasis and weight, the words of Caution are doubled, as if the Matter were of
so much Concernment, that no Caution about it could be too much; to signify to
us both the Great Danger of this Sin of Covetousness, and the Great Care Men
ought to use to preserve themselves from it.

First. The great danger of this Sin; how apt we are to fall into this Vice,
and of how pernicious a Consequence it is to those in whom it reigns.

1. How apt we are to fall into this Vice: And excepting those Vices which are
immediately founded in a Man's Natural Temper and Constitution, there is none
that Men have a more Universal propension to, than this of Covetousness. For
there are two Things which Human Nature does more especially desire to be
secured against, which are Want, and Contempt: And Riches seem to be a certain
Remedy against both these Evils. And because Men think they can never be
sufficiently secured against these, therefore their desire of Riches grows
endless and insatiable; so that unless Men be very jealous and watchful over
themselves, this Desire will grow upon them, and enlarge it self beyond all
Bounds.

2. As Men are very apt to fall into this Vice, so is it of very pernicious
consequence to those in whom it reigns. The Mischief of it is very great, and
very extensive: So St. Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 6. 8, 9, 10. where he presses Men
to be contented with a small competency of the Things of this Life, because of
the great Danger and Mischief of a Covetous Mind; having Food and Raiment, let
us be therewith content. But they that will be Rich (that is, they that are
bent and resolved upon being Rich) fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition.
For the love of Money is the root of all Evil. But this I shall speak more fully
to, when I come to show the great Evil and Unreasonableness of this Vice.

Secondly, This earnest kind of Caution, as it signifies the Great Danger of
this Sin of Covetousness, so likewise the great Care that Men ought to use to
preserve themselves from it; for the greater the Danger is in any kind, so much
the greater Care should be used for the avoiding of it. Men are not so
Solicitously concerned to defend themselves against a slight Mischief; but when
a terrible one threatens us, we should be continually upon our guard against
it, and summon all our strength and for^e to resist it. Thus much for the
Manner of the Caution.

I proceed to the second Thing to be considered in the Text, viz. The Matter of
the Caution, or the Vice which our Savior here warns his Hearers against, and
that is Covetousness; Take heed and beware of Covetousness. And in speaking of
this, I shall consider these two Things.

1. Wherein the Nature of this Vice consists.

2. I shall Endeavor to show the great Evil and Unreasonableness of it. I
shall be large in both.

1. For the Nature of this Vice of Covetousness. The shortest Description that
I can give of it is this; That it is an inordinate desire and love of Riches;
but when this Desire and Love are Inordinate, is not so easy to be Determined.
And therefore that we may the better understand what this Sin of Covetousness
is, which our Savior does so earnestly Caution against, it will be requisite
to Consider more particularly wherein the Vice and Fault of it does consist;
that whilst we are are speaking against Covetousness, we may not under that
General Word Condemn any thing that is Commendable, or Lawful. To the end then
that we may the more clearly and distinctly understand wherein the Nature of
this Vice does consist, I shall

First, Endeavor to show what is not Condemned under this Name of
Covetousness, either in Scripture, or according to right Reason: And

Secondly, What is Condemned by eit^er of these as a plain Instance o^ Branch
of this Sin.

1. What Things are not Condemned under the Name of Covetousness, either in
Scripture, or according to right Reason, which yet have some appearance of it;
namely, these three Things.

1. Not a provident Care about the Things of this present Life.

2. Not a regular Industry and Diligence for the obtaining of them: Nor

3. Every Degree of Love and Affection to them. I mention these Three, because
they may all seem to be Condemned by Scripture, as Parts or Degrees of this
Vice, but really are not.

I. Not a provident Care about the Things of this present Life. This indeed
seems to be Condemned in Scripture as a Branch of Covetousness, namely, in our
Savior's Sermon upon the Mount, Mat. 6. 25. Take no thought for your Life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall
put on. Here our Savior seems to forbid all Care, even about the Necessaries
of Life, Meat, and Drink, and Clothing; much more about the Delights and
Conveniences of it. But this is not absolutely and in ordinary Cases intended
by our Savior to be Condemned, as I shall show by and by, under the next Head.

Secondly, Neither is a regular Industry and Diligence for the obtaining of
these Things Condemned in Scripture; though this also seems to be Prohibited by
our Savior in the same Chapter, ver. 26. Behold the Fowls of the air: for they
sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your Heavenly Father
feeds them; and ver. 28. Why take ye thought for Raiment? Consider the Lilies
of the Field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. In which
words our Savior seems to intimate, that we ought to depend upon the
Providence of God for Food and Raiment, and to use no more Industry for the
obtaining of them, that the Fowls of the Air do, or the Lilies of the Field:
And the same may seem to be collected out of this Chapter of St. Luke: For
after our Savior had in my Text cautioned them against Covetousness, and
spoken to them a Parable to that purpose, of a Rich Man who enlarged his Barns,
and laid up Goods for many years, He infers from thence, ver. 22. that Men
should take no thought for the Things of this Life, nor use any Industry about
them; and he said unto his Disciples, therefore I say unto you, take no thought
for your Life, what ye shall eat; neither for the Body, what ye shall put on.

Now to avoid all Inconvenience from our Saviors words, I think that it is
commonly said by Interpreters, that he does here only condemn a distrustful and
anxious Care about the Things of this Life, and an over-solicitous Industry and
Diligence for the obtaining of them; but that he allows a prudent Care and
regular Industry about these Things: And this were very well said, if it would
agree with the Scope and Design of our Savior's Discourse; but the Instances
which he gives of the Fowls of the Air, and the Lilies of the Field, which are
sufficiently provided for without any Care and Industry of theirs, and which he
seems to set before us for a Pattern, behold (says he) the Fowls of the Air, I
say these Instances, which he gives, seem to exclude even all regular and
ordinary Care and Diligence about these Things.

What shall we say then, that our Savior intended by his Religion to take Men
off from all Labor and Industry in their Callings? This seems to be
unreasonable; and indeed so it certainly were, if our Savior had given this
for a standing and ordinary Rule to all Christians; and not only so, but
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who constantly charged Christians to labor
with great diligence in their Callings, that they might be able to provide for
themselves, and their Families.

But this Discourse of our Savior's was not intended for a General and
Standing Rule to all Christians; but only designed for his Disciples, to take
them off from all Care about the Things of this Life, that they might attend
upon his Person, and wholly give up themselves to that Work to which he had
called them. And therefore St. Luke takes notice, that after he had cautioned
his Hearers in general against Covetousness, he applies himself particularly to
his Disciples, and tells them that he would have them so far from this Vice of
Covetousness, that they should not so much as use that ordinary Care and
Industry about the Things of this Life, which is not only lawful, but necessary
for Men in all ordinary Cases, ver. 22. and he said unto his Disciples,
therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat. And
this agrees very well with the Direction which our Savior gave to his
Disciples, when he first sent them forth to Preach, Mat. 10. 9. Provide neither
gold, n^r silver, nor brass in your purses, neither coat, nor scrip; which no
Man ever understood as a general Law to all Christians, but as a particular
Precept to the Apostles at that time.

And if this be our Savior's meaning, there is then no Reason to think, that
this Caution against Covetousness does forbid Men to use a provident Care and
regular Industry about the Things of this Life.

Thirdly, Nor is every Degree of Love and Affection to the Things of this World
Condemned in Scripture, as any Branch, or Part of this Vice of Covetousness;
but such a love of the Things of this World as is truly consistent with the
Love of God, and a due and serious care of our Souls, is allowed both by
Scripture and Reason. St. John indeed seems to condemn all love of the World,
and of the Things of it, as utterly inconsistent with the love of God, 1 John
2. 15. Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World; if any Man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him: But this is according to
the Hebrew Phrase and manner of speaking, to forbid Things Absolutely, which
are to be understood only Comparatively. So Mat. 6. 19. Lay not up for your
selves Treasures upon Earth; but lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven; i.
e. be not so solicitous for the good Things of this World, as for the Glory and
Happiness of the next. And Luke 12. 4. Be not afraid of them that kill the
Body; that is, fear them not so much as him that can destroy both Body and Soul
in Hell: And Luke 14. 26. If any Man come unto me, and hate not his Father and
Mother, and all that he has; that is, if he do not love me more than all these
Things, he cannot be my Disciple: And John 6. 27. Labor not for the Meat which
perishes, but for that which endures to Everlasting Life; that is, labor not
so much for the one as for the other, be not so solicitous about the Things of
this Life, as about the great Concernments of Eternity. So likewise Colos. 3.
2. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the Earth; i. e. set
them more on Things above, than on earthly Things. So here, Love not the World,
neither the Things of the World; that is, do not overvalue them, do not love
them so much as not to be able to part with them for Christ; for if any Man
thus love the World, he does not love God as he ought. So that when the
Scripture commands us not to love the World, this is to be understood
Comparatively, that we should not love these Things in Comparison of God, and
the great Concernments of another World: But it does not forbid us to love
the^e Things in a due Degree, and with a due Subordination to those Things
which are more Excellent, and of Infinitely greater Concernment to us. For
nothing can be more inconsistent, than to recommend to Men Diligence in their
worldly Callings and Employments (as the Scripture frequently does) and that in
order to the attaining of the good Things of this Life; and yet to forbid us to
love these Things at all. For if Men have no degree of love to them, the best
Argument to Diligence for the obtaining of them would be taken away. Besides,
that we are commanded in Scripture to be thankful to God for bestowing on us
the Blessings of this Life, and we are to love him upon this account. Now can
any Man love the Giver, for bestowing such Gifts upon him, which if he do as he
ought, he must not love?

You see then what those Things are, which the Scripture does not Condemn as
any Branch or Degree of this Vice of Covetousness; a provident Care, and a
regular Industry, and such a degree of Love to the Things of this World, as is
consistent with the love of God, and the care of our Souls.

2. I come now to show what is Condemned in Scripture under the name of
Covetousness; and by this we shall best understand wherein the Nature of this
Sin does consist. Now Covetousness is a word of a large Signification, and
comprehends in it most of the Irregularities of Men's Minds, either in desiring,
or getting, or in possessing, and using an Estate. I shall speak to each of
these severally.

First, Covetousness in the Desire of Riches, consists in an eager and
unsatiable desire after the Things of this World. This the Scripture condcmns,
though it be free from Injustice, as it seldom happens to be. This insatiable
desire of Wealth God plainly condemns by his Prophet, Isa. 5. 8. Woe unto them
that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth. And this is that which our
Savior here in the Text seems to have a more particular respect to, when he
cautions Men against the Sin of Covetousness, as appears both from the Reason
which he gives of this Caution, and from the Parable whereby he illustrates it.
From the Reason which he gives of this Caution, Take heed and beware of
Covetousness; for the Life of Man does not consist in the abundance of the
Things which he possesses. As if he had said, take great care to set some
Bounds to your Desires after the Things of this World. For whatever Men may
imagine, it is certain in Experience, that it is not the Abundance of outward
Things which makes the Life of Man happy. Wealth and Content do not always
dwell together; nay, so far from that, that perhaps they very seldom meet.

And the Parable likewise which follows upon this Caution, does sufficiently
show this to be our Savior's meaning; for he illustrates what he was speaking
of, by a Rich Man, whose desire of Wealth was never satisfied, but he was
continually increasing his Estate, and enlarging his Barns, to make more room
still for his Fruits, that he might lay up Goods in store for many years. The
Parable does not so much as intimate any indirect and unjust ways of Gain,
which this Man used to increase his Estate; but condemns his insatiable Desire
and Thirst after more; so that even this alone is Covetousness, and a great
fault, though it were attended with no other; because it is unreasonable, and
without end.

Secondly, There is Covetousness likewise in getting an Estate; and the Vice or
Evil of this kind of Covetousness consists chiefly in these three Things.

1. In the use of unlawful and unjust ways to get or increase an Estate. He is
a Covetous Man, who by the greediness of Gain is tempted to do any unjust
Action, whether it be in the way of Fraud and Deceit, or of Violence and
Oppression. And this perhaps is that which is most frequently in Scripture
called Covetousness. And this I ^ake to be the meaning of the Tenth
Commandment, Thou shall not Covet; wherein is forbidden all unjust desire of
that which is another Man's, and all unjust endeavors and attempts to deprive
him of it. For so our Savior renders it, Mark 10. 19. where he says to the
young Man that came to be directed by him, what good thing he should do, that
he might Inherit Eternal Life; Thou know the Commandments, do not commit
Adultery, do not Kill, do not Steal, do not bear false witness; and then
instead of the Tenth Commandment, Thou shall not Covet, or rather by way of
explication of it, he adds (...), de^raud not; as if he had said, in a word, be
not injurious to thy Neighbor in any kind, in desiring or endeavoring to
deprive him of any thing that is his. As the Romans in their Laws were wont to
comprehend those Crimes which had no Proper Name, by the general Name of
Stellionatus, and dolus malus; so here in the Decalogue, after God had
instanced in the chief and most common sorts of Injuries which Men are guilty
of toward their Neighbor, as Murder, Adultery, Theft, Bearing of false
Witness; he sums up all the rest, which could not so easily be reckoned,
particulary in this short and general Prohibition, Thou shall not Covet; that
is, thou shall not be injurious to thy Neighbor in any other kind; in his
Wife, or Servant, or House, or Cattle, or any thing that is his. Covetousness,
or any inordinate desire of that which is our Neighbors, being commonly the
Root and Parent of all these kinds of Injuries.

And for the same Reason, St. Matthew, instead of the Tenth Commandment, puts
this general Precept, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, as being the
sense of it in other words; Mat. 19. 18, 19. Thou shall do no Murder, thou
shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Steal, thou shall not bear false
Witness, honor thy Father and thy Mother, and thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self. And this Command of loving our Neighbor as our selves, our Savior
elsewhere tells us was the sum of the Duties of the Second Table; and it is
the same in sense with that Precept of our Savior, Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.
That is, as thou would have no Man to be injurious to thee in any thing, so
be not thou so to any other Man in any kind. And the Apostle, Romans 13. 8, 9,
10. shows us upon what account this General Precept, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, is the Sum of the Second Table. He that loves another
has fulfilled the Law: For this, Thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall
not Kill, thou shall not Steal, Thou shall not bear false Witness, Thou shall
not Covet; and if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this Saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And then he
adds in the next words, Love works no ill to his Neighbor; therefore Love is
the fulfilling of the Law. That is, he that truly loves his Neighbor, will not
be injurious to him in any kind: Therefore Love is the sum of the Law.

The Design of all this is to show that he that is injurious to his Neighbor
in his Estate in any kind, is properly guilty of the Sin of Covetousness, which
is forbidden in the Tenth Commandment. So that all Arts of Fraud and
Oppression, whereby Men endeavor to get and increase an Estate by the injury
of their Neighbor, is a Branch of the Sin of Covetousness.

2. The Vice of Covetousness in getting Wealth, does likewise consist in an
anxious and tormenting Care about obtaining the Things of this Life. The
regular and due Temper of a Man's Mind about the Things of this World, is to
commit our selves to the Providence of God in the use of honest and lawful
Endeavors, and to refer the success of all to his good Pleasure; and
whatsoever is beyond this, is a Branch of the Evil Root of Covetousness. We
distrust the Providence of God, when after we have used our best Endeavors,
and begged his Blessing upon them, we torment our selves about the issue and
event of Things. And as this is sinful, so it is vain, and to no purpose.
Diligence in our Business is the way to get an Estate; but no Man was ever the
Richer, for tormenting himself, because he was not so. The Reason why Men seek
the T^ings of this World, and take pains to get them, is to make Life
convenient and comfortable; and consequently he that torments himself about the
getting of these Things, contradicts himself in his own Design, because he
makes his Life Miserable, that he may make it Comfortable.

3. The Sin of Covetousness in getting, consists in seeking the Things of this
Life, with the neglect of Things infinitely better, and which are of far
greater and nearer Concernment to us. He is a Covetous Man, who so minds the
World, as to neglect God, and his Soul; who is so busy and intent upon making
provision for this Life, as to take no care of the other; so concerned for the
few days of his Pilgrimage here, as to have no consideration and regard for his
Eternal Abode in another World. God allows us to provide for this Life, and
considers the Necessities which do continually press us while we are in the
Body: But while we are making provision for these Dying Bodies, he expects that
we should remember that we have Immortal Souls; which since they are to have an
endless duration in another World, ought to be provided for with far greater
Care. It Is an inordinate desire of Riches, when Men so lay out all their Care
and Industry for the obtaining of them, as if nothing else were to be regarded,
as if no Consideration at all were to be had of another World, and of that
better part of our selves which is to continue and live for ever. All Desires
and Endeavors after Riches, which take Men off from the business of Religion,
and the Care of their Souls, which allow Men neither the leisure and
opportunity, nor the heart and affection to love God, and to serve him, are to
be referred to this Sin of Covetousness, which is here condemned by our Savior
in the Text.

3. There is Covetousness likewise in possessing or using an Estate: And this
consists chiefly in these three Things.

First, When Men are sordid toward themselves, and cannot find in their hearts
to use and enjoy what they possess; are continually adding to their Estate,
without any design of enjoyment; and take infinite pains to raise a huge
Fortune, not that they may use it, but that they may be said to have it. This
is a degree of Covetousness even beyond that of the Rich Man in the Parable
after the Text: For he it seems, after he had enlarged his Barns to his Mind,
and laid up goods for many years, designed at last to have taken his ease, and
have fallen to the enjoyment of what he had gotten; to have eat and drank, and
to have been merry; and this, though it proved but a foolish design in the issue,
he being cut off in that very instant when he was come to the point of
satisfaction and enjoyment; yet is it infinitely more reasonable, than to take
great pains to get an Estate, with a full Resolution never to be the better for
it.

Secondly, Men are Covetous in keeping an Estate, when they do not use it
Charitably; when they cannot find in their hearts to spare any thing out of
their Abundance, to the Relief of those who are in want. Though a Man get an
Estate without Covetousness, and have an heart to enjoy it, yet so far he is
Covetous, as he is Uncharitable. He loves Money more than he ought, who having
enough to spare, chooses rather to keep it, than to do good with it, and to use
it to one of the principal Ends for which God gives an Estate.

Thirdly, They likewise are Covetous, who place their chief Trust and Happiness
in Riches, who (as the Expression is, Job 31. 24.) make Gold their hope, and
say to the fine Gold, thou art my confidence. And this is the Reason why
Covetousness is so often in Scripture called Idolatry; because the Covetous Man
sets up his Riches in the place of God, putting his Trust and Confidence in
them, and setting his whole Heart upon them, loving them as he should love God
only, with all his Heart, and Soul, and Strength: And therefore Mammon, which
signifies Riches, is in Scripture represented as a Deity, and the ^^vetous Man,
as a Servant, or Worshipper of Mammon.

So that in Scripture he is a Covetous Man who places his chief Felicity in a
great Fortune, and will venture to lose any thing, rather than to part with
that; who will quit his Religion, and violate his Conscience, and run the
hazard of his Soul, rather than forfeit his Estate, or the hopes of advancing
it to his Mind.

And this in times of Trial and Difficulty, is the great Temptation to which
the Covetous Man is exposed. When a Man may not only save himself, but get
considerable advantage by departing from the Truth; and in changing his
Religigion, may have a good Sum of Money to boot, or which is equal to it, a
good Place; This to a Covetous Mind is a very strong Temptation, and almost
irresistible. When Error and Delusion can bid so high, and offer so good Terms,
no wonder if it gain some Proselytes among the Covetous and Ambitious part of
Mankind. This the Apostle gives warning of, as a great Temptation to Rich Men
in Times of Suffering, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. They that will be Rich, fall into
Temptation, and a Snare: for the love of Money is the root of all Evil; which
while some have lusted after, they have erred from the Faith. The young Man in
the Gospel is a sad Instance of this kind, who chose rather to leave Christ,
than to part with his great Possessions. And such a one was Demas, who forsook
the Apostles, and Christianity it self, to cleave to this present World.

Thus I have done with the First Thing I proposed to speak to, the Nature of
this Vice, which our Savior in the Text Cautions Men so earnestly against;
Take heed and beware of Covetousness. I should now proceed in the Second place
to show the Evil and Unreasonableness of this Vice. But that shall be the
Subject of another Discourse.

The Second SERMON ON LUKE XII. 15.
And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
I Have made entrance into a Discourse upon these Words, in which I told you
there are Three Things Observable.

First, The Manner of the Caution which our Savior here gives, Take heed and
beware.

Secondly, The Matter of the Caution, or the Sin which our Savior here warns
his Hearers against, Take heed and beware of Covetousness: And

Thirdly, The Reason of this Caution, because a Man's Life consists not in
the abundance of the Things which he possesses.

In Discoursing of the Second of these, viz. the Matter of the Caution, I
proposed.

1. To Consider wherein the Nature of this Vice of Covetousness does consist.

2. To show the Evil and Unreasonableness of it.

The First of these I have dispatched, and now go on to the Second, viz. To
show the great Evil and Unreasonableness of the Vice of Covetousness.

Now Covetousness will appear to be very Evil, and Unreasonable, upon these
following Accounts.

I. Because it takes Men off from Religion, and the Care of their Souls.

II. Because it tempts Men to do many Things which are inconsistent with
Religion, and directly contrary to it.

III. Because it is an endless and insatiable Desire.

IV. Because the Happiness of Humane Life does not consist in Riches.

V. Because Riches do very often contribute very much to the Misery and
Infelicity of Men.

First, Covetousness takes Men off from Religion, and the Care of their Souls.
The Covetous Man is wholly intent upon this World; and his inordinate Desire
after these Things, makes him to neglect God, and the Eternal Concernments of
his Soul. He employs all his Time, and Care, and Thoughts about these Temporal
Things, and his vehement love and eager pursuit of these Things steals away his
Heart from God, robs him of his Time, and of all Opportunities for his Soul,
and diverts him from all serious Thoughts of another World, and the Life to
come. And the Reason of this is, that which our Savior gives, Mat. 6. 24. No
Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other;
or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God,
and Mammon. No Man can serve two Masters so different as God and the World are,
because they will give cross Commands, and enjoin contrary Things. God he calls
upon us to mind the Duties of his Worship and Service, to have a serious regard
to Religion, and a diligent Care of our Souls: But the Cares of the World, and
the Importunity of Business, and an eager appetite of being Rich, call us off
from these Divine and Spiritual Employments, or disturb us in them. God calls
upon us to be Charitable to those that are in want, to be willing to
distribute, and ready to communicate to the Necessities of our Brethren: But
our Covetousness pulls us back, and hales us another way, and checks all
Merciful and Charitable Inclinations in us. God calls us to Self-Denial, and
Suffering for the Sake of him, and his Truth, and commands us to prefer the
keeping of Faith, and a good Conscience, to all Worldly Considerations
whatsoever: But the World Inspires us with other Thoughts, and whispers to us
to save our selves, not to be Righteous over much, and rather to trust God with
our Souls, than Men with our Bodies and Estates.

If we set our Hearts and Affections strongly upon any thing, they will partake
of the Object which they are Conversant about; for where our Treasure is (as
our Lord has told us) there will our Hearts be also. If a great Estate be our
chief End and Design, if Riches be our Treasure, and our Happiness, our Hearts
will be found among the Stuff. We cannot bestow our Affections freely upon two
Objects. We cannot intensly love God, and the World; for no Man can have two
Ultimate Ends, two Principal Designs. Our Riches may increase; but if we set
our hearts upon them, and give them the chief place in our Affections, we make
them our Lord and Master. Whatever we make our Ultimate End, we give it a
Sovereignty and Empire over us; we put our selves under its Dominion, and make
our selves subject to all its Commands. So that if it bid us go, we must go;
come, we must come; do this, we must do it; because we are under Authority: The
World is our Master, and we are its Slaves. Now he that is under the Rule and
Dominion of this Master, must withdraw his Obedience from God, and in many
Cases decline Obedience to his Laws.

This Worldly Covetous Disposition was that which made those in the Parable to
make so many Excuses, when they were Invited to the Supper, Luke 14. 18. One
had bought a Farm, and he could not come: Another had bought so many Yoke of
Oxen, and therefore he desired to be excused. Riches do so fill the Covetous
Man's Heart, and the Cares of the World so possess his Mind, that he has no
room left in his Soul for any other Guests: Intus existens prohibet alienum,
that which is full already, can receive no more. The Covetous Man's Heart is
taken up with such Things as keep out God, and Christ, and better Things. If
any Man love the World, and the Things of it to this Degree, St. John tells us
that the love of the Father is not in him. In the Parable of the Sower, Mat.
13. 7. Our Savior represents to us the Cares of the World, which choke the
word of God, by Thorns which sprang up among the Seed, and stifled the growth
of it. The Cares of the World will not suffer the Word of God to take deep root
in our hearts, and to have any permanent effect upon them: And Ezekiel. 33. 31.
God gives this as a Reason why the People of Israel would not hearken to the
words of his Prophet, because their Hearts were upon the World. They come unto
thee, (says God there to the Prophet) as the People comes, and they sit before
thee as my People, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: For with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
Covetousness. A Heart that is deeply engaged in the World, will stand out
against all the Invitations, and Promises, and Threatenings of God's Word. When
the Word of God invites such Persons, it is like making Love to those who have
already fixed their Hearts and Affections elsewhere; the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel signify but very little to such Men, because their
Hearts are set upon Worldly Things, and all their Affections are bent that way;
all their Hopes and Desires are Worldly, to be Rich, and abound in Wealth; and
all their Fears are of Poverty and Loss. Now such a Man can only be moved with
the Promises and Threatenings of Temporal Things; for no Promises have any
effect upon us, but such as are of some Good, which we care for and value: Nor
are any Threatenings apt to move us, but such as are of some Evil, which we
dread, and are afraid of. And therefore when Eternal Life, and the Happiness of
another World, are offered to a worldly-minded Man, he does not desire it, he
is not at all sensible of the value of it^ the Man's Heart is full already of
other Hopes and Desires, and the full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb. Promise to
such a Man the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Pleasures of God's Presence, and the
Joys of Eternity, this does not signify to such a Man any Good or Happiness
that he is sensible of, or knows how to relish. And on the other hand, threaten
him with the loss of God, and an Eternal Separation from that Fountain of
Happiness, and with the unspeakable Anguish and Torments of a long Eternity;
these Things, though they be terrible, yet they are at a distance, and the
Covetous Man is enured to Sense, and is only to be moved with Things present
and sensible; he cannot extend his Fears so far as another World, so long as he
finds himself well and at ease, as to the Things of this present Life.

If we would affect such a Man, we must offer to his Consideration something
that is fit to work upon him; threaten him with breaking open his House, and
ri^^ing his Coffers, and carrying away his full Bags; with questioning his
Title to his Estate, or starting a precedent Mortgage, or something of the like
Nature: These Things indeed are dreadful and terrible to him; now you speak
intelligibly to him, and he understands what you mean: Tell him of a good
Bargain, or an advantageous Purchase, offer him decently a good Bribe, or give
him notice of a young Heir that may be circumvented, and drawn in, then you say
something to him that is worthy of his regard and attention; the Man may be
tempted by such Offers and Promises as these: But Discourse to him with the
tongue of M^^ and Angels, of the Excellency of Virtue and Goodness, and of the
Necessity of it, to the obtaining of a Glory and Happiness that shall neither
have bounds nor end; and lo! thou art unto him as a very lovely Song of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an Instrument, for he hears
thy words, but he will not do them; as the Prophet expresses it, Ezekiel. 33. 32.
Such Discourses as these they look upon as fine talk, or a melodious ^ound,
that vanishes into air, but leaves no impression behind it. Perhaps even these
dull and stupid kind of Men are affected a little for the present with the
liveliness of the Romance, and the Poetical Vein of the Preacher; but these
Things pass away like a Tale that is told, but have no lasting effect upon
them. So effectually does Covetousness, and the love of this present World,
obstruct all those Passages, through which the Consideration of Religion and
Heavenly Things should enter into our Minds.

Secondly, As Covetousness hinders Men from Religion, and takes them off from a
due Care of their Souls; so it many times tempts and engages Men to do many
Things contrary to Religion, and inconsistent with it: It is the Natural Source
and Fountain of a great many Evils, and the Parent of most of the worst of
Vices. He that will engage deep in the World, must use much more guard and
caution than most Men do, to do it without Sin. How many Temptations is the
Covetous Man exposed to in the getting, and in the securing, and in the
spending and enjoying of a great Estate? It is no easy Task to reckon them up,
and much more difficult to escape or re^ist them; and yet each of these
Temptations bring him into the danger of a great many Sins. For,

I. In the getting of an Estate, he is exposed to all those Vices which may
seem to be serviceable to this Design. Nothing has been the Cause of more and
greater Sins in the World, than Covetousness, and making haste to be Rich. It
is Solomon's Observation, Prove. 28. 20. He that makes haste to be Rich, shall
not be Innocent. He does not say he cannot be Innocent, but he speaks as if
there were all the probability in the World that he will not prove to be so;
but being in so much haste, will almost unavoidably fall into a great many
oversights and faults. And the Heathen Poet makes the very same Observation in
more words, Inde fere scelerum causae, nec plura venena
Miscuit, aut ferro grassatur saepius ullum
Humanae mentis vitium, quam saeva Cupido
Immodici Census: nam dives qui fieri vult,
Et cito vult fieri; Sed quae Reverentia Legum,
Quis Metus aut Pudor est unquam properantis avari?


This, says he, is the Cause of most Sins: Nor is there any Vice of which the
Mind of Man is capable, that has been guilty of more Murders and Poysonings,
than a furious Desire of immode^ate Wealth; for he that will be Rich, will make
haste to be so: And what Reverence of Laws, what fear or shame was ever seen in
any Man that was in in haste to be Rich? And this is the sense of what the
Apostle says concerning this Vice of Covetousness, this peremptory Resolution
of being Rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. They that will be Rich, fall into Temptation,
and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in
Destruction and Perdition. For the love of Money is the root of all Evil. If
this Vice of Covetousness once reign in us, if we have once fixed our End, and
set up this Resolution with our selves, that we will be Rich, we shall then
make every thing stoop and submit to this Design. A Cov^tous Man will make his
Principles and his Conscience to bend to his Resolution of being Rich, and to
bow to that Interest. The eager Desire of Riches makes Men to pursue them in
indirect and uncharitable ways, by Falsehood and Perjury, by undermining and
overreaching, by dissembling and flattery, by corrupting and imbasing of
Commodities, by false Weights and Measures, by taking Fees with both hands, by
making use of their Power and Wit to oppress and defraud their Brother, by
imposing upon his Ignorance and Simplicity, or by making a Prey of his Poverty
and Necessity.

Covetousness many times makes Men Cruel and Unjust; nay it makes them guilty
of the worst sort of Cruelty and Oppression. For (as one says well) the
Covetous Man oppresses his Neighbor, not for any good to himself; for he does
not enjoy what he tears and rends from others; so that he is of that most
hateful kind of Beasts of Prey, that kill other Creatures, not to eat them, but
that they may see them lie dead by them. Lions and Wolves kill out of hunger;
but the Covetous Man, like a Serpent, or Scorpion, stings and bites others to
death, not for his need, but for his pleasure and recreation. Covetousness is
the Parent of the most monstrous Sins; because it fixes a Man in a Resolution
of getting an Estate by any means. If Falseness and Deceit, Violence and
Oppression will further this End; the earnest desire of the End tempts Men to
use any sort of Means whereby the End may be compassed; and though a Man may have
some averseness from them at first, yet that wears off by degrees, and the
strong desire of the End, reconciles a Man at last to the love and liking of
the Means, how wicked and unwarrantable soever. Covetousness tempted Achan to
steal the accursed Thing, and Gehazi to lie to the Prophet, and Ahab to Oppress
and Murder Naboth. Nay, a small Sum tempted the Covetous Mind of Judas to
betray his Master, and his Savior. And how do many Men every day strain their
Consciences to get an Estate, and hazard their Souls for Money; nay exchange
their Souls, which are of more value than the whole World, for a very small
portion of it?

II. There are likewise many other Temptations which a Covetous Man is exposed
to in the keeping and securing of an Estate, when he has got it. A Covetous
and worldly-minded Man, when it comes to the Trial, is in great danger of
quitting his Religion, and making shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.
When his Estate comes to be in hazard, he is very apt to fall off from the
Truth; it is an hundred to one but in these Circumstances he will choose rather
to violate his Conscience, than to forfeit his Estate. What the Devil falsely
said of Job, is true of the Covetous Man, he does not serve God for naught.
Upon these Terms it was, that Christ and the young Man parted; he had great
Possessions, and it troubled him to part with them. When Demas was brought to
the Trial, and put to it, whether he would stick to the profession of the
Gospel, or his Worldly Possessions, he quitted St. Paul, and declared for the
World, the 2 d of Tim. 4. 10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present
World. So far had his Covetous humor besotted him, as to make him prefer his
present Interest in these Temporal Things, before those Eternal Rewards which
the Gospel offered.

III. There are likewise many Temptations which Men are exposed to in the
enjoying and spending of a great Estate. It is hard to have a great Estate, and
not to be mastered by the love of it; not to have our Cares and Thoughts, our
Hearts and Affections swallowed up by it. It Is no easy thing for a Man that
has Riches, not to overvalue them, and love them more than he ought; not to
be puffed up by them, and so place his Trust and Confidence in them. Prove. 18.
11. The Rich Man's Wealth is his strong City, and as an high Wall in his own
Conceit. The Covetous Man sets up his Riches in the place of God, and is apt
to fall down before this Golden Calf, and Worship it: To say to the Gold, thou
art my Hope, and to the fine Gold, thou art my Confidence: To Rejoice, because
his Wealth is great, and because his hand has gotten much.

Riches are a great Temptation to Irreligion and Atheism. Upon this account
Agur wisely prays to God for a moderate Estate, because of the danger of both
the Extremes of Riches and Poverty; because of the great and violent
Temptations which Men are exposed to in both these Conditions, Prove. 30. 8, 9.
Give me neither Poverty, nor Riches; but feed me with food convenient for me.
Why not Riches? Le^t I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? And
much more do Riches tempt Men to Pride and Insolence toward others, Prove. 18.
23. The Poor uses entreaties, but the Rich answers roughly. Men's Spirits are
commonly blown up and bloated with their Fortunes, and their Pride, and
Stomach, and Passion do usually increase in proportion to their Wealth.

And many times Riches Tempt Men to Luxury, and Intemperance, and all manner of
Excess. Rich Men have a mighty Temptation to allow themselves all manner of
unlawful Pleasures, because he who has a great Estate, is furnished with that
to which hardly any thing can be denied. And this is not inconsistent with a
Covetous Humor; for there are many times Men who are Covetous in getting, for
no other End and Reason, but that they may spend it upon their L^sts. As
Covetousness sometimes starves other Vices, so sometimes it serves them, and is
made subordinate to a Man's Ambition, or Lust, or some other reigning Vice.
There is no such absolute inconsistency between Riches and Virtue, but that it
is possible that a Man that is very Rich, may be very good. But yet if we
consult Experience, I doubt it will be found a true Observation, that there are
but very few Rich Men, who are not insupportable, either for their Vanity, or
their Vices; so that our Savior had reason for that severe Question, How hard
is it for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God? And well might he upon
this account pronounce the Poor, (the poor in Estate, as well as the Poor in
Spirit) blessed, as we find he does, Luke 6. 20. Blessed be ye Poor, for yours
is the Kingdom of God. They oftener enter there, than the Rich.

Thirdly, Covetousness is likewise Evil and Unreasonable, because it is an
endless and insatiable desire. A Covetous Mind may propose to it self some
certain bounds and limits, and a Man may think that when he is arrived to such
an Estate, and has raised his Fortune to such a pitch, that he will then sit
down contented and satisfied, and will seek after no more. But he deceives
himself in this Matter; for when he has attained to that which he proposed to
himself, he will be never the nearer being satisfied. So Solomon tells us,
Eccles. 5. 10. He that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor
he that loves abundance, with increase; for no degree of Wealth can satisfy a
Covetous Mind. He may think so beforehand, that if he had so much, it would be
enough; but when he has attained it, he will be still reaching after more; for
Covetousness is a Disease of the Mind, and an unnatural thirst, which is
inflamed by that which should quench it. Every Desire that is Natural, is
satisfied and at rest, when it has once obtained the thing it desired. If a
Man be hungry, he is satisfied when he has eaten; or if he be thirsty, his
thirst is allayed and quenched when he has drank to such a proportion as
Nature does require; and if he eat and drink beyond this measure, Nature is
oppressed, and it is a burden to him. But Covetousness is not the thirst of
Nature, but of a Diseased Mind. It is the thirst of a Fever, or of a Dropsy;
the more a Man drinks, the more he desires, and the more he is inflamed. In
like manner, the more the Covetous Man increases his Estate, the more his
Desires are enlarged and extended, and he finds continually new Occasions and
new Necessities; and every day as he grows Richer, he discovers new Wants; and
a new Poverty to be provided against, which he did not think of before, comes
into his Mind: Et minus haec optat, qui not habet; and he that is without these
Things, covets them less than he that has them. So far is a Covetous Man's
attaining to Riches from giving him satisfaction, that he who has scarce any
thing at all, is many times much nearer to Contentment, than he that has got
so much; nay so unreasonable is this appetite, as to desire more, even when the
Man knows not how to bestow what he has already. This Solomon observed long
since, (for the Vices and Humors of Men are much the same in all Ages) Eccles.
4. 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea he has neither Child
nor Brother; yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye
satisfied with Riches, neither says he for whom do I labor, and bereave my
Soul of good? This is also vanity, yea it is a sore travel. And indeed what can
be greater Vanity and Folly, than to be at certain pains and labor all the
days of a Man's Life, and yet to be uncertain all the while, for whom it is
that he drudgeth, and takes all these pains.

And if this be the Nature of this Vice, the more it gets, still to covet the
more; then nothing can be more unreasonable, than to think to grati^ie this
appetite; because at this rate, the Man can never be contented, because he can
never have enough; nay so far is it from that, that every new accession to his
Fortune, sets his Desires one degree farther from rest and satisfaction: For a
Covetous Mind having no bounds, it is very probable that the Man's Desire will
increase much faster than his Estate; and then the Richer he is, he is still
the Poorer, because he is still the less contented with his Condition. However,
it is impossible that the Man's Desire should ever be satisfied; for Desire
being always first, if the Man's Desire of Riches advances and goes forward as
fast as Riches follow, then it is not possible for Riches ever to overtake the
Desire of them, no more than the hinder Wheels of a Coach can overtake those
which are before: Because as they were at a distance at first setting out, so
let them go never so far, or so fast, they keep the same distance still.

So that it is the vainest thing in the World, for a Man to design his own
satisfaction by the perpetual increase of his Fortune, because Contentment does
not arise from the abundance of what a Man has, but it must spring from the
inward frame and temper of our Minds; and the true way to it, is not to enlarge
our Estate, but to contract our Desires; and then it is possible that a Man's
Money and his Mind may meet; otherwise the pursuit is endless, and the farther a
Man follows Contentment, it will but flee so much the farther from him; and
when he has attained the Estate of a Prince, and a Revenue as great as that of
France, or the Turkish Empire, he shall be farther from being satisfied, than
when he began the World, and had no more beforehand than would just pay for
his next Meal.

I should now have proceeded to the Fourth Thing, whereby the unreasonableness
of Covetousness does appear; because the Happiness of Humane Life does not
consist in Riches. And this is the Argumeut which I shall more especially
insist upon, because it is that which our Savior uses here in the Text, to
take Men off from this Vice. The Life of Man consists not in the abundance of
the Things which he possesses. And this certainly is one of the best and most
Reasonable Considerations in the World, to moderate Men's Affections toward
these Things. Every Reasonable Desire propounds some End to itself. Now to what
purpose should any Man desire to increase his Wealth so vastly beyond the
proportion of his Necessities, and real Occasions? What Benefit and Advantage
would it be to any Man, to have a hundred times more than he knows what to do
withal? But I shall not Enlarge upon this Argument at present, but referr it
to another Opportunity.

The Third SERMON ON LUKE XII. 15.
And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
AFter I had, in my first Discourse upon this Subject, given you an Account of
the Nature of the Vice of Covetousness, I proceeded in the next place to
represent the great Evil and Unreasonableness of it.

First, Because it takes Men off from Religion, and the Care of their Souls.

Secondly, Because it tempts Men to many Things which ar^ inconsisten^ with
Religion, and dir^^^ly contra^y to it.

Thirdly, Because it is an endless and insatiable Desire^ Thus far I have gone,
I proceed to the

Fourth Thing, whereby the unreasonableness of Covetousness will yet farther
appear. Namely, because the Happiness of Humane Life does not consist in
Riches, and Abundance. And this I shall insist upon somewhat the more largely,
because it is the Argument which our Savior makes use of here in the Text, to
take Men off from this Sin. The Life of Man consists not in the abundance of
the things which he possesses: Therefore take heed and beware of Covetousness.
And this certainly is one of the best and most reasonable Considerations in the
World, to moderate our Affections toward these Things. For every reasonable
Desire propounds some End to itself. Now to what purpose should any Man desire
to increase his Wealth so vastly, and beyond the proportion of his Necessities
and real Occasions? What Benefit and Advantage can it be to any Man, to have an
hundred, or perhaps a thousand times more than he knows what to do withal?

And as for the other World, no Man ever pretended that the heaping up Riches
here, would be useful to him there; Riches will not deliver him in the day of
wrath. No Man was ever so senseless, as to imagine that he could take his
Estate along with him into the other World; or if he could, that Heaven was to
be bought with Money; or that a great Estate, or a great many Lordships would
recommend him to the favor of God. It Is true indeed, a Man may so use Riches
in this World, as thereby to promote and further his happiness in the next. But
then it is likewise as true, that a Man may so demean himself in a Poor and Low
Condition, as thereby to render himself as acceptable to God, and capable of as
great a Reward, as the Richest Man can do. The Poor Woman's two Mites
cheerfully given to Pious and Charitable Uses, will go as far in the other
World, and find as great a Reward there, as the Rich Man's thousands of Gold
and Silver. And a Man may be as truly Generous and Charitable of a little, as
out of the greatest Fortune. Besides that the Poor Man's Contentedness in a
mean Condition, is more admirable in it self, and more valuable with God, than
for a Rich Man to be so.

So that the great Use of Riches respects this World, and the best Use of them
is in ways of Charity; and the Poor Man's Charity, though it cannot be of so
great an extent in the effects of it, yet in the degree of its Virtue and Merit
it may be equal to it.

Now the two great Designs of Men, in regard to this World, are these.

1. To maintain and support our Lives as long as we can.

2. To make our Lives as truly Happy and Comfortable as we can.

To the First of these Ends, namely the support of our Lives, a very little
will suffice, and it is not much that is necessary to the other, to render our
Lives as truly Comfortable as this World can make them; so that a vast Estate
is not necessary to either of these Ends; for a Man may live by having what is
necessary, and may live comfortably by having that which is convenient.

No Man lives the longer by having abundance; it is many times an occasion of
shortning a Man's Life, by Ministering to Excess and Intemperance; but seldom of
prolonging it. And setting aside the vain fancy and conceit of Men, no Man
lives the more happily, for having more than he has real use and occasion for.

These two Heads I shall at present speak to, to make out the full force of
this Reason, which our Savior here uses; namely, That a Man's Life consist^th
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

I. That Riches do not contribute to the support of our Lives; nor,

II. To the Happiness and Comfort of them. That is, they are not necessary to
either of these Ends. For by Riches I mean whatever is beyond a su^^icient
competency of those things, which a^e requisite to the real Uses and Occasions
of Humane Life.

First, Riches and Abundance do not contribute to the support of our Lives. And
this our Savior very well represents to us in the Parable immed^ately after
the Text, of the Rich Man, who was continually increasing his Estate, so that
he had goods laid up for many years; but he lived not one jot the longer, for
being provided of the Conveniences of Life for so long a time beforehand; for
whilst he was blessing himself, as if he had secured his Happiness sufficiently
for this World, he was uncertain of his continuance in it; God having decreed
to take him out of this World, at that very time when he had determined to
enter upon the Enjoyment of those Things, which he had been so long laying up.
God says to him, thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee; and
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? That is, what good
then will all these Things do thee, when thou have no farther use and occasion
for them? So that if he had been the poorest Man in the World, and had not been
provided for the next Meal, he might have lived as long as he did with all his
stores. You see then that in this sense, a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses. For notwithstanding all his great
Barns, and the abundance of Fruits he had stowed in them, he did not live one
jot the longer, than the poorest Man might have done.

Secondly, Nor do Riches contribute to the Happiness and Comfort of our Lives.
Happiness is not to be bought and purchased together with great Lordships; it
depends upon a great many Causes, among which, a competency of the Things of
this World is one; but Riches and Abundance is none of them. The Happiness of
this World consists in these two Things,

1. In the Enjoyment of Good. And,

2. In a state of freedom from Evil.

Now Riches do not necessarily make a Man Happy in either of these Respects.

First, For the Enjoyment of Good, A competent Estate suitable to the Condition
and Station in which God has set us in this World, will give a Man whatever
Nature and Reason can desire; and abundance cannot make a Man Happier. If a Man
had an hundred times more than he needed, he could but enjoy it according to
the capacity of a Man; for if he consulted his own Happiness, and would tr^ly
enjoy what he has, he must eat and drink within the bounds of Temperance and
Health, and must wear no more Clothes than are for his Convenience. It Is true,
he has wherewithal to put on a new Suit every day; which is to be uneasy all
the days of his Life; and may drink, if he please, every time out of a new Cup;
which would be a vain expense, and a great trouble to his Servants, without any
manner of convenience to himself.

But then if Riches fall into the Covetous Man's hands, they can be no
Happiness to him, because he has no heart to enjoy them. He has indeed the
Estate of a Rich Man, but he wants the Comfort of it, because he has the Mind
of a Poor Man; and Enjoyment is all the Felicity that is in a great Fortune;
what we enjoy is ours, but what we lay up, is from that time not ours, but some
bodies else. He that heaps up Riches, and enjoys them not, is Rich only for his
Heir, but a Beggar for himself.

We are apt to pity Poor Men, and too apt to despise them; but surely no Man's
Condition is more to be deplored than his, who starves himself in the midst of
Plenty, and being surrounded with the Blessings of God, turns them into the
greatest Curse; for it is a much greater Curse, not to use an Estate when one
has it, than not to have it. It is like a plentiful Table without an Appetite.

But it may be it is a great Happiness to have a great Estate, though a Man never
use it; the pleasure of seeing it, and telling it over, may be like the
removing of Billets, which may warm a Man as much as if he had spent and
consumed them. But this is Real, and the other only Imaginary. I doubt not,
many Covetous Men take a great deal of pleasure in ruminating upon their
Wealth, and in re-counting what they have; but they have a great deal of
tormenting care and fear about it; and if they had not, it is very hard to
understand where the reasonable Pleasure and Happiness lies of having Things to
no end. It is at the best, like that of some foolish Birds, which they say take
pleasure in stealing Money, that they may hide it; as if it were worth the
while, for Men to take pains to dig Silver out of the Earth, for no other
purpose, but to melt it down, and stamp it, and bury it there again.

But many Necessities may happen, which we cannot foresee, and it is good to
provide against them. There is nothing so bad, but something may be said in
excuse of it; and I do not deny, but that a provident Care against the common
Accidents of Humane Life is very commendable; but it is unreasonable to think
of providing against all possibilities, which it is impossible either to
foresee, or prevent. It Is very possible, that after a Man has gotten the
greatest Estate imaginable, he may lose it all by some Fatal Accident; and then
to what purpose was all this provision made, when that which was so long a time
a getting, and laying up, is lost at once?

Besides, that it is not easy to conceive what necessity can happen to a
Covetous Man, to give him an occasion of using his Estate; he cannot find in
his heart to bestow it upon himself in such Things as are convenient, nay
almost necessary for the support of his Life; for no Man can feed his Servants
more penuriously than he does himself; all the Religion he values himself upon,
is a strict observance of the Lessian Diet, which he recommends to those few
that can deny themselves to Dine with him, in hopes to make better Meals upon
his Estate when he is gone. And if he be so penurious to himself, the
neces^ities of others are not like to mov^ him to be liberal. I can but imagine
one Occasion that could tempt such a Man to lay out what he has; namely, when
one part of his Estate is in danger, to spend the other to secure it. And yet
even in that Case, if his Cause were not very clear and good, he would go nigh
to lose it, using it as he does himself; that is, by starving it. And if this
be all, then a Man had as good be without an Estate, and save himself the
trouble either of getting it, or securing it; for if it were all gone, he might
live as well as he does, and that with half the Care and Pains.

Secondly, The Happiness of this World consists in a state of freedom from
Evil. Now the great Evils that Men are liable to in this World, are such as are
incident to them either in the course of their Lives, or at the time of their
Death; and Riches do not contribute to Men's Happiness, by freeing them from
either of these. I shall speak to these severally.

1. Not from the Evils which are incident to Men in the course of their Lives.
These are of two kinds, inward, or outward.

1. Inward Evils, by which I mean those of the Mind; and our greatest troubles
are from within, from the anxiety of our Minds, and the guilt of our
Consciences, from the vicious inclinations of our Wills, and the irregularity
and disorders of our Passions. Now Riches were an admirable thing indeed, and
worth our Coveting, if they would help to Cure these Distempers of our Minds;
but they are the least fitted for such a purpose of any thing in the World: For
not he that has the greatest Estate, but he that has the fewest and most
reasonable Desires, and the best governed Passions, and the most Virtuous
Inclinations, is the Happiest Man, and dwells nearest to satisfaction. Nemo
malus foelix, No bad Man can be Happy, though he were possessed of the whole
World; because he has that within him, which frets and discontents him, which
galls his Spirit, and keeps his Mind restless and uneasy; and he that does not
enjoy himself, can enjoy nothing else.

Did but Men know how much Happiness has been enjoyed by many a Pious and
Virtuous Man in a mean Fortune, how quiet and easy their Minds have been, how
much fuller of Joy and Pleasure, than the Heart of any Covetous Worldling ever
was in his most prosperous Estate, and when his Corn, and Wine, and Oil
abounded; did we (I say) but know this, we should not envy the Men of mighty
Fortunes. Nam neque divitibus contingunt gaudia solis. Rich Men are not the
only happy People in the World. If they be not Good as well as Rich, Happiness
is a greater stranger to their Dwellings, than to the Cottages of Poorer Men.

Now Riches are so far from helping to make Men good, that they are one of the
greatest Temptations to them in the World to be otherwise; which it the Reason,
why our Savior says, it is so very hard for a Rich Man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; because considering the powerful and almost irresistible
temptations of a great Estate, and the impotency and weakness of humane Nature
to govern it self in a plentiful Fortune, it is very hard for a Rich Man to be
so good as he ought, it requires a great force and firmness of Resolution, a
very solid and vigorous constitution of Mind, to bear a great Fortune, and not
to be corrupted by it; and a Man has never more Reason to implore God's
gracious help and assistance, and to consult his own best and coolest thoughts,
to know what he ought to do, and how he ought to demean himself, than when the
outward Blessings of this Life flow in amain upon him; felicitate corrumpimur,
nothing sooner debaucheth Men than Prosperity; and he is a very happy Man, whom
Wealth and a good Fortune do not make licentious and dissolute; because these
tempt Men with the power and opportunity to do all the ill that their wicked^
Hearts can design, or desire.

The Temptation of Riches, and the Power that goes along with them, is so
forcible and prevalent, that the Devil, who is a sagacious Spirit, and has
great and long experience in this kind, when he was making the Experiment
whether Christ was a mere Man, or the Son of God, reserved this for his last
Temptation; resolving if that would not do, to try him no farther. After he had
assaulted him in several kinds, he represents to him at last that which was
sufficient to have surfeited two of the most insatiable Desires of Humane
Nature, Ambition, and Covetousness, even all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
glory of them, in a moment, or point of time; he brings all the Rays of this
Glory to one point, that the Temptation might kindle and take hold the sooner;
and says to him, all this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship
me. He supposed with great probability, that if he were but a mere Man, the
strongest and most resolved Mind would bend and yield to so dazzling a
Temptation as this; but when he saw that this Temptation was rejected, he found
himself baffled, and gave him over; since this did not move him, he concluded
now that he was the Son of God indeed, and that it was in vain to tempt him any
farther.

From all this it appears, that Riches are so far from making Men Virtuous,
that nothing is more dangerous to Virtue, than a full Condition; if Men have
not a great degree of Grace, as well as Discretion to manage it. Solomon tells
us, that the prosperity of Fools destroys them.

And yet how do most of us Court this Temptation, and are forward to thrust and
venture our selves upon it? There are a great many other Things, in which most
Men make a right Judgment of themselves, and will readily acknowledge that they
are altogether unfit for them. Every Man will not take upon him to be a
Physician, or a Lawyer, to prescribe Medicines in dangerous Cases, and to give
Counsel to Men in knotty and difficult Points about their Estates; but every
Man thinks himself fit enough to be Rich, and sufficiently qualified to manage
a great Estate, if he can but get it; when perhaps there are few things in the
World, which Men are more insufficient for, than to weild and govern a great
Fortune, nor wherein there is greater danger and miscarriage. It is not every
bodies Talent, to be Wealthy, and Wise; Rich, and Innocent.

2. As for the outward Evils of this Life, such as Want, and Contempt, Bodily
Pains and Diseases, Unhappiness in Friends and Relations, a great Estate is by
no means a sufficient Security or Remedy to a Covetous Man against these.

1. As for want. And surely one would think, that if Riches were good for any
thing, they are a very proper Remedy against this Evil, and a most certain and
Infallible Cure of it; but Experience tells us quite otherwise. Socrates was
wont to say, that To want nothing is the privilege of the Deity, and proper to
God alone; but to stand in need of as few things as may be, is the Privilege
of a Wise and Good Man, and a state of Happiness, next to that of God himself;
because he that has the fewest Wants, is the most easily supplied, and is next
to him that is self-sufficient. Now a Man of moderate Desires has infinitely
fewer wants than a Covetous Man; and because his Desires are moderate, a
moderate Estate will satisfy them: but the Wants of a Covetous Mind are never
to be supplied, because it has ordered the Matter so cunningly, as to want
even that which it has; such a Man does not get Riches to supply his Wants,
but is content to Want, that he may be Rich; insomuch that he has not the
heart to use his Estate for the supply of his real necessities. How many do
almost starve themselves in the midst of Plenty and Abundance? There is no
greater sign of Poverty, than to be deeply in debt: now the Covetous Man lives
and dies in debt to himself. Some Men have been so shamefully penurious and
stingy to themselves, as even to die, to save Charges, which yet perhaps is the
most generous thing they ever did in their whole Lives, in respect to the
World; because by this means some body may come to the enjoyment of their
Estates, and that great Dunghill which they have been so long in raking
together, may by this means come to be spread abroad for the Public Benefit.

So that if a Covetous Man were possessed of the Wealth of both the Indies, all
this would not free him from want. A Poor Man's wants may be satisfied, when he
has obtained what he wants: but the Covetous Man labors of an incurable want;
because he wants that which he has, as well as that which he has not.

2. As for Contempt, Riches will not secure a Covetous Man against this
neither; nay so far is it from that, that he is commonly the more ridiculous
and despised for living Poor in the midst of Abundance, than if he were really
so. Did I say really so? He is the most really Poor of all other Men. For as
one says well, the Rich Poor Man is emphatically Poor.

3. Neither will Riches free Men from bodily illness and pain. The Rich are
liable to as many Diseases, and as sharp Pains, as the Poor, and they have
commonly less patience to bear them than the Poor; because they have not been
inured to other sorts of Evils. They that have been accustomed to Labor, are
generally best fitted to bear Pain; the Rich are commonly more tender and
delicate, and have a quicker sense of Pain, more Matter, and greater quantity
of Humors to feed a Disease, and to inflame it to a greater height.

I must not here forget that there is a sort of Rich Men, I mean the penurious
Misers, who starve themselves more than the Poor, and fare many times more
hardly; and for this Reason, though they be not in danger of the Diseases that
come from Intemperance, and a plentiful Table; yet they are liable to the
Diseases which proceed from starving and emptiness; which the Physicians say
are more dangerous than the other: So that neither the Prodigal, nor the
Niggardly Rich Man is secured from Bodily Pains and Diseases by a great Estate.

4. Neither will Riches secure a Man from being unhappy in his Friends and
Relations. A great Estate will not make a Man's Children either more Dutiful or
Wise, than the Children of meaner Persons; and if they be not so, his Estate
cannot be so great an Happiness to him, as they may prove an Affliction.
Solomon tells us, that the very fear and apprehension of this did very much
imbitter the fruit of all his Labor; and he seems to speak it sensibly, and
very probably with a melancholy reflection upon his Son Rehoboam, Eccles. 2.
18, 19. Yea I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun, because I
should leave it unto the Man that shall be after me; and who knows whether he
shall be a Wise Man, or a Fool? Yet shall he have rule over all my labor,
wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self Wise under the Sun.
Who knows whether he shall be a Wise Man, or a Fool? He seems to speak
doubtfully: but he had a very shrewd guess what kind of Man his Son would make;
for he speaks more despondingly in the next words, (ver. 20, 21.) therefore I
went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labor which I took under
the Sun; (that is, when I thought seriously of it, I began to think that all
the pains I had taken to get an Estate, would be but to l^ttle purpose;) for
there is a Man (says he) whose labor is in Wisdom, and in Knowledge, and in
Equity (that is, who by wise and honest means has ^ais'd a great Estate) yet
to a Man that has not labored therein (that is, to a Man who is endowed with
none of these qualities) shall he leave it for his Portion; this also is
Vanity, and a great Evit.

And as for Friends, though the Rich Man have many that will call themselves so,
yet he had almost as good have none; for he can hardly ever know whether they
be so or not, unless he chance to fall into Poverty, and then indeed the change
of his Condition may give him that advantage and opportunity, which otherwise
he is never like to have, of discerning between his Friends and his Flatterers.
Thus you see that Riches are no security against the most considerable Evils
which attend us in the course of our Lives.

Secondly, When we come to die, nothing will minister less Comfort to us at
that time, than a great Estate. It is then a very small pleasure to a Man, to
reflect how much he has gotten in the World, when he sees that he must leave
it; nay, like the Young Man in the Gospel, he goes away so much the more
sorrowful, because he had great Possessions. All the Things of this World seem
very inconsiderable to a Man, when he approaches to the Confines of the other:
For when he sees that he must leave this World, then he would fain make a
Virtue of Necessity, and begins to change his apprehensions of these Things,
and to have very slight and mean thoughts of them, when he is convinced he can
enjoy them no longer. What the Philosopher was wont to say of the Pleasures of
this World, is as true of Riches, and all the other Enjoyments of it; that if
they did but put on the same countenance, and look with the same face, when
they come to us, that they will do, when they turn from us, and take their
leave of us, we should hardly entertain them.

Now if a Man have placed his chief Happiness in this World, as the Covetous
Man does in his Riches, his great trouble when he comes to die, will be, that
he must leave them. Nothing could be more severely said to the Covetous Man,
than that which God says to the Rich Man in the Parable; Thou Fool, this night
shall thy Soul be required of thee, and then whose shall these things be? For
of all things in the World such Men cannot endure to think of parting with
these things, or that what they have got with such great Care and Labor,
should come to the Possession of another.

And therefore when we are so hot and eager in the pursuit of these things, we
should do well to consider, how they will appear to us in a dying hour. And
this Consideration well imprinted upon our Minds, would make us very careful,
to treasure up other kind of Comforts to our selves against such a time, and to
Labor after those Things which we shall never grow out of conceit withal, but
shall value them to the last, and then most of all, when we come to die, and
leave this World. For as a Poet of our own says Excellently, It Is not that
which first we love:
But what dying we approve.


Thus I have done with the Fourth Thing, whereby the Evil and Unreasonableness
of Covetousness does appear; namely, that the Happiness of Humane Life does not
consist in a great Estate; the Life of Man does not consist in the abundance of
the things which he possesses. The great Ends of Religion, and Covetousness,
are very different. The great End which Religion proposes to it self, is
Happiness: but the great End which Covetousness proposes, is Riches; which are
neither a necessary nor a probable means of Happiness. I should now have
proceeded to the Fifth and last Particular; namely, That Riches are so far from
being the Happiness of Humane Life, that they usually contribute very much to
our Misery, and Sorrow; as will appear if we consider these Four Things.

First, The Labor and Care which Covetous Men are at in the Getting of a great
Estate.

Secondly, The Anxiety of keeping it, together with the Fears of losing it.

Thirdly, The Trouble and Vexation of having lost it; and,

Fourthly, The dreadful and heavy Account which every Man must give of a great
Estate. But these Particulars, together with the Application of this whole
Discourse, I shall refer to another Opportunity.

The Fourth SERMON ON LUKE XII. 15.
And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
IN my two last Discourses on this Subject, I have represented the Evil and
Unreasonableness of the Vice of Covetousness in Four Particulars. I proceed now
to the Fifth and last Particular, whereby I told you the Evil^ and
Unreasonableness of it would appear; viz^

That Riches are so far from being the Happiness of Humane Life, that they
usually contribute very much to our misery and sorrow; as will evidently
appear, if we consider these Four Things.

First, The Labor and Care which the Covetous Man is at in the getting of a
great Estate.

Secondly, The Anxiety of keeping it, together with the Fears of losing it.

Thirdly, The Trouble and Vexation of having lost it.

Fourthly, The heavy and dreadful Account which every Man must give of a great
Estate.

First, The Labor and Care which the Covetous Man has in getting a great
Estate. He that will be Rich must sweat for it, and refuse no pains and
trouble; he must rise up early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of
Carefulness. A Slave that Diggs in the Mines, or Rows in the Galleys, is not a
greater Drudge, than some Covetous Worldlings are; only with this difference,
that the Covetous Man thinks that he Labors and takes all these Pains for
himself; whereas the Slave understands the matter more truly, and thinks that
he does it for another.

But besides the Pains he takes, he is full of Care and Anxiety. How is he,
through the greedy desire of having, racked between the hopes of getting, and
the fear of missing what he seeks? The Apostle observes what tormenting Cares
accompany this Vice, 1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of Money (^aith he) is the root of
all evil; not only of the Evil of Sin, but of the Evil likewise of Trouble and
Disquiet. For it follows, which while some coveted after, they have pierced
themselves through with many sorrows: Variety of Troubles attend them that will
be Rich.

Secondly, If we consider the Anxiety of keeping what they have got, together
with the Fear of losing it again, this is another great part of a Covetous
Man's infelicity. The Rich Man here in the Parable after the Text, when he saw
his Estate coming upon him so fast, cries out, what shall I do? Poor Man! who
would not pity his Condition, to see him put to this difficulty and distress,
and to hear him make as heavy a moan as the Poorest Man could do! Now that he
has a plentiful Harvest, and his Crop has answered, if it were possible, his
Covetous Desire, he is in a great deal of perplexity, and almost at his wits
end how to dispose of it; he was horribly afraid lest any of it should be lost
for want of a secure place to store it up in. What shall I do, because I have
no room where to bestow my Fruits? Where was the difficulty of this? why, he
was loath to lose his Fruits, and he was loath to lay out Money to secure them.
But upon farther Consideration, he resolves of the two Evils to ^huse the
least; and he said, this will I do, I will pull down my Barns, and build
greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits, and my Goods. But why could he
not let the Barns he had stand, and build more? No, that he did not think so
well, he loved to see all his good Things at one view, and what a goodly show
they would make together. Besides that it is the humor of Covetousness, when
it breaks out into Expense, to over-do; the Miser's Buildings are like his
Feasts, always Extravagant. The Covetous Man (as to the business of expense) is
like a Coward as to fighting, he declines it as long as he can; but when he is
pushed to the last necessity, he grows desperate, and lays about him. Tantis
parta malis, cura majore metuque
Servantur, misera est magni custodia census.


Riches which are got with so much trouble, are not kept without greater fear
and care. A Covetous Man is in nothing more miserable, than in the Anxiety and
Care of disposing and securing what he has got. When a Man's Desires are
endless, his Cares and Fears will be so too.

Thirdly, As great an Evil as any of the former, is the vexation of having lost
these Things. If by any Accident the Man happens to be deprived of them, then
he takes on heavily, hangs down his head and mourns, as a Man would do for his
firstborn; and is ready to cry out with Micah, they have taken away my Gods,
and what have I more? Upon every little loss the Covetous Man is undone, though
he have a hundred times more left than he knows what to do withal. So deeply
are the hearts of Earthly-Minded Men many times pierced with Earthly Losses, as
with Rachel to refuse to be comforted. Nay St. Paul observes, that the sorrow
of the world sometimes works death, 1 Cor. 7. 10.

Fourthly, But the saddest Consideration of all is, that heavy and dreadful
Account that must one day be given, both of the getting and using of a great
Estate. They that have got an Estate by Fraud and Falsehood, or by Oppression
and grinding the face of the Poor, may read their Doom at large, James 5. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Go to now ye Rich Men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you, your Riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten, your Gold
and Silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall ^e a witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for
the last days. Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back b^ fraud, cries, and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath; ye have lived in
pleasure on the earth, and been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts as in a
day of slaughter.

And we must be accountable likewise for the using of our Estates. God gives
them to us in trust, and the greater they are, the more we are to account for;
so much as we need is ours, but beyond what will support us, and be a
convenient provision for our Families, in the rank God has placed them, all
that is given to us, that we may give it to others; and indeed it is not ours;
we are the Proprietors of it in respect of Men, but in respect of God we are
but Trustees, and Stewards, and God will require an account of us how we have
disposed of it.

And can there be a more reigning madness among Men, than to take care only to
increase their Account more and more, by receiving much; whereas our great Care
and Concernment should be to clear our Account, by laying out what we receive,
according to the trust reposed in us. How much we shall receive of the Things
of this World, is in the Care and Will of our Master; but our Care and Fidelity
is seen in laying it out as we ought. Among Men (says one) it is well enough,
if a Steward can give an Account of so much laid out, and so much in Cash, and
upon this he shall have his Discharge: but we cannot this way clear our Account
with God; for it is not offering him his own again that will satisfy him, as
we may learn from the Parable of the Talents. So that upon the whole matter, we
should be so far from envying the Rich, that we should rather envy the Safety
and Happiness of those who are not entrusted with such dangerous Blessings, and
who are free from the Temptations of a plentiful Fortune, and the Curse of a
Covetous Mind, and from the heavy Account of a great Estate.

I come now, in the last place, to make some Application of this Discourse to
our selves.

1. Let our Savior's Caution take place with us, let these words of his ^^nk
into our Minds, take heed and beware of Covetou^ness. Our Savior I told you
doubles the Caution, that we may double our Care. It is a Sin very apt to steal
upon us, and sliely to insinuate it self into us, under the spec^ous pretense
of Industry in our Callings, and a provident Care of our Families: But however
it may be colored over, it is a great Evil, dangerous to our selves, and
mischievous to the World. Now to kill this Vice in us, besides the
Considerations beforementioned taken from the Evil and Unreasonableness of it,
I will urge these three more.

1. That the Things of this World are uncertain.

2. That our Lives are as uncertain as these Things: And,

3. That there is another Life after this.

1. The uncertainty of the Things of this World. This should very much cool our
Affections toward them, that after all our Care and Diligence for the obtaining
of them, we are not sure to enjoy them, we may be deprived of them by a
thousand Accidents. This Consideration Solomon urges, to take Men off from an
over-eager pursuit of these Things, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon
that which is not; for Riches certainly make to themselves wings, they fly
away as an Eagle toward Heaven. After we have sat brooding over an Estate many
years, it may all on a sudden, before we are aware, take wing, and fly away
like an Eagle toward Heaven, soaring suddenly out of our sight, and never to
return again.

And the same Argument St. Paul ^seth, to take off Men's Affections from the
World, 1 Cor. 7. 31. because the fashion of this World passes away, (...). He
compares the Things of this World to a Scene, which is presently changed, and
vanishes almost as soon as it appears. Now seeing these Things are so
uncertain, we should take heed how we fix our Hearts too much upon them; we
should not make love to any thing that is so Fickle and Inconstant as this
World is. We should be afraid to contract too near and intimate a Friendship
with any thing which will forsake us, after we have Courted it with so much
importunity, and purchased it with so much pains, and endeavored to secure it
with so much Caution, and Tenderness.

2. Our Lives are as uncertain as these Things. If our Estates remain with us,
we are continually in danger of being removed from them. And (as one says) it
is folly to build our hopes upon a Match, where both Parties a^e so uncertain
and inconstant. Why should we place our dearest Affections upon Things which we
are not sure to enjoy one Moment? Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be taken
from thee, and then whose shall those things be? I remember Seneca tells us a
real Story, just answerable to the Rich Man in the Parable, of an Acquaintance
of his, who by long and great Industry had arrived to a vast Estate; and just
when he began to enjoy it, after one of the first good Meals which perhaps he
ever made in his Life, that very night his Soul was taken from him, for
presently after Supper he died. In ipso actu been sedentium rerum, in ipso
procurrentis fortunae impetu. In the height of his Prosperity, and in the full
career of his good Fortune.

But if we live to enjoy for any time what we have got, we should remember that
our Life is but a passage through the World, and that we are but Pilgrims and
Stranger in the World, as all our Fathers were, that we have here no abiding
place, no continuing City, but are traveling toward our own Country. And why
should we load our selves whilst we are upon our journey, and cumber our selves
with those things which will be of no use to us there, whither we are a going?

But the great wonder of all is, that this Vice should so strongly reign, and
even grow upon Men in Old Age, and get strength, as weakness creeps upon us.
This very thought that we are to dye, should work in us a great indifferency
toward the Things of this World. But when Men are convinced they cannot live
long, and that every step they take, they are in danger of stumbling into the
Grave, this one would think should wean our Affections from this World; and yet
usually none take so fast hold of it, and embrace it so kindly as Old Men; like
Friends, who though they know they must leave one another, yet are loath to part.
Do we not see many pursue these things with as much eagerness and appetite,
when they are leaving the World, as if they were to stay in it a hundred years
longer? So that in this sense also, they are Children again, and are as fond of
these Toys, as if they were just beginning the World, and setting out for their
whole Life.

3. There is another Life after this, to be seriously thought on, and provided
for with great care: and did Men firmly believe this, they would not with
Martha, busy themselves about many things, but would mind the one thing
necessary, and with Mary choose that better part which could not be taken from
them. They would overlook the trifles of this World, and scarce take notice of
the things which are seen, but be only intent upon the things which are not
seen; because the things which are seen are but Temporal, but the things which
are not seen are Eternal. The great Concernments of another World would employ
their utmost Care, and their best Thoughts.

Whilst we are in this World, we should remember that this is not our home, nor
the place of our rest; and therefore as Men do in an Inn, we should make a
shift with those indifferent Accommodations which the World will afford us, and
which we can have upon easy terms, without too much trouble and stir, because
we are not to continue long here; and in the mean time we should cheer up our
selves with the thoughts of the pleasure and the plenty of our Father's house,
and of that full contentment and satisfaction which we shall meet withal, when
we come to those Everlasting Habitations.

So that our great Care should be to provide for Eternity. If we have unbounded
Desires, let us place them upon such Objects as are worthy of them. Let us
earnestly covet the best things, and seek after the true Riches. We should so
mind the World, as to make Heaven our great Care, as to make sure to provide
for our selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens, that fails
not, where no thief approaches, neither Moth corrupts, as our Savior
advises, Luke 12. 33. To the same purpose is the Counsel of St. Paul, 1 Timothy
6. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they be Rich in
good works, willing to distribute, ready to communicate, laying up for
themselves a good foundation; or (as the word (...) may also be rendered) a good
treasure, against the time which is to come, that they may lay hold of Eternal
Life.

I have told you that all these things will fail in a short space, we shall
either be stripped of them, or separated from them when we come to dye, and
shall look over to that vast Eternity which we must shortly enter upon; this
World, and all the Enjoyments of it, will then be as nothing to us, and we
shall be wholly taken up with the thoughts of another World, and be heartily
sorry that the things of this World have taken up so much of our Time and Care,
and that the great and weighty Concernments of all Eternity have been so little
minded and regarded by us. Now seeing all these things shall be, pardon me, if
I earnestly beg of you, in the midst of all your Worldly Cares, to have some
Consideration for your Immortal Souls, which are no wise provided for by a
great Estate, but are designed for Nobler Enjoyments than this World can
afford. When you are taking care to Feed and Cloth these dying Bodies,
remember that better part of your selves which is to live for ever. Let not all
your enquiry be, what shall I eat? or what shall I drink? or wherewithal shall
I be clothed? But sometimes ask your selves this question, what shall I do to
be saved? I have an Immortal Spirit, it is but fit some Care should be taken of
that, to train it up to Eternity, and to make it fit to be made partaker of an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

The firm Belief and serious Consideration of the great Things of another World
cannot surely but cool the heat of our Affections toward these dying and
perishing Things, and make us resolved not to do any thing whereby we may
violate the peace of our Consciences, or forfeit our Interest and Happiness in
another World.

2. By way of Remedy against this Vice of Covetousness, it is good for Men to
be contented with their Condition. This the Apostle prescribes as the best Cure
of this Vice, Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without Covetousness, and be
content with such things as ye have; (...), being contented with the present,
and thinking that sufficient. A Covetous Man cannot enjoy the present, for fear
of the future; either out of fear that he shall come to want, or out of a
sickness and uneasiness of Mind, which makes that nothing pleases him: But if
we could bring our Minds to our Condition, and be contented with what we have,
we should not be so eager and impatient after more.

This Contentedness with our present Condition does not hinder, but that Men by
Providence, and Industry, and lawful Endeavors, may lay the Foundation of a
more plentiful Fortune than they have at present. For provided a Man use no
indirect and dishonest ways to increase his Estate, and do not torment himself
with anxious Cares, do neither make himself guilty, nor miserable, that he may
be Rich; provided he do not neglect better things, to attain these; and have
not an insatiable Appetite toward them; provided he do not Idolize his Estate,
and set his Heart upon these things; and if he can find in his heart to enjoy
them himself, and to be Charitable to others; nothing hinders but that he may
be contented with his present Condition, and yet take all fair Opportunities
which the Providence of God puts into his hands of enlarging his Fortune. It is
a good Character which the Poet gives of Aristippus, Omnis Aristippum decuit
color, and status and res;
Tentantem majora, fere praesentibus aequum.
Every State and Condition became him; for though he endeavored after more, yet
his Mind was always in a manner equal to his present Condition.

But if a Man be discontented with the present, and restless because he has no
more, the whole World will not satisfy him; and if God should raise him from
one step to another, he would never think his Fortune high enough, and in every
degree of it would be as little contented as he was at first. Our Savior
represents this sort of Men by the Rich Man here in the Parable, who when his
Barns were full, and ready to crack, his Mind was not filled; therefore he
pulls them down, and builds greater; and if he had lived 'till these had been
full, they must have gone down too, and he would still have built greater. So
that though he designed when he had raised his Estate to such a pitch, to have
sat down, and taken his ease, yet his Covetous humor would have been stirring
again, and still have stepped in between him and Contentment, and for ever have
hindered him from arriving at it.

Thirdly, By way of Direction, I would persuade those who are Rich, to be
Charitable with what they have. If God have blessed us with abundance, and we
would not be like this Rich Man here in the Parable, we must lay out of our
Estates, in ways of Piety and Charity, for the Public Good, and for the
private Relief of those who are in want; for that is the (...), or Moral of the
Parable; so is he that lays up Treasures for himself, and is not Rich toward
God. So shall he be; such an issue of his Folly may every one expect, (to be
taken away from his Estate before he comes to enjoy it) who lays up Treasures
for himself, but is not Rich toward God; but does not lay up Riches with God.
How is that? By Works of Mercy, and Charity. This our Savior calls laying up
for our selves Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 16. 20. And at the 33 d Verse of this
Chapter, he calls giving of Alms, providing for our selves baggs which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens which fails not; they who do thus, who are
Rich in good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate, are said to
lay up for themselves a good Treasure against the time which is to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19. Extra fortunam est
quicquid donatur; whatsoever we give to the Poor is safely disposed, and put
out of the reach of Fortune, because it is laid up in Heaven, where we may
expect the return and recompense of it. Charity to our poor Brethren is a
certain way of transmitting our Riches into the other World, to make way for
our reception there. So our Lord tells us, Luke 16. 9. I say unto you make to
your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye shall fail
(that is) when ye shall leave this World, and the enjoyments of it, they may
receive you into Everlasting Habitations.

At the Great Day of Judgment, when we shall all appear before God, and,
according to our Savior's Representation of the Proceedings of that Day, shall
hear him thus Expostulating with Men, I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat;
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in
prison, and ye visited me not; what would we then give, how much of our
Estates, if we had them then at our Command, would we not be willing to part
withal, to have that Comfortable Sentence past upon us; Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of the
World! But if we be found among those who would spare nothing out of their
abundance to any Charitable Use and Purpose, I have not the heart to tell you
how miserable the Condition of such Persons will be, and how dreadful a Doom
will be passed upon them.

It is a sad Consideration, that there are some Persons in the World, who seem
to be only defective in this Duty; like the young Man in the Gospel, who lacked
but this one thing to make him perfect; he had kept the Commandments from his
youth, and preserved himself from those gross Sins which the Law did plainly
forbid; and yet for want of this one thing he parted from his Savior, and, for
any thing we know, fell short of Eternal Life. There are many who are very
Devout and Religious, much in Prayer and Fasting, and all the other frugal
exercises of Piety, which cost them no Money; but yet are very defective in
Alms, and Charity, which in Scripture are so frequently joined with the
Fastings and Prayers of good Men; and by this means, all their Devotion and
Diligence in the other parts of Religion is lost, and will not bring them to
Heaven. And is it not great pity, that they who are not far from the Kingdom of
God, should fall short of it? that they, who in most other things bid so fair
for Heaven, should break wit^ God upon this single Point?

I know Men have several ways to deceive their own Hearts, and to defend
themselves against all these Assaults.

First, They say they are injurious to no Man, in not being Charitable. And
it is true, that in Humane Courts the Poor can have no Action against the Rich
for want of Charity to them; but yet for all that, they do injuriously detain
that which does not of right belong to them. They are Cruel, and Hard-Hearted,
and they are guilty of high breach of Trust, in respect of God, whose Stewards
they are, and who has dealt so liberally with them in the Things of this Life,
on purpose to oblige them to be so to others. That which thou storest up,
without regard to the necessities of others, is unlawfully detained by thee,
since God intended it should have been for Bread to the hungry, and Clothes to
the naked, and for help and relief of those who are ready to perish. For why
art thou Rich, and another Poor? But that thou might exercise thy Charity
upon those fitting Objects which the Providence of God presents to thee. It had
been easy for God (since the Earth is his, and the fu^ness thereof) so to have
contrived Things, that every Man should have had a sufficiency, and have been
in a moderate Condition; but then a great many Virtues would have been shut out
of the World, and lost, for want of opportunity to exercise them. Where then
had been the Poor Man's Patience, and the Rich Man's Pity? and the
contentedness of Men of moderate Fortune?

Secondly, Men say that they have Children to provide for. And do so in God's
Name, for he allows us to do it liberally; but unless their Condition and
Wealth set them above an ordinary Calling, do not choose so to provide for them,
as to take them off from all Employment, lest you put them in the ready way to
be undone; have a Care of leaving them no other business, but to spend what you
have left them; if you do so, they will in all probability do that work very
effectually, and make as much haste to be Poor, as you did to make them Rich.
If Men could but be contented to do that which is best for their Children, they
might do a great deal better for themselves, by disposing what they have to
spare in Charity.

Thirdly, Others would fain excuse themselves from this Duty at present, by
telling what they intend to do when they come to Die, that is, when they can
keep what they have no longer. It seems then thou will leave it to thy Executor
to do good in thy stead This shows thou have no great heart to the business,
when thou deferrest it as long as ever thou can. But why will thou trust
another with the disposal of thy Charity, rather than thy self? This is hardly
to offer either a Reasonable, or a Living Sacrifice to God, to do good only
when we are dead. It is well that God has made all Men Mortal, and that it is
appointed for all Men once to die; otherwise some Men would never do good at
all.

Wherefore setting aside these, and all other excuses, which will not be
admitted, nor will any of us have the face to plead them at the Day of
Judgment; I say, setting aside all Excuses whatsoever, let us resolve to do
good with what we have whilst we can; and to that end let us lay aside some
Portion of what God has blessed us withal, for the uses of Piety, and Charity,
and let it bear some decent Proportion to what God has given us.

There is never want of proper Objects for our largest Charity, and now less
than ever. Besides those at home, which present themselves to us in great
numbers every day, God has sent us many from abroad, who call loud upon us for
our pity and help, both as they are reduced to the greatest extremi^y, and are
Sufferers in the best Cause, that of our common Religion, which ought now to be
dearer to us than ever. Let us show Mercy now, as we expect Mercy from others,
in any day of our distress in this World, and as ever we hope, when ever we
come to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to find Mercy with the Lord
in that Day.

Consider what I have said upon this Argument, and let this extraordinary kind
of Caution, which our Savior here gives, make a deep impression upon your
Minds; Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life consists not in
the abundance of the things which he possesses.

A SERMON ON MATTHEW. VI. 33.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righ^^ousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.
IN the latter part of this Chapter, our Savior does in a long Discourse
caution his Disciples against an Inordinate Care about the Things of this Life,
which he concludes with a strict Charge to make Religion their first and great
Concernment, and above all Things to take Care to secure to themselves the
happiness of another Life; But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, etc. In the handling of which words, I shall do these Four
Things.

First, I shall explain what is here meant by the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness.

Secondly, What by seeking of these.

Thirdly, I shall lay down some necessary and plain Directions, which if we
observe, we cannot miscarry in this matter.

Fourthly, I shall set before you some of the most proper and powerful Motives
and Encouragements to the minding of this great Interest and Concernment; among
which, I shall particularly consider the Argument or Encouragement here used in
the Text, and all these things shall be added unto you.

1. I shall explain to you what is here meant by the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness.

First, What is meant by the Kingdom of God. And there are two Famous
acceptations of this Phrase, and both of them very frequent in the New
Testament. Sometimes it is used to signify the State of the Gospel, or the
Christian Religion, which by the Jews was called the Kingdom of God, or the
Kingdom of the Messiah, Mark 1. 15. The Kingdom of God is at hand; that is, the
State or Dispensation of the Gospel is now approaching, and ready to take
place. Luke 17. 20. The Pharisees demanding of our Savior when the Kingdom of
God should come, that is, when the Reign of the Messiah should commence; he
answers them, the Kingdom of God comes not with observation; that is, not with
any Temporal Pomp and Splendour, so as to draw the eyes of People after it, as
the Jews did vainly imagine; but the Kingdom of God, (...), is among you; not
within you, as our Translation has improperly rendered it; the Kingdom of God
(he tells them) is already come unto you, the Messiah is among you, and ye are
not aware of him. In the like sense this Phrase is used, Mat. 21. 43. the
Kingdom of God (that is, the Gospel) shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And so likewise the Phrase of the
Kingdom of Heaven is used, Mat. 11. 11. where speaking of John the Baptist, our
Savior says, that among them that were born of Women, there has not risen a
greater than John the Baptist; that is, there was no greater Person than he,
under the Jewish Dispensation, and yet he that is least in the Kingdom of
Heaven (that is under the Dispensation of the Gospel) is greater than he.

Now though this sense of the Kingdom of God be not wholly excluded in the Text,
yet there is another sense of this Phrase very usual likewise in the Scripture,
and which is more agreeable to the scope of our Savior's Argument and
Discourse^ and so it signifies that future state of Happiness and Glory which
good Men shall be advanced to in another World, in opposition to this Life, and
the Enjoyments of it, which our Savior had before forbidden his Disciples to
be so solicitous about. Take ye no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? And then it follows in
direct opposition to this inordinate and solicitous Care about Worldly Things,
but seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. That is, be not so
solicitous about the Conveniences and Necessaries of this Life, as about the
Happiness of the other, and the Means to it. And this sense of this Phrase of
the Kingdom of God is so very frequent in the New Testament, that I shall not
need to give particular Instances of it.

Secondly, what is meant by Righteousness; seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness. Righteousness, in the strictest and most proper sense of
the word, signifies the particular Virtue of Justice; and very frequently in
the Old Testament it is used for Charity to the Poor, or Almsgiving, Psalm. 37.
25, 26. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the Righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread; he is ever merciful, and lends; and
Psalm. 112. 9. he has dispersed, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness
endures for ever. But Righteousness in its largest and most extended sense,
comprehends all the Virtues of a good Man; and so it signifies here in the
Text, and in many other places of Scripture.

So that the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, comprehends the whole
business of Religion, our last End, which is Eternal Life and Happiness in
another World; and the way and means to this End, which is Righteousness, or
that Universal Goodness which God requires of us, and whereof he himself is a
Pattern and Example to us; for which Reason it is called his Righteousness. And
in this sense of our last End, and the way and means to it, the Kingdom of
Heaven, and Righteousness, are used in another place, even of this Sermon of
our Savior's upon the Mount, Matthew. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness shall
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; where Righteousness is made the necessary
Means and Condition of Eternal Life. I proceed in the

Second Place, to explain what is meant by seeking first the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness. And this signifies the greatest intention of mind, and
earnestness of endeavor about the business of Religion, in order to our
attaining of Eternal Happiness; such a seriousness and earnestness of endeavor
as Earthly-Minded Men use about the Things of this World. For after all these
things (says our Savior immediately after the Text) do the Gentiles seek;
(...), which words signify an intense Care, and vigorous Endeavor; but seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Rightousness; that is, be ye who profess
your selves Christians, as intent upon the business of Religion, and the
Salvation of your Souls, as the Heathen, who are in a great measure ignorant of
God and another Life, are about the things of this Life.

And here are two Things to be explained.

1. What is here meant by seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness;
And,

2. What by seeking them in the first place.

For the First: A sincere and earnest seeking of the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, does imply in it these Four Things.

First, A fixed Design and Resolution as to the End; that we do not only
propound to our selves the Eternal Happiness and Salvation of our Souls as our
chief End, but that we be immoveably fixed upon it, and always have it in our
aim and design; that here we set up our Resolution, if it be possible, to be
happy for ever; that we have this End always in our eye, and be firmly resolved
to do all that we can toward the attaining of it.

Not that we are obliged always actually to think upon it; but to have it
frequently in our Minds, and habitually to intend and design it, so as to make
it the scope of all our Endeavors and Actions, and that every thing we do be
either directly and immediately in order to it, or some way or other
subservient to this Design, or however not inconsistent with it; like the term
and end of a Man's Journey, toward which the Traveller is continually tending,
and has it always habitually in his intention, though he does not always think
of it every step that he takes, and though he be not always directly advancing
and moving toward it, yet he never knowingly goes out of the way. And though he
bate and lodge by the way, and does many other things which do not directly set
him forward, yet they are all subservient to his Journey, or in prosecution of
it; or at least no wilful deviations from it. Thus it should be with us, while
we are Sojourning in this World; our fixed aim and design should be to get to
Heaven, and thither we should be continually tending in our Desires and
Endeavors.

And if this Resolution be deeply root^d and fixed in our Minds, it will govern
all our Actions, and keep them steady to their main End. Whereas, if we be
uncertain, and unresolved upon our great End, and be divided between the
Happiness of the next Life, and the present Enjoyments of this, we shall be
fickle and unsteady in all our Motions. He that has two Ends, can pursue
neither vigorously; but while he is moving toward the one, he leans and
inclines to the other; and like a Needle between two Loadstones, is always in a
doubtful and trembling Condition; inclines to both, but is constant to neither:
And this is the meaning of that Aphorism of St. James, The double-minded Man is
unstable in all his ways. He that is unresolved as to his main End, has two
Minds, and can prosecute nothing vigorously: But if our Mind be once fixed and
resolved, that will determine and govern all our motions, and inspire us with
Diligence, and Zeal, and Perseverance in the prosecution of our End.

Secondly, Seeking the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, implies incessant
Care and Diligence as to the means; that we make Religion our business, and
exercise our selves in the Duties of it, both in public and private, at proper
times and seasons, with the same seriousness and application of Mind, as Men do
in their Callings and Professions, for the gaining of Wealth and Preferment;
especially on the Lord's Day, which God has taken to himself, and set apart
for the Duties of his Worship and Service. Not that we are excused from minding
Religion at other times; but that those who are pressed and straightened by the
necessary Cares of this Life, may be sure to mind it then, and may have no
color of excuse for the neglect of it at that time, which God has allotted
for that very purpose, and which it is unlawful to employ about our Worldly
Affairs. God expects that we should serve him at other times, that we should
live in an habitual sense of him, and (as Solomon expresses it, Prove. 23. 17.)
Be in the fear of the Lord all the day long; so as to be careful not to offend
or transgress in any thing, and so as to redeem all Opportunities for the
exercise of Piety, and Devotion; but this Day he peremptorily challenges to
himself, and expects we should employ it in his Service, and Dedicate it to
Religion, to the Contemplation of God and Heavenly things, and the Care of our
Immortal Souls, with the same seriousness and diligence, as we do upon other
days labor for the bread which perishes; and the less leisure we have upon
other days for this purpose, the more entirely should we Devote and Consecrate
this Day to the Purposes and Duties of Religion.

Not but that our whole Life, and all the Actions of it, should be under the
government of Religion, and directed by the Laws and Rules of it; and it should
be our continual Care and Endeavor to please God in all things, and we should
take as much pains, and be as heartily concerned to be good Men, as the Men of
the World are to grow Rich and Great in this World; nay so much more, by how
much it is a better and nobler Design to improve in Grace and Virtue, than to
prosper and thrive in our Temporal Estate; and we do not in good earnest seek
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, if this be not our great study and
endeavor, to subdue our Lusts, and govern our Passions, and, in a word, to
reform whatever is amiss in the inward frame and temper of our Minds, and in
our outward Conversation. And indeed nothing does require greater diligence,
and attention, and care, than for a Man to become truly and thoroughly good, to
be meek and humble, and patient and contented, and resigned to the Will of God
in every Condition; to be peaceable, and charitable, and placable, and ready to
forgive; these are great and difficult things, and, whatever we think, not the
work of a Wish, or the effect of a sudden Resolution before the receiving of
the Holy Sacrament, no nor the fruit of frequent and ^ervent Prayers, without
the hearty concurrence of our own Care and Endeavor, to render our Lives such,
as we pray God by his Grace to assist and enable us to be.

Thirdly, Seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, does further imply
zeal and earnestness in the pursuit of this Design: And this is a degree above
diligence, for zeal is an ardour and ^ervency of Mind in the prosecution of a
thing for which we are greatly concerned, and which we vehemently desire to
obtain; it is the hottest and most intense degree of our affection toward any
thing, of our desire and love, mixed with anger at every thing that stands in
our way, and hinders us from obtaining what we seek after; such an heat as
Ambition does commonly inspire Men withal, in the pursuit of Power and
Preferment. Such ought to be the temper of our Minds, and the edge of our
Spirits, in seeking the Kingdom of God, as does usually possess Men in seeking
the Kingdoms of this World, and the Glory of them. We must remember, that it is
a Kingdom which we seek for, and aspire after, not like the unstable and
tottering Kingdoms of this World, but a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, as the
Apostle calls it.

So that the greatness of the Design, and the Excellency of what we seek after,
will justify and warrant the highest degree of a discreet zeal and fervor in
the prosecution of it; and therefore no wonder that the Scripture in this
matter uses words that import the greatest vehemence and earnestness, bidding
us to strive to enter in at the strait gate, to labor and watch, to run, and
wrestle, and fight, and, in a word, to give all diligence, to make our Calling
and Election sure.

Lastly, Seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, does imply patience
and perseverance in our endeavors after them, and that we never cease our
pursuit of them, 'till we have obtained them; and this, notwithstanding all the
difficulties and discouragements, the opposition and persecution that we meet
with for Righte^usness sake: For this we must expect, and reckon upon
beforehand, to encounter many difficulties, and find many discouragements in
the ways of Religion; for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
to life, as our Lord himself has told us: Nay we must count to be grievously
persecuted for Righteousness sake, and, if God see it good for us, to pass
through many Tribulations, before we shall enter into the Kingdom of God; and
therefore we had need to be armed with a great deal of Patience, and a very
firm and obstinate Resolution, to enable us to bear up, and to hold out against
all these; for this is a necessary qualification for our seeking the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness. So our Lord has told us, Mat. 10. 22. he that
endures to the end, shall be saved; if we hope to receive the Crown of Life,
we must be faithful to the death, Rev. 2. 10. And to the same purpose St. Paul
declares, Romans 2. 7. that they only shall be made partakers of Eternal Life,
who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality.

You see what is meant by seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; it
remains briefly to be shown, in the Second place, what is meant by seeking
these first; seek ye f^rst the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; that is,
let this be your main and principal Design, so as to take place of all others
in your esteem and affections, in your aim and endeavor; in comparison of
this, mind nothing else, not the Comforts and Conveniences, no not the
Necessaries of Life, what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, and
wherewithal ye shall be clothed. These you see our Savior instanceth in
before the Text, as not to be regarded and taken care of, when they come in
competition with the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. And our Savior
tells us elsewhere, that not only none of the Comforts and Necessaries of Life
are to be valued against him, and his Religion; but that even this Temporal
Life itself, as dear as it is to us, is to be parted withal, and given up,
rather than to quit the profession of his Truth and Religion, Mat. 10. 37. 38.
He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that
loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. He instanceth in the
nearest Relations, those toward whom we have the most tender and relenting
affections, and yet he tells us, that the Consideration of his Truth and
Religion ought to take place of these, nay even of Life it self; for so it
follows, and he that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not
worthy of me. St. Luke expresses it more strongly and vehemently, Luke 14. 26.
If any man come to me (that is, take upon him the profession of my Religigion)
and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. When these come
in competition with our Religion, and the great interest of our Eternal
Salvation, we are to regard and value them no more than if they were the
Objects of our hatred, but to set aside all consideration of affection to them,
so far as it would tempt us from Constancy in our Religion, and the Care of our
Souls.

So that when our Savior bids us first to seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, his meaning is, tha^ Religion, and the Concernments of our
Souls, and the Eternal Happiness of them in another World, should be our first
and chief Care; and that all other things should be made subordinate and
subservient to this great Design, and be no further minded by us, than they
really are so: For that which is our great End, will subdue all other things,
and bring them into subjection to it, and will reject them, and throw them
aside, if they be inconsistent with it. If Heaven be our utmost aim, and in
order to that, it be our great study and endeavor to be Righteous, and Holy,
this Resolution and Design, sincerely entertained, will overruled all other
Considerations, and make all the things of this World to stoop and give way to
that which is our chief End, the Eternal Happiness and Salvation of our Souls.
And thus I have done with the Second Thing I proposed, namely, what is meant by
seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and what by seeking them
first.

I proceed in the Third place, to lay down some plain Rules for our Direction
and Furtherance in seeking the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; that is,
in the great business of Religion.

First, Let us always live under a lively and powerful sense of another World;
that we are placed here in this World, but for a little while, and that wholly
in order to our preparation for a better and a happier Life. Let this thought
be often in our Minds, that Eternity is the most considerable duration, and the
next World the place of our Everlasting abode, where we must dwell and continue
for ever; and therefore our present state is but of little Moment and
Consideration to us, but only in order to our future and Everlasting Condition.
We may please our selves here for a little while with Toys, and Trifles, with
Dreams and Shadows of Pleasure and Happiness, and may be exercised with some
Troubles and Afflictions for a short space, for a moment (as the Apostle calls
it, our light afflictions which are but for a moment, and so indeed it is,
compared with all Eternity; but the substantial and durable Happiness or Misery
remain for Men in the other World, and will certainly be their portion,
according as they have demeaned themselves in this World.

Now the serious Consideration of this cannot fail to put us upon vigorous
preparations for another World, and to make us wholly intent upon our Eternal
Concernments, and to resolve whatever becomes of us in this World, to take
effectual Care that we may be Happy for ever. He that firmly believes the
Immortality of his Soul, and a Life after Death, which will never have an end,
must needs take into Consideration his whole duration, and bend all his Care
and Thoughts, how he may avoid the greatest and most lasting Misery, and secure
to himself an Immortality of Bliss and Happiness.

Secondly, Let us be always under a Conviction of the absolute and
indispensable necessity of Holiness and Righteousness, as the only way and
means whereby the Kingdom of God is to be attained, and that Holiness and
Happiness are not to be separated, the one being a necessary Condition and
Qualification for the other; and consequently, that it is the vainest thing in
the World for any Man to hope to enter into the Kingdom of God, without
endeavoring after his Righteousness; there is so strong a connection between
them, that a Man may as reasonably expect to be well and at ease without
Health, as to be Happy without Holiness; for this makes us like to God, and our
Likeness and Conformity to God is that alone which can make us capable of the
Blessed Sight and Enjoyment of God. We must be Partakers of a Divine Nature, in
order to our participation of the Divine Blessedness. And the Consideration of
this will effectually engage us to seek the Righteousness of God, without which
we shall never enter into his Kingdom; and to follow Holiness, without which no
Man shall see the Lord.

Thirdly, Let us always remember that Righteousness is of a great extent, and
comprehends in it all goodness, it takes in all the Duties of Religion, and the
Practice of all of them; it is a Complication of all Graces and Virtues, of all
the Parts and Ingredients, of all the Duties and Offices of a good Man. To
denominate a Man Righteous, all Causes must concur; all the Essential
Principles and Parts of Religion and Goodness must meet together; Knowledge and
Practice, Faith and Good Works, Right Opinions and Real Virtues, an Orthodox
Profession and a Holy Life, abstaining from Sin and doing of Righteousness,
Purity of Heart and Unspotted Manners, Godliness and Honesty, the Bridling of
our Tongue, and the Government of our Passions, and above all things Charity,
which is the Band of Perfection.

For Righteousness is our Conformity to the Law of God, as Unrighteousness and
Sin is the Transgression of it: Now this, if it be real and sincere, will be
uniform and universal, equally respecting all the Laws of God, and every part
of our known Duty, and will not content it self with an especial regard to one
or two Precepts of the Law, though never so considerable, and then allow it self
in the neglect and violation of the rest; no nor with the observation of the
Duties of one Table of the Law, if it overlook the other; no nor with Obedience
to all the Commandments of God, one only excepted. St. James has put this very
Case, and determined it, that he that shall keep the whole Law, save only that
he offend in one point, is guilty of all; that is, he is not sincere in his
Obedience to the rest: And therefore if we seek the Righteousness of God, our
Righteousness must be Universal; as he that has called us is holy, so must we
be holy in all manner of Conversation, in the tenor of our Actions, and the
whole course of our Lives; and any one Reigning Sin and Vice, any gross and
notorious defect in the Virtues of a good Life, will spoil all our
Righteousness, and will effectually shut us out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Fourthly, Let us wisely subordinate the several parts and duties of Religion
to one another, according to the intrinsical worth and value of them, that so
we may mind every part of Religion in its due place, and according to the true
nature and importance of it. Knowledge and Faith are in order to Practice, and
a good Life; and signify nothing, unless they produce that; the Means of
Religion, such as Prayer, and Fasting, diligent Reading and Hearing of the Word
of God, Reverent and Devout Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, are of less
account and value, than that which is the End of all these, which is to make us
inwardly and really good, and fruitful in all the works of Righteousness, which
by Jesus Christ are to the Praise and Glory of God. And therefore the Means of
Religion which I have mentioned, are to be regarded and used by us, in order to
the attaining of these Ends, without which they are mere Formalility and
Hypocrisy, and instead of finding acceptance with God, they are an abomination
to him, and his Soul hates them.

And so likewise the Circumstances of Religion are less considerable than the
substantial Means and Instruments of it. And therefore all Rites and Ceremonies
are in Religion of less consideration, than the Substance of God's Worship, and
ought always to be subordinate to it. In like manner, the Moral Duties of
Religion, comprehended under the two great Commandments of the love of God, and
our Neighbor, because they are of Eternal, and indispensable obligation, are
to be preferred to matters of mere positive Institution; and where they cannot
stand togother, that which is positive ought to be set aside, and to give way
for the present, to that which is moral and good in its own Nature, and not
only because it is Commanded, and Enjoined; for in this Case God has expressly
declared that he will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. Upon which ground our
Savior declares, that the Law of the Sabbath ought to give place to works of
Mercy. Upon the same account, Peace and Charity are to be valued above Matters
of Nicety and Scruple, of doubtful Dispute and Controversy; because the former
are unquestionably good, the latter doubtfully and uncertainly so.

All these things ought to be considered, and are of great moment to make a Man
sincerely and wisely Religious. For Men may keep a great stir about some parts
of Religion, and be very Careful and Diligent, Zealous and Earnest about the
Means and Instruments of Religion, and in the Exercises of Piety and Devotion;
and yet be destitute of the Power and Life of it, and fall short of that
inward, and real, and substantial Righteousness, which alone can qualify us
for the Kingdom of God.

The Fifth and last Direction I would give, is this; That we have a particular
regard to the great Duty of Charity, or Almsgiving, this being very frequently
in Scripture called Righteousness, as being an eminent part of Religion, and a
great Evidence of the truth and sincerty of our Piety. And this our Savior
particularly directs to, as the way to the Kingdom of God, Luke 12. 33. After
this general Exhortation, to seek the Kingdom of God, he instanceth in Charity,
as the direct way to it; give Alms, provide for your selves Bags that wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens, that fails not. And elsewhere our Savior
speaks of this Grace and Virtue, as that which, above all others, will make way
for our admission into Heaven, Luke 16. 9. I say unto you, make to your selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive
you (or ye may be received) into Everlasting Habitations. And St. Paul calls
it, laying in store for our selves a good foundation; or (as the word may
better be rendered in this place) a good treasure against the time to come, that
we may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. St. James speaks of it, as a
main and most essential part of Religion, and the great Evidence of a true and
sincere Piety, Jam. 1. 27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this; to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction.
Finally, our Lord instanceth in this, as the very thing which will admit us
into, or shut us out of Heaven; by the performance whereof we shall be
Absolved, and for the neglect whereof we shall be Condemned, in the Judgment of
the Great Day, Mat. 25. So that this part of Righteousness or Religion ought in
a more especial manner to be regarded by us; because upon the performance or
neglect of this Duty, our Eternal Happiness does so much depend.

The Fourth and last thing only remains to be spoken to; which is, to set
before you the most proper and powerful Motives and Encouragements, to the
minding of this great Interest and Concernment. But this will be the Subject of
another Discourse.

The Second SERMON ON MATTHEW. VI. 33.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.
THESE Words, which I began to Discourse upon the last Day, are a strict Charge
and Command to all Christians, to mind the business of Religion in the first
place, and to take all imaginable Care to secure the Happiness of another Life;
but seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you. In the handling of which Argument,

First, I Explained what is meant by the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.

Secondly, I showed what is meant by seeking these; and what by seeking them
first.

Thirdly, I laid down some Rules for our Direction and Furtherance in this
great Business.

I shall now proceed to represent to you, in the

Fourth and last place, some of the most proper and powerful Arguments and
Encouragements, to engage us to the minding of this great Inte^est and
Concernment; amongst which, I shall in the last place particularly consider the
Encouragement here given in the Text, seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.

1. My First Argument shall be from the Worth and Excellency of the things we
seek, the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; which are certainly the
greatest and best things we can seek. The Kingdom of God, is the Eternal
Salvation of our Souls, Everlasting Life and Happiness in another World; which,
to animate our Endeavors, and to tempt our Ambition the more, are set forth to
us under the notion of a Kingdom. And what will not Men do to obtain that? what
pains will they not take? what hazards will they not run? what difficulties
will they not grapple with, and break through if they can, to come at a
Kingdom? which when they have obtained, they are exposed to as many, and
commonly to more Cares and Fears, to greater Difficulties and Dangers in the
keeping, than they were for the getting of it: And yet all this Men will do for
a corruptible Crown, for one of the petty Kingdoms and Principalities of this
World, which are continually tottering, and ready to be overturned by open
violence, or to be undermined by secret Treachery. But the Kingdom which I am
speaking of, and persuading you and my self to seek after, is not like the
Kingdoms of Men, and of this World; it is called the Kingdom of God, to
signify to us the Excellency and stability of it; as much beyond any of the
Kingdoms of this World, as the Heavens are high above the Earth, and as God is
greater than Man; a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, a Crown which fades not
away, a Scepter which cannot be wrested from us.

But to quit the Metaphor, and speak to the Thing; the Kingdom of God imports
the Eternal Salvation of our Souls; I say of our Souls, which both in respect
of the Dignity of their Nature, and their Immortal duration, are infinitely
more valuable than any of the perishing things of this World, and ought to be
much dearer to us. Other things are without us, they neither constitute our
Being, nor are ^ssential to our Happiness; but our Souls are our selves, and
the loss of them is our utter ruin and destruction. So that nothing is to be
regarded by us with equal Care and Concernment, as the Salvation of our
Immortal Souls; that is, that we may be rescued from Eternal Misery, and
Everlastingly Happy in another World. And can we be at too much cost and pains
upon such a design, to escape so dismal a Condition, so dreadful a ruin, as
that of Body and Soul to all Eternity? Can any Man be concerned enough to bring
about so great a good to himself? or, can he purchase it too dear, whatever he
give or part with for it? a good so desirable and so durable, as our being
Happy for ever. When we purchase the things of this World, the Riches and
Honors of it, at the expense of so much Time, and Care, and Trouble, we pay
dear for Trifles and Fancies; but Eternal Happiness is a Jewel of so
inestimable a Price, that a Wise Merchant will have it at any rate, and sell
all that he has to purchase it.

Of such value is the Kingdom of God; and next to it is Righteousness, which is
the only Way and Means whereby this Kingdom is to be attained, and therefore to
be sought by us with the greatest diligence and earnestness: For that which is
the only Means to a great and desirable End, and which alone can make us
capable of that End, and which in truth is a degree of it, is valuable next to
the End, and almost equally with it; and such is Righteousness, in respect of
the Kingdom of God; it is the only means to it, it is that alone which
qualifies us, and makes us capable of Happiness; nay, it is an essential
ingredient into it, and that which does in a great measure constitute the
Happiness of Heaven: For that temper of Mind, that Conformity and likeness to
God, which Holiness and Righteousness brings us to, is the true Foundation of
our Happiness, and according to the best apprehensions we have now of it, is
the very formal Cause and Essence of our Blessedness. So St. John tells us, 1 John 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; that is, we do not now distinctly
understand wherein the Happiness of the next Life consists, we are not able to
frame a clear and perfect Idea of it; but this we know in general, that it
consists in our likeness to God, in a conformity to the Moral Perfections of
the Divine Nature, which are expressed by the name of Purity and Holiness; and
therefore every one that hopes for the Happiness of Heaven, must endeavor
after Holiness; every Man that has this hope in him, must purify himself,
even as he is pure.

So that the things which I am pressing you to seek after, are most effectually
recommended, by telling you what they are; the Kingdom of God is Eternal Life
and Happiness, and his Righteousness is Universal Holiness and Goodness,
without which no Man is qualified for this Blessed State. Now if there be any
thing better than Goodness, any thing more desirable than a Happiness which
ha^h no bounds, nor no End; do not mind them, nor look after them: but if there
be not; then certainly these a^e worthy of the Care and Endeavor of our whole
Life.

Secondly, Another Consideration that should very much excite and quicken our
Endeavor and Diligence in seeking these things, is the difficulty of obtaining
them. This I confess is no Encouragement, but it is a very good Motive and
Argument to whet our industry in seeking these things, when we plainly see that
they are not to be had upon other terms. And this Consideration our Savior
uses to quicken us to strive and to contend earnestly for Eternal Life, Mat.
7. 14. because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads to Life,
and few there be that find it: And Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able.

Seeking here, in opposition to striving, is a faint and weak Endeavor, which
will not carry us through this narrow and difficult passage; and this is the
reason why many miscarry, who make some attempts toward Heaven; but they do
not strive, they do not put forth any vigorous Endeavors to get thither.

Now the difficulty of attaining Eternal Happiness, arises from the difficulty
of the Way and Means to it; and it is therefore hard to attain the Kingdom of
God, because it is hard to attain his Righteousness. As desirable as it is, it
must be acknowledged very difficult for a Man to raise himself to that temper
and disposition of Mind, so to subdue his Lusts, and govern his Passions, to
bridle his Tongue, and order all the Actions of his Life, as is necessary to
qualify him for Happiness, and to make him fit to be admitted into the Kingdom
of God.

And this difficulty is chiefly in our selves, but greatly increased by
temptation and opposition from without: Chiefly I say in our selves, from the
strong biass of our Evil and Corrupt Inclinations, and the strong power of
vicious Habits and Customs, which when they are grown inveterate, do Tyrannize
over us, and make us perfect Slaves, and lead us Captive at their pleasure; so
that our Nature must be quite changed, and as the Apostle expresses it, we
must be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, our Souls must be new molded and
fashioned, we must be as it were Created and Born again, before we can enter
into the Kingdom of God. In this our Savior is positive and perempto^y, Joh.
3. 3. verily verily I say unto you, except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. This difficulty indeed is greatest at first, but it is
considerable afterward, 'till a through Change be made, and new Inclinations
planted in us, and the contrary habits of Grace and Virtue be super-induced.

And that which increases the difficulty is outward Temptation and Opposition
from the World, and the Devil; which to withstand and resist, requires great
Courage and Resolution, great Watchfulness and Guard over our selves. But yet
for our Comfort, these Difficulties are not insuperable to that Grace and
Assistance, which God is always ready to afford to us upon so good an Occasion,
and to so good a purpose^ greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the
World. And this I am sure is Matter of great encouragement to us, that though the
difficulty ^f working out our Salvation be great, yet if we do in good earnest
set about it, God is ready to assist and second our sincere Endeavors, to work
in us both to will and to do of his own goodness, and so to prevent us with his
gracious Favor, and to further us with his continual Aid, that finally by his
Mercy we may obtain Eternal Life.

Thirdly, Another powerful Argument to Care and Diligence, is the fatal Danger
of Miscarriage in a Matter of so great Concernment. We may do many things in
Religion, and take some pains to get to Heaven, and yet fall short of it. The
Rich young Man in the Gospel, our Savior tells us, was not far from the
Kingdom of God, and he broke with our Savior only upon one Point, he was too
much addicted to the World, and loath to part with his great Possessions, and
distribute them in Charity to the Poor, and thereupon he left our Savior, and
for any thing that we find, never returned to him again.

If the World govern and bear sway in our Hearts, if we mind Earthly things
first, and make these our chief Care and Design, the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness shall not be added unto us; i^ we will not mind them in the first
place, they are too good to be Accessories.

And if upon any one point we miscarry, either out of love to the World, or
affection to any other Lust or Vice that we are loath to part withal, our
miscarriage is fatal, and the ruin which we bring upon our selves irreparable;
for the Soul once lost, is lost for ever. If we have neglected the opportunity
of working out our own Salvation, while we are in this World, it will never
return into our power again, Death will shut the door against us, and we shall
never see the Kingdom of God.

Fourthly, It is a mighty encouragement to us to consider, that if we sincerely
seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, there is not only a fair
probability of obtaining them, but all the security we can desire. Men may be
in good earnest for the things of this World, may love them with all their
Hearts and Souls (as we see too many do) and seek them with all their might and
strength, and yet after all their Endeavors may be shamefully frustrated and
disappointed of their End. There are many Examples of this kind daily before
our eyes, and yet Men are not discouraged from seeking these things. A fair
probability, nay almost a possibility of attaining them, is enough to a
Worldly-Minded Man to drudge and toil for them. Why the same Affection^ the
^ame Zeal, the same unwearied Endeavor to serve God, and to save our Souls,
would Infallibly bring us to Heaven. It was a sad but true Saying of Cardinal
Wolsey, when he was leaving the World, Had I been but as careful to please God,
as I have been to serve my Prince, he would not have forsaken me now in the
time of my gray hairs.

Nay it is to be hoped, that less Diligence and Care about the Concernments of
our Souls, and another Life, than many Men use about the things of this Life,
will secure our Eternal Happiness; or else it is to be feared, that but very
few would be saved: And who would not place his Industry and Endeavor upon a
Design in which he is sure not to miscarry, if he do but heartily and in good
earnest pursue it? Especially when it will be of infinite greater advantage to
him, than any Design he can propound to himself for this World. If a Man may be
certainly Happy for Ever, upon the same, or easier terms, than he can
ordinarily compass any of those little Designs which Men propose to themselves
in this World, who would not seek that which is most worthy the having, and
which he is surest to obtain?

Fifthly, and Lastly, the Encouragement here in the Text is not inconsiderable;
that if we seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, all these things
shall be added unto us. This certainly is a very tempting Consideration; for
who would not be glad to reconcile the enjoyment of this World with the hopes
of Heaven, and Eternal Happiness? But Men do not generally like our Savior's
Method, they would seek the things of this World in the first place, and get to
Heaven at last; they would be content to seek the one, and have the other cast
in and conferred upon them, without their seeking. But this will not be
granted, this way will not do. And yet our Savior has gone as far as one
would think could in Reason be desired; he has promised that if we will make
Religion, and the Salvation of our Souls, our first and chief Care, that all
these things shall be added unto us. So that the Design of going to Heaven, and
being Happy for ever, is no ways inconsistent with a competent portion of the
things of this Life. Godliness (the Apostle tells us) has the promise of this
Life, and of that which is to come. The business of Religion, the practice of a
Holy and Virtuous Life, is no hindrance to a Man's thriving in his Temporal
Estate; nay in many Respects it is apt to promote and advance it; by engaging
us to diligence in our Calling, and by deriving the blessing of God upon our
honest and lawful Endeavors; by obliging us to the strict and constant
practice of Truth, and Justice, and Fidelity in all our Dealings and Commerce,
which are the best way to establish a clear and solid Reputation, and good
Esteem among Men, which is an unspeakable advantage in Business, and, at the
long run, one of the best and most lasting Instruments of Prosperity and
Success.

Besides that Religion frees a Man from those Passions and Vices, which do
naturally tend to dissipate and ruin Men's Estates; as Intemperance and
Lewdness, which are every way chargable Vices, and do not only take Men off
from Business, and render them unfit for it; but waste their Estates, and bring
many other inconveniences upon their Persons and Families. Religion makes Men
meek and peaceable, and inoffensive in word and deed, which is a great security
against chargeable Suits and Contentions, and all sorts of Injuries and
Affronts from others. Among all the Beatitudes of our Savior, he only
promises Temporal Happiness to Meekness, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall
inherit the Earth. They who provoke and offend no body, are likely to be least
disturbed and disquieted by others in their Possession and Enjoments; who will
harm you (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 13.) if ye be followers of that which is
good? Some may be so perverse as to persecute a Man for his goodness; but it
rarely happens; most Men have not only a kindness, but a veneration for true
goodness.

By all these ways Religion naturally tends to the Temporal Prosperity of Men,
and the promoting of their welfare and happiness even in this World; besides
that the Providence of God is very peculiarly concerned for good Men, and a
special Blessing attends them in all their Undertakings. So that excepting the
Case of Persecution (which God will particularly Consider, and Reward in
another World) the Religious and good Man, who sincerely seeks the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, stands as fair, and is upon as good terms, for all
the lawful Enjoyments of this World, as he that makes it his only Design to be
Rich and Great in this World; nay as to the necessaries of Life, and a
competency of outward things, he has a much greater and better security from
the Providence and Promise of God, than the Men of the World have by all their
Care and Pains.

Besides that he has this Considerable advantage, by minding these things only
as accessories, that if he miss of them, he has something better to support
him in the want of them; being secure of a Happiness which this World can
neither give nor take from him. But now the Worldly Man, if he be defeated in
his Designs, is of all Men most miserable, because he has nothing else to
Comfort him, nothing else to trust to; he fails of his hopes as to this World,
and has done what in him lies, to make his Case desperate, as to the other.

Upon all these Considerations and Encouragements, you see how reasonable it
is, that we should make Religion, and the Concernments of another Life, our
great Care and Business. And yet how are these neglected by the greatest part
of Mankind! and by the best of us (God knows) not minded as they ought, and as
they deserve! What can we say for our selves, in excuse of so intolerable a
folly? There are two or three things which Men commonly pr^tend, if not in
justification, yet in mitigation and excuse of this great neglect.

First, they pretend great difficulties and discouragements in the ways of
Religion. This I have already acknowledged to be true, so far as to awaken our
Care, and to whet our Industry; but by no means to make us despond, and give
over all Care of so great a Concernment, because of the Difficulties it is
attended withal. Men who have no mind to a thing, are apt to imagine great
difficulties in the attaining of it, and to magnify them in their fancies
beyond Reason. As the People of Israel, when they were to enter into Canaan
(which was the Type of the Kingdom of Heaven) represented the Inhabitants of
the Land, whom they were to Conquer, more terrible than in truth they were;
reporting to one another, that the Land was full of Giants, and Sons of Anak,
Men of prodigious Stature, which reached up to Heaven. And this the Wise Man
observes to be the perpetual excuse of the Sloathful; when they have no mind to
a thing, they say there is a Lion in the way; that is, they fancy to themselves
Dangers and Terrors which are not. Thus Men who are averse from Religion, and
have no mind to be at the trouble and pains to get to Heaven, are apt to
complain of the monstrous and insuperable Difficulties of Religion, and how
hard it is for a Man to mortify his Lusts, and subdue his Appetites, and
govern his Passions, and to do all those things which are necessary to bring
him to Heaven. Well! it is acknowledged to be difficult. And is it not so to
get an Estate, and to rise to any thing in this World? The true pains which Men
take about these things, show that they are difficult; only when Men have a
mind to a thing, and their Heart is set upon it, they do not stand to complain
of the difficulty, but buckle to it, and grapple with it.

Is Religion difficult? And what is not so, that is good for any thing? Is not
the Law a difficult and crabbed study? Does it not require great labor, and
perpetual drudging, to excel in any kind of Knowledge, to be Master of any Art
or Profession? In a word, is there any thing in the World worthy the having,
that is to be gotten without pains? And is Eternal Life and Glory the only
slight and inconsiderable thing, that is not worth our Care and Industry? Is it
fit that so great a good should be exposed to the faint and idle Wishes, to the
cheap and lazy Endeavors of sloathful Men? For what Reason? Nay with what
Conscience can we bid less for Heaven and Eternal Life, than Men are contented
to give for the things of this World; things of no value in Comparison, not
worthy the toiling for, not sure to be attained by all our Endeavors; things
which perish in the using, and which, when we have them, we are liable to be
deprived of by a thousand Accidents? One fit of a Fever may shatter our
Understandings, and confound all our Knowledge, and turn us into Fools and
Idiots; an Inundation or a Fire may sweep away and devour our Estates; a
Succession of Calamities may in a few hours make the Richest and Greatest Man
as Poor as Job, and set him upon a Dunghill.

But be the Difficulty what it will of attaining the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, they are to be sought at any rate; because they are absolutely
necessary, and we miserable and undone if we have them not. And therefore not
to dissemble in the Matter, the Difficulties of Religion are considerable; but
then they are much greater a^ first, and will every day abate and grow less,
and the work by degrees will become ea^^e, and turn into Pleasure and Delight;
a Pleasure so great, as none knows but he that has it; and he that has it,
would not exchange it for all the sensual Pleasures and Enj^yments of this
World.

Secondly, Others pretend want of time for the minding of so great a Work. And
it is very true, that all Persons have not equal leisure for this purpose; some
are much more straightened than others, and more taken up with the necessary Cares
of this Life: but God has put no Man upon this hard necessity, that for want
of time he shall be forced to neglect his Body and his Health, his Family and
Estate, to save his Soul. And yet if any Man were brought to this distress, it
were well worth his while to secure his Eternal Salvation, though it were with
the neglect and loss of all other things. But those who are most straightened for
time, have so much as is absolutely necessary: for there is a considerable part
of Religion which does not require time, but Resolution and Care. Not to commit
Sin, not to break the Laws of God, not to be intemperate, to make no provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, does not spend time, but saves it
for better Purposes; so that every Man has time not to do that which he ought
not to do: And for the positive part of Religion, whether it consists in the
exercise of our Minds, or in the External Acts of Religion; no Man is so
distressed, but he has time to think of Heaven, and Eternity; time to love God,
to esteem him, and delight in him above all things. And this a Man may do very
frequently, and very acceptably, while he is laboring and traveling about his
Worldly Affairs; while his hand is upon the Plow, his heart may be with God;
and while he converseth here upon Earth, his Thoughts and Affections may be in
Heaven. Every Man has time to pray to God every day, for his Mercy and
Forgiveness, for his Grace and Assistance, for his Preservation and Support,
and to thank him heartily for all his Blessings, and Benefits. And a little
time seriously employed in this kind, would have the same acceptance with God,
as the more solemn and longer Devotions of those who have more leisure and
opportunities for them. To be sure we have all of us time to serve God upon his
own Day, and to employ it wholly in the Exercises of Piety, and in the Care and
Consideration of our Souls.

But this, when all is said, is the Case but of very few; most of us have no
color for this Complaint; non inopes temporis, sed prodigi sumus, (as Seneca
says) we are not Poor, but Prodigal of our time, and lavish it away profusely
upon Folly and Vanity. Our Vices and Lusts, our Pleasures and Diversions,
consume and divert those precious hours, which should be employed to these
better purposes; nay many times Time oppresses us, and is a burden to us, and
lies upon our hands, and we know not how to get rid of it; and yet we choose
rather to let it run waste, than to bestow it upon Religion, and the Care of
our Souls; insomuch that I fear this will be the Condition of many, that when
they were at a loss what to do with their Time, and knew not how to spend it,
they would not lay it out upon that which was best and most necessary; for this
surely is the very best use that can be made of Time, to prepare and provide
for Eternity.

Thirdly, Others pretend it will be time enough to mind these things hereafter.
But this (as bad Excuses seldom hang together, and agree with one another)
directly contradicts the former pretense, which supposes so much time
necessary, and more than many have to spare; and yet now they would make us
believe that a very little time will suffice for this Work, and that it may be
done at any time, even just when we are going out of this World. But this, of
all other, is the strangest Interpretation of seeking the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness first, to put it off to the very last. This surely is a
greater error on the other hand, to think that the business of Religion is so
quickly to be dispatched, and that the great work of our Lives can be crowded
into so narrow a corner of it, that the time of Sickness and Old Age, nay the
hour of Death, well employed to this purpose, will be sufficient. Alas! what
can we then do that is good for any thing? that can in Reason be thought either
acceptable to God, or available for our selves? When we have not Sense and
Understanding enough to dispose of our Temporal Concernments, and to make our
Wills, do we think we shall be fit to repent of the Sins and Miscarriages of
our whole Lives, and to make our Peace with God? Every Man must not expect to
have Readiness Fortune, who when he was wearied with seeking his Father's Asses,
met with a Kingdom. We must not think when we are tired with pursuing the
Follies and Vanities of this World, to retire into Heaven, and to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God.

Our Savior has taken care to caution us against this desperate Folly, by a
Parable to this very purpose, of the Foolish Virgins, who having trifled away
their time 'till the Bridegroom was coming, and neglected to get Oil into their
Lamps, (by which we are to understand all those good Preparations and
Dispositions which are necessary to qualify us for the Kingdom of God) I say,
having neglected their opportutunity of getting this Oil, while they were
looking after it too late, the Door was shut against them. They thought to have
repaired all at last, by borrowing of others, and supplying themselves that way.

And thus many deceive themselves, hoping to be supplied out of another store,
when they have no grace and goodness of their own; out of the Treasure of the
Church, from the redundant Merit of the Saints, and their Works of
Supererrogation, of which some believe (I know not for what Reason) that there
is a great stock which the Pope may dispose of, to supply those who have taken
no care to get Oil into their Lamps. But I know not for what Reason Works of
Supererrogation are supposed; the Wise Virgins knew not of any Merit they had
to spare, it was the Foolish Virgins only that entertained this senseless
Conceit. I am sure the Parable insinuates the quite contrary, that the Best and
Holiest Persons (which are represented by the Wise Virgins) have nothing to
spare for the supply of others, who have been careless of their Souls; the
Foolish said unto the Wise, give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out;
but the Wise answered, saying, not so, lest there be not enough for us and you,
but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves. It seems they had
no works of Supererrogation that they knew of; but they do Ironically send them
to a Market that was set up somewhere, and where these things were pretended to
be Sold; but how they sped, the Conclusion of the Parable tells us, that whilst
they were running about in great haste to make this purchase of the Merits and
good Works of others, the Bridegroom came, and the Wise Virgins, that were
ready, went in with him to the Marriage, and the rest were shut out.

And there are those likewise among our selves, who having been careless to
qualify themselves for the Kingdom of God, hope to be supplied out of the
infinite Treasure of Christ's Merits: but this also is a vain hope. For though
there be Merit enough in the Death and Sufferings of Christ to save all
Mankind, yet no Man can lay claim thereto, who does not perform the Condition
of the Gospel.

Others think by sending for the Minister, when the Physician has given them
over, to receive in a few hours such Advice and Direction, as will do their
business, as effectually, as if they had minded Religion all their Lives long;
and that a few Devout Prayers said over them when they are just imbarking for
another World, will, like a Magical Wind, immediately waft them over into the
Regions of Bliss and Immortality.

But let us not deceive our selves; we may defer the Business so long, 'till we
shall get nothing by our late application to God, and crying to him Lord, Lord,
open unto us, but that severe Answer, Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity, I
know ye not whence ye are. If we would not have this our Doom, let us first
seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, that so having our Fruit unto
Holiness, our End may be Everlasting Life.

A SERMON ON PSALM. CXIX. 96.
I have seen an end of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.
THis Psalm seems to have a great deal more of Poetical Number and Skill in it,
than at this distance from the Time and Age in which it was written, we can
easily understand. The main Scope and Design of i^ is very plain and obvious;
namely, to Magni^ie the Law of God, and the observation of its Precepts, as
that wherein true Religion does mainly consist. And indeed if we attentively
read and consider it, every part of this Psalm does with great variety of
expression, and yet very little difference of the sense, descant upon the same
ground, viz. The Excellency and Perfection of the Law of God. And t^^ wor^^ of
t^^ Te^t seem to be as full and comprehensive of the sense and design of the
whole Psalm, as any one Sentence in it; I have seen an end of all Perfection,
but thy Commandm^nt is exceeding broad.

These words are variously rendered, and understood by Interpreters, who yet in
this variety do very much conspire and agree in the same sens^^ The Chaldee
Paraphrase renders the words thus, I have seen an end of all things, about
which I have employed my Care; but thy Commandment is very large. The Syriac
version thus, I have seen an end of all Regions, and Countries (that is, I have
found the compass of this habitable World to be ^ini^e, and limited) but thy
Commandment is of a vast extent. Others explain it thus, I have seen an end of
all Perfection; that is, of all the things of this World, which Men value and
esteem at so high a rate^ of all Worldly Wisdom and Knowledge, of Wealth, and
Honor, and Greatness, which do all perish and pass away; but thy Law is
Eternal, and still abides the same; or, as the Scripture elsewhere expresses
it, the word of the Lord endures for ever.

Thy Law; that is, the Rule of our Duty Natural and Revealed; or, in a word,
Religion, which consists in the Knowledge and Practice of the Laws of God^ is
of greater perfection than all other things which are so highly valued in this
World: for the perfection of it is Infinite, and of a vast influence and
extent; it reaches to the whole Man, to the Happiness of Body and Soul; to our
whole duration both in this World, and the next, of this Life, and of that
which is to come. And this will clearly appear, if we consider the
Reasonableness and the Wisdom of Religion, which consists in the knowledge of
God, and the keeping of his Laws.

First, The Reasonableness of Religion; which is able to give a very good
account of it self, because it settles the Mind of Man upon a firm Basis, and
keeps it from rolling in perpetual uncertainty; whereas Atheism and Infidelity
wants a stable Foundation, ^t centers no where but in the denial of God and
Religion, and yet substitutes no Principle, no tenable and constituent Scheme
of things in the place of them; its whole business is to unravel all things, to
unsettle the Mind of Man, and to shake all the common Notions and received
Principles of Mankind; it bends its whole force to pull down and to destroy,
but lays no Foundation to build any thing upon, in the stead of that which it
pulls down.

It runs upon that great absurdity which Aristotle (who was always thought a
great Master of Reason) does every where decry, as a Principle unworthy of a
Philosopher, namely, a progress of Causes in In^initum, and without End; that
this was the Cause of that, and a third thing of that, and so on without end,
which amounts to just nothing; and finally resolves an infinite number of
effects into no first Cause; than which nothing can be more unskilful and
bungling, and less worthy of a Philosopher. But this I do not intend at present
to insist upon, having treated largely on the same subject upon another Vide
Sermon. 1st, of the first Vol. Published by the Author.
Occasion. I shall therefore proceed in the

Second place, to consider the Wisdom of Religion. The fear of the Lord is
Wisdom, so says the Psalmi^t; it is true Wisdom indeed, it is the beginning of
Wisdom, Caput Sapientiae, the top and perfection of all Wisdom. Here true
Wisdom begins, and upon this Foundation it is raised and carried on to
Perfection; and I shall in my following Discourse endeavor to make out these
two things.

1. That true Wisdom begins and is founded in Religion, in the fear of God, and
in the keeping of his Commandments.

2. That this is the Perfection of Wisdom, there is no Wisdom without this, nor
beyond it.

First, True Wisdom begins and is founded in Religion, and the Fear of God, and
Regard to his Laws. This is the first Principle of Wisdom, and the Foundation
upon which the whole Design of our Happiness is to be built. This is in the
first place to be supposed, and to be taken into Consideration in all the
Designs and Actions of Men: This is to govern our whole Life, and to have a
main influence upon all the Affairs and Concernments of it. As the first
Principle of Humane Society, and that which is to run through the whole frame
of it, is the Public good; this was always to be taken into Consideration, and
to give Law to all Laws and Constitutions about it: So Religion is the first
Principle of Humane Wisdom, by which all our Actions are to be conducted and
governed; and all Wisdom which does not begin here, and lay Religion for its
Foundation, is preposterous, and begins at the wrong end; and is just as if in
the forming of Humane Society, every one in the settlement of the Constitution,
and the framing of Laws, should have an eye to his own private and particular
advantage, without regard to the Public Good, which is the great End of
Society, and the Rule and Measure of Government and Laws, and in the last issue
and result of things, the only way to procure the settled welfare, and to secure
the lasting Interests of particular Persons, so far as that is consistent with
the Public Good. And it would be a very preposterous Policy to go about to
found Humane Society upon any other terms, and would certainly end in Mischief
and Confusion.

And such is all the Wisdom of Men, in relation to their true Happiness, which
does not b^gin with Religion, and lay its foundation there; which does not take
into Consideration God, and his Providence, and a Future State of Rewards and
Punishments after this Life. All Wisdom which does not not proceed upon a
supposition of the truth and reality of these Principles, will certainly end in
shame and disappointment, in misery and ruin; because it builds a House upon
the Sand, which when it comes to be tried by stress of weather, and assaulted
by violent storms, will undoubtedly fall, and the fall of it will be great.

And this Error every Man commits, who pursues Happiness by following his own
Inclination, and gratifying his Irregular Desires, without any Consideration of
God, and of the restraint which his Laws have laid upon us, not for his own
Pleasure, but for our good. For when all things are duly Considered, and all
Accounts cast up, it will appear upon a just Calculation of things, that all
the restraints which the Laws of God lay upon Men, are highly reasonable, and
greatly for their benefit and advantage, and do not abridge us of any true
Pleasure or Happiness; but are Wise and Merciful Provisions of Heaven, to
prevent our harm and mischief; so that we are not Wise, if we act without
regard to God, and his Laws, and are not willing to be governed by him, who
loves us better than we do our selves, and truly designs our Happiness, and
Commands us nothing but what directly tends to it. For the Laws of God are not
Arbitrary Constitutions, and mere instances of Sovereign Will and Power; but
Wise Rules and Means to procure and advance our Happiness.

And in like manner, all that Wisdom which Men use to compass their Worldly
Designs, of Riches, and Greatness, without Consideration of the Providence of
God, and Dependence upon it for the Success of our Affairs, is all perfect
Folly and Mistake. For though the Design be never so well laid, and vigorously
prosecuted, and no Means which Humane Wisdom can devise for the attaining of
our End have been omitted by us; yet if we leave God out of the Account, we
forget that which is Principal, and signifies more to the Success of any
Design, than all other things put together. For if God favors our Designs, the
most improbable shall take effect; and if he blow upon them, the most likely
shall misca^ry. Whenever he pleases to inter^o^e, to cross the Counsels and
Desig^^ of M^n, the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong;
neither yet bread ^o the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor
to men of skill; but time and chance happens to all.

So that it is great folly not to Consider the Providence of God in all our
Designs and Undertakings, not to implore his Favor and Blessing, without which
nothing that we take in hand can prosper. That which is Principal to any
Purpose, ought to be considered in the first place, nothing being to be
attempted either without or against it. And such is the Providence of God in
all Humane Affairs; it is more considerable to the promoting or hindering of
any Event, than all things in the World besides; and therefore all Policy,
which sets aside God and his Providence, is vain; because there is no wisdom,
nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.

So likewise all that Wisdom which only considers and regards this short Life,
and the narrow Concernments of it, and makes provision only for our welfare in
this World; and therefore can only be tempted with the hopes of Temporal
Advantages, and terrified only with the danger of Temporal Evils and
Sufferings; but has no sense of an Immortal Spirit within us, no prospect of a
Life after Death, no Consideration of a Happy or Miserable Eternity, of Rewards
and Punishments, infinitely greater than all the Temptations and Terrors of
Time and Sense; I say all this is a preposterous and pernicious Wisdom, and
proceeds upon a false Supposition, and a quite contrary Scheme of Things to
what really is; and consequently our whole Life, and all the Designs and
Actions of it do run upon a perpetual mistake, and a false Stating of our own
Case; and whatever we do pursuant to this Mistake is foolish and hurtful, and
so far from conducing to our true interest, that it is all either besides it,
or contrary to it; because we act upon a Supposal only of this Life, and a
Being only in this World, and that there is nothing either to be feared or
hoped for beyond it; and being thus grossly mistaken, we set our hearts only
upon Temporal Things, and study our present security and satisfaction, and in
all our Counsels and Actions are swayed only by the Consideration of Temporal
Good and Evil, of the present Ease and Pleasure, the Disturbance and Pain of
our Fleshly and Sensual Parts; without any sense of our own Immortality, and of
that Everlasting State which remains for us in another World.

But there is (my Brethren) most certainly there is another Life after this; we
are not Beasts, if we do not make our selves so; and if we die, we shall not
die like them, neither shall our last End be like theirs? For whatever we may
think or wish, it will not be in our power to extinguish our own Beings when we
have a mind to be rid of them, and to choose whether or no we shall live for
ever.

And if this be a false Scheme of things which we have framed to our selves,
and proceeded upon (as undoubtedly it is) then our whole Life is one great
Error, and a perpetual Mistake, and we are quite wrong in all that we design to
do. Our Wisdom ha^^ begun at the wrong end, and we have made a false
Calculation and Account of things, and have put our Case otherwise than it is;
and the farther we proceed ugon this Mistake, our Miscarriage will be so much
the more fatal in the issue. But if our Wisdom begin at the right end, and our
Case be truly stated, that God has put into these frail and mortal Bodies of
ours, Immortal Spirits that shall live for ever; and has sent u^ into this
World to so^ourn here for a little while, and to be disciplined and trained up
for Eternity; and that after a short proof and trial of our Obedience, we shall
be translated into an Everlasting State of unspeakable Happiness or Misery,
according as we have demeaned our selves in this World; if we believe this to
b^ truly our Case, our Interest is then plainly before us, and we see where our
Happiness lies, and what remains for us to do, in order to the obtaining of it,
and what we are to expect to suffer, if we do it not.

Now this Foundation being laid, it is evident, that the best thing we can do
for our selves, is to provide for our Future State, and to secure the
Everlasting Happiness of another Life. And the best way to do that, is to live
in obedience to those Laws which our Maker, and our Sovereign, has prescribed
to us; and according to which he will one day Sentence us to Eternal Rewards or
Punishments.

It is evident likewise, that all our sensual Appetites and Desires are to be
bounded by the Rules of Reason and Virtue, which are the Laws of God; and that
no present Ease and Pleasure, Trouble and Suffering, are to be considered and
regarded by us, in competition with the things which are Eternal; and that Sin
is of all other the greatest Evil, and most mischievous to our main Interest,
and therefore with all possible Care to be avoided; and that the favor of God
is to be sought, and the Salvation of our Souls to be provided for at any pains
and expense whatsoever, and even with the hazard and loss of our dearest
Interests in this World, yea and of Life it self.

And now if this Matter has been rightly stated, then Religion, and the Fear
of God, is the first Principle and Foundation of true Wisdom, and that which we
are to consider, and take along with us in all the Designs and Actions of our
Lives; and all Wisdom which does not begin here, is preposterous, and will
prove folly in the issue.

Secondly, As Religion is the beginning of Wisdom, so it is the perfection of
it, it is the highest point of Wisdom in which we can be Instructed. The fear
of the Lord (says Solomon, Prove. 15. 33.) is the instruction of Wisdom. A good
Understanding (says David, Psalm. 111. 10.) have all they that do his
Commandments. The Practice of Religion is the perfection of Wisdom; and he
understands himself best, who lives most according to the Laws of God. And this
I might show, by instancing in particular Virtues, the practice whereof is much
Wiser, and every way more for our Interest, than the contrary Vices; but this
is too large an Argument to engage in, and therefore I shall content my self at
present, briefly to show, that the chief Characters and Properties of Wisdom do
all meet in Religion, and agree to it.

The First Point of Wisdom is to understand our true Interest, and to be right
in our main End; and in this, Religion will best instruct and direct us. And if
we be right in our main End, and true to the interest of it, we cannot
miscarry: but if a Man mistake in this, he errs fatally, and his whole Life is
Vanity and Folly.

Another property of Wisdom is to be steady and vigorous in the Prosecution of
our main End. To oblige us hereto, Religion gives us the most powerful
Arguments, the glorious Happiness, and the dismal Misery of another World.

The next Point of Wisdom is, to make all things stoop and become subservient
to our main End. And wherever Religion bears sway, it will make all other
things subordinate to the Salvation of our Souls, and the Interest of our
Everlasting Happiness; as the Men of this World make every thing to submit and
give way to their Covetous, and Ambitious, and Sensual Designs.

Another part of Wisdom is, to Consider the Future, and to look to the last End
and Issue of things. It is a common folly among Men, to be so intent upon the
present, as to have little or no regard to the future, to what will be
hereafter. Men Design and Labor for this present Life, and their short
continuance here in this World, without taking into serious Consideration their
main Duration, and their Eternal Abode in another World. But Religion gives us
a clear Prospect of a Life after Death, and overlooks Time, and makes Eternity
always present to us, and minds us of making timely provision and preparation
for it. It takes into Consideration our whole Duration, and inspires us with
Wisdom, to look to the End of things, and to what will be hereafter, as well as
to what is present.

It is likewise a great Property of Wisdom, to secure the main Chance, and to
run no hazard in that. And this Religion directs us to take care of, because
the neglect of it will prove fatal.

Another Mark of Wisdom is, to lay hold of Opportunities, those especially,
which, when they are once past, will never return again. There are some Seasons
wherein great things may be done, which if they be let slip, are never to be
retrieved. A Wise Man will lay hold of these, and improve them; and Religion
inculcates this Principle of Wisdom upon us, that this Life is the opportunity
of doing great things for our selves, and of making our selves for ever; this
very day and hour may, for ought we know, be the last and only Opportunity of
Repentance, and making our Peace with God? Therefore to day, whilst it is
called to day, let us set about this necessary work, lest any of us be hardened
through the deceitfulness of Sin; to morrow it may be too late to begin it, and
the Justice of God may cut us off whilst we are wilfully delaying it; and the
Opportunities of Saving our Immortal Souls may vanish, and be for ever hid from
our eyes.

The next Property of Wisdom is, to foresee Dangers, and to take timely care to
prevent them. The Prudent Man (says Solomon) foreseeth the Evil, and hides
himself; that is, shelters and secures himself against it; but the simple pass
on, and are punished; that is, the Evil overtakes them, and their Folly is
punished in their fatal Ruin. Now the greatest Danger is from the greatest
Power; even from him who is able to save, and to destroy; I will tell you (says
the Wisdom of God) whom ye shall fear; fear him, who after he has killed, can
destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.

Again, another main Point of Wisdom is, to do as little as we can to be
repented of, trusting rather to the Wisdom of Prevention, than to that of
Remedy. Religion first teaches Men Innocence, and not to offend; but in case
we do, (as in many things we offend all) it then directs us to Repentance, as
the only Remedy. But this certainly is folly, to Sin in hopes of Repentance,
that is, first to make work for Repentance, and then run the hazard of it; for
we may certainly Sin, but it is not certain that we shall Repent. And if it
were, yet it is great folly to lay in before hand, and to make work for
trouble; Ne tu stultus homuncio es, qui malis veniam precari, quam non peccare,
was a Wise Saying of old Cato; Thou are (says he) a silly Man indeed, who
chusest rather to ask Forgiveness, than not to Offend. If a Man had the best
Remedy in the World, he would not make himself sick to try the Virtue of it;
and it is a known Comparison, and a very fit one, that Repentance is Tabula
post Na^fragium, a Plank after Shipwreck. But I am greatly afraid that
thousands of Souls, who have trusted to it, have perished before they could get
to Land, with this Plank in their arms.

The last Character of Wisdom I shall mention is, In all things to consult the
Peace and Satisfaction of our own Minds, without which nothing else can make us
Happy; and this, Obedience to the Laws of God does naturally procure. Great
Peace have they (says David) that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.
The work of Righteousness, says the Prophet, shall be Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever. The fear of God, and the
keeping of his Commandments, is the best Preservative against the troubles of a
guilty Conscience, and the terrifying apprehensions of a Future Judgment. And
this is the great Wisdom of Religion, that whosoever lives according to the
Rules and Precepts of it, prevents the chief Causes of discontent, and lays the
surest Foundation of a perpetual satisfaction of Mind, a Jewel of inestimable
price, which none knows but he that has it; and he that has it, knows the
value of it too well to part with it for the pleasures of Sin, which are but
for a season, and which always prove bitt^rness in the end, and for the little
sweetness which they yielded, leave a terrible sting behind them.

Thus have I briefly represented the Reasonableness and Wisdom of Religion. It
is of Infinite perfection, and of a vast influence and extent, it reaches to
the whole Man, the Happiness of Soul and Body; and to our whole duration, the
Happiness of this World and the next; for Godliness (that is true Religion and
Piety) has the Promise of this Life, and of that which is to come.

But now where are the Effects of true Religion, in the full compass and extent
of it, to be found? Such real Effects as do in any measure bear a proportion to
the power and perfection of their Cause. For nothing certainly is more
Excellent and Amiable in its definition than true Religion is; but, alas! how
imperfect is it in the Subject, I mean in us, who ought to show forth the power
and perfection of it, in the Practice and Actions of our Lives, the best
demonstration of the excellent frame and temper of our Minds.

What a conflict and struggling do the best Men find between their Inclination
and their Duty? How hard to reconcile our Practice and our Knowledge, and to
make our Lives to agree with the Reason of our Minds, and the clear Conviction
of our Consciences? How difficult for a Man, in this dangerous and imperfect
state, to be in any measure either so wise or so good as he ought? How rare is
it for a Man to be good natured, gentle, and easy to be entreated, without
being often betrayed into some weakness and sinful compliances, especially in
the bad Company of our Betters? How next to impossible is it to be strict and
severe in our Lives, without being sower? to govern our Lives with that
perpetual Caution, and to maintain that evenness of temper, as not to be
sometimes peevish, and passionate? and when we are so, not to be apt to say
with Jonah, we do well to be angry?

There are two Precepts in the New Testament, that seem to me to be the nicest
of all other, and hardest to be put in practice. One is that of our Blessed
Savior, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. How hard is it to hit upon
the just temper of Wisdom and Innocence; to be Wise, and hurt no body; to be
Innocent, without being Silly? The other is, that of the Apostle, be angry, and
sin not. How difficult is this, never to be angry but upon just Cause; and when
the Cause of our anger is just, not to be transported beyond due bounds, either
as to the degree of our anger, or as to the duration and continuance of it?
This is so very nice a Matter, that one would be almost tempted to think that
this were in effect a prohibition of anger in any Case; be ye angry, and sin
not; be ye so, if ye can, without Sin. I believe whosoever observes it, will
find that it is as easy to suppress this Passion at any time, as to give way
to it, without offending in one kind, or other. But to proceed,

How hard a Matter is it, To be much in Company, and free in Conversation, and
not to be infected by it? To live in the midst of a wicked World, and yet to
keep our selves free from the Vices of it? To be temperate in the use of things
pleasing, so as neither to injure our Health, nor to lose the use of our
Reason, nor to offend against Conscience? To Fast often, without being
conceited of it, and bargaining as it were with God for some greater Liberties
in another kind; and without censuring those who do not tie up themselves to
our strict Rules either of Piety or Abstinence? when perhaps they have neither
the same Opportunities of doing it, nor the same Reason to do it that we have;
nay perhaps have a much better Reason for not doing just as we do: For no Man
is to prescribe to others his own private Method, either of Fasting, or of
Devotion, as if he were the Rule, and his Example a kind of Proclamation,
enjoining all his Neighbors the same days of Fasting and Prayer which he
himself, for Reasons best known to himself, thinks fit to observe.

And then how hard is it to be cheerful, without being vain? and grave and
serious, without being morose? to be useful and instructive to others, in our
Conversation and Discourse, without assuming too much Authority to our selves?
which is not the best and most effectual way of doing good to others; there
being something in the Nature of Man, which had rather take a hint and
intimation from another, to advise himself, and would rather choose to imitate
the silent good Example which they see in another, than to have either his
Advice or his Example imposed upon them.

How difficult is it to have a Mind equal to every Condition, and to be content
with mean and moderate things? to be Patient in Adversity, and Humble in
Prosperity, and Meek upon sudden and violent Provocations? to keep our Passions
free from getting head of our Reason, and our Zeal from out-running our
Knowledge? to have a Will perfectly submitted and resigned to the Will of God,
even when it lies cross and thwart to ours, so that whatever pleases God,
should please us? to be Resolute, when our Duty happens to be difficult and
dangerous; or even to believe that to be our Duty (though it certainly be so)
which is very inconvenient for us to do? to hold out and be unwearied in
well-doing? to be careful to preserve our Lives, and yet upon a great Occasion,
and whenever God calls for them, to be content to lay them down?

To be Wise and Innocent; Men in Understa^ding, and yet in Malice Children? to
have many great Virtues, and not to want that which gives the great luster to
them all, I mean real and unaffected Modesty, and Humility? In short,

How difficult is it, to have regard to ^ll God's Commandments, and to hate
every evil and false way? To have our Duty continually in our eye, and ready to
be put in practice upon every proper Occasion? To have God, and the
Consideration of another World, always before us, present to our Minds, and
operative upon our Practice? To live as those that know they must die, and to
have our thoughts perpetually awake, and intent upon the great and Everlasting
Concernments of our Immortal Souls?

These are great things indeed, easy to be talked of, but hard to be done; nay
not to be done at all, without frequent and fervent Prayer to God, and the
continual aids and supplies of his Grace; not without an earnest endeavor on
our parts, a vigorous resistance of Temptations, and many a sore conflict with
our own perverse Wills and sensual Inclinations; not without a perpe^^al guard
and watchfulness over our Lives, and our unruly Appetites and Passions.

Little do unexperienced Men, and those who have taken no great pains with
themselves, imagine what Thought and Consideration, what Care and Attention,
what Resolution and Firmness of Mind, what Diligence and patient continuance in
well-doing, are requisite to make a truly good Man; such a one as St. Paul
describes, that is perfect and entire, and wanting nothing; that follows God
fully, and fulfils every part of his Duty, having a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Man. Who is there among us, that is either wise enough
for his own direction, or good enough for the peace and satisfaction of his own
Mind; that is so happy as to know his Duty, and to do it; as to have both the
Understanding and the Will to do in all things as he ought?

After our best Care, and all our Pains and Endeavors, the most of us will
still find a great many defects in our Lives, and cannot but discern great and
manifold imperfections in our very best Duties and Services; insomuch that we
shall be forced to make the same acknowledgment concerning them, which Solomon
does concerning the imperfection of all things under the Sun; that which is
crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
And when all is done, we have all of us reason to say, not only that we are
unprofitable servants, having done nothing but what was our duty to do; but
have cause likewise, with great shame and confusion of face, to acknowledge
that we have been in many respects Wicked and Slothful Servants, and so very
far from having done what was our duty to do, that the greatest part of the
good which the most of us have done, is the least part of the good which we
might and ought to have done.

The Practice of Religion, in all the Parts and Instances of our Duty, is work
more than enough for the best and greatest Mind, for the longest and best
ordered Life. The Commandment of God is exceeding broad; and an Obedience in
any good measure equal to the extent of it, extremely difficult. And after all,
as the Man in the Gospel said with tears to our Savior, concerning the
weakness of his own Faith, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief, Mar. 9. 24.
So the best of Men may say, and say it with tears too, concerning every Grace
and Virtue wherein they excel most, Lord, I aspire, I endeavor after it, be
thou pleased to assist my weakness, and to help me by thy grace continually to
do better.

The Sum of all is this, If we be careful to do our best, and make it the
constant and sincere endeavor of our Lives to please God, and to keep his
Commandments, we shall be accepted of him: For God values this more than whole
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, more than thousands of Rams, and ten thousands
of Rivers of O^l; because this is an essential part of Religion, To love God
with all our hearts, and minds, and strength, and to love our Neighbors as our
selves. The Duties comprehended in these two great Commandments, sincerely
practiced by us (though with a great deal of imperfection) will certainly be
acceptable in the sight of God, in and through the Merits and Mediation of
Jesus Christ the Righteous. Blessed are they (says St. John very plainly, in
the conclusion of that obscure Book of his Revelation) Blessed are they that do
his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22. 14.

I speak now to a great many who are at the upper end of the World, and command
all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of it; but the time is coming, and (whether we
think of it or not) is very near at hand, when we shall see an end of all
perfection, and of all that is desirable upon Earth, and upon which Men are apt
to value themselves so much in this World; and then nothing but Religion, and
the Conscience of having done our Duty to God and Man, will stand us in stead,
and yield true Comfort to us. When we are going to leave the World, how shall
we then wish that we had made Religion the great business of our Lives; and in
the Day of God's Grace and Mercy, had exercised Repentance, and made our Peace
with God, and prepared our selves for another World; that after our departure
hence, we might be admitted into the presence of God, where is fullness of Joy,
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore?

Let no Man therefore, of what Rank or Condition soever he be in this World,
think himself too great to be good, and too Wise to be Religious, and to take
care of his Immortal Soul, and his Everlasting Happiness in another World;
since nothing but this will approve it self it to be true Wisdom at the last.
All other things will have an end with this Life; but Religion and the Fear of
God is of a vast extent, and has an influence upon our whole duration, and,
after the course of this Life is ended, will put us into the secure Possession
of a Happiness which shall never have an end.

I will Conclude this whole Discourse with those words of our Blessed Savior,
If ye know these things, happy are ^e if ye do them. Which thou, who art the
Eternal Spring of Truth and Goodness, grant that we may all know and do in this
our day, for thy Mercies sake in Jefus Christ; to whom, with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power, now and for ever.

Amen.
A SERMON ON 2 PETER I. 4.
Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises; that by these
ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature.
THE Connection of these words with the fo^mer is somewhat obscure, but it
seems to be this. The Apostle had in the Verse before said, that the Divine
Power of Christ has by the knowledge of the Gospel given us all things that
pertain to Life and Godliness; that is, by the knowledge of the Gospel we are
furnished with all Advantages which conduce to make Men happy in the next Life,
and Religious in this; and then it follows, whereby are given unto ^s exceeding
great and precious Promises. Where^^; this seems to refer to the whole of the
foregoing Verse; as if it had bee^ ^^id, Christ by the Gospel has given to us
all things that conduce to our Future Happiness; and in order thereto, all
things which tend to make Men holy and good. Or else Life and Godliness are, by
a Hebraism frequent in the New Testament, put for a Godly Life. And then among
all those things which conduce to a Godly Life, the Apostle instanceth in the
Promises of the Gospel, which do so directly tend to make Men Partakers of a
Divine Nature.

In the handling of these words, I shall,

First, Consider the Promises here spoken of; whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises.

Secondly, The influence which these Promises ought to have upon us; that by
these ye might be made partakers of a Divine Nature.

First, We will consider the Promises which are here spoken of; whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises. And because the chief
Promises of the Gospel are here intended, I shall take occasion from this Text
to handle the Doctrine of the Promises, which is frequently discoursed of in
Divinity, but not always so clearly stated. And to this purpose, it will be
proper to take into Consideration these four things.

1. What the Promises are which are here spoken of; whereby are given unto us
Promises.

2. Why they are said to be so great and precious; exceeding great and precious
Promises.

3. We will Consider the Tenor of these Promises.

4. When Men are said to have a right to them, so as they may apply them to
themselves. These four Heads will comprehend what I have to say upon this
Argument.

1. What the Promises are which the Apostle here speaks of; whereby are given
unto us Promises. And no doubt the Apostle here intends those great and
excellent Promises which Christ has made to us in the Gospel. So that to
satisfy our selves in this enquiry, we need only to consider what are the
Principal Promises of the Gospel. Now the great Promises of the Gospel are
these three.

(1.) The Promise of the free Pardon and Forgiveness of our Sins, upon our
Faith and Repentance.

(2.) The Promise of God's Grace and Holy Spirit to assist our Obedience.

(3.) The Promise of Eternal Life to Reward it.

(1.) The Promise of the Pardon and Forgiveness of our Sins upon our Faith and
Repentance. The Gospel has made full and clear Promises to this Purpose; that
if we believe the Gospel, and will forsake our Sins, and amend our wicked
Lives, all that is past shall be forgiven us, and that Christ died for this
end, to obtain for us Remission of Sins in his Blood. The light of Nature, upon
consideration of the Mercy and goodness of God, gave Men good hopes, that upon
their Repentance God would forgive their sins, and turn away his wrath from
them. But Mankind was doubtful of this, and therefore they used expiatory
Sacrifices to appease the offended Deity. The Jewish Religion allowed of no
Expiation, but for legal impurities, and involuntary transgressions, such as
proceeded from ignorance and inadvertency; but not for Sins of Presumption, and
such as were committed with an bigh hand. If Men sinned wilfully, there was no
Sacrifice appointed by the Law for such Sins. But the Grace of the Gospel
justifies us from the greatest Sins, upon our Faith and sincere Repentance. So
St. Paul tells the Jews, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, men
and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins: And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. There was no general Promise of
Pardon, nor way of Expiation under the Law; perfect Remission of Sins is
clearly revealed, and ascertained to us only by the Gospel.

(2.) Another great Promise of the Gospel is the Promise of God's Grace and
Holy Spirit to assist our Obedience. Our Blessed Savior has promised, that
our Heavenly Father will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. It Is true
indeed, there was a peculiar Promise of the Holy Ghost to the Apostles and
Christians of the first Ages, which is not now to be expected; namely, an
Extraordinary and Miraculous Power, whereby they were qualified to publish the
Gospel to the World, and to give Confirmation to it. But now that the Christian
Religion is propagated and settled in the World, the great End and Use of these
Miraculous Gifts is ceased: but yet the Spirit of God does still concur with
the Gospel, and work upon the Minds of Men, to excite and assist them to that
which is good. And though this Operation be very secret, so as we cannot give an
account of the manner of it, yet the effects of it are very sensible, and this
influence of God's Holy Spirit is common to all Christians in all Ages of the
World. This Proposition is Universally true, and in all Ages and Times; If any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

It must be acknowledged, that the Spirit does not now work upon Men in that
sudden and sensible manner, as it did in the first times of Christianity;
because then Men were strongly possessed with the prejudices of other Religions,
which they had been brought up in; and therefore as more outward means of
Conviction were then necessary, so likewise a more powerful internal Operation
of the Spirit of God upon the Minds of Men, to Conquer and bear down those
prejudices, and to subdue them to the Obedience of Faith. But now the
Principles of Religion and Goodness are more gradually instilled into the Minds
of Men, by the gentle degrees of Pious Instruction and Education; and with
these means the Spirit of God concurrs in a more Humane way, which is more
suited and accommodated to our Reason, and offers less violence to the Nature
of Men. So that this Promise of God's Holy Spirit is now made good to us, as
the Necessity and Circumstances of our present State do require. God does not
use such extraordinary Means for the producing of those Effects, which may be
accomplished in a more ordinary way. The assistance of God's Holy Spirit is
still necessary to Men, to incline and enable them to that which is good; but
not in that manner and degree that it was necessary at first: Because the
prejudices against Christianity are not now so great, and many of those
Advantages which were necessarily wanting at first, are now supplied in an
ordinary way; and therefore it is not reasonable now to expect the same
extraordinary operation of the Spirit of God upon the Minds of Men, which we
read of in the first beginnings of Christianity.

(3.) There is likewise the Promise of Eternal Life to Reward and Crown our
Obedience. And this the Scripture speaks of, as the great Promise of the
Gospel, 1 Job. 2. 25. This is the promise which he has promised us, even
Eternal Life. And upon this account the new Covenant of the Gospel is preferred
before the old Covenant of the Law, because it is established upon better
Promises. All the Special and Particular Promises of the Law were of Temporal
good things, and these were the great Encouragements that were given to
Obedience, under that imimperfect Dispensation: but now Godliness has not only
the Promise of the Life that now is, but of that which is to come; as the
Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 4. 8. The Gospel has clearly revealed to us a happy
State of Immortality after this Life, of which Men had but very obscure and
doubtful apprehensions. So the same Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 1. 10. That it is
now made manifest, by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has
ab^lisbed Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light, through the
Gospel. Holy Men had good hopes of it before; but they had no sure distinct
apprehensions of it, no such full assurance concerning it, no such clear and
express Promises of it, as the Gospel has given us.

Thus you see what those great Promises are which the Gospel has given us,
namely, the Promise of the Free Pardon and Forgiveness of our Sins, upon our
Faith and Repentance; the Promise of God's Grace and Holy Spirit to assist our
Obedience, and the Promise of Eternal Life and Happiness to Reward it. These
are the three Eminent Promises of the Gospel, and in all probability those
which the Apostle here calls great and precious Promises, which brings me to the

Second Thing which I propounded to Consider, namely, why they are said to be
exceeding great and precious; (...), the greatest and the most valuable
Promises. And to satisfy us that they are such, the very Consideration of the
B^essings and Benefits that they carry in them will be sufficient. If we
Consider the Condition that Mankind was in, when God was pleased to make these
gracious Declarations to us, we shall see great Reason to set a high value upon
every one of these Promises. Mankind was extremely degenerated, all Flesh had
corrupted its ways, and the whole World was guilty before God, and liable to
all that Misery which the Sinner had reason to apprehend from the incensed
Justice of the Almighty. We had forfeited that Happiness to which our Immortal
Nature was designed, and, which made our Condition more sad, we were without
strength to recover our selves out of it, by our Repentance for what was past
(if God would have accepted of it) and by our Future Obedience. Now the
Promises of the Gospel offer Relief to us in all these Respects, and thereby
obviate all the difficulties and dis^ouragements which Mankind lay under.

The gracious Promise of Pardon frees us from guilt, and s^cures us from the
terrible wrath of God, which our guilty Consciences did so much dread; and
without this Promise, Mankind would have been under the greatest doubts and
discouragements. For when Men are afraid their Sins are greater than will be
forgiven them, they are apt to fall into Despair, and Despair is an effectual
bar to Repentance; for when Men think their Condition is desperate, they care
not what they do.

And the Promise of God's Grace and Holy Spirit, to assist and enable us to do
our Duty, does fully answer all the Discouragements and Objections from our own
weakness, and the power of temptation. We may do all things through Christ
strengthening us; and how weak soever we are of our selves, we are strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. If God be for us, who or what can stand
against us? The Devil is a very powerful Enemy, and much too strong for Flesh
and Blood to Encounter in its own strength; but there is another Principle in
the World, which is Mightier and more Powerful than he, the Holy Spirit of God,
who is always ready to help, when we do not repulse and refuse his assistance;
Gre^ter is he that is in you, than he that is in the World, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 4. The Spirit of God dwell^ in all those who are willing to admit him,
and is ever ready to assist those who comply with his blessed Motions, and do
vigorously put forth their own endeavors.

And then the Promise of Eternal Life, that answers all the difficulties of our
Obed^ence, and sets us above any thing that the World can threaten us withal,
for our Constancy to God, and his Tr^th. A Wise Man will be content to suffer
any thing, or to quit any thing upon terms of far greater advantage: And what
greater Consideration can be offered to encourage our Constancy and Obedience,
than an Eternity of Happiness? So that the Apostle had Reason to call these
exceeding great and valuable Promises; so valuable, that if any one of them had
been wanting, our Redemption and Recovery had either been absolutely
impossible, or extremely difficult. I proceed to the

Third thing I propounded, which was to consider the Tenor of these Promises;
that is, whether God have made them absolutely to us, without requiring any
thing to be done on our part, o^ upon certain Terms and Conditions to be
performed by us. That God may (if he please) make an Absolute Promise of any
Blessing or Benefit to us, there is no doubt; and that God's grace does prevent
many, and is beforehand with them, is as little to be doubted; the Spirit of
God goes along with the Gospel, moving and inclining Men to yield Obedience to
it, many times before any inclination and disposition thereto on their parts.
But as to this Promise of God's Grace and Holy Spirit, the great question is
not about the first motion of it, but the continuance of this assistance, and
the increase of it; and this, I think may safely be affirmed, is promised only
Conditionally, as also the Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life. And concerning each
of these, the Matter may quickly be decided, by plain Texts of Scripture.

Concerning the Promise of the grace and assistance of God's Holy Spirit, the
Scripture takes notice of two Conditions. First, that we beg it earnestly of
God: And this our Savior expresses by asking, seeking, and knocking, which
signifies the importunity of our Requests; Our Heavenly Father will give his
Holy Spirit to them that thus ask it. And then Secondly, That we improve and
make use of the grace which God affords us; To him that has, shall be given,
and from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he seems to
have. That is (as appears plainly from the scope of the Parable) to him that
uses that grace, and those advantages which God affords him, more shall be
given; but from him that makes no use of them, and therefore is as if he had
them not, shall be taken away that which he but seems to have, because he makes
no use of it.

Concerning the Pardon of Sins; The Scripture plainly suspends that upon the
general Condition of Repentance, and the change of our Lives; Repent, that your
Sins may be forgiven you: And upon the Condition of our forgiving others; If ye
forgive Men their Trespasses, then will your Heavenly Father also forgive you;
but if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your Trespasses, says our Savior, Mat. 6. 14, 15.

And then the Promise of Eternal Life, is every where in Scripture suspended
upon the Condition of Faith and Repentance, and Perseverance in well doing. He
that believes (says our Savior) shall be saved, which indeed implies the whole
Condition of the Gospel. He that Believes; that is, he that effectually assents
to the Doctrine of Christ, and is so persuaded of the truth of it, as to live
according to it, shall be saved. But if Obedience were not included in the
Scripture Notion of Faith, yet the Scripture elsewhere expressly makes it the
Condition of our Eternal Salvation. Heb. 5. 9. Christ is there said to be the
Author of Eternal Salvation to them that obey him; thereby implying, that none
shall be saved by Christ, but those that obey the Gospel. Heb. 12. 14. Follow
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9. To them who
by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, God will give Eternal Life; but to them who are contentious, and
obey not the Truth, that is, the Gospel, but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation,
and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of man that does Evil.

I cannot well imagine what can reasonably be answered to such plain Texts; but
I will tell you what is commonly answered; namely, That God gives the Condition
which he requires; and therefore though these Promises run in a Conditional
Form, yet in truth they are absolute; because he that makes a Promise to
another, upon a Condition which he will also perform, does in effect make an
absolute Promise. As if a Man promised another such an Estate, upon Condition
he pay such a Sum for it, and does promise withal to furnish him with that
Sum, this in effect amounts to an absolute Promise of the Estate.

And this is very well argued, if the Case were thus. But God has no where
promised to work the Condition in us, without the concurrence of our own
Endeavors. God may, and oftentimes does prevent Men by his Grace; but he has
no where promised to give his Holy Spirit, but to them that ask it of him. And
he has no where promised to continue his grace and assistance to us, unless we
will use our sincere Endeavors; nay in case we do not, he has threatened to
take away his grace and assistance from us. And if this be so, then the
Promises of the Gospel do not only seem to be Conditional, but are really so.
And it is a wonder that any Man should doubt of this, who considers how
frequently in the New Testament the Gospel is represented to us under the
notion of a Covenant, since a Covenant in the very nature of it does imply a
mutual Obligation between the Parties that enter into it. But if the Gospel
contain only Blessings which are promised on God's part, without any thing
required to be done and performed on our part, in order to the obtaining of
those Blessings, then the Gospel is nothing else but a Promise, or Deed of
Gift, making over certain Benefits and Blessings to us; but can in no propriety
of Language in the World be called a Covenant: But if there be some things
required on our part, in order to our being made partakers of the Promises
which God has made to us (as the Scripture every where tells us there is) then
the Promises are plainly Conditional. To instance in the Promise of Forgiveness
of Sins; Repent, that your Sins may be blotted out; that is, upon this
Condition that ye Repent of your Sins, they shall be forgiven; and not
otherwise. Can there be any plainer Condition in the World, than is in those
Words of our Savior? If ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your Hea^enly Father
will also forgive your Trespasses; but if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses,
neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses.

This is so far from being any prejudice to the freeness of Gods grace, who is
infinitely gracious in offering such great Blessings to us upon any Condition
that we can perform; yet it were one of the absurdest things in the World, to
imagine that God should grant to Men forgiveness of Sins, and Eternal Life, let
them behave themselves as they Will.

Fourthly, The last thing I proposed for the explaining of this Doctrine of the
Promises of God, was, to consider when Men may be said to have a right to these
Promises, so as to be able upon good grounds to apply them to themselves? And
the Answer to this is very plain and easy; namely, when they find the
Conditions of these Promises in themselves; and not till then.

When a Man has truly repented of his Sins, so as to forsake them, and lead a
new Life; and when he does from his heart forgive those that have offended him,
and has laid down all animosity against them, and thoughts of Revenge, then
has he a right to the Promise of Pardon and Forgiveness, and may apply to
himself in particular what the Scripture says in general, that God will blot
out all his Transgressions, and remember his Iniquities no more. When a Man
does constantly and earnestly implore the assistance of God's Holy Spirit, and
is ready to yield to the motions of it, and does faithfully make use of that
strength and assistance which God affords him, then he may expect the
continuance of his grace, and further degrees of it. When a Man makes it the
constant and sinsincere endeavor of his Life, to please God, and to walk in
all the Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord blameless, and is effectually
taught by the grace of God to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, and righteously, and godlily in this present World, then he may with
comfort and joy wait for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; then he may with confidence depend
upon God, in sure and certain hope of that Eternal Life, which God, that cannot
lie, has promised. When he can say with St. Paul, I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, then he may likewise triumph,
as he did, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
God the Righ^eous Judge shall give me in that day.

Upon these terms, and in these Cases, Men may upon good grounds apply to
themselves these exceeding great and precious Promises of the Gospel; and so
far as any Man is doubtful and uncertain of the performance of the Conditions
which the Gospel requires, so far he must necessarily question his Right and
Title to the Blessings promised. And if any Man think this Doctrine too
uncomfortable, and be willing to reject it upon this account, I shall only say
this, that Men may cheat themselves, if they please, but most certainly they
will never find any true and solid Comfort in any other. This is a plain and
sensible account of a Man's Confidence and good hopes in the Promises of God;
but for a Man to apply any Promise to himself, before he finds the Condition in
himself, is not Faith, but either Fancy, or Presumption.

And therefore it is a very preposterous course which many take, to advise and
exhort Men, with so much earnestness, to apply the Promises of God to
themselves, and to tell them that they are guilty of great unbelief in not
doint it. That which is proper to exhort Men to, is to ^ndeavour to perform the
Condition upon which God has promised any Blessing to us; and when Men find
the Condition in themselves, they will without any great persuasion take
Comfort from the Promise, and apply it to themselves; but till they discern the
Condition in themselves, it is impossible for a Man that understands himself,
to apply the Promise to himself; for till the Condition be performed, he has
no more right to the Promise, than if such a Promise had never been made. And
it is so far from being a Sin in such a Man, to doubt of the benefit of such a
Promise, that it is his Duty to do so; and no Man that understands himself, and
the Promises of God, can possibly do otherwise.

Therefore it is a vain and groundless trouble which perplexeth many People,
that they cannot apply the Promises of God to themselves; whereas the true
ground of their trouble should be this, that they have not been careful to
perform the Condition of those Promises which they would apply to themselves;
the other is an endless trouble; let them but look to the Condition, and the
Promise will apply it self. I speak all this on purpose to free Men from those
perplexities wherewith many have entangled themselves, by false apprehensions
of the Promises of God, either as if they were not made to us upon certain
Conditions to be performed by us, or as if any Man could comfortably apply them
to himself, before he has performed those Conditions upon which God has made
such Promises. For if Men will believe that which is not true, or expect things
upon such terms as they are not to be had, they may trouble themselves
Eternally, and all the World cannot help it.

I have now done with the First thing I propounded to speak to, namely the
Promises which are here spoken of. The Second thing, (viz.) what Influence
these Promises ought to have upon us, that by them we may be made Partakers of
a Divine Nature, I shall reserve to another Opportunity.

The Second SERMON ON 2 PETER I. 4.
Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises; that by these
ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature.
I Made entrance into these words the last Day, in the handling whereof I
proposed to do these two things.

First, To consider the Promises here spoken of; Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises.

Secondly, The Influence which these Promises ought to have upon us; that by
these ye might be partakers of a Divine Nature.

The first of these I have done with, and proceed now to the

Second, viz. The Influence which these Promises ought to have upon us; Whereby
are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these ye might
be partakers of a Divine Nature. Not that we can partake of the Essence and
Nature of God, as some have blasphemously affirmed, pretending, in their
canting and senseless Language, to be Godded with God, and Christed with
Christ. In this sense it is impossible for us to partake of the Divine Nature;
for this would be for Men to become Gods, and to be advanced to the State and
Perfection of the Deity. But the word (...) does frequently in Scripture
signify a temper and disposition; and to be partakers of a Divine Nature, is
to be of a Divine Temper and Disposition, to have our Corrupt Natures rectified
and purged from all sinful Lusts, and irregular Passions, and from all Vicious
and Corrupt Affections; and therefore it follows in the Text, having escaped
the Corruption that is in the World through Lust; and besides this, giving all
diligence, add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and to Brotherly-kindness Charity. So that we are
made partakers of a Divine Nature, as the Apostle here explains it, these two
ways; by cleansing our selves from the Lusts of the Flesh, which the Apostle
here calls the corruption or defilement which is in the World through Lust; and
by a diligent endeavor after all Christian Graces, and Virtues, Faith, and
Temperance, and Patience, a sincere love of the Brethren, and an Universal
Charity and goodwill toward all Men.

And that this is the proper influence and efficacy of the great Promises of
the Gospel upon the hearts and lives of Men, the Apostle St. Paul fully
declares to us, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved,
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh, and Spirit; that
is, from the lusts of the Flesh, and of uncleanness, and from all evil and
corrupt affections of the Mind, such as Wrath, Envy, Malice, Hatred, Strife,
Revenge, Cruelty, Pride, and the like; perfecting holiness in the fear of God;
that is, continually aspiring still more and more after further degrees of
Holiness, and Virtue, and goodness, which are the great Perfections of the
Divine Nature. And thus by a constant and sincere endeavor to cleanse our
selves from all impurity of Flesh and Spirit, and by practicing all the Virtues
of a good Life, we shall by degrees raise and advance our selves to a Godlike
temper and disposition, imitating in all our Actions the Goodness, and Mercy,
and Patience, and Truth, and Faithfulness of God, and all those other
Perfections of the Divine Nature, which are comprehended under the term of
Holiness. This is that which the Apostle here calls partaking of a Divine
Nature; or, as our Blessed Savior expresses it, to be perfect, as our Father
which is in Heaven is perfect.

This the Gospel designs to raise us to; and one of the great Instruments
whereby this is effected, are those exceeding great and precious Promises which
I have insisted upon: And they are capable of effecting it these two ways.

First, By way of internal Efficacy and Assistance; and,

Secondly, By way of external Motive and Argument: Both these ways, some or
other of these Promises have a mighty influence upon us (if we be not wanting
to our selves) to raise us to a Godlike temper and disposition, that is, to the
greatest perfection of Virtue and Goodness which we are capable of in this Life.

First, By way of internal Efficacy and Assistance. And this influence the
Promise of God's Holy Spirit, and of the gracious help and assistance thereof,
has upon the Minds of Men, inclining them to that which is good, and enabling
them to do it. For the Holy Spirit is promised to us, in consideration and
commiseration of that impotency and weakness which we have contracted in that
degenerate and depraved Condition into which Mankind is sunk; to help us, who
are without strength to recover our selves, out of that evil and miserable
state into which by wilful transgression we are fallen; to quicken us who are
dead in Trespasses and Sins, (as the Scripture expresses the Condition of
unregenerate Persons) to raise ^s to a new Life, and to cherish this Principle
of Spiritual Life, which is commonly weak at first, and to carry it through
alldiscouragements and oppositions; to excite us continually to our Duty, and
to enable us to the most difficult parts of Obedience, such as are most
contrary to our natural inclinations, and against the grain of flesh and blood,
to bear down the strength of Sin and Temptation; and in all our Conflicts with
the World, and the Flesh, the Devil, and all the Powers of Darkness, to make us
victorious over them; and, in a word, to be a Principle within us, more mighty
and powerful than the Lusts and Inclinations of our evil Hearts, than the most
obstinate and inveterate habits of Sin and Vice, and than all the Temptations
and Terrors of sense. So that if we will make use of this assistance, and lay
hold of this strength which God affords us in the Gospel, and (as the Apostle
expresses it) be workers together with God, we need not despair of Victory and
Success; for our strength will continually increase, and the force and violence
of our Lusts will be abated, God will give us more grace, and we shall walk
from strength to strength, and our path will be (as Solomon says of the way of
the Righteous) as the light which shines more and more unto the perfect day.

For the Holy Spirit of God conducts and manageth this great work of our
Sanctification and Salvation from first to last, by opening our Hearts to let
in the light of Divine Truth upon our Minds, by representing to us with
advantage such Arguments and Considerations as are apt to persuade us to
embrace it, and yield to it; by secret and gentle reprehensions, softning our
hard hearts, and b^nding our stiff and stubborn Wills to a compliance with the
Will of God, and our Duty. And this is that great Work which the Scripture
calls our Regeneration, and Sanctification, the turning us from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, a new Creation, and a Resurrection
from the Death of Sin, to the Life of Holiness. And then by leading and
directing us in the ways of Holiness and Obedience; by quickening our Devotion,
and stirring up in us Holy Desires and Dispositions of Soul, rendering us fit to
draw near to God in Prayer, with a due sense of our own wants and unworthiness,
and an humble Confidence in the goodness of God, that he will grant us those
good things that we ask of him; in supporting and comforting us in all our
Afflictions and Sufferings, especially for Truth and Righteousness sake; and by
Sealing and Confirming to us the Blessed Hopes of Eternal Life. Thus the Spirit
of God carries on the Work of our Sanctification, and makes us Partakers of a
Divine Nature, by way of inward efficacy and assistance.

Secondly, The Promises of the Gospel are apt likewise to have a mighty
influence upon us by way of Motive and Argument, to engage and encourage us to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, and to perfect
holiness in the fear of God. For,

First, A full Pardon and Indemnity for what is past, is a mighty encouragement
for us to return to our Duty, and a forcible Argument to keep us to it for the
future. For since God, who has been so highly injured and affronted by us, is
so willing and ready to forgive us, as not only to provide and purchase for us
the Means of our Pardon, by the grievous Sufferings of his dear Son, but to
offer it so freely, and invite us so earnestly to accept of it, and to be
reconciled to him; the Consideration of this ought in all Reason, Ingenuity,
and Gratitude, to melt us into Sorrow and Repentance for our Sins, and a deep
sense of the evil of them, and to inflame our hearts with a mighty love to God,
and our blessed Redeemer, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood; And to make us extremely unwilling, nay most firmly resolved never
more to offend that merciful and gracious God, who is so slow to punish, and so
forward to forgive; and effectually to engage us to a dutiful and constant and
chea^ful Obedience to God's holy Laws and Commandments, lest by our wilful
transgression and violation of them, we should run our selves into a deeper
guilt, and aggravate our Condemnation. Now that by the tender Mercies of our
God we are made whole, we should be infinitely afraid to sin any more, lest
worse things come to us; lest we relapse into a more incurable state, and bring
a heavier load of guilt and misery upon our selves.

Secondly, The Promise of God's Grace and Holy Spirit is likewise a very
powerful Argument and Encouragement to Holiness, and Goodness, engaging us to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that our Souls and
Minds may be a fit Temple for the Holy Ghost, which will not dwell in an impure
Soul: And likewise Encouraging us hereto, by this Consideration, that we have
so unerring a Guide to Counsel and Direct us, so Powerful an Assistant to
strengthen us with all might in the Inner Man, to stand by us in all our
Conflicts with Sin and Satan, and to make us (as the Apostle expresses it)
more than Conquerours over all our Spiritual Enemies. For though we be weak, and
our Lusts strong, our Enemies many, and Temptations mighty and violent; yet we
need not be disheartened, so long as we know that God is with us, and the Grace
of his Holy Spirit sufficient for us, against all the strength of Sin, and
Hell; though our Duty be hard, and our strength small, yet we cannot fail of
success, if we be sure that the Omnipotent grace of God is always ready to
second our sincere, though never so weak, Endeavors. So that when we see all the
Enemies of our Salvation drawn up in array against us, we may encourage our
selves, as the Prophet Elisha did his Servant, when he told him that an Host
compassed the City with Horses and Chariots, and said, Alas! my Master, how
shall we do? And he answered, fear not, for they that be with us, are more than
they that be with them, 2 King. 6. 16. Or, as Hezekiah Comforted the People,
when they were afraid of the mighty force of the King of Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 32.
7, 8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of
Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: For there be more with us,
than with him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to
help us, and to fight for us. This is the Case of every Christian; the force
that is against us is finite and limited; but the Almighty God is on our side,
and fights for us; and every one of us may say with St. Paul, Philip. 4. 13. I
can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

Thirdly, The Promise of Eternal Life and Happiness, if duly weighed and
considered, has a mighty force in it to take us off from the Love and Practice
of Sin, and to encourage our Obedience, and patient continuance in well-doing.
The assurance of enjoying unspeakable and endless Happiness in another World,
and of escaping extreme and eternal Misery, is a Consideration of that weight,
as one would think could not fail of its efficacy upon us, to put all
temptations to Sin out of countenance, and to bear down before us all the
difficulties and discouragements in the way of our Duty. And if this make no
impression upon us, if Heaven and Hell be of no weight with us, it will be in
vain to use any other Arguments, which in Comparison of this, are but as the
very small dust upon the balance. For if on the one hand the hopes of perfect
Comfort, and Joy, and Felicity, perpetual in duration, and vast beyond all
imagination, such as ^ye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the
heart of Man to conceive: And if on the other hand, the dread of the terrible
wrath of God, and of the vengance of Eternal Fire, together with the
insupportable torments of a guilty Conscience, and the perpetual stings of
bitter remorse and anguish for the wilful folly of our wicked Lives, and the
rage of horrible despair of ever getting out of so miserable a State; If
neither of these Considerations, if both of them will not prevail upon us to
cease to be evil, and to resolve to be good, that we may obtain one of these
Conditions, and may escape the other; there is no hope that any words that can
be used, any Arguments and Considerations that can be offered, should work upon
us, or take place with us. He that is not to be tempted by such hopes, nor to
be terrified by such fears, is proof against all the force of persuasion in the
World.

And thus I have done with the two things which I proposed to consider from
these words; the Nature of these Promises, and the Influence they are apt, and
ought to have upon us, to raise us to the perfection of Virtue and Goodness,
which the Apostle here calls our being Partakers of a Divine Nature. All that
now remains is, to make some useful Reflections upon what has been discoursed
upon these two Heads.

First of all, If we expect the Blessings and Benefits of these exceeding great
and precious Promises of the Gospel, we must be careful to perform the
Conditions which are indispensably required on our parts. It is a great
mistake, and of very pernicious consequence to the Souls of Men, to imagine
that the Gospel is all Promises on God's part; and that our part is only to
believe them, and to rely upon God for the performance of them, and to be very
confident that he will make them good, though we do nothing else but only believe
that he will do so. That the Christian Religion is only a Declaration of God's
good will to us, without any expectation of Duty from us; this is an Error
which one could hardly think could ever enter into any who have the liberty to
read the Bible, and do attend to what they read, and find there.

The Three great Promises of the Gospel are all very expressly contained in our
Savior's first Sermon upon the Mount. There we find the Promise of Blessedness
often repeated; but never absolutely made, but upon Certain Conditions, and
plainly required on our parts; As Repentance, Humility, Righteousness, Mercy,
Peaceableness, Meekness, Patience. Forgiveness of Sins is likewise Promised;
but only to those that make a Penitent acknowledgment of them, and ask
Forgiveness for them, and are ready to grant that Forgiveness to others, which
they beg of God for themselves. The gift of God's Holy Spirit is likewise there
Promised; but it is upon Condition of our earnest and importunate Prayer to
God. The Gospel is every where full of Precepts, enjoining Duty and Obedience
on our part, as well as of Promises on God's part, assuring Blessings to us;
nay of terrible threatenings also, if we disobey the Precepts of the Gospel. St.
Paul gives us the sum of the Gospel in very few and plain words, declaring
upon what terms we may expect that Salvation which the Gospel offers to all
Men, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. The grace of God which brings Salvation has
appeared to all Men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purisie unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
works. And then he adds, These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority; Intimating, that though Men were very averse to this Doctrine, it
ought to be inculcated with great Authority and Earnestness, and those who
opposed and despised it, to be severely rebuked: And with great Reason, because
the contrary Doctrine does most effectually undermine and defeat the whole
Design of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, From hence we learn, that if the Promises of the Gospel have not
this effect upon us, to make us Partakers of a Divine Nature, it is our own
fault, and because we are wanting to our selves. God is always ready to do his
part; if we do not fail in ours. There is a Divine Power and Efficacy goes
along with the Gospel, to make way for the entertainment of it in the hearts of
Men, where they put no bar and obstacle to it. But if Men will resist the
Motions of God's Blessed Spirit, and quench the light of it, and obstinately
hold out against the force of Truth; God will withdraw his Grace and Holy
Spirit from them. The Gospel would raise us to the perfection of all virtue and
goodness; and the Promises of it are admirably fitted to relieve the
infirmities and weakness of Humane Nature, and to renew us after the Image of
God, in Righteousness, and true Holiness; to take us off from Sin and Vice, and
to allure us to Goodness; and to assist and encourage us in the practice of it:
But if we will not comply with the gracious Design of God in the Gospel, and
suffer these Promises to have their due influence and efficacy upon us; we
wilfully deprive our selves of all the Blessings and Benefits of it, we reject
the Counsel of God against our selves, and receive the Grace of God in vain;
and and by rejecting and despising his Promises, we provoke him to execute his
Threatenings upon us.

Thirdly, and Lastly, If the Promises of the Christian Religion are apt in
their own Nature to work this great effect upon us, to make us like to God, and
to bring us to so near a resemblance of the Divine Perfections, to make us
Good, and Just, and Merciful, and Patient, and Holy in all manner of
Conversation, to purge us from our Iniquities, and to make us a Peculiar and
Excellent People, zealous of good works; I say if this be the proper tendency
of the Gospel, and the Promises of it, how does this upbraid the degenerate
state of the Christian World at this day? which does so abound in all kind of
Wickedness and Impiety; so that we may cry out as he did, upon reading the
Gospel; Profecto aut hoc non est Evangelium; aut nos non sumus Evangelici;
Either this is not the Gospel which we read, and the Christian Religion which
we profess; or we are no Christians. We are so far from that pitch of goodness
and Virtue which the Christian Religion is apt to raise Men to, and which the
Apostle here calls the Divine Nature, that a great part of us are degenerated
into Beasts and Devils, wallowing in abominable and filthy Lusts, indulging our
selves in those Devilish Passions of Malice and Hatred, of Strife and Discord,
of Revenge and Cruelty, of Sedition, and Disturbance of the Public Peace, to
that degree, as if the Grace of God had never appeared to us to teach us the
contrary. And therefore it concerns all those who have the face to call
themselves Christians, to demean themselves at another rate, and for the Honor
of their Religion, and the Salvation of their own Souls, to have their
Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ; and by departing from the
Vicious practices of this present Evil World, to do what in them lies to
prevent the Judgments of God which hang over us; or if they cannot do that, to
save themselves from this untoward Generation.

A SERMON ON 1 PETER IV. 19.
Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.
THIS Epistle was written by St. Peter, who was the Apostle of the
Circumcision, to the dispersed Jews, who were newly Converted to Christianity;
And the Design of it is to Confirm and Establish them in the Profession of it;
and to instruct them how they ought to demean themselves toward the Heathen or
Gentiles, among whom they lived; and more particularly to arm and prepare them
for those Sufferings and Persecutions, which he foretells would shortly overtake
them for the Profession of Christianity, that when they should happen, they
might not be surprised and startled at them, as if some strange and unexpected
thing were come upon them; at the 12 v. of this Chapter, Beloved, think it not
strange concerning the fiery Trial which is to try you; that is, do not wonder
and be not as^onish'd at it, as if some strange thing happened unto you.

And then he instructs them more particularly, how they ought to behave
themselves under those Tr^als and Sufferings, when they should happen; not only
with Patience, which men ought to exercise under all kinds of Sufferings, upon
what Account and Cause soever; but with Joy and Cheerfulness; considering the
Glorious Example and Reward of them, v. 13. but rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding Joy: And at the 14. ver. he tells them, that
besides the Encouragement of so great an Example, and so glorious a Reward,
they should be supported and assisted in a very extraordinary manner, by the
Spirit of God resting upon them in a glorious manner, as a Testimony of the
Divine Power and Presence with them; v. 14. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; or,
as it is in the best Copies, for the Spirit of Glory and of Power, even the
Spirit of God res^eth upon you; that is, the Glorious Power of the Divine
Spirit is present with you, to comfort and bear up your Spirits under these
Sufferings. But then he cautions them, to take great Care, that their
Sufferings be for a good Cause, and a good Conscience; v. 15. But let none of
you suffer as a M^^therer, or as a Thief, or as an evil-doer, (that is, as an
Offender in any kind against Human Laws, made to preserve the Peace and good
Order of the World) or as a busy-body in other men's matters; (that is, as a
pragmatical Person, that meddles out of his own Sphere, to the Disquiet and
Disturbance of Human Society:) For to suffer upon any of these Accounts, would
be matter of Shame and Trouble, but not of Joy and Comfort: But if they
suffered upon Account of the Profession of Christianity, this would be no Cause
of Shame and Reproach to them; but they ought rather to give God Thanks for
calling them to suffer in so good a Cause, and upon so glorious an Account. V.
16. Yet if any man suffer as a Christian (if that be his only Crime) let him
not be ashamed, but let him glori^ie G^d on this behalf; for the time is come,
that Judgment must begin at the House of God; (that is, the wise and just
Providence of God, has so ordered it at this Time, for very good Reasons and
Ends, that the first Calamities and Sufferings should fall upon Christians, the
peculiar People and Church of God, for their Trial, and a Testimony to the
Truth of that Religion, which God was now planting in the World:) And if i^
first begin at us, (that is, at us Jews, who were the ancient People of God,
and have now embraced and entertained the Revelation of the Gospel) what shall
the end be of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? (that is, how much more
severely will God deal with the rest of the Jews who have crucified the Son of
God, and still persist in their Infidelity and Disobedience to the Gospel?) And
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? (that is, if good Men be saved with so much Difficulty, and must
through so many tribulations enter into the kingdom of God, what will become of
all Ungodly and Impenitent Sinners? Where shall they appear? How shall they be
able to stand in the Judgment of the great Day?) From the Consideration of all
which, the Apostle makes this Inference or Conclusion, in the last ver. of this
Chapter, Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Thus you see the Connection and Dependence of these words, upon the Apostle's
foregoing Discourse. I shall explain the several Expressions in the Text, and
then handle the main Points contained in them.

The Expressions to be explained are these: What is meant by those that suffer
according to the will of God? what by committing the keeping of our Souls to
God, ^s unto a faithful Creator? and what by well-doing?

1. What is meant by suffering according to the will of God? This may be
understood of Suffering in a good Cause, such as God will approve: But this is
not so probable; because this is mentioned afterward, in the following
Expressions of committing the keeping of our Souls to God in welldoing; that
is, in suffering upon a good Account: And therefore the plain and genuine Sense
of this Expression, seems to be this; that those who according to the good
Pleasure of God's Will, and the wise dispensation of his Providence, are
appointed to suffer for his Cause, should demean themselves so and so; Let them
that suffer according to the will of God; that is, those whom God thinks fit to
call to Suffering. And this agrees very well with the like Expression, Chap. 3.
of this Epist. ver. 17. for it is better, if the will of God be so, (that is,
if God have so appointed it, and think it fit) that ye suffer for well-doing,
than for evil-doing.

Secondly, What is here meant by committing the keeping of our Souls to God, as
to a faithful Creator? That is, to deposit our Lives, and all that belongs to
us, in a word our selves, into the Hands and Custody of his Merciful Care and
Providence who made us; and therefore we may be sure will faithfully keep what
we commit to him: For as we are his Creatures, he is engaged to take care of
us, and will not abandon the work of his own hands. Besides that, he has
Promised to be more especially concerned for good Men, to support them in their
Sufferings for a good Cause, and to Reward them for it; and he is faithful that
has promised.

And therefore there is great Reason and great Encouragement, in all our
Sufferings for God's Cause and Truth, to commit our Souls to his Care and
Custody: Our Souls, that is (as I said before) our Lives, and all that belongs
to us; in a word, our selves: For so the word Soul is frequently used both in
the Old and New Testament, Psalm. 7. 5. Let the Enemy persecute my Soul, and
take it; that is, my Life; for so it follows in the next words; yea, let him
tread do^n my Life upon the Earth. And Psalm. 54. 3. Oppressors seek after my
Soul. And Psalm. 59. 3. they lie in want for my Soul; that is, my Life. And
Psalm. 16. 10. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; my Soul, that is, my self,
thou will not suffer me to continue in the Grave, and under the power of Death,
but wilt raise me up to Life again. And so likewise in the New Testament, Mar.
8. 35. Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. The same word
which is here rendered Life, in the very next Verse is rendered Soul; For what
shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
that is, his Life. And so likewise Jo^. 12. 25. He that loves his Life, shall
lose it: And he that hates his Life in this World, (in the Original the Word
signifies Soul) He that hates his Life in this World (that is, who neglects
and exposes his Life in this World, for the sake of Christ) shall keep it unto
Life Eternal. And Luke 9. 25. that which the other Evangelists render by the
word Soul, or Life, he renders himself; for what is a Man advantaged, if he
gain the whole World, and lose himself? And so here in the Text, to commit the
keeping of our Souls to God, is to commit our selves to his Care and Providence.

Thirdly, What is here meant by committing our selves to him in well-doing? By
well-doing is here meant, a fixed Purpose and Resolution of doing our Duty,
notwithstanding all hazards and sufferings; which is called by St. Paul, Romans
2. 7. A patient continuance in well-doing. It signifies sometimes acts of
Goodness and Charity; but in this Epistle it is taken in a larger sense, for
Constancy and Resolution in the doing of our Duty; as Chap. 2. 15. for so is
the will of God, that with well-doing (that is by a Resolute Constancy in a
good Course) ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men. And ver. 20.
But if when ye do well, and s^ffer for it (that is, if when ye suffer for
well-doing) ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. And Chap. 3.
ver. 6. As long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement; that is,
are Resolute and Constant in doing your Duty, notwithstanding all Threatenings
and Terrors. And ver. 17. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye
suffer for well-doing, than for evil-doing; that is, for your Religion and
Constancy in so good a Cause, as Christians, and not as Criminals upon any
other account.

So that the plain meaning of the words is, as if the Apostle had said,
wherefore being forewarned of Suffering and Persecution for the Cause of
Religion, the sum of my direction and advice upon the whole matter is this;
that since it is the will of God that ye should suffer upon this account,
commit your selves in the constant discharge of your Duty, and a good
Conscience, to the particular Care and Providence of Almighty God, as the
faithful Creator.

And now I come to handle the particular Points contained in the words; and
they are these Three.

First, That when Men do suffer really and truly for the Cause of Religion,
they may with confidence commit themselves (their Lives and all that is dear to
them) to the particular and more especial Care of the Divine Providence.

Secondly, Always provided, that we do nothing contrary to our Duty, and a good
Conscience; for this the Apostle means, by committing our selves to God, in
well-doing. If we step out of the way of our Duty, or do any thing contrary to
it, God's Providence will not be concerned for us, to bear us out in such
Sufferings.

Thirdly, I shall Consider what ground of Comfort and Encouragement the
Consideration of God, as a faithful Creator, affords to us in all our
Sufferings, for a good Cause, and a good Conscience.

First, When Men do suffer really and truly for the Cause of Religion, and
God's Truth, they may with confidence and good assurance commit themselves,
(their Lives and all that is dear to them) to the particular and more especial
Care of his Providence. In the handling of this, I shall Consider these three
things.

1. When Men may be said to Suffer really and truly for the Cause of Religion;
and when not.

2. How far they may rely upon the Providence of God, to bear them out in these
Sufferings.

3. What ^^ound and Reason there is to expect the more Particular and Especial
Care of God's Providence, in case of such Sufferings.

1. When Men may be said to Suffer really and truly for the Cause of Religion,
and God's Truth; and when not. In these Cases.

First, When Men Suffer for not renouncing the true Religion, and because they
will not openly declare against it, and Apostatize from it. But it will be
said, that in all these Cases the question is, what is the true Religion? To
which I answer; That all Discourses of this Nature, about Suffering for
Religion, do suppose the truth of some Religion or other. And among Christians,
the truth of the Christian Religion is taken for granted, where ever we speak
of Men's Suffering Persecution for it. And the plainest Case among Christians,
is, when they are Persecuted, because they will not openly deny and renounce
the Christian Religion. And this was generally the Case of the Primitive
Christians; they were threatened with Tortures and Death, because they would not
renounce Jesus Christ, and his Religion, and give demonstration thereof, by
offering Sacrifices to the Heathen-gods.

Secondly, Men do truly suffer for the Cause of Religion, when they are
Persecuted only for making an open Profession of the Christian Religion, by
joining in the Assemblies of Christians for the Worship of God; though they be
not urged to deny and disclaim it, but only to conceal and dissemble the
Profession of it, so as to forbear the maintenance and defense of it upon
fitting Occasions, against the Objections of those who are Adversaries of it.
For to conceal the Profession of it, and to decline the defense of it, when
just occasion is offered, is to be ashamed of it; which our Savior Interprets
to be a kind of denial of it, and is opposed to the confessing of him before
Men, Mat. 10. 32, 33. Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him will I also
confess before my Father which is in Heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before
Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. And this by St.
Mark is expressed by being ashamed of Christ; that is, afraid and ashamed to
make an open profession of him, and his Religion; Mark 8. 38. Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
finful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

And this likewise was the Case of the Primitive Christians under the moderate
Emperors, when the Persecution of them was not so hot, as to drive them to a
denial of Christ; provided they would be contented to conceal and dissemble
their Religion; in that case they did not hunt them out, nor Prosecute them to
renounce their Religion, if they made no discovery of themselves. But yet they
who suffered, because they would not conceal their Profession of Christianity,
did truly suffer for the Cause of Religion.

Thirdly, Men do likewise truly suffer for the Cause of Religion, when they
suffer for not betraying it, by any indirect and unworthy means; such as among
the Primitive Christians was the delivering up their Bibles to the Heathen, to
be burnt and destroyed by them: For to give up that holy Book, which is the
great Instrument of our Religion, is in Effect to give up Christianity it self,
and to Consent to the utter extirpation of it.

And such likewise is the Case of those, who suffer in any kind for not
contributing to break down the Fences of Religion in any Nation, where the
Providenc^ of God has given it a Legal Establishment and Security; or, in a
word, for refusing to countenance and further any Design, which visibly tends
to the Ruin of Religion: For to destroy Religion, and to take away that which
hinders the Destruction of it, are in Effect much the same thing.

Fourthly, Men do truly suffer for the Cause of Religion, when they suffer for
the Maintenance and Defense of any necessary and Fundamental Article of it, tho
they be not required to renounce the whole Christian Religion: For what St.
Paul says of the Article of the Resurrection of the dead is true of any other
necessary Article of the Christian Religion, that the Denial of it, is a
Subversion of the whole Christian Faith; because it tends directly to the
overthrow^ng of Christianity, being a Wound given to it in a Vital and
Essential Part. And this was the Case of those, who in any Age of Christianity
have been persecuted by Heretics, for the Defense of any Article of
Christianity.

And I cannot but observe by the Way, that after the Heathen Pe^secutions were
ceased, Persecution was first begun among Christians by Heretics; and has
since been taken up, and carried much beyond that bad Pattern, by the Church of
Rome; which, besides a standing Inquisition in all Countries, which are
entirely of that Religion; (a Court, the like whereto, for the clancular and
secret Manner of Proceeding, for the unjust and arbitrary Rules of it, for the
barbarous Usage of Men's Persons, and the Cruelty of its Torments, to extort
Confessions from them, the Sun never saw erected under any Government in the
World, by Men of any Religion whatsoever.) I say, which, besides this Court,
has by frequent Croisadoes for the Extirpation of Heretics, and by many
Bloody Massacres in France and Ireland, and several other places, destroyed far
greater numbers of Christians, than all the ten Heathen Persecutions; and has
of late revived, and to this very Day continues the same or greater Cruelties,
and a fiercer Persecution of Protestants, if all the Circumstances of it be
considered, than was ever yet practiced upon them; and yet whilst this is doing
almost before our eyes, in one of our next neighbor Nations, they have the
Face to complain of the Cannibal Laws, and bloody Persecutions of the Church of
England; and the Confidence to set up for the great Patrons of Liberty of
Conscience, and Enemies of all Compulsion and Force in Matters of Religion.

Fifthly, Men do truly suffer for the Cause of God and Religion, when they
suffer for asserting and maintaining the Purity of the Christian Doctrine and
Worship; and for opposing and not complying with those gross Errors and
Corruptions, which Superstition and Ignorance had in a long Course of Time
brought into the Christian Religion. Upon this Account many Good People
suffered in many past Ages, for resisting the growing Errors and Corruptions of
the Church of Rome, which at first crept in by Degrees, but at last broke in
like a mighty Flood, which carried down all before it, and threatened Ruin and
Destruction to all that opposed them. Upon this Account also, infinite Numbers
suffered among the Waldenses and Albigenses, in Bohemia, and in England, and in
most other Countries in this Western Part of Christendom: And they who suffered
upon this Account^ suffered in a good Cause, and for the Testimony of the Truth.

Sixthly, and Lastly, Men do truly suffer for the cause of Religion, when they
suffer for not disclaiming and renouncing any clear and undoubted Truth of God
whatsoever; yea though it be not a Fundamental Point and Article of Religion.

And this is the Case of those many Thousands, who, ever since the IV. Council
of Lateran, which was in the Year 1215, (when Transubstantiation was first
defined to be an Article of Faith, and necessary to Salvation to be believed)
were persecuted with Fire and Sword, for not understanding those words of our
Savior, this i^ my Body, (which are so easily capable of a reasonable Sense)
in the absurd and impossible Sense of Transubstantiation. And though this
disowning of this Doctrine, be no express and direct Article of the Christian
Religion; yet it is a Fundamental Article of right Reason and common Sense:
Because the admitting of Transubstantiation, does undermine the Foundation of
all Certainty whatsoever, and does more immediately shake the very Foundation
of Christianity it self. Yea, though the Christian Religion were no ways
concerned in this Doctrine, yet out of reverence to Reason and Truth, and a
just animosity and indignation at confident nonsense, a Man of an honest and
generous Mind would as soon be brought to Declare or Swear, that twice two do
not make four, but five, as to profess his belief of Transubstantiation.

And though all Truths are not of equal Consequence and Concernment, yet all
Truth is of God; and for that Reason, though we are not obliged to make an open
profession of all Truths at all times, yet we are bound not to deny or renounce
any Truth, nor to make profession of a known Falsehood or Error: For it is
merely because of the intrinsical Evil of the thing, that it is impossible for
God to lie; and the Son of God thought it worth his coming into the World, and
laying down his Life, to bear witness to the Truth. So he himself tells us,
Joh. 18. 37. To this End was I born, and for this Cause came I into the World,
that I should bear witness to the Truth.

Thus I have shown you in these plain Instances (to which most other Cases may
be reduced) when Men may be said to suffer truly for the Cause of Religion, and
Truth.

I shall mention two or three Cases wherein Men may seem to suffer for the
Cause of Religion, but cannot truly be said to do so.

First, When Men rashly expose themselves to danger, and run upon sufferings
for the sake of Religion. Thus several of the Primitive Christians voluntarily
exposed themselves, when they were not called in question, and in the heat of
their Affection and Zeal for God and Religion, offered themselves to Martyrdom,
when none enquired after them. This, in the gracious interpretation of God, who
knowing the sincerity of their Zeal, was pleased to overlook the indiscreet
forwardness and rashness of it, might be accepted for a kind of Martyrdom: but
cannot in Reason be justified, so a^ to be fit to be made a Pattern, and to be
recommended to our imitation. For though God may be pleased to excuse the
weakness of a well-meaning Zeal; yet he can approve nothing but what is
Reasonable.

To suffer cheerfully for the Cause of God and his Truth, when he calls us to
fight this good fight of faith, and to resist unto blood; and when we are
reduced to that strait, that we must either die for God and his Truth, or deny
them; to suffer I say in this Case with Courage and Patience, is one of the
Noblest of all the Christian Virtues. But to be perfect Volunteers, and to run
our selves upon Sufferings, when we are not called to them, looks rather like
the Sacrifice of Fools; which though God may mercifully excuse, and pardon the
Evil of the action, for the good Meaning of it; yet he can never perfectly
approve and accept of it. But I think there is little need nowa-days to caution
men against this rashness; it is well if they have the Grace and Resolution to
Suffer when it is their Duty, and when they are called to it.

Secondly, Nor can Men be truly said to Suffer for the Cause of Religion, when
they Suffer not for their Faith, but their Fancy, and for the wilful and
affected Error of a mistaken Conscience. As when Men suffer for indifferent
things, which in heat and passion they call Superstition and Idoltary; and for
their own false Opinions in Religion, which they mistake for Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith. In this Case, their mistake about these things
will not change the Nature of them, nor turn their Sufferings into Martyrdom;
and yet many Men have certainly Suffered for their own mistakes. For as Men may
be so far deluded, as to think they do God good service, when they kill his
fa^thful Servants; so likewise may they be so far deceived, as to Sacrifice
their Lives, and all that is dear to them, to their own culpable Errors and
Mistakes. But this is Zeal without Knowledge^ not the Wisdom which descends
from above, but that which comes from beneath, and is like the fire of Hell,
which is heat without light.

Thirdly, and Lastly; Nor can Men truly be said to Suffer for the Cause of God
and Religion, when they Suffer for the open Profession and Defense of Truths
not necessary. For though a Man be obliged to make an open Profession of all
Fundamental and Necessary Truths; yet he is under no such Obligation to make
Profession of Truths not necessary at all times; and unless he be called to
deny them, he is not bound either to declare or defend them; he may hold his
peace at other times, and be silent about them, especially when the open
Profession of them will probably do no good to others, and will certainly do
hurt to our selves, and the zealous endeavor to propagate such Truths will be
to the greater prejudice of Charity, and the disturbance of the public peace
of the Church.

It was a good Saying of Erasmus (if we understand it, as I believe he meant
it, of Truths not necessary) adeo invis^ sunt mihi discordi^, ut veritas etiam
contentiosa displiceat: I am (says he) so perfect a hater of discord, that I am
even displeased with truth, when it is the occasion of contention. As a Man is
never to deny Truth, so neither is he obliged to make an open Profession of
Truths not necessary, at all times; and if he Suffer upon that account, he
cannot justify it to his own Prudence, nor have Comfort in such Sufferings;
because he brings them needlessly upon himself; and no Man can have Comfort, but
in Suffering for doing his Duty.

And thus I have done with the first thing I proposed to enquire into; namely,
when Men may be truly said to Suffer for the Cause of Religion?

I proceed now to the

Second Enquiry; namely, how far Men may rely upon the Providence of God, to
bear them out in such Sufferings?

To which I Answer; That provided we do what becomes us, and is our Duty on our
part, the Providence of God will not be wanting on his part, to bear us out in
all our Sufferings for his Cause, one of these three ways.

First, To secure us from that violent degree of Temptation and Suffering,
which would be too strong for Humane Strength and Patience; Or,

Secondly, In case of such extraordinary Temptation and Trial, to give us the
extraordinary Supports and Comforts of his Holy Spirit; or else,

Thirdly, In case of a Temporary Fall and Miscarriage, to raise us up by
Repentance, and a greater Resolution and Constancy under Sufferings. I shall
speak severally to these.

1. Either the Providence of God will not be wanting to secure us from that
violent degree of Temptation and Suffering, which would be too strong for
Humane Strength and Patience to bear. And this is a great security to good Men,
against the fears of a final Miscarriage, after all their Labors, and Pains,
and Sufferings in a Religious Course, by being overborn at last by the assault
of a very violent and powerful Temptation. Not but that the best of Men ought
always to have a prudent distrust of themselves, so as to keep them from
security; according to the Apostle's Caution and Counsel; be not high minded,
but fear; and let him that stands, take heed lest he fall; because, 'till we
come to Heaven, we shall never be out of the danger and possibility of falling:
But yet for all this, we may hope, by the sincerity and firmness of our
Resolution, under the usual influences of God's Grace, to acquit our selves
like Men, in ordinary Cases of Temptation and Suffering.

And to this end, we should represent to our selves those exceeding great and
precious Promises, which he has made to Good Men, and his merciful Providence,
which continually watches over them, and steers their course for them in this
World, among those many Rocks which they are in Danger to split upon; that he
is able to stablish us in the Truth, and to keep us from falling, and to
present us faultless before the presence of h^s Glory with exceeding joy, and
to preserve us to his heavenly Kingdom; and that if we do not forsake him, and
forfeit his Care and Protection, he will keep us by his mighty power through
faith unto Salvation; either by his merciful Foresight and Prevention of those
Temptations, which would probably be too hard for us; or if he thinks fit they
should befall us, by supporting us under them in an extraordinary Manner.

For I doubt not, but that the best Men do own their Security and Perseverance
in Goodness, much more to the merciful Providence of God, preventing the
Assaults of violent and dangerous Temptations, than to the Firmness and
Constancy of their own resolutions. For there are very few Persons of so firm
and resolute Virtue, but that one time or other, a Temptation might assault
them upon such a Disadvantage, as would in all probability not only stagger
them, but bear them down. Now herein the ^^ovidence of God toward good (...)
very remarkable, in secu^^^^ (...) from those Temptations, which (...) ^oo
st^ong for them to grapple wi^^al; like a kind and tender Father, who, if he be
satisfied of the dutiful Disposition of his Child toward him, will not try his
Obedience to the utmost, nor permit too strong a Temptation to the contrary to
come in his way. So the Psalmist represents God's tender Regard and
Consideration of the Frailty and Infirmity of his Children, Psalm. 103. 13, 14.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him:
For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust; that is, he
considers us as men, and deals with us accordingly. Provided we be sincere,
he will not suffer us to be set upon by Temptations that are too big for us.
Andtherefore our blessed Savior makes it one of the Petitions of that
excellent Prayer, which he has recommended to us; Lead us not into Temptation;
that is, we should every day beg of God, that his Providence would keep us out
of the Way of great and dangerous Temptations, as knowing that this will be a
greater Security to us, than any strength and resolution of our own.

Secondly, Or in case of such violent and extraordinary Temptations, the
Providence of God will not be wanting to give us the extraodinary Support and
Comfort of his Holy Spirit, to bear us up under them. The Providence of God did
take Care of Good Men in all Ages, and did afford Comfort to them, under great
Trials and Sufferings; but God never made so express and general a Promise of
this, to all good Men, as he has done by the Christian Religion. Never was so
constant a Presence and Influence of the Divine Spirit vouchsafed and assured
to Men under any dispensation, as that of the Gospel; wherein the Spirit of God
is promised to all that sincerely embrace the Christian Religion, to reside and
dwell in them; not only to all the purposes of Sanctification and Holiness, but
of Support and Comfort under the heaviest Pressures and Sufferings. For which
Reason the Gospel is called the Ministration of the Spirit; and is upon this
account said to be more Glorious than any other Revelation which God had ever
made to Mankind.

We are naturally apt to be very much disheartened and cast down at the
apprehension of great Sufferings, from the consideration of our own weakness
and frailty; but the Spirit of Christ dwells in all true Christians, and the
same Glorious Power, which raised up Jesus from the dead, works mightily in
them that Believe. St. Paul uses very high Expressions about this Matter, Ephesians.
1. 19. That ye may know (says he, speaking to all Christians) what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who b^lieve, according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand. So that every Christian is
endowed with a kind of Omnipotence, being able (as St. Paul speaks of himself)
to do and to endure all things, through Christ strengthening him. Of our selves
we are very weak, and the Temptations and Terrors of the World are very
powerful; but there is a Principle residing in every true Christian, that is
able to bear us up against the World, and the power of all its Temptations.
Whatsoever is born of God (says St. John) overcomes the world; for greater is
he that is in you, than he that is in the world. The Holy Spirit of God, which
dwells in all true Christians, is a more powerful Principle of Resolution, and
Courage, and Patience, under the sharpest Trials and Sufferings, than that Evil
Spirit which rules in the World is, to stir up and set on the Malice and Rage
of the World against us. Ye are of God, little Children (he speaks this to the
youngest and weakest Christians) Ye are of God, little Children, and have
overcome; because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.
The Malice and Power of the Devil is very great; but the Goodness and Power of
God is greater. And therefore in case of extraordinary Temptation, good Men, by
virtue of this Promise of God's Holy Spirit, may expect to be born up and
comforted in a very extraordinary and supernatural manner, under the greatest
Tribulations and Sufferings for righteousness sake.

And this was in a very signal and remarkable manner afforded to the Primitive
Christians, under those Fierce and Cruel Persecutions to which they were
exposed. And this may still be expected, in like Cases of extraordinary
Sufferings for the Testimony of God's Truth. If ye be reproached (says St.
Peter, in this 4th Chap. ver. 14.) for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for
the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. The Spirit of God is here
promised to strengthen and support all that Suffer for the Name of Christ, in a
very conspicuous and glorious manner, according to that Prayer of St. Paul,
Col. 1. 11. That Christians might be strengthened with all might, according to
God's Glorious Power, unto all Patience, and Long-suffering, with joyfulness.
For when God is pleased to exercise good Men with Trials more than Humane, and
such Sufferings as are beyond the common rate of Humane Strength and Patience
to bear, he has engaged himself to endue and assist them with more than Humane
Courage, and Resolution. So St. Paul tells the Corinthians, who had not then
felt the utmost rage of Persecution, 1 Cor. 10. 13. No Tempt^tion or Trial has
yet befallen you, but what is common to Man; that is, nothing but what is
frequently incident to Humane Nature, and what by Humane strength, with an
ordinary assistance of God's Grace, may be grapled withal. But, in case God
shall call you to extraordinary Sufferings, he is faithful that has promised,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it; that is,
as he has ordered and appointed so great a Temptation or Trial to befall you,
so he will take care that it shall have a happy issue, by enabling you to bear
it, by affording you grace and strength equal to the violence and power of the
Temptation. For, as he is said to fall into temptation, that is Conquered by
it; so he is said to get out of it, or escape it, who is enabled to bear it,
and, in so doing, gets the better of it. And for this we may rely upon the
faithfulness of God, who has Promised that we shall not be tried above our
strength; either not above the strength which we have, or not above the
strength which he will afford us in such a case.

And why then should we be daunted at the apprehension of any Suffering
whatsoever, if we be secured that our Comfort shall be increased in proportion
to our Trouble, and our strength in proportion to the sharpness and weight of
our Sufferings? Or else,

Thirdly, In case of Temporary falling, the Providence and Goodness of God will
give them the Grace and Opportunity of recovering themselves from their fall by
Repentance. For the Providence of God may sometimes, for wise Ends and Reasons,
see it fit to leave good Men to their own Frailty, and to faint and fall
shamefully under Sufferings, so as to renounce and deny the Truth; sometimes to
punish their vain Confidence in themselves; as in the case of Peter, who
declared more Resolution, and bare it out with a greater Confidence, than any
of the Disciples, when he said to our Savior, though all men forsake thee, yet
will not I; and yet after this he fell more shamefully than any of the rest, so
as to deny his Master with horrid Oaths, and Imprecations, and this, though our
Savior had prayed particularly for him, that his Faith might not fail. From
which Instance we may learn, that God does not engage himself absolutely to
secure Good Men from falling, in case of a great Temptation and Trial; but if
they be sincere, he will not permit them to fall finally, though he may suffer
them to miscarry grievously for a time, to covince them of the Vanity of their
Confidence in themselves and their own Strength.

Sometimes God my suffer Good Men to fall, in order to their more glorious
Recovery, and the greater Demonstration and Triumph of their Faith and
Constancy afterward; which was the Case of that happy Instrument of our
Reformation here in England, Archbishop Cranmer, who after he had been so
great a Champion of the Reformation, was so overcome with Fear, upon the
Apprehension of his approaching Sufferings, as to subscribe those Errors of the
Chuch of Rome, which he had so stoutly opposed a great part of his Life: But he
did not long continue in this State, but by the Grace of God, which had not
forsaken him, was brought to Repentance; and when he came to suffer, gave such
a Testimony of it, and of his Faith and Constancy, as was more glorious, and
more to the Confirmation of the Faith of others, than a simple Martyrdom could
have been, if he had not fallen; for when he was brought to the Stake, he put
his right Hand(withwhich he had signed his Recantation) into the Fire, and with
an undaunted Constancy held it there, til it was quite burnt, for a Testimony
of his true Repentance for that foul Miscarriage; and when he had done, gave
the rest of his Body to be burnt, which he endured with great Courage and
Cheerfulness to the last. So that he made all the amends possible for so great
a Fault; and the Goodness of God, and the Power of his Grace was more glorified
in his Repentance and Recovery, than if he had never fallen.

But what shall we say, when notwithstanding these Promises of extraordinary
Comfort and Support, in case of extraordinary Sufferings, so great Numbers are
seen to faint in the day of Trial, and to fall off from their Stedfastness? Of
which there were many sad Instances, among the Primitive Christians, and have
likewise been of late in our own Times, and n places nearer to us. This I
confess is a very melancholy Consideration, but yet I think is capable of a
sufficient Answer.

And first of all, let this be established for a firm and undoubted Principle,
that God is faithful to his Promise; and therefore we ought much rather to
suppose in all these Cases, that there is some Default on our part, than any
Failure and Unfaithfullness on God's Part. Thus St. Paul, determines in a like
Case, when the Promise of God seemed not to be made good to the Jews, he lays
the Blame of it on their Unbelief, but acquits God of any Unfaithfulness in his
Promise, Romans 3. 3, 4. For what if some did not believe, shall their unbelief
make the Faith (or Fidelity) of God without effect? God forbid: Yea, let God be
true, but every man a liar. This I confess does not answer the Difficulty; but
yet it ought to incline and dispose us, to interpret what can fairly be offered
for the Removal of it, with all the Favor that may be on God's side. I say
then,

Secondly, That when good Men fall in Case of extraordinary Temptation, and
recover again by Repentance, and give greater demonstration afterward of their
Constancy and Resolution, in the Cause of God and his Truth, the Faithfulness
of God in his Promises is sufficiently vindicated, as in the Cases I mentioned:
Because the Promise of God is not absolute, that good Men shall be preserved
from falling; but that the Temptation shall have a h^ppy issue, and that they
shall not finally miscarry. For Promises of this Nature are to be interpreted
by us, and understood, as we do our Savior's Prayer for Peter before his Fall,
that his faith should not fail finally; but though he fell through too much
Confidence in himself, he should, through the Grace of God assisting him, be
enabled to recover by Repentance.

Thirdly, The Sincerity or Insinc^rity of Men in the Profession of the true
Religion, is a thing which we cannot certainly know, because we do not see into
Men's Hearts; but he who knows the heart, and trys the Spirits of Men in a
Balance, cannot be deceived in this Matter; and where men are not sincere, the
Promise of God is not concerned to hinder them from discovering themselves; and
the Fall of such Persons, is no Reflection upon the Faithfulness of God. And it
is reasonable enough to presum^, that this may be the Case of not a few, and
that (like Simon M^gus) after they have made a very solemn Profession of
Christianity, their hearts may not be right in the sight of God.

Fourthly, If we put the Case at the hardest, that some that were very sincere,
after they have h^ld out a great while, under the Extremity of Torments, have
at last fainted under them, and yielded to the Malice and Cruelty of their
Persecutors, and in this Amazement and Distraction have not long after expired,
without any Testimony of their Repentance; In this Case, both Reason and
Charity ought to restrain us from passing any very positive and severe Sentence
upon the State of such persons. For what do we know, but God whose Goodness
will certainly make all the Allowance to Human Frailty that Reason can require;
(For he knows whereof we are made; and remembers that we are but dust; he
mercifully considers every Man's Case, and weighs all the Circumstances of it
in an exact Balance;) I say who can tell, but that in such a Case as I have
mentioned, God may graciously be pleased to accept such a degree of constant
Suffering of great Torments for so long a time, for a true Martyrdom, and not
expect a more than Humane Patience and Resolution, where he is not pleased to
afford more than Humane Strength and Support; and whether he may not look upon
their failing and miscarriage at last, in the same rank with the indeliberate
actions of Men in a Frenzy, and besides themselves?

And thus God may be said with the temptation to make a way to escape, or, to
give a happy issue to it; since they were enabled to bear it, 'till being
distracted by their Torments, their Understandings were thrown off the hinges,
and incapable of exercising any deliberate acts of Reason. And without some
such equitable consideration of the Case of such Persons, it will be very hard
to reconcile some appearances of things with the goodness of God, and the
faithfulness of his Promise.

However, it will become us to abstain from all uncharitable and peremptory
censure of the final Estate of such Persons, especially 'till we our selves
have given greater and better testimony of our Constancy; and in the mean time,
to leave them to the Righteous and Merciful Sentence of their Master and ours,
to whose Judgment we must all stand or fall.

I am sure it will very ill become those, who by the Providence of God have
escaped those Sufferings, and are at present out of danger themselves, to ^it
in Judgment upon those who are left to endure this terrible Conflict, and have
perhaps held out as long, or longer, than they themselves would have done in
the like Circumstances. Let us rather earnestly beg of the God of all grace and
patience, that he would endue us with a greater measure of Patience and
Constancy, if he see fit to call us to the exercise of it; and (which we
lawfully may, after the Example of our Blessed Savior) that if it be his will,
he would let this Cup pass from us, and not try us with the like Sufferings,
lest we also be weary, and faint in our Minds. I come now to the

Third, and last Enquiry which I proposed; what Ground and Reason there is, for
good Men to expect the more Peculiar and Especial Care of God's Providence in
case of such Sufferings?

The Providence of God extends to all his Creatures, according to that of the
Psalmist, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
Works. But he exercises a more particular Providence toward Mankind; and more
peculiar yet toward those who study to please him, by obeying his Laws, and
doing his Will. He that is assured of his own heart, that he loves God, and
would do or suffer any thing for him, can have no cause to doubt but that God
loves him, and is concerned for his Happiness. No Man was ever afraid of God,
that was not conscious to himself that he had offended him, and by the wilful
breach of his Laws had put himself out of the care of his Providence. But on
the contrary, if our hearts give us this Testimony, that we have made it our
sincere endeavor to please him, we are naturally apt to have good assurance
and confidence of his favor and good-wil^ toward us. This comfort the Mind of
every good Man is apt to give him, from his own Reason, and the natural Notions
which he has of God.

But to free us from all doubt in this Matter, God himself has told us so, and
given us plentiful assurance of it in his word, Psalm. 11. 7. The Righteous Lord
loves Righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright; that is, he will
be favorable unto them. Psalm. 33. 18. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him; upon them that hope in his mercy. The eye of God, signifies his
watchful Care and Providence over good Men. So that besides the sure and
well-grounded Reasonings, from the Essential Perfections of the Divine Nature,
the mercy and goodness of God; we have a more sure word of Promise, in ^the
express declarations of God's Word, and more particularly in the case of great
Temptations and Sufferings. For can we think, that the Scripture says in vain,
Wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart?
Many are the afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all? The steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his
ways; though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand? The Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their
help in time of trouble. The same Promises we find in the New Testament. All
things shall work together for good, to them that love God. God is faithful,
who has promised, that he will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are
able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape. And to mention no
more; Hold fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering, he is faithful
that bath Promised; viz. to support you under Sufferings, and to reward them.

Thus much for the first Point, namely, that when Men do suffer truly for the
Cause of Religion, they may with confidence commit themselves to the more
Peculiar Care of the Divine Providence.

The Second SERMON ON 1 PETER IV. 19.
Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.
FROM these words I proposed to Consider these three Points.

First, That when Men do Suffer really and truly for the Cause of Religion,
they may with confidence commit themselves (their Lives, and all that is dear
to them) to the peculiar and more especial Care of the Divine Providence.

Secondly, This we may do always, provided that we be careful of our Duty, and
do what is required on our Part; and that neither to avoid Sufferings, nor to
rescue our selvesout of them, we do any thing contrary to our Duty and a good
Conscience; for this is the meaning of committing our selves to God in
well-doing.

Thirdly, To show what Ground of Comfort and Encouragement the Consideration of
God, under the Notion of a Faithful Creator, does afford to us, under all our
Sufferings for a good Cause and a good Conscience.

The First of these Points I have treated on at large in my former Discourse. I
proceed now to the

Second, Namely, when in all our Sufferings for the Cause of Religion, we may
with Confidence and good Assurance, commit our selves to the peculiar and more
especial Care of God's Providence^ This is to be understood, always provided
that we be careful of our Duty, and do what is required on our part; and that
neither to avoid Sufferings, nor to rescue our selves out of them, we do any
thing contrary to our Duty and a good Conscience. And this I told you was the
meaning of committing our selves to God in well-doing; for if we either neglect
our Duty, or step out of the Way of it, by doing things contrary to it, the
Providence of God will not be concerned to bear us out in such Sufferings. So
that in our Sufferings for the Cause of God and Religion, to commit our selves
to him in well-doing, may reasonably comprehend in it these following
Particulars.

1. Provided always, that we neglect no lawful Means of our Preservation from
Sufferings, or our Deliverance out of them: In this Case Men do not commit
themselves to the Providence of God, but cast themselves out of his Care and
Protection; they do not trust God, but tempt him, and do as it were try whether
he will stand by us, when w^ desert our selves; and bring us out of Trouble,
when we would take no Care, would use no Endeavors to prevent it. If we will
needlessly provoke Trouble, and run our selves upon sufferings; if we will
neglect our selves, and the Lawful Means of our preservation; if we will give
up, and part with those Securities of our Religion, which the Providence of
God, and the Laws of our Country have given us; if we our selves will help to
pull down the Fence which is about us; if we will disarm our selves, and by our
own Act expose our selves naked and open to Danger and Sufferings; why should
we think in this Case, that God will help us; when we would not help our
selves, by those lawful Ways, which the Providence of God had put into our
hands?

All Trust in God, and Dependence upon his Providence, does imply, that we join
Prayer and Endeavor together; Faith in God, and a prudent and diligent use of
Means: If we lazily trust the Providence of God, and so cast all our Care upon
him, as to take none at all our selves, God will take no Care of us. In vain do
we rely upon the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power of God; in vain do we
importune and tire Heaven with our Prayers, to help us against our Enemies and
Persecutors, if we our selves will do nothing for our selves: In vain do we
hope that God will maintain and defend our Religion, against all the secret
Contrivances and open Assaults of our Enemies, if we, who are united in the
Profession of the same Religion, and in all the Essentials of Faith and
Worship, will for some small Differences in lesser Matters, which are of no
moment, in Comparison of the things wherein we are agreed: I say, if for such
slight matters, we will divide and fall out among our selves; if when the Enemy
is at the Gates, we will still pursue our Heats and Animosities, and will madly
keep open those Breaches, which were foolishly made at first; what can we
expect, but that the common Enemy should take the Advantage, and enter in at
them; and whilst we are so unseasonably and senselesly contending with one
another, that they should take the Opportuity which we give them, to destroy us
all.

2. Provided likewise, that we do not attempt our own Preservation or
Deliverance from Suffering, by evil and unlawful Means: We must do nothing that
is contrary to our Duty, and to a good Conscience; nor comply with any thing,
or lend our helping Hand thereto, that apparently tends to the Ruin of our
Religion, neither to divert and put off Sufferings for the present, not to
rescue our selves from under them; because we cannot with Confidence commit our
selves to the Providence of God, but in well^doing.

This is an Eternal Rule, from whence we must in no Case depart, That men must
do nothing contrary to the Rules and Precepts of Religion, no not for the sake
of Religion it self: We must not break any Law of God, nor disobey the lawful
Commands of lawful Authority, to free our selves from any Sufferings
whatsoever; because the Goodness of no End can sanctify Evil Means, and make
them lawful: We must not speak deceitfully for God, nor lie, no not for the
Truth; nor kill men, though we could thereby do God and Religion the greatest
Service. And though all the Casuists in the World should teach the contrary
Doctrine, (as they generally do in the Church of Rome) yet I would not doubt to
oppose to all those the single Authority of St. Paul, who expressly condemns
this Principle, and brands it for a d^mnable Doctrine, that Evil may be done by
us, that Good may come. Romans 3. 8. And not as we be slanderously reported, and
as some affirm thas we say, let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation
is just. St. Paul it seems looked upon it as a most devilish Calumny, to
insinuate that the Christian Religion gives the least Countenance to such
damnable Doctrines and Doings as these; and pronounces their Damnation to be
just, who either teach any such Principle as the Doctrine of Christianity, or
practice according to it.

Let those look to it, who teach, That a right Intention, and a good End, will
render things, which are otherwise evil and unlawful, not only lawful to be
done by us, but in many Cases meritorious; especially where the good of the
Church, and the Extirpation of Heresy are more immediately concerned. Of this
Nature are the Doctrines of Equivocation and Mental Reservation, and the
Lawfulness of such Artificial ways of Lying, to avoid the Danger of the Law,
when they are brought before Heretical Magistrates; and this is the common
Doctrine of the most learned Casuists of all Orders in the Church of Rome: And
such likewise are their Doctrines, of the Law^ulness of extirpating Heretics,
by the most barbarous and bloody Means, and of breaking Faith with them, though
given by Emperors and Princes, in the most public and solemn manner; both
which are the avowed Doctrines of their General Councils, and have frequently
been put in Practice, to the Destruction of many millions of Christians, better
and more righteous than themselves. But we have not so l^arned Christ, who have
heard him, and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. They who are
rightly instructed in the Christian Religion, are so far from thinking it
lawful to do any thing that is evil, to bring others under suffering, that they
do not allow it in any Case whatsoever, no not for the Cause of God and
Religion, and to free themselves from the greatest Sufferings that can be
inflicted upon them.

3. Provided also, that we do trust the Providence of God, and do indeed commit
our selves to it; relying upon his Wisdom and Goodness, and entirely submitting
and resigning up our selves to his Will and Disposal, both as to the Degree and
the Duration of our Sufferings; believing that he will do that for us, which
upon the whole matter, and in the final issue and result of things, will be
best for us. That Blessing, wherewith Moses the Man of God blessed the People of
Israel before his Death, does belong to good Men in all Ages: He loves his
People, and all his Saints are in his hand: Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Innumerable are the
Pro^ises in Scripture concerning the merciful Providence and Goodness of God,
toward those who trust in him, and hope in his Mercy. Psalm. 32. 10. Many
sorrows shall be to the wicked: But he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall
compass him about. Psalm. 33. 18^ 19, 20, 21, 22. Behold, the eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him: Upon them that hope in his mercy: To deliver their
soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. Our soul waits for the
Lord: he is our help and our shi^ld. For our heart shall rejoice in him:
Because we have trusted in his holy name. Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us,
according as we hope in thee. Psalm. 34. 22. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his
servants: And none of them that trust in him shall be desolate. Psalm. 37. 39,
40. But the salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in
the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and deliver them: He shall
deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in him. Psalm.
31. 19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the Sons of
men! Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: He
shall never suffer the right^ous to be moved. Psalm. 125. 1. They that trust in
the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but a^id^th for ever.
Esa 26. 3, 4. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trus^eth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: For in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

4. Provided yet further, that we pray earnestly to God for his Gracious Help
and Assistance, for his merciful Comfort and Support under Sufferings; that he
would be pleased to strengthen our Faith, and to increase and lengthen out our
Patience, in proportion to the Degree and Duration of our Sufferings.

All the Promises which God has made to us, are upon this Condition, that we
earnestly seek and sue to him for the Benefit and Blessing of them. Psalm. 50.
15. Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Ezekiel. 36. 37. After a great Deliverance, and many Blessings
promised to them, this Condition is at last added, Thus says the Lord God, I
will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. And
this likewise is the tenor of the Promises of the New Testament, Mat. 7. 7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. And in this very Case that I am speaking of, God expects that
we should apply our selves to him, for Spiritual Wisdom and Grace, to behave
our selves under Sufferings as we ought: Jam. 1. 2, 3, 4. Where speaking of the
manifold Temptations that Christians would be exercised withal; he directs them
to pray to God for Wisdom to demean themselves under Persecutions, with
Patience, and Constancy, and Cheerfulness, My Brethren account it all joy, when
ye fall into diverse Temptations; (meaning the Temptations and Trials of
Suffering in several kinds) Knowing this, that the trying of your faith works
patience. But let patience have its perfect work. And because this is a very
difficult Duty, and requires a great deal of Spiritual Skill, to demean our
selves under Sufferings as we ought, therefore he adds in the next words: If
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

And this earnest application we are to make to God, for his grace and
seasonable help in time of need; not to put him in mind of his Promise, but to
testify our dependence upon him, and expectation of all good from him. And we
must likewise use great importunity in our Prayers to God, to assist us and
stand by us in the day of Trial, and the hour of Temptation. And therefore our
Savior heaps up several words, to denote the great earnestness and importunity
which we ought to use in Prayer, bidding us to ask, and seek, and knock. And to
show that he lays more than ordinary weight upon this Matter, and to encourage
our importunity, he spoke two several Parables to this purpose; the first, Luke
11. 5. of the Man who by mere importunity prevailed with his Friend to rise at
midnight to do him a kindness, which our Savior applies to encourage our
importunity in Prayer, ver. 9. And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. The other
is the Parable of the importunate Widow, and unjust Judge, related by the same
Evangelist, Luke 18. 1. with this Preface to it; and he spoke a Parable unto
them to this end, that Men ought always to pray, and not to faint. And to speak
the truth, they seem at first sight two of the oddest of all our Savior's
Parables, if the design of them were to insinuate to us that God is to be
prevailed upon, by the mere importunity of our Prayers, to grant our Requests:
but our Blessed Savior, who best knew his own meaning, tells us, that all he
designed by it, was only to signify, that we ought always to pray, and not to
faint; that is, to continue instant in Prayer, and not to give over after once
asking, as if we despaired of prevailing. Not that mere importunity prevails
with God to give us those things which he is otherwise unwilling to grant; but
because it becomes us to be fervent, and earnest, to testify our Faith and
Confidence in the goodness of God, and the deep sense we have of our own
weakness, and wants, and unworthiness; and likewise that we set a true value
upon the Blessings and Favors of God, as worth all the earnestness and
importunity we can use: And in this decent and sober sense, the success of our
Prayers may truly be said to depend upon our importunity; not that it is
necessary to move God to grant our Requests, but that it becomes us to be thus
affected, that we may be the more fitly qualified for the Grace and Mercy which
God is willing to confer upon us.

I have been the longer upon this, to give us a right notion of this matter,
and that we may the more distinctly understand the true Reason why our Savior
does require so much earnestness and importunity of Prayer on our part; not at
all to work upon God, and to dispose him to show mercy to us (for that he is
always inclinable to, when ever we are fit for it) but only to dispose and
qualify us to receive the grace and mercy of God, with greater advantage to
our selves.

Fifthly, Provided moreover, that we be not confident of our selves, and of the
force and strength of our own Resolution. We know not our selves, nor the
frailty and weakness of our own Resolution, 'till we are tried. It Is wise
Advice which Solomon gives us, and never more seasonable than in the day of
trial, Prove. 3. 5, 6, 7. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not
to thine own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths; be not wise in thine own eyes; that is, be not conceited and
confident of thine own wisdom and strength, or ability in any kind; there is a
secret Providence of God, which mingles it self with the actions and spirits of
Men, and disposes of us unknown to our selves; and what we think to be the
effect of our own strength and resolution, of our own wisdom and contrivance,
proceeds from an higher Cause, which unseen to us, does steer and govern us. So
the Wise Man observes, Prove. 20. 24. Man's goings are of the Lord, how can a
Man then understand his own ways? And therefore we have reason every one to say
with the Prophet, Jer. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of Man is not in
himself, it is not in Man that walks to direct his steps. Our feet will soon
slip, if God do not uphold us by his hand. Remember how shamefully the chief of
our Lord's Disciples miscarried, by too much confidence in himself, I mean St.
Peter; in whose fall we may all see our own frailty; if God do but permit the
Devil to have the winnowing of us, there will be a great deal of chaff found in
the best of us. What St. Paul said of himself, 2 Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak,
then am I strong, we shall all find true, when it comes to the trial; we are
then strongest, when, in a just sense of our own weakness, we rely most upon
the strength and power of God.

Sixthly, Provided furthermore, that according to our ability we have been much
in the exercise of Alms and Charity. For well-doing, or doing good, is
sometimes taken in a narrower sense, not improper here to be mentioned, though
perhaps not so particularly intended here in the Text, for works of Charity and
Alms. As Heb. 13. 16. But to do good, and to communicate (that is, to the
necessities of the Poor) forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased. This kind of well-doing is a special Preservative in times of Evil;
there is no kind of Grace or Virtue to which there are in Scripture more
special Promises made, of our Protection and Preservation from Evil and
Suffering, of Support and Comfort under them, and Deliverance out of them, than
to this of a Charitable and Compassionate Consideration of those who labor
under want or Suffering. Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall
thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed: And ver. 19. speaking of
Righteous or Merciful Men, They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in
the days of Famine they shall be satisfied. Psalm. 41. 1, 2. Blessed is he that
considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble; the Lord
will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth;
and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his Enemies.

There are likewise in the Apocryphal Books Excellent Sayings for the
encouragement of Charity, as that which will be particularly considered and
rewarded to us in the times of Danger and Distress, in the days of Affliction
and Suffering, Tob. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10. Give Alms of thy substance, and turn not
thy face from any Poor Man, and the face of God shall not be turned away from
thee; if thou have abundance, give Alms accordingly, if thou have but a little,
be no^ afraid to give according to that little, for thou layest up for thy self
a good treasure against the day of necessity, because that Alms do deliver from
death, and suffers not to come into darkness. Ecclus. 3. 31. Speaking of him
that gives Alms, and is ready to do Kindness to others, He is mindful of that
which may come hereafter; and when he falls he shall find a stay. And, Chap.
29. 11, 12, 13. Lay up thy treasure according to the Commandment of the most
High, and it shall bring thee more profit than Gold, shut up alms in thy
storehouses, and it shall deliver thee from all affliction, it shall fight for
thee against thine Enemies, better than a mighty shield, and strong spear.

I have often said it, and am verily persuaded of it, that one of the best
^igns of Gods Mercy and Favor to this poor Nation, is, that God has been
pleased of late years to stir up so general a disposition in Men to works of
Alms and Charity, and thereby to revive the Primitive Spirit of Christianity,
which so eminently abounded in this Grace, and taught those who believed in
God, to be careful to maintain and pract^se good works. And nothing gives me
greater hopes that God has Mercy still in store for us, than that Men are so
ready to show Mercy; there are great Objects to exercise our Charity upon in
this time of the general suspension of Trade and Business, from an apprehension
of approaching troubles; by reason whereof, both the numbers and the
necessities of the Poor are greatly and daily increased among us; and besides
the Poor of our own Nation, God has sent us great numbers from abroad; I mean
those who are fled hither for shelter, from that violent storm of Persecution
which has lately fallen upon them for the Cause of our common Religion.
According to the compassion we show to them, we may expect that God will either
preserve us from the like Sufferings, or graciously support us under them. What
do we know, but that God is now trying us, and has purposely put this
opportunity into our hands, of preventing, or mitigating, or shortning our own
Sufferings, according as we extend our Charity and Pity to those who have
suffered so deeply for the Cause of God, and his truth.

Seventhly, Provided in the last place, and above all, that we be sincere in
our Religion, and endeavor to be universally good, and holy in all manner of
Conversation, and to abound in all the fruits of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God. This is the largest sense of
welldoing, and the most necessary of all the rest, to prepare us for
Sufferings, and to give us Courage and Constancy under them; and likewise to
engage the Providence of God to a tender care of us, and Concernment for us, if
he shall ^ee it fit to bring us into a State of Suffering.

But if we live in open Contempt and Violation of God's Laws, if we make no
Conscience of our Ways and Actions, we cannot possibly have any well grounded
Trust and Confidence in God, for he hates all the workers of iniquity, and his
Providence sets it self against them for evil. Bad Men draw many Mischiefs and
Inconveniences upon themselves, as the Natural Consequence of their Actions;
but besides this, the Vengeance of God haunts and pursues Evildoers, and his
just Providence many times involves them in many Difficulties and Dangers,
besides and beyond the Natural Course of things: Upon the wicked (says David)
he will rain snares: So that as ever we expect the comfortable Effects of the
Divine Care and Providence, we must live in a dutiful Obedience to God's Holy
Will and Laws.

Bad Men may make a Profession of the true Religion, and may in some sort
believe it, though they do not live according to it; and yet perhaps for all
this, out of mere Generosity and Obstinacy of Mind, they cannot bear to be
threatened and terrified out of the Profession of the Truth; and will endure a
great deal of Trouble and Inconvenience, before they will renounce it; knowing
themselves to be so far in the Right, that they stand for the Truth, and hoping
perhaps thereby to make some amends for their bad Practice. But when all is
done, nothing gives a Man true Courage and Resolution, like the Testimony of
our own Hearts, concerning our own Sincerity, and the Conscience of well-doing.
And on the contrary, he that has not the Resolution and Patience to mortify
his Lusts, and to restrain his Appetites, and to subdue his irregular Passions,
for the sake of God and Religion, will not easily bring himself to submit to
great Sufferings upon that Account. There is considerable Difficulty in the
Practice of Religion, and the resolute Course of a Holy Life; but surely it is
much easier to live as Religion requires we should do, than to lay down our
Lives for it; and (as I have told you upon another Occasion) he that cannot
prevail with himself to live like a Saint, will much more hardly be persuaded
to die a Martyr. I proceed to the

Third Point, namely, what ground of Comfort and Encouragement the
Consideration of God under the Notion of a faithful Creator, does afford to us
under all our Sufferings for a good Censcience and a good Cause. Let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him,
in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. And in this I shall be very brief.

And this is a firm ground of Comfort and Encouragement to us, under all our
Sufferings for God, to consider him as the Author of our Beings, or as it is
expressed in the Text, as a faithful Creator; one that is not fickle and
inconstant in his Affection and Kindness to his Creatures; but is true to his
own Design, and will not abandon and forsake the Work of his own Hands: So
great a Benefit as that of our Beings, freely conferred upon us, is but an
earnest of God's further Kindness to us, and Future care of us; if by our ill
Carriage toward him, we do not render our selves unworthy and incapable of it:
That we are God's Creatures, is a Demonstration that he has Kindness for us;
if he had not, he would never have made us; as it is excellently said in the
Wisdom of Solomon, Cap. 11. 23. 24. Thou have mercy upon all, for thou love
all the things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made: For never
would thou have made any thing, if thou had hated it. And ver. 26. Thou
sparest all, for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of Souls.

To whom then may be with so much Confidence commit our selves, as to him who
freely gave us our Being? From whom may we expect so tender a Regard and
Consideration, of our Case, and all the Circumstances of it; as from this great
Founder and Benefactor? For he that made us knows our Frame, and whereof we are
made, and how much we are able to bear; he considers our Strength, or rather
our Weakness, and what Courage and Resolution he has endued us withal, and
what Comfort and Support we stand in need of in the day of Tribulation. And as
they who make Armor, are wont to try that which they think to be good and well
tempered, with a stronger Charge, not to break and hurt it, but to prove and
praise it. So God exercises those whom he has fitted and t^mpered for it,
with manyfold Temptations, that the trial of their faith, as St. Peter
expresses it, 1 Pet. 1. 7. being much more precious th^n of gold tried in the
Fir^, may be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ.

So that this Consideration that we are God's Creatures, does (as I may say)
oblige him in Faithfulness to his own Act, and in Consequence of his bringing
us into Being at first, to be concerned for us afterward, so as never to
abandon us, nor quite to take away his loving kindness and Mercy from us; till
we are good for nothing, and do in a manner cease to be what he made us, that
is Reasonable Creatures. A Person or People must have proceeded to the utmost
degree of degeneracy, when God will consider them no longer as his Creatures,
nor show any Pity or Favor to them; things must be come to extremity, when God
deals thus with us, as he threatened the People of Issr^el, Isa. 27. 11. When
the boughs are withered, they shall be broken off, and set on fire: for it is a
People of no understanding: therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor.

And now I have done with the three Points which I proposed to handle from this
Text, and the Discourse which I have made upon them, does all along apply it
self, by dir^cting us how we ought to commit our selves to the Providence of
God, in all Cases of Danger and Suffering, especially for the Cause of God and
his Truth, viz. in the faithful discharge of our Duty and a good Conscience,
and by a firm Trust and Confidence in the Wisdom and Goodness of the Divine
Providence, not doubting but that he who made us, and knows our frame, will
have a tender Care of us, and not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able.

And as to our present Danger, and that Terrible Storm which threatens us, let
us pray to God, if it be his will, to divert it; but if otherwise he has
determined, to fit and prepare us for it. And let us be fervent and earnest in
our Prayers to him; not that he is moved by our importunity, but that we may
thereby be qualified and made fit to receive the Mercy which we beg of him.

And let us take this Occasion to do that which we should have done without it,
to brea^ off our Sins by Repentance, and to turn every one of us from the evil
of our ways^ that hereby we may render God propitious to us, and put our selves
under the more immediate Care and Protection of his Providence; that we may
prevent his Judgments, and turn away his wrath and displeasure from us, as he
did once from a great and sinful City and People, upon their sincere
Humiliation and Repentance, Jonah 3. 10. where it is said of the People of
Niniveh, That God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he
did it not. Above all, let us be sincere in the profession of our Religion, and
conscientious in the Practice of it; nothing will bear us up under great Trials
and Sufferings, like the testimony of a good Conscience, void of offense
toward God and Men.

I will conclude this whole Discourse with those Apostolical Blessings and
Prayers, Colos. 1. 10, 11. That ye may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious Power, unto all patience, and long-suffering, with
joyfulness. And 2 These. 2. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God
even our Father, who has loved us, and has given us everlasting Consolation
and good hope through Grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every
good word, and work. To him be Glory and Dominion, for Ever, and Ever,

Amen.
A SERMON ON JOHN IX. 4.
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: The night comes
when no man can work.
THese words our Blessed Savior spoke of himself, whilst he was upon Earth; in
which he tells us, that he was sent by God into the World, and had a certain
Work and Employment appointed him during his Abode in it. A great Work indeed!
to instruct, and reform, and save Mankind. A Work of great Labor, and Pains,
and Patience, not to be done in a short time; and yet the time for doing it was
not long after he came into the World: It was a good while before he began it,
and after he began it, the time of Working was not long, before the Night came
and put an End to it: I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is
day: The night comes when no man can work.

But this which our Savior here speaks of himself, and which properly belongs
to him, and no other; may ye^ be accommodated to every Man, with some Allowance
for the Difference and Disproportion. For though every Man be not sent by God
into the World, after so peculiar a manner, and upon so particular and vast a
Design: Yet upon a general Account, every Man is sent by God into this World,
and has a Work given him to do in it, which he is concerned vigorously to mind
and to prosecute with all his Might. And though every Man be not sent to save the
whole World, as the Son of God was, yet every Man is sent by God into the
World, to work out his own Salvation, and to take Care of that in the first
Place, and then to promote the Salvation of others, as much as in him lies. So
that every one of us may, in a very good Sense, accommodate these Words of our
Savior to himself: I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day:
The night comes when no man can work.

I shall therefore at this time take the Liberty to handle these words
according to this moral Accommodation of them, and apply what our Savior here
says of himself to every Man that comes into the World: And this I shall do,
by showing these three things.

First, That every Man has a Work assigned him to do in this World, by him
that sent him into it; and may in some Sense say, as our Blessed Savior did of
himself, I must work the works of him that sent me.

Secondly, That there is a certain and limited time for every Man to do this
Work in. While it is day.

Thirdly, That after this Season is expired, the^e will be no further
Opportunity of working. The Night comes when no man can work.

First, Every Man has a Work assigned him to do in this World, by him that
sent him into it; and may in some sense say, as our Blessed Sav^our did of
himself; I must work the works of him that ^ent me. God who made man a
reasonable Creature, and has endowed him with Faculties, whereby he is capable
of knowing and serving him; has appointed him a Work and Service suitable to
these Faculties: And having infused an immortal Soul into this Earthy Body,
has certainly designed him for a State beyond this Life, in which he shall be
for ever happy or miserable, according as he uses and demeans himself in this
World.

So that the Work which every one of us has to do in this World, is to
prepare, and fit our selves for that Eternal Duration which remains for us
after Death: For the Life which we live now in this World, is a time of
Exercise, a short state of Probation and Trial, in order to a durable and
endless state, in which we shall be immutably ^ixt in another World. This
World, into which we are now sent for a little while, is as it were God's
School, in which immortal Spirits, clothed with Flesh, are trained and bred up
for Eternity; and therefore the best, the only sure way to be happy for ever,
is, so to improve the short and uncertain time of this Life, that we may
approve our selves to God in this World, and enjoy him in the next; or (as St.
Paul expresses it) that having our fruit unto Holiness, our end may be
everlasting Life.

And this Work consists in these three things.

First, In the Care of our own Salvation.

Secondly, In doing what we can, to promote the Salvation of others.

Thirdly, And in order to both these, in the careful Improvement and good
Husbandry of our time.

First, In the Care of our own Salvation. And this consists in two things.

1. In the Worship of Almighty God.

2. In the careful and conscientious Practice and Obedience of his Holy Laws.

1. The Care of our own Salvation consists in the pious and devout Worship of
Almighty God; that we honor him, and pay him that Homage and Respect, which is
due from Creatures to him that made them, and is the great Sovereign, and Judge
of the World; that we have an inward Reverence and Esteem of him, and that we
express this by all solemn externalacknowledgments of him; as by praying to him
for the supply of our Wants; by praising him for all the Blessings and Benefits
which we have received at his Hands; and that we set apart constant and solemn
times for the Performance of these Duties; and that when we are employed in
them, we be serious, and hearty, and attentive to what we are about, and
perform every part of Divine Worship with those Circumstances of Reverence and
Respect, which may testify our awful Sense of the Divine Majesty, and our
inward and profound Veneration of him, with whom we have to do. And this is
that which is directly and properly Religion.

2. This Care of our own Salvation, does consist likewise in the conscientious
and constant Obedience and Practice of all God's Holy Laws, in the Conformity
of our Lives and Actions to the Laws which he has given us, whether they be
natural or written upon our Hearts, or made known to us by the Revelation of
his Word; that we govern our Passions by Reason, and moderate our selves in the
use of sensual Delights, so as not to transgress the Rules of Temperance and
Chastity; that we demean our selves toward others, and converse with them with
Justice and Fidelity, with Kindness and Charity.

These are the Sum of the Divine Laws, and the Heads of our Duty toward our
selves and others; all which are more powerfully enforced upon us, by the
Revelation of the Gospel, and the plain Promises and Threatenings of it; the
Faith of Christ being the most firm and effectual Principle both of Piety
toward God, and of Universal Obedience to all his particular Commands.

And this is the great work which God has sent us to do in the World; so the
Wise Man sums up our Duty, Eccl. 12. 13. Fear God, and keep his commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man. The Fear and Reverence of the Divine
Majesty, is the great Foundation and Principle of Religion, but Obedience to
God's Laws is the Life and Practice of it. God does not expect that we should
spend the greatest part of our time, in the immediate Acts of Religion, and in
the solemn Duties of his Worship and Service, but only that we should allot a
fitting Proportion of our time to these, according to the Circumstances of our
Condition in this World, and the Example of Holy and Good Men that are in the
like Circumstances with our selves: For such is the Goodness of God, that he
does not only allow us to provide for the Necessities and Conveniences of this
Life, but has made it our Duty so to do. It is one of the Precepts of the
Gospel, which the Apostle charge the Bishops and Teachers of the Gospel to
inculcate frequently upon Christians, that they which have believed in God,
should be careful to maintain good works; that is, to employ themselves in the
works of an honest Calling for necessary uses; that is, for the support of
their Families, and the relief of those who are in want and necessity. And the
Apostle lays great weight and stress upon this, as a very great Duty, Tit. 3.
8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works. These things are good and profitable unto Men; that is, of general
benefit and advantage to Mankind.

So that no Man's Calling is a hindrance to Religion, but a part of it; and by
performing the Duties of Piety in their proper Seasons, and spending the rest
of our time in any honest and useful Employment, we may make our whole Life a
perpetual serving of God; we may glorify God in our eating and drinking, and
in all other lawful and useful actions of Life; in serving the Occasions and
Necessities of Life, with Sobriety and Temperance, and in managing our Worldly
Commerce with Justice and Integrity, we may serve God, and perform considerable
Duties of Religion.

So that provided we do nothing that is sinful, and manage the Actions and
Concernments of this Life, with a due regard and subserviency to the great
interests of Eternity, we may do the work of God all the while we are providing
for our selves, and employed in the works of an honest Calling: For God, who
has designed this Life in order to the other, considers the necessities of our
present state, and allows us to make provision for it.

There are some Persons indeed, whose Birth and Condition sets them above the
common Employments of Life, and the Works of an ordinary Calling: But these
also have a work given them to do; for God has sent no Man into the World to
no purpose, and only to take his pastime therein; neque enim ita generati sumus
a natura, ut ad ludum and jocum facti esse videamur; sed ad severitatem potius,
and quaedam studia graviora atque majora; for ^e are not (says Tully de Off.
Lib. 1.) so framed by Nature, as if we were made for sport and jest; but for
more serious Employments, and for greater and weightier business; and those who
are tied to no particular Calling, may allow so much larger portions of their
time to Religion, and the Service of God; and God likewise expects from them,
that they should be useful to Mankind in some higher and nobler way, according
to the publickness of their station, and influence. Such Persons may be
serviceable to their Country, and the Affairs of Government, and in the care of
public Justice, and may employ their time in preparing and rendering themselves
more fit for this Service. They may find a great deal of work to do in the good
government of their Families, and in the prudent care and management of their
Estates, and in reconciling differences among their Neighbors, and in
considering the necessities of the Poor, and providing for their supply.

So that besides the proper work of Religion, and the more immediate Service of
God, every Man in the World, how exempt soever his Condition be from the common
care an^gdrudgery of Humane Life, may find work e^ough wherein he may usefully
employ all his time, and provide for his own, and for the common benefit of
Mankind: And God expects it as a Duty from such, that every Man should employ
himself in some work or other, suitable to the station in which God has placed
him in this World.

Secondly, The work which God has given us to do in the World, consists in
doing what we can to further and promote the Salvation of others: This chiefly
lies upon us, who are the Ministers of God, and to whom the word of
Reconciliation is committed. We are more especially Commissioned and Appointed
for this work, and are Ambassadors for Christ, to beseech Men in his stead to
be reconciled to God. We are sent by God in a more peculiar manner, and
appointed for this very work, to watch for Men's Souls, and to be the
Instruments and Means of their Eternal Happiness. And therefore we who are sent
by God in a more peculiar manner, and have this work assigned to us to do in
the World, ought to be very vigorous and industrious in i^ ^ And this, whether
we consider the Nature of our Employment, or the Glorious Reward of it.

First, If we consider the Nature of our Employment, both in respect of the
Honor and the Happiness of it; it is the most Honorable work that Mortal Man
can be employed in; it is the same in kind, and in the main end and design o^ it
with that of the Blessed Angels, for we also are Ministering Spirits, sent forth
by God to Minister, for the good of those who shall be heirs of Salvation. We
are the Messengers and Ambassadors of God to Men, sent to treat with them about
the terms of their Peace and Reconciliation with God, to offer Salvation to
them, and to direct them to the best ways and means of procuring it. Nay, we
have the Honor to be employed in the very same work that the Son of God was,
when he was upon Earth, to see^ and to save them that are lost; and to call
Sinners to Repentance; and to carry on that work, whereof he himself said the
Foundation when he was in the World. And what greater Honor can be put upon
the Sons of Men, than to help forward that glorious Design and Undertaking of
the Son of God, for the Salvation of Mankind.

And it is an Employment no less Happy than Honorable; it is not to drudge about
the mean and low Concernments of this Life, a perpetual toil and care about
what we shall eat and drink, and wherewithal we shall be clothed, which is the
business of a Worldly Employment; but it is a direct and immediate seeking of
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and a continual endeavor to promote
these. It does not consist in the labor of our Body, and in Bodily toil; but
in the delightful exercise of our Minds, about the best and noblest Objects,
God, and Heaven, and Eternity; in an earnest and faithful endeavor by all wise
ways and means to gain Souls to God, and to turn Sinners from the error of
their ways, and to prevent their Eternal Ruin and Destruction; and next to the
procuring of our own Happiness, to be instrumental to the Happiness of others,
which is certainly the most pleasant and noble work that we can possibly be
employed in; especially if we consider, that by the very nature of our
Employment, we do at the same time, and by the very same means, carry on both
these designs, of the Salvation of our selves, and others. So St. Paul tells
Timothy, when he exhorts him upon this very Consideration, to give himself
wholly to this Blessed Work; because, says he, in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4. 16. And when two of the
greatest and best designs in the World, our own Happiness, and the Salvation of
others, do so happily meet in one, and are jointly carried on by the same
labor; this ought to be a great spur and incitement to us, to be vigorous and
unwearied, and abundant in the work of the Lord; and a mighty encouragement to
us to preach the word, to be instant in season, and out of season, and to be
Examples to others, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith,
in Purity; as St. Paul charge Timothy in the most solemn and awful manner,
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing, and his Kingdom, 1 Timothy 4. 12. and 2 Timothy 4. 1. And then,

Secondly, If we consider the glorious Reward of this work. If we be Faithful
and Industrious in it, it will advance us to a higher degree of Glory and
Happiness in the other World: They that be wise (says the Prophet, Dan. 12. 3.)
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. They that are industrious in
this work, as they are worthy of double honor in this World, so they shall
shine with a double glory and luster in the other.

But though this work of promoting the Salvation of others, be chiefly incumbent
upon those whose Office it is to attend upon this very thing; yet we are all of
us concerned in it, according to the advantages and opportunities we have for
it. Every Man is concerned to help forward the Salvation of his Brother, and
not to let him perish, if he can help it; and it is in every Man's power to
contribute something to this Blessed Work of saving others, by seasonable
Counsel and Advice, by kind and gentle reproof, but especially by a Holy and
Exemplary Conversation, by a shining Virtue, which has a silent power of
persuasion, and I know not what secret charm and attraction to draw and allure
others to the imitation of it.

Thirdly, And in order to both these, the saving of our selves, and others,
this work which God has given us to do in the World, consists in the careful
use and good husbandry of our time; for without this, neither of the other can
be promoted and carried on to any purpose. Time is the season and opportunity
of carrying on of any work, and for that reason is one of the most valuable
things; and yet nothing is more wastfully spent, and more prodigally squandred
away by a great part of Mankind than this, which next to our Immortol Souls is
of all other things most precious; because upon the right use or abuse of our
time, our Eternal Happiness or Misery does depend. Men have generally some
guard upon themselves, as to their Money and Estates, and will not with eyes
open suffer others to rob and deprive them of it; but we will let any body
almost rob us of our time, and are contented to expose this precious Treasure
to every bodies rapine and extortion; and can quietly look on, whilst Men
thrust in their hands, and take it out by whole handfuls, as if it were of no
greater value than Silver was in Solomon's days, no more than the stones in the
street. And yet when it is gone, all the Silver and Gold in the World cannot
purchase and fetch back the least moment of it, when perhaps we would give all
the World for a very small part of that time, which we parted with upon such
cheap and easy terms.

Good God! what a stupid and senseless Prodigality is this! do we consider what
we do, when we give away such large portions of our time to our ease and
pleasure, to diversion and idleness, to trifling and unprofitable Conversation,
to the making and receiving of impertinent visits, and the usual and almost
inseparable attendants thereof, spiteful observations upon them that are
present, and slandering and backbiting those that are absent; (For the great
design of most People in visits, is not to better one another, but to spy and
make faults, and not to mend them; to get time off their hands, to show their
fine Clothes, and to recommend themselves to the mutual contempt of one
another, by a plentiful impertin^nce;) when we part with it by wholesale in
sleep and dressing, and can spend whole Mornings between the Comb and the
Glass, and the Afternoon at Plays, and whole Nights in Gaming, or in Riot, and
Lewdness, and Intemperance; in all which People commonly wast their Money and
their time together!

Nay how do even the best of us misplace this precious Treasure; and though we do
not employ it to wicked purposes, and in Works of Iniquity, yet we do not apply
it to the best and noblest use, to the Glory of God, and the Good and Salvation
of Men! By thus laying out this Treasure, we might lay up for our selves
treasures in heaven, and help others on in the Way thither.

Thus our Blessed Savior employed his precious time, in going about doing
good, in all kinds and upon all Occasions, healing the Bodies, and enlightening
the Minds, and saving the souls of men: This was his Business, and this was his
delight; it was his meat and drink, and his very Life, he spent himself in it,
and sacrificed his Ease, and his Safety, and his Life to these great Ends, for
which he came into the World; he considered the Goodness and the Greatness of
his work, and the little time he had to do it in, which made him incessantly
industrious in it, and to run the Race which was set before him with great
speed, and to work while it was day, because he knew the night would come when
no man can work. And this brings me to the

Second thing, I observed from the Text, namely, that there is a certain and
limited time for every man to do this Work in, while it is day: I must work the
works of him that sent me, whilst it is day. And this day comprehends all the
Oportunities of our Life, which will soon be over, and therefore had need to be
well spent. A great part of our Life is past, before the Season of Working
begins; it is a great while before the use of our Reason begins, and we come to
have our Senses exercised to discern between Good and Evil; before our
Understandings are ripe for the serious Consideration of God and Religion, and
for the due Care of our Souls, and of the Eternal Concernment of another World;
so that this first part of our Life is in a great Measure useless, and
unprofitable to us, in regard to our great Design. For Infancy and Childhood
are but the Dawnings of this Day, and no fit time to work in; and Youth, which
is as the Morning of this day, though it is the Flower of our Time, and the most
proper season of all other for the Remembrance of God, and the Impressions of
Religion; yet it is usually possessed by Vanity and Vice; the common Custom and
Practice of the World, has devoted this best part of our Age to the worst
Employments, to the Service of Sin and of our Lusts. How very few are there
that lay hold of this Opportunity, and employ it to the best Purposes! And yet
the following Course of our Lives, does in a great measure depend upon it; for
most Persons do continue and hold on in the Way in which they set out at first,
whether it be good or bad. And those who neglect to improve this first
Opportunity of their Lives, do seldom recover themselves afterward. God's
Grace may seize upon Men in any part of their Lives; but according to the most
ordinary Methods of it, the Foundations and Principles of Religion and Virtue
are most commonly laid in a pious and virtuous Education. This is the great
Opportunity of our Lives, which setleth and fixes most Men, either in a good
or bad Course; and the Fortune of their whole Lives does usually follow it, and
depend upon it.

It Is true indeed our Day continues many times a great while longer, and we are
to work while it continues; and it is never too late to begin to do well, and to
enter upon a good Course: but there is no such proper and advantageous Season
for the beginning of this work, as in our youth and tender years. This is the
accepted time, this is the day of salvation. God's Grace is then most forward
and ready to assist us; and we are then least of all indisposed for the
receiving of the Impressions of it; and the Impressions of it do then go
deepest into our minds, and are most lasting and durable. But if we neglect
this Opportunity, we provoke God by Degrees to withdraw his Grace, and to take
away his holy Spirit from us, and by degrees we settle in vicious Habits, and
are every day more and more hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. It is
never too late to work while the day lasts; but the sooner we begin this work,
and set about it in good earnest, the easier we shall find it; if we defer it
late, every step will be up the Hill, and against the Grain.

Thirdly, After this Season is expired, there will be no ^urther Opportunity of
working; when this day is once at an end, then comes the night when no man can
work. The Night is a time unfit for work, when we can hardly do any thing, if
we had never so great mind to it; and there is such a Night coming upon every
one of us, and Woe be to us if we have our work to do when the Night overtakes
us.

There is usually an Evening before this Night, when it will be very difficult
for us, and next to impossible, to do this work; and this is the time of
Sickness and Old Age, in which men are commonly unfit for any work; but most of
all that which requires the whole force and vigor of our Minds, the business
of Religion. If we attempt this work then, we shall go very heartlesly about
it, and do it very imperfectly, and be forced to slubber it over, and to huddle
it up in great haste and confusion, and so as we can hardly hope that God will
accept it. For how unfit are Men to do any thing, when they are full of the
Sense of their own Infirmities, and Life it self is become so great a Burden
to them, that they are hardly fit to stand under it! how incapable shall we
then be of doing the greatest and most momentous work of our Lives, when our
Faculties are almost quite spent and worn out, and all the Powers of Life ar^
decayed in us; when our Understandings are dark and dull, our Memories frail
and treacherous, and our hearts hard and deceitful above all things! When
Sickness and old Age overtake us, we shall then find to our sorrow, that
sufficient for that day is the evil thereof; we shall have need then of nothing
else to do, but to bear our Infirmities with patience and decency; and it is
well if we can rally together of the broken Forces of our Reason, so much as
may be a sufficient Guard to us against Peevishness and Discontent; we had need
then have nothing else to do, but to be old and weak, to be sick and die.

Besides, how can we expect that God should accept of any work that we do at
such a time? with what face can we put off God with the dregs of our Life? or
how can we hope that he will be pleased with the service of those years, which
we our selves take no pleasure in? if we offer the lame in Sacrifice, is it not
evil? and if we offer the blind, is it not evil? offer it now to thy Governor,
and see if he will be pleased with thee?

And Sickness is commonly as bad a time as Old Age, and usually in^umber'd with
greater Difficulties, and clogged with more Indispositions. If a violent
Distemper seize upon us, it many times takes away the use of our Reason, and
deprives us of all opportunity of Consideration; it makes us both insensible of
the danger of our Condition, and incapable of using the means to avoid it. And
if we have neglected Religion before, and have put off the great work of our
Life to the end of it, our opportunity is irrevocably lost; for there is
nothing to be done in Religion, when our Reason is once departed from us; the
night is then come indeed, and darkness has overtaken us; and though we be still
alive, yet are we as unfit for any work, as if we were naturally dead.

And this is no such rare and extraordinary Case; for it happens to many; and
every Man that wilfully defers the work of Religion and Repentance to a hour,
has Reason to fear that he shall be thus surprised in his Sin, and Security,
and by the just Judgment of God deprived of all the opportunity of Life and
Salvation, while he is yet in the Land of the Living.

But if God be more merciful unto us, and visit us with such a Sickness, as
leaves us the use of our Understandings; yet all that we do in Religion at such
a time, proceeds from so violent a Cause, from the present terror of Death, and
the dreadful apprehension of that Eternal Misery which is just ready to swallow
us up, that it is one of the hardest things in the World, not only for others,
but even for our selves, to know whether our Resolutions, and this sudden and
hasty Fit of Repentance be sincere or not. For it is natural, and almost
unavoidable, for a Man to Repent and be sorry for what he has done, when he is
going to Execution: But the Great Question is, what this Man would do, if
his-Life were spared? whether his Repentance would hold good, and he would
become a new Man, and change his former course of Life, or relapse into it
again? And it is by no means certain, that he would not be as bad as he was
before: Because we see many, who, when they lie upon a Sick Bed, give all
imaginable testimony of a deep Sorrow, and a hearty Repentance for their Sins,
who yet upon their Recovery return to their former Sins with a greater
appetite, and make themselves ten times more the Children of wrath than they
were before. So that all the work that we can do at such a time, ought not to
be much reckoned upon, and can give us little or no Comfort; because it is so
infinitely uncertain whether it be real and sincere, and whether the effect of
so violent a Cause would last and continue, if the Cause were removed.
Therefore we should work while it is day; for whatever we do in this Evening of
our Lives, will be done with very great difficulty, and with very doubtful
success.

But besides this Evening, there is a night coming when no man can work; Death
will seize upon us, and then our state will be irrecoverably concluded; after
that it will be impossible for us to do any thing toward our own Salvation, or
to have any thing done for us by others; the Prayers of the living will not
avail the dead, as the Tree falls so it lies; there is no wisdom, nor counsel,
nor device in the grave whither we are going; therefore, according to the
Counsel of the Wise Man, what our hand finds to do, let us do it with our
might.

This Counsel concerns all Ages and Persons. I will apply it to the young, in
the words of the wise Preacher, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when
thou sh^lt say, I have no pleasure in them. To them who are in the vigor of
their Age, in the words of the Prophet, Isa. Chapter 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he
may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. And to them that are old, in
the words of another Prophet, Jer. 13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God,
before he causes darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark
Mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness. And let us every one of us, of what Age or
Condition soever, apply it to our selves, in the words of our Blessed Savior
here in the Text, I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is Day:
the Night comes, when no Man can work.

FINIS.

