TO THE KING AND Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT The Suffering Condition of the
peaceable People, called QUAKERS, Only for tender Conscience toward Almighty
God, Humbly Presented.
Showing, That of late above One Thousand five Hundred of the said People (both
Men and Women) having been detained Prisoners in England, and part of them in
Wales (some of which being since discharged by the Judges, and others freed by
Death, through their long and tedious Imprisonment) there are now remaining
(according to late Accounts) about One Thousand, three Hundred, Eighty and
Three, above Two Hundred of them Women. Many under Sentence of Praemunire (both
Men and Women) and more than Three Hundred near it; not for denying the Duty,
or refusing the substance of Allegiance it self, but only because they dare not
Swear: Many on Writs of Excommunication, and Fines for the King, and upon the
Act for Banishment. Besides above Three Hundred and Twenty have Dyed in Prison
and Prisoners since the Year 1660. near One Hundred whereof by means of this
long Imprisonment (as it is judged) since the Account delivered to the late King
and Parliament, in 1680. thereby making Widows and Fatherless, and leaving
them in Distress and Sorrow: The two last hard Winters Restraint, and the close
Confinement of great Numbers in diverse Goals, unavoidably tending toward their
Destruction, their Healths being evidently impaired thereby.

And here in London, the Goal of Newgate has been from time to time crowded,
within these two years, (sometimes near Twenty in one Room) to the Prejudice of
their Health; and several poor innocent Tradesmen, of late, have been so
suffocated by the closeness of the Prison, that they have been taken out sick
of a Malignant Fever, and dyed in a few days after.

Besides these long continued and Destructive Hardships upon the Persons of Men
and Women, as aforesaid, great Violences, outrageous Distresses, and woeful
Havoc and Spoil have been, and still are frequently made upon our Goods and
Estates, both in and about this City of London, and other parts of this Nation,
by a company of Idle Extravagant and Merciless Informers, and their
Prosecutions upon the Conventicle Act, many being convicted and fined
Vnsummoned and Unheard in their own defense. As also on Qui Tam Writs, at the
Suit of Informers (who prosecute for one third part for themselves) and on
other Processes, for Twenty Pound a Month, and Two Thirds of Estates, seized
for the King: All tending to the Ruin of Trade, Husbandry and Farmers, and the
Impoverishing of many Industrious Families, without Compassion shown to
Widows, Fatherless or Desolate. To some not a Bed left to rest upon; to
others, no Cattle to till their Ground, nor Corn for Bread or Seed, nor Tools
to Work withal: The said Informers and Sheriffs Bailiffs in some places being
Outrageous and Excessive in their Distresses and Seizures, breaking into
Houses, and making great Waste and Spoil. And all these and other Severities
done against us by them, under pretense of serving the King and the Church,
thereby to force us to a Conformity, without inward Conviction or Satisfaction
of our tender Consciences, wherein our Peace with God is concerned, which we
are very tender of.

The Statutes on which we, the said People suffer Imprisonment, Distress and
Spoil, are as follows.

The 5th of Eliz. chap. 23. De Excommunicato Capiendo. The 23d of Eliz. chapter 1.
for twenty Pound per Month. The 29th of Eliz. chapter 6. for Continuation. The
35th of Eliz. chapter 1. for Abjuring the Realm, on pain of Death. The 1st of Eliz.
chapter 2. for twelve pence a Sunday. The 3d of K. James 1. chapter 4. for Praemunire,
Imprisonment during Life, and Estates confiscated. The 13th and 14th of K.
Charles 2. against Quakers, etc. Transportation. The 22d of K. Charles 2. chapter
1. against Seditious Conventicles. The 17th of K. Charles 2. chap. 2. against
Non-Conformists. The 27th of Hen. 8. chapter 20. some few suffer thereupon.
Upon Indictments at Common Law, pretended and framed against our peaceable
Religious Assemblies, for Riots, Routs, Breach of the Peace, etc. Many, both
Men and Women, thereupon fined, imprisoned and detained for Non-payment, some
till Death. Instance the City of Bristol, what a great Number have been these
diverse years straightly confined and crowded in Goal, mostly above One Hundred on
such pretense, about Seventy of them Women, many aged. And in the City of
Norwich, in the years 1682, and 83. about Seventy kept in hold, Forty Five
whereof in Holes and Dungeon, for many weeks together, and great Hardships have
been, and are in other places. So that such our peaceable Meetings are
sometimes fined on the Conventicle Act, as for a Religious Exercise, and other
times at common Law, as Riotous, Routous, etc. when nothing of that Nature
could ever be proved against them, there being nothing of Violence or Injury
either done, threatened or intended against the Person or Property of any other
whatsoever.

The during and tedious Imprisonments are chiefly on the Writs De Excommunicato
Capiendo, upon the Judgment of Praemunire, and upon Fines, said to be for the
King.

The great Spoil and excessive Distresses and Seizures, are chiefly upon the
Conventicle Act, and for Twenty Pound a Month, Two Thirds of Estates, and on
Qui Tam Writs. In some Counties, diverse have suffered by Seizures and
Distresses above eight years last past, and Writs lately issued out for further
Seizures in several Counties, for Twenty Pound a Month, amounting to the Value
of many Thousands of Pounds, sometimes seizing for eleaven Months at once, and
making Sale of all Goods and Chattels, within Doors and without, both of
Household Goods, Beds, Shop-Goods, Movables, Cattle, etc. and prosecution
hereupon still continued, and in diverse Counties much increased. So that
several, who have long employed some Hundreds of poor Families in Manufacture,
and paid considerable Taxes to the King, are greatly disabled from both, by
these Writs and Seizures, as well as by long Imprisonments. So many
Serge-makers of Plymouth, as kept above five Hundred poor People at work,
disabled by Imprisonment: Many in the County of Suffolk, under a long
Imprisonment, sentenced to a Praemunire, one whereof employed at least Two
Hundred poor People in the Woollen Manufacture, when at liberty. Omitting other
Instances, that we may not seem too tedious, these may evince how Destructive
such Severities are to Trade and Industry, and Ruinous to many poor Families.

On the Conventicle Act, within these two years last past, many in and about
this City of London, have been extremely oppressed, impaired and spoiled in
their Estates and Trades, upon Numerous Convictions and Warrants made against
them in their Absence, upon the credit of Informations sworn by concealed
Informers, diverse of them Impudent Women, who swear for their profit in part of
the Fines and Seizures, their Husbands being Prisoners for Debt, through their
own Extravagancies. The Warrants commonly made to break open and enter Houses,
which is done with Rigor and great Spoil, not sparing Widows, Fatherless or
poor Families, who are sustained by their daily care and industry, not leaving
them a Bed to rest upon: The Fines upon one Justice's Warrants amounting to
many Hundreds of Pounds: frequently Ten Pound a Warrant, and two Warrants at
once for Twenty Pound executed upon one Person: and three Warrants at once from
another Justice, for Sixty Pound upon another Person, and all his Goods carried
away in about Ten Cart-Loads; and five Warrants at once for Fifty Pound upon
another, etc. besides what we have suffered by others in the like kind. And in
this Destructive Course the Informers have Encouragement, and are suffered
still to go on, to the Ruining many Families in their Trades and Livelihoods;
diverse so discouraged and disabled, that they are forced to give over their
Shops and Trades.

These Informers being accepted for credible Witnesses, yet Parties, Swearing
for their own Profit and Gain, in the absence of the Persons prosecuted; This
we think is very hard, and undue Proceeding, and not consistent with Common Law
or Justice

As also Convicting and Fining us upon their Depositions, Vnsummon'd and
Unheard in our own defense, and so keeping us ignorant of our Accusers (unless
upon Traverse of our Appeals) This Procedure appears contrary to the Law (a) of
God, common Justice and Equity, and to the Law and Justice of the ancient
Romans, (b) and of Nations. (a) Deuteronomy. 19.17, 18. John 7.51. Prove. 26.2. Job
29.16, 17. Genesis 3.8. Judges 19.30. (b) Acts 25.5, 7, 8, 10, 16.

And although it has been openly manifested, upon trial of Appeals at several
Quarter Sessions, both for Middlesex and London, and other places, that the
Depositions of diverse Informers have been false in Fact, yet the great trouble
and charge in the Traverse of Appeals, and the great encouragement Informers
have from Him who grants the most Warrants, has been a discouragement to many
from seeking such difficult Remedy, considering also the treble Costs against
the Appellant, in case he succeeds not, or is not acquitted upon Trial: Whereas
there is no Costs nor Restitution awarded or given against the Informers, for
unjust Prosecution. Some also having refused to grant Appeals, others denied
Copies of Warrants to prevent Appeals: Which, whether this be equal or just,
pray consider, ye that are Wise and Judicious Men? And whether it be for the
King's Honor and the Peoples Interest, that Idle, Drunken, Extravagant
Informers should either be encouraged or suffered to go on thus to Ruin Trade,
Husbandry and Families, or to command and threaten Justices of Peace, with the
Forfeiture of an Hundred Pound, if they do not make Convictions, and issue out
Warrants upon their bare Informations and uncertain Depositions, frequently in
the absence of the Accused.

And Lastly, One third part of the Fines being assigned to the King, he can
only Remit that, but the Informers and Poor being assigned two third parts,
seems not to allow him to Remit them, how much cause so ever may appear to him,
to extend his Favor in that case: Is not this against the King's Prerogative,
to restrain his Sovereign Clemency? And how far it Reflects upon the
Government, and is Scandalous thereto, for Beggarly Rude Informers (some of
them Confident Women) not only to command, threaten and disquiet Justices,
Peace-Officers, etc. but to destroy the King's honest industrious and peaceable
Subjects, in their Properties and Estates, is worthy of your serious
Considerations? And whether the said Conventicle-Act ought not therefore justly
to be Repealed? A noted Instance of the like case, we have, concerning the
Statute of the 11 Hen. 7. chapter 3. (for determining certain Offenses and
Contempts, only upon Informers Prosecutions) being Repealed in the first year
of K. Hen. 8. chapter 6. though that, in some respects, was more tolerable than this.

Be pleased to make our case your own, and Do to us, as you would be done unto;
as you would not be Oppressed or Destroyed in your Persons or Estates, nor have
your Properties Invaded and Posterities Ruined for Serving and Worshipping
Almighty God (that made all Mankind) according to your Persuasions and
Consciences, but would, no doubt, enjoy the Liberty thereof: So we entreat you
to allow the same Liberty to Tender Consciences, that live peaceably under the
Government, as you would enjoy your selves; and to Disannul the said
Conventicle Act, and to Stop these devouring Informers, and also take away all
Sanguinary Laws, Corporal and Pecuniary Punishments, merely on the score of
Religion and Conscience; and let not the Ruin and Cry of the Widow, Fatherless
and Innocent Families lie upon this Nation, nor at your Door, who have not only
a great Trust Reposed in you for the Prosperity and Good of the whole Nation,
but also do profess Christianity, and the tender Religion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And notwithstanding all these long sustained Extremities, we the said
suffering People, do solemnly profess and declare in the sight of the
All-seeing God, who is the Searcher of Hearts, That as we have never been found
in any Seditious or Treasonable Designs (they being wholly contrary to our
Christian Principle and Profession) so we have nothing but Good Will and true
Christian Affection to the King and Government, sincerely desiring His and Your
Safety, Prosperity and Concurrence in Mercy and Truth, for the good of the
whole Kingdom.

Having thus given you, in short, the general state of our Suffering Case, in
matter of Fact, without Personal Reflection, We, in Christian Humility, and for
Christ's sake, Entreat, that you will Tenderly and Charitably consider of the
Premises, and find out some Effectual Expedient or Way for our Relief from
Prisons, Spoil and Ruin.


