A CALL TO THE SHULAMITE: OR To the Scattered and Divided Members OF THE CHURCH.

Delivered and Published upon occasion.

By THOMAS TANNER.

Cant. 8. 8, 9. We have a little Sister, and she has no Breasts, [not able to
bear the discipline of the married Wife] what shall we do for our Sister in the
day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall [united within her self] we
will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a door [that will admit
Us] we will enclose her with boards of Cedar. LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark,
for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's, 1674.

To the Honorable, The Lady URITH POLE, The Virtuous Consort of Sir COURTENAY
POLE, Baronet, Colonel-General of the Eastern Division of Devon, a Member of
the Parliament, etc.
MADAM,
YOur Ladyship heard this Call of the Shulamite with a pious sympathy, and
compassion; and since it took so well with you in the hearing, the first view
of it is in gratitude returned to Your Ladiship's hand, and eye, that you may
try whether it be not the same that it was. And because this Call did not
sound alike to every ear, but was judged of, as every head was more clear, or
full of pre-possession: and could not reach to others, to whom it was more
especially intended, but by the Eccho's of a sinister report: I must confess I
was not hard to be induced upon some persuasion, to let it go unto the Press,
that I might have a few Copies to distribute among some of these (in hope that
their apprehensions might be some ways rectified, or reduced by them) without
any further trouble to my self. So praying to Your Ladyship an increase of all
the blessings of this life; and at last, that full of years, and good works
(which are your only studies) You may sweetly drop into a better; being that,
that You do infinitely more desire. I humbly beg Your Ladiship's pardon, and
protection too,

MADAM, Your very humble and obliged Servant, Tho. Tanner.

A CALL TO THE SHULAMITE.
Cant. 6. 13. Return, return, o Shulamite, return, return, that we may look
upon thee: what shall ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two
armies.
LET us take that for granted, which will hardly be denied us on any hand (or
if it be, the majority of Interpreters will overruled it) that this Song of
Excellency sets forth the passionate desires of the Church after Christ, and
the most affectionate returns of Christ himself toward Her. But in the words
which I have read, he does not only show his own affection in his Call after
the wandering Shulamite, but that of his Body too, which is the same Christ
mystical; saying, Return, return, that we may look upon thee; plainly
intimating that there is more than one in this Call: And no one will deny, or
doubt, but that the ingeminating of the words does express the greater ardour
and elegancy of intention. Wherefore for the better opening of the words, let
us 1. consider the Call, what it is, viz. to return, 2. The Person called, who
she is, viz. the Shulamite. 3. The End, that we may look upon thee. 4. The
Answer of the Shulamite: what will ye see in the Shulamite? 5. The Rejoinder:
as it were the company of two Armies.

First, for the Call what it is; It is to return, implying that the Shulamite
was some time before in the right way, if she had but held it: Else it had been
rather said, Come hither, come hither, o Shulamite: but it is, Return, return:
she had left the way that before she was engaged in: And the ingemination in
the Call seems to import, that since she went off, she occasioned much
trouble to the Church, and as much inconveniency to her self; so that the
saving of more trouble to the Church was a just motive to make her call out
unto the Shulamite; and the compassion of her made it more intense and earnest:
for the Church loved the Shulamite, and wished her well-doing, even as her own.

Secondly, for the person called therefore, and called the Shulamite, who or
what was she? some understand her to be the Church of the Gentiles, called upon
by the Synagogue, or Church of the Jews to return, that is, to join her self to
the Jewish Congregation, and to worship with her: but as we hinted before,
Return signifies, that the Shulamite was once in the right way; which could not
be said of the Gentiles in the time of Solomon, if at any time before. Others
therefore take the Shulamite to be the beloved wife of Solomon, and that her
name does seem to be framed out of his, for the more ingratiating of Shelomoh
with Shulamith, and Shulamith with Shelomoh, (...)
(as if he had called her the Shelomoh, but one entirely with my self.) This
Shulamite is therefore thought to be the Daughter of Pharaoh, who to gain the
greater power with her Husband, became Proselyte to the Jewish Church; but
being her self unstedfast in the Covenant, proved an occasion to draw away the
heart of Solomon to worship in the High places, wherewith the Lord was
offended. Thus we find in Scripture, that from diverse literal and historical
hints of passages many things purely spiritual, and mystical, have been
extended to a more general, and universal intention, and so conveyed to the
Church: which we see almost in all the types relating to our Savioir Christ, as
they are exhibited and exemplified in the New Testament. Let the Shulamite
(then) be the diverted Proselyte, once a Member of the true Church; and let
this voice, Return, return, be either that of Solomon, converted from his own
error, and now calling upon the Shulamite (in the name of Christ) and longing
to reclaim her; Or that of the Daughters of Jerusalem (in the name of the true
Church) longing also to regain her. Return, return, o Shulamite, from thy
High Places, and from thy diverse Worships, according to thine own inventions,
and readjoyn thy self to us, Return, return.

Thirdly, To this end, That we may look upon thee: that is, that we may both
contemplate and admire thy taking beauty, and enjoy it as our own, even as we
did before. Return, o Shulamite, return; we acknowledge the splendour of thy
virtues; oh that they were ours once again! we adore thy piety; oh that it were
well informed! we admire the variety of thy gifts and graces, which are thy
rare embellishments; oh that thou may not have received them to thine own,
and our prejudice! Return, o Shulamite, return, that we may look upon thee in
such a manner as we earnestly desire, viz. as our own entirely, without
division.

Fourthly, Then we have the Answer of the Shulamite: what shall ye see in the
Shulamite? It seems to be a kind of shye and coy answer, cast (as it were) with
half a look; as if she had said, I know well enough that you do but compliment
and flatter with me; you have no such opinion of my accomplishments and
beauties as you pretend, nor any such desire of my company; why should you
dissemble so? for what can you see in the Shulamite that can be taking unto
you, that are of another way, and fancy other looks than such as the
Shulamites? Some do join the latter part to this: as it were the company of two
armies, viz. that are jealous of one another: (q. d.) If I should return again
to you, we should never be satisfied one in the other, we should be always at
debate and ready to break out into battles: Better asunder as we are!

Fifthly, But I take these last words, as the Rejoinder of the true Church, or
daughters of Jerusalem replying again to the Shulamite; If thou will but return
unto us, we shall be strong, as it were the company of two armies against a
common enemy: or we shall make a beauteous or a splendid show, even as one Army
drawn up into two Divisions, when the Prince is to pass thorough them in
triumphant manner, as is used after Victory. Return, return therefore, o
Shulamite, return, return, that we may behold thy beauty, enjoy thy love, and
join thy strength and thine array to ours, and we shall be both happy.

The result of the words, thus opened, is only this.

That the true Church does earnestly desire the return of her Doct.
scattered and divided Members.

When God had stirred up his people to unite and join themselves from all parts
against the Canaanites, is there not mention made of Ephraim, and Benjamin, and
Zebulun, and Issachar, and Nepthall, that assembled? But is it not also said,
for the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts or impressions Judge. 5.
etc.
of heart; for the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart;
that is, much trouble and sorrow, much enquiring what the reason should be,
that Reuben should so divide it self from the body of the Holy People? And why
should Gilead abide beyond Jordan, and Dan remain in ships? why should Asher
continue in his Ports or Creeks?

When the ten Tribes did rend themselves from the obedience of the Sons of
David, and from the Worship of the true Temple, built by Solomon according unto
God's appointment, do we not read of such complaints as these? Israel was
holiness Jer. 2. 3, 5.
unto the Lord, and what iniquity, says the Lord, have your fathers found in
me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are
become vain? O Israel return Hos. 14. 1. etc.
unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take unto you
words, and return unto the Lord.

And is not this the great Promise to support the spirits of the true
Worshippers? I will gather my Plock; I will set up Jer. 23. 3. 4.
shepherds over them. Because ye are all become dross, behold I will therefore
gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. And abundance of such other Prophecies,
which may be more close and pertinent, is to be left to your observations, when
you read the holy Scriptures.

To come to the times of the New Testament, when there were divisions in the
Church of Corinth, does not Paul protest after this manner. I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of 1 Cor. 1. 10. etc.
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that there be no
divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind,
and in the same judgment. To the Church of the Galatians thus: I marvel that ye
are so soon Gal. 1. 6, 7.
removed from him, that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel; which is not another, but that there be some that trouble you. O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? To Gal. 3. 1]
the Ephesians thus: I the prisoner of the Lord beseech you that Ephesians. 4. 1, etc.
ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, endeavoring to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; for there is one Body, and one
Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc. To the Philippians thus: If
there be any consolation Phil. 2. 1. etc.
in Christ fulfill my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind. Let as many as be perfect Phil. 3. 15, 16.
be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto them. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. It might but seem superfluous to
run through the rest of the Epistles, which are all full of the like
expressions.

To proceed to the times succeeding the Apostles, while yet the Church was
under persecution. About the year of our Lord 199. Because the Eastern Churches
held resolutely to the observation of the Feast of Easter, at the same time
that the Jews kept the Passover; which the Western Christians were offended at,
not because they doubted whether the Feast should be celebrated in memory of
our Saviors resurrection (which it seems had been always used, without any
interruption from the times of the Apostles) but because they thought it not
convenient to have this day kept on any other than that when our Savior rose;
whereas if they had observed the falling of the 14th Moon, they should not only
have gratified the Jews, but might have happened to observe the wrong time: And
we do not doubt but the Western Christians were in the right: But because the
Eastern Churches were resolute in their own way, one Victor, Bishop at that
time of Rome (who was eminent on this side of the world, in as much as Rome was
the Imperial City, and the number and quality of Christians there, was
predominant) took upon him to sever from the union of Communion all the Eastern
Churches which adhered to the other Custom: Behold the first print of the foot
of Antichrist! here was a beginning of erecting a false Church, excommunicating
for an opinion, or for a practice, which was indifferent, or at least not
inconsistent with the peace of Christians; excommunicating not only one person,
or a few particulars, but whole Churches at a blow; yea, all Churches, though
they were on this side, and of the same Communion, if they would not join in
the same wrong; for which fact the said Victor was sharply (then) reproved by
Ireneus Bishop Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 26.
of Lions in France (and a better man than he) where there was also a numerous
and a noble Church of Western Christians. It is the false Church therefore
which is for scattering and dividing, whereas the true Church is for gathering
and uniting as much as may be; And although the Church of Rome did afterward
resume some policy, or prudence, under other Bishops, inclining to a show of
moderation; yet the breach, as only skinned over, has broken out again, and
lasts unto this day, and will last for ever, till Rome return to be what it
was before this breach of unity and charity: upon her therefore we justly lay
the impeachment of the first great Schism that ever was, wherein she still
persisteth, thinking by her power to bear all other Churches down, while she
assumeth to her self the name of Catholic, and imposes on the rest the name
of Schismatics.

Again about the year of our Lord 254. when the Persecution under Decius waxed
hot, many poor souls staggered by reason of the peril, and were forced by fear
to comply somewhat with the Heathen Sacrificers, which much afflicted them in
their consciences; and they afterward most humbly sought the peace of the
Church, and to be restored to her Communion. But one Novatus a Presbyter
opposed their restitution, and upon the question raised a division in the
Church, and after that, pretending unto more purity, erected another Church (if
such a pretension may be but so named) in opposition to the General Assembly,
calling themselves the Church of Martyrs. So did he seek to scatter or divide
those poor Members, which the Church would have gathered and set in joint by
repentance and confession, and such holy discipline as was necessary both to
comfort them in respect of the time past, and to confirm them for the time to
come: and many of these that were thus restored became afterward constant even
unto the death. It was to be known therefore by the point of charity, if there
were no other evidence, which was the true Church; and the other has left to
this day (by the special providence of God) the mark of heresy and schism upon
it self, which is never to be obliterated.

Once again, and so to surcease from further instances: About the year of our
Lord 356. toward the latter end of the reign of Constantine (the Persecution
having long ceased, for his Reign was long) there arose one Donatus, who wrote
somewhat after the copy of Novatus and the Arians, supplying the rest by
occasion, interest, the humor of the Africans, and his own ambition: He
condemned other Churches as impure, rebaptized such as joined unto him, and
entitled salvation unto them alone: And these have also left the like mark and
brand upon their followers for ever.

Let the Sects of latter times, whose names I spare, repute amongst themselves,
or give account to the world (if they think fi^) what their judgment is
concerning these Parties, or those Churches; or what they think concerning this
Antiquity whereof we speak, which is of the first and best times (if there be
any to be approved in their sense) or concerning the posterity that is to come,
what they think, or what these would have them judge (or whether they make any
matter of it) about themselves.

I have done with the in-artificial arguments (that are so called) which yet
should be the strongest, by reason of such authority, whereon they do rely; but
that power and authority may not be divided from one another, which those that
are given to division do affect; and that you may the better hold my method
(whilst I my self do not show to affect dividing from the common way) I proceed
to the reasons of the point. If you would know why the true Church does so
earnestly desire the return of her scattered and divided Members: some of her
reasons are these that follow.

The first is the unity of the spirit, that does inspire the Reas. 1.
whole body, enforcing unto unity, love, and sympathy (mutually and
reciprocally) in all the Members. This unity of the spirit is the great and
earnest desire that is put into the hearts of all Saints in their conversion to
save themselves and others, and to edify one another in their most holy faith.
1 Timothy 4. 15.
Now because there is but one way to save our selves, and the same is the way
to save others also; this makes the desire of the Church the more intense to
gather, and to bind unto it self all that do belong unto the election of grace:
To enlighten them that are yet in darkness, to confirm the weak, to stir up
them that faint, and are like to yield to weariness, and to reduce them that go
astray; for there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, and one
Truth. The way to save our selves is to walk in this Unity by one and the same
spirit; so that we come to save others by the same Acts whereby we save our
selves; and by the Communion of the body come to receive those benefits which
we could not attain unto by a solitary faith, or private life. Wherefore the
desires of the Church for unity cannot but be intense and earnest, being thus
conversant about the common salvation, which is much endangered and disturbed
by division; insomuch that even they that are in the right way can scarcely be
saved, by reason of the breaches, impairments and decays of piety, which the
others make.

Now true it is, that this one spirit, which is given unto all that do believe,
is distributed amongst them according to variety of gifts and measures; but the
same that are given unto every one to profit himself, the same are also given
unto him to edify another; whether they be gifts of knowledge, or gifts of
grace (as they use to distinguish the gifts of sanctity from any other kind)
God has dealt to every man the measure of To. 12. 3. etc.
faith, and we are every one members one of another, having gifts differing
according to the grace that is given to us, according to the proportion of
faith. And, the manifestation of the spirit 1 Cor. 12. 4. etc.
is given unto every man to profit withal: There are diversities of gifts; but
the same spirit: God has so tempered the body together, that one member shall
have need of another, that there should be no schism in the body; but that the
members should have the same care one for another. And again it is said, that
there are diverse gifts given for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 411. etc.
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto perfect men, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. That speaking the truth in
love, we may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ,
from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.
From which, and many other passages in the writings of this Apostle, that which
we have said may seem to be abundantly proved; and many other things might be
inferred, and applied, fit to be seriously considered, and laid to heart: as
viz. That the gifts and graces of private men are not only profitable, but
necessary to the Church, as well as those of her Ministers, or Elders; and that
the measures of faith, and hope, and love, and zeal are distributed unto every
one, according to the exigency of the Church, the Body, which is the fullness of
Christ; and that by such graces we are more strongly joined unto one another,
than by any other gifts, though they be of miracles; That one Member cannot
want another, or divide it self from the Body, but that a rent and schism will
follow in the Body; not without great sin and mischief; for such a rent is a
sin against the Head, dividing the unity of the spirit; against the body,
hindering of its growth wounding it with pain, maiming it with impotency,
depriving it of perfection: against particular members, in that it does
withdraw that measure whereby another member should have been supplied, and
does drain and divert the fullness of Christ; against a man's own soul, in that
as a branch cut off from the Vine, he must needs become dry, cease to be
fruitful, and grow worse and worse, till he return back to be anew engrafted.
In a word, if one man cannot grow in Christ, whilst another is at a stand, or
does decay and wither; and the very juice and chyle that does administer unto
growing be speaking of the same truth; and the only way of digesting this
truth, to making increase of the body, be the edifying of it self in love: We
may easily perceive how this unity of the spirit does constrain the Church, if
it be possible, to maintain the unity of her Body; for she cannot keep the
unity of spirit without it; but if she cannot possibly do so, then earnestly to
desire and endeavor the return of her scattered and divided Members.

Now to say the truth, the dissenting Brethren have been always sensible of
the weight of this argument, and to break the force, or rebate the edge of it,
they pretend diverse matters (as it were for their excuse, since it cannot be
denied but we were first a Church, or else they could not have derived from Us,
as they do; and that we were the first in possession of the faith) as viz. 1.
That they agree with Us in the unity of faith, believing the same Doctrine of
salvation. 2. In the unity of the spirit, having the same desires about the
saving of themselves and others. 3. In the bond of charity, as we are all
members (they say) of the same Catholic Church; and as Protestant Professors,
members of one another. 4. Then that variety of opinion, and union in the point
of charity, are not inconsistent. 5. Nay, that diverse Order, Discipline, and
Communion need not break the bond of charity, unless by accident of men's
corruptions; which if they should be observed and humoured, the Gospel it self
could never have been preached; for our Lord foretold, that it would be an
occasion of division. 6. And for schism rightly understood, that they look upon
it as an heinous sin, even as we do. In which several pretenses, as they give
us little cause of satisfaction; so they give us a just and necessary occasion
of returning somewhat more than is like to sort to their favor.

We must confess; that when the Church is so divided, that in the judgment of
charity, many godly persons do divide themselves from the body; and in the
judgment of the Church, many men of eminent gifts and graces (that were known
to be such whilst they remained in her communion) do desert her communion, it
cannot but prove an inexplicable inconvenience both to the Church and Them: for
if all believe and teach the same Doctrine of Salvation, whence arises so much
caution whom we hear? such exceptions, heats, and scruples? If we do not all
believe the same Doctrine, as it is to be doubted that we do not, for as much
as there seems not only to be a diverse scope and drift in the pressing of
many points of importance, but that we fear our dissenting Brethren do not
close with Us in one of the 12 articles of the Apostles Creed (though some of
them do not scruple at standing up when the whole is rehearsed in our Churches)
viz. I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, putting such
a construction upon it as is far from the consent not only of our Church, but
of all Ages, as we conceive: I say, how can we then grow up together into him
in all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body is
fitly joined together unto one increase? If they could hold still the same
charity inviolable, without the same Order, Discipline, and Communion (as
others do pretend) whence should arise such animosities and contentions? It
cannot be altogether from men's corruptions, as at the first propagation of the
Gospel: but if it do arise partly from the corruptions, frailties, and
partialities of such as break without necessity, partly from the passions of
such as are offended justly (as we conceive, howsoever unjust or extravagant
they may be, when they are provoked.) let them join the whole verse together;
It is necessary that offenses come, but woe be to them by whom they come. But,
as we conceive, the nature of the thing it self does necessarily infer a breach
of charity (suppose men more good or perfect than either They or We can find,
or our Ancestors before us, or the Posterity to come) for it cannot be, that
there should be two Communions, wherein it is supposed to be unlawful for one
to join with another, but that one Party to the other must needs be as the Jew
or the Samaritan. But if it be granted, that these two parties cannot possibly
have perfect charity with one another (which if the nature of the thing did not
hinder, the just judgments of God, by reason of the violation of his own
Ordinance would do it; then it must needs follow, that the body cannot edify
it self in love: and so the Church must needs retain an earnest desire to be
restored to its best estate, when it was in Union: for though we may remain
(possibly) Members of the Catholic Church still, yet because we doubt of our
consent in the Catholic Faith, we cannot be united, nor join in perfect
charity; and though we be all Protestants, and so members of one another, we
can take no greater benefit or privilege thereby, than English men, when they
are in civil wars with one another.

To deal ingeniously this is the charity of the Church; she looks upon such
good men (whom in charity we way esteem so, in some measure) as do divide and
separate from Us, and such as they may draw with them, to belong to the body
still; not only of the Catholic Church, but of such particular Churches from
which they do recede, or within whose Precincts they may chance to fall:
Therefore she is not rash to excommunicate them, but uses all her care, and
power, and tenderness to reclaim and to reduce them, having arms ever open to
embrace them, and to restore them to her peace, and to indulge them in what she
may, to oblige them the faster to her self. So far are we from looking upon
them as other Churches, or that their schisms can make them such; or as free
from our charge, though they renounce Us; or as fallen from the hope of the
Gospel, with all their followers, into an inevitable state of damnation, though
we cannot reduce them (as the Papists judge of Us) that we own, even these, as
a part of the Church of England against their wills, and are ever ready to
regain their good will, and to reduce them to a better state: for, though we
speak it soft, and mildly, we do judge indeed, that these do much interrupt and
disturb, the way of salvation to themselves and others, and do much impeach and
prejudice those amongst our selves, who before did run well; and would yet
proceed to do so, if they did not object their rubbs and impediments in the way.

We answer further, that whereas it is truly said, [Opinionum varietas, and
opinantium unitas non sunt (...);] Variety of opinions, and unity of Opiners
are not inconsistent; Our Church allows a greater latitude in this kind, than
any of those that do pretend a latitude, only to palliate their own restraints:
for amongst them, if one be for Lay Elders, and another against it; one for the
power of Pastors, another for the power of the People; one for laying on of
hands after baptism, and another against it; nay, one for free will, and
another for free* grace: and so in certain lesser questions, it has been found
enough to divide and sub-divide them into Parties, Churches, feuds, and
animosities; whereas in our Church great variety of opinions may, and do
consist very well with the Unity of the Church: Every Scholar knows how
ingenious men do abound in their own senses, even in the Schools: and it is not
at all to the prejudice of the Church, but may be rather to her benefit, that
certain points be not carried (otherwise) in extremes, but that there may be
here a little and there a little, and one to balance with another. But when
this rule of variety or diversity of opinion is traduced to a contrariety of
establishment, they must give us leave to assume that such a diversity is
utterly inconsistent with the Unity of the Church. In vain therefore do they
declaim in general against schism, as much as we could wish, being sensible of
what Pamelius has delivered, viz. that the name of schism has been Schismatis
nomen in Ecclesia semper ignominiosum, publiceque damnatum. In Tert. de
praescript. adv* Haeret.
always ignominious in the Church, and on all hands condemned, whilst they
defend in particular all the Sects at this day (besides the Quakers) to be true
particular Churches, that a man may safely join with any of them, to do better,
that separation is no schism; that the Church which imposes (though it be but
things indifferent) is the schismatical Church, if it will not vary from her
orders, for the satisfaction of the weak, or scrupulous: and that in such cases
the schismatical Churches (which are so called) are the truer and purer
Churches of Christ, and have all Church power within themselves, to all intents
and purposes: for where can we now find a Schism which is culpable? or a Church
which can stand, if she must vary from her order upon all demands? or any
possibility either of a Church or of a Schism? By all which it seems that some
of our dissenting Brethren domisdoubt themselves as liable unto this charge of
schism, and would either cloak it neatly, if they could, or if it come to the
worst, defend that schism is no such sin, as they sometimes granted; and that
they may lawfully live in schism, especially when their maintenance arises
that way (as some have put themselves upon that exegency, and so are bound to
maintain that which maintains them, framing their lives and doctrines
according to their interests.) Not to grate any further upon that point,
wherein they are so tender; there remains yet another word about the Unity of
the Spirit, that they have the same desires (if not more intense and earnest
than we our selves) for the good of souls, for the saving of themselves and
others: We do not doubt but that there is a zeal of God amongst many of them,
though not according unto a right knowledge; not because they are more weak or
ignorant than We, but only otherwise persuaded or inclined (howsoever it has
happened to them.) We trust that many of them do sincerely mean as they
profess: And so far as this is true, we acknowledge the working of one and the
same spirit in them and Us: We look upon them as a part of the body, and
wherein they are not only not against Us, but for Us, that they are so far One
with us. But then, if they do really believe that we have the same spirit
amongst us (or some of us at least) why should they so magnify the same spirit
in themselves above the same in Us? as if there were not the same power and
purity of the spirit amongst Us to conveigh grace unto the hearers, or to make
them perfect that do come unto Us? which Query we have the more reason to put
home to our Brethren, since they may seem (now) to cease from their instance
upon the work of conversion (a gift which they thought almost singular to
themselves before) as a thing below their Auditories; or to preach against
profaneness (wherein they were once the Boanerges's of the Age) seeing their
followers must be taken for no such; and, it may be, cannot well bear it; so
that all their writings of late (which are the reports of their Preachments to
such as cannot hear them) do run in a new strain, which is much different from
that way, which they did admire and applaud before. Again, if they do
acknowledge such an Unity of Spirit with Us, how can they think or pretend (as
they do) to be complete without Us, and to have no need of Us? how happens it
that they do so little weigh what the Apostle says, that one member has need
of 1 Cor. 12. 15. etc.
another? And if the foot shall say, because I am not the hand, I am not of the
body; is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear shall say, because I am
not the eye I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? The eye
cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: Nor again the head to the
feet, I have no need of you. That there should be no schism in the body, but
the members should have the same care one for another.

But if these members separate from the body, can each member which is
separated subsist by it self? or any few that join together, presently
constitute themselves an entire Body, a complete Church? Or can any of their
Officers, which was but as an hand or a foot before make it self an heart or an
head in a New Church, and think that in truth they are such, if they be not
altogether useless? which cannot but put us in mind of Iotham's Judge. 9. 15.
Parable, and though we shall abstain from applying the prickles of it to our
Brethren, yet we doubt that it is this ambition of some hand, or foot, or
other, which thinks it self worthy of a better place, that is one of the sad
occasions of such dismembring. But when they have dismembered and divided to the
utmost, let others observe that the use whereof they are (if they be of any
good use) is but the same, of which they were before in their proper places;
and being distorted to the places, which they usurp, they do but move like
members out of joint, and will soon be impaired for want of the body,
notwithstanding their pretenses to completeness among themselves. And we could
show of how little use men of eminent gifts and parts before have been for many
years, since they left their stations in the Church; the leaving of us (as we
conceive) occasioning the dereliction of the spirit unto them; so that they are
left to themselves in matters of great concern to their own good, and the good
of others.

But I will conclude my answer, and this first reason, with applying of a
passage of St. Augustine upon that place; Little 1 John 2. 18. etc.
children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall
come, even now are there many Antichrists. They went out from us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us. Non possunt exlre for as nisi Antichristi, etc. None, says he, can go out
of the Church but Antichrists: They which are not contrary unto Christ cannot
go forth; for he which is not contrary unto him does abide in his Body, and is
accounted a member. Whosoever do not abide with us, but do go out, it is
manifest that they are Antichrists: And how is that to be proved? by their lie:
Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? Let us ask the
several Heretics of our times; what Heretic do you find that denies Jesus to
be the Christ? Some (as he proceeds) are gone out from us, and are become
Donatists: Let us ask them whether Jesus be the Christ, they presently confess
that Jesus is the Christ. If therefore he be the Antichrist that denies Jesus
to be the Christ: neither can they call Us Antichrists, nor We them, because we
both confess the same. Wherefore, if neither call one another Antichrists, we
are not gone out from one another, we remain in Unity. But if we remain in
unity; [Quid faciunt in hac civitate duo altaria?] What mean two diverse
Churches in this City? [Quid faciunt divisae domus?] What means the scattering
of houses? [divisa conjugia?] husband and wife going two ways? [Quid facit
communis lectus and divisus Christus?] What means this, that husband and wife
are one in all but Christ? says he, we must confess the truth. Are they gone
out from Us, or We from Vult nos fateri quod verum est. An ipsi a nobis
exierunt, an nos ab ipsis? sed abfit, ut nos ab ipsis: Habemus enim testamentum
dominicae haereditatis: Dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam: Quis quis huic
haereditati non communicate, for as e^iit.
them? God forbid that it should be We from them; for We have the Testament of
the Lords Inheritance, saying, I will give thee the Nations for thine
Inheritance: whosoever does not communicate with this Inheritance, he is gone
forth, and in fact and deed he is against Christ, though in word he do confess
him. Such as act preposterously for Christ, and for the Cause of Christ, do but
hinder where they make a show to help, and pull down where they seem to build,
or at least build that which must be pulled down again, although they may
possibly work with a good intention. But under this pretext there are many that
do act from a different temper; which is one thing that our Brethren will be
loath to bear; and therefore I will compound with them for some abatement, that
they may hear my next reason with the more patience.

The true Church does earnestly desire the return of her Reas. 2.
scattered and divided Members, by reason of her sense of pain, and loss,
through such dissipation or division: she does not feel, nor yet conceit
herself to be complete without them, but rather maimed and deprived.

The Physical Philosopher says, that dolor est solutio continui, pain is the
solution or division of that which was entire: As if it be a wound or rent, the
parts are distermined from one another; if it be a bruise, the circling of the
blood and spirits are interrupted: from which ensues an ach or a sting in the
parts affected, or in the whole body, which is called pain. The Members of the
Church may be divided, either by a bruise, or a wound, or a dislocation, or in
a word by dismembring; in each of which degrees the Church does suffer a diverse
pain or loss. It is a bruise, when heresies are broached, which tend to
division: It is a wound when a breach is made thereby. It is a dislocation,
when the Church comes by this means to lose her influence, so that she cannot
move her limbs. It is a dismembring, when the part unsound is either cut off by
censure, or cutteth of its self by rashness. Because I cannot touch upon all
the cases, there is a threefold pain, and a threefold loss, which are worthy to
be mentioned.

1. There is a pain of inflammation in the Church, when certain Tenants are
given out that tend unto a new way, contrary to the constitution or
establishment: And though in truth there be no time nor place wherein the enemy
does not cast abroad the wildfire of heresy and schism; yet at sometimes the
minds of men are more disposed than at others, to receive these sparks, and to
kindle in combustion. When the Arrian Heresy first brake forth, there arose
every where Socr. l. i. c. 6.
(says my Historian) no small tumult; for then a man might have seen not only
the Presidents and chief Rulers of the Churches, inveighing one against another
with opprobrious terms, but also the lay-multitude severed asunder into two
parts, the one favoring the one side, the other favoring the other side; and
the case became so heinous, and so shameful, that the Christian Religion came
to be derided openly, even in the public Plays and Shows. And has it not
happened thus amongst us, by reason of some factious Doctrines that have been
far and wide dispersed? We allowed a great latitude unto opinion before,
according unto every man's sense and conscience; and now we come to tax other
points, which tend to division, and do not come within the Verge of that
latitude (though the maintainers of them do pretend indeed that they ought to
do) We must not doubt to instance in a few particulars instead of all the rest.
What could follow but a miserable inflammation, when there were subjects apt to
receive such opinions as some of these? viz. That our National Church is no
true Church, or if it be a Church in any sense, that it is improperly so
called: That it has no power of binding or loosing; That her Members have no
obligation to continue in her Communion, but rather to come forth from it, even
as out of Babylon: That there can be no Communion with Congregations that are
so mixed, and which cannot choose but to continue so, whiles they are under
such a government: And in fine, that the work of Reformation does require the
subverting of such a Government, and setting up of some other more agreeable
(as the parties grieved do conceive) to the word of God; or, if they cannot do
that, aedificare imperium in imperio, to separate from the Church, and exercise
among themselves such diverse disciplines as the several free people will admit.
What a bustle have these opinions made throughout the Land, rending in the Body
before they rent from it?

2. There is a pain of convulsion, which is a rending in the bowels of the
Church by such as do yet continue in her body, and hold with her Communion, but
are ready to gnaw their passage out by their working. Thus it was when some of
our Members were taught, as if it were hardly lawful to hear some of our
Ministers, at least not to live under their Ministry; to go abroad far and wide
to hear; and to communicate only in some choicer Congregations; yet abhorring
separation, because as then (it may seem) there wanted strength to bring forth
those issues which the Teachers did desire, hoping better of the product then
the event did show.

3. Lastly, there is a pain of distraction, which the Church does suffer, and
which has long continued; partly whilst the several dividing Members struggled
with one another, which should give the law unto the rest; at least, which
should have preeminence; partly since the Church has recovered some
consistency with a poor subsistence (howsoever envied) through Gods especial
grace and mercy (till we do forfeit it again by our miscarriages) in the
several Banners that are hung out from diverse Forts, refusing to be reduced
upon any reasonable terms that can be offered. Which pain is the more grievous
to the Church, the Mother of peace, in that she is both forced to contend with
her own children, and is also rent by her own bowels of compassion, and fearful
of the issue. As when the Israelites had vanquished the Tribe of Judge, 21.
Benjamin (which we have not yet done, fearing to proceed unto extremities.)
The people of Israel came to the house of God, and lift up their voices and
wept sore, and said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel,
that there should be to day one Tribe lacking in Israel? This alas! is our
complaint at this day; not a Tribe or two, but they speak as if of twelve we
had but two remaining. They speak it may be according to their passions, but we
with the pain of compassion added unto this of our distraction, must needs
acknowledge and lament the sad diminutions which we have suffered, and do still
suffer in our Body, which having lost its Members, can neither go with ease,
nor take repose in any posture: And this brings me from the pain of sense to
the pain of loss; to mention also the threefold loss, which the Church
sustaineth by these divisions.

1. The first is the loss of power unto edification; our divisions have plucked
up the floodgates, and made profaneness overflow like a deluge: and behold
they say, look what the people are whom we have left! who could have abode
amongst them? whereas the people was not such before, whilst the laws might be
executed, and the Discipline of the Church was revered, and the gravity of
Ministers was held in some respect! Is not all Religion (or at least the power
of it) become contemptible? so that now it is in vain to go about to restrain
any man's practice by fear of censure; he does not value it; or to bind any man's
conscience by the power of any sound doctrine: He has received dissolute
principles: He is not to be moved by love or fear. Our divisions have
demolished all these, and laid them low; and men do now pretend a binding
conscience to commit such sins, as we were bound in conscience to restrain them
from, if we were able; fot since our divisions have erected that plea of
liberty of conscience, men of no conscience have served their ends of it: and
if all parties now were to be numbered, the greatest part would be found to be
that which is of no party, but to live as they list, without a law, and (I had
almost said) without God in the world too. Besides all this; has not Popery had
as fair play as it could wish, and so strange an increase in a short time, as
to amaze us now, and strike a real terror, not into vain apprehensions (as they
have made use of it, as a scarecrow heretofore) but into the soberest minds
amongst us? And we may thank our divisions for this too. Yet our Brethren that
have divided us, have still declared themselves to be no less enemies unto
Popery than unto Profaneness. But see how they have been over-wrought, and to
what a pass we are all brought, who do but want the power of the Papists to
unite us in Religion, and to reduce us unto better manners, and to more
obedience unto Governments! Oh sad disease, that needs such a remedy! from
such a sad and fearful revolution, Good Lord deliver us.

2. A second loss is that of Intercession: when the men of Nineveh joined
unanimously in one request, God Almighty favored them with an eminent return
of mercy; yet they were aliens from the Covenant of promise. But did ever the
Children of Israel cry unto the Lord, and he did not hear them? Did they ever
murmur and he did not plague them? What should I say, as a mortal man, about
the unsearchable judgments of Almighty God? If we agree in any one desire, as
for peace and settlement, can we agree to come into any one place, or to take
with us words to ask it at his bounteous hands? Can we ask it with any fervor,
whilst we have reserves about the terms, whereupon we do desire it? or can we
expect that he should answer cold, uncertain, and lukewarm Petitions? Is not
this the cause that we are spiritually disarmed, even as the Philistines dealt
by the Israelites, so that there is neither sword nor shield amongst us,
whereby we may prevail with God for any blessing upon us, or our Posterity?
That the Heavens are as brass, which our divided prayers cannot pierce? That
such clouds of blackness are impendent over us? But if we pray to God for
diverse things, such indeed as are contrary and inconsistent with one another,
what returns can we expect? Here is an Assembly, praying, down with this, down
with that. There is another, praying, Not so Lord, but establish this, and
restore that: only in this they may possibly agree: Any thing rather than that
which is. Which side should God Almighty hear? or with which Evert ere domos
totas, optantibus ipsis, Dii faciles: nocitura toga nocitura petuntur militia,
Juven. Sat. 10.
should he not be offended? Is not this the reason therefore of such a
distracted State? Do not the same pray against the peace and settlement which
they do pretend to desire? And has not God (sometimes) answered their
importunity, by giving their own requests, to their utter disappointments, that
they might be convinced of their own vanity, in their intermedling so much as
they do with his Providence? And yet they will not learn to be wise unto
sobriety: but still they seem never to pray with more spirit (such as it is)
than when they pray against their Brethren.

3. The third and last loss which I shall mention, is also most invaluable; our
charity is distracted and abated, which the poor do sadly feel: our civility is
disturbed, so that men do not dare to become free in conversation, till they
have sufficiently proved the company: our neighbourly love is abated, and
instead of a friend, which one had before, it may be he has an enemy, or but a
faint-hearted kindness, or an hollow pretense of some good will, consisting
rather in some good wishes that he were but such as his former friend would
have him to be, that he might love him, whose love (at best) is not without its
rigor. But I will also spare to dilate my self on this point, that (at least)
on one side charity may remain the sounder.

The last reason why the Church does so earnestly desire the return of her
scattered and divided Members, is the great Reas. 3.
benefit and content that she should find therein; which is,

1. The delight of love: The Shulamite was passionately beloved for her good
parts and beauty, which the Daughters of Jerusalem do acknowledge when they say,
Return, return, o Shulamite, that we may look upon thee: and the Shulamite
understands no other when she answers, What shall ye see in the Shulamite? We
acknowledge the like, and we will tell you (with your favor) what we would see
in you. We would see, and be partakers of your knowledge, and of your gifts of
understanding in the Scriptures: We would see your zeal for God, and for his
Sabbaths, and for his Ordinances: We would see your charity toward your
neighbor, whom you would not have seen heretofore to sin (at least to commit a
sin unto death) but you would have aided, and admonished him, howsoever you
think your selves to be excused (since) of being your Brothers keepers: We
would see the strictness of your lives, and of those of your families: We would
hear your Readings, Prayers, Instructions, Catechisings, and other good
Conferences that were wont to be there, fit to edify, and to minister grace
unto the hearers: We would over-hear your private prayers and devotions in your
Closets, where you were wont to strive with God for the pardon of your sins,
and for the obtaining of his holy Spirit, to sanctify you throughout in body,
soul, and mind: We would see your first love again (if it be possible) and
those fruits, which you then brought forth, worthy of amendment of life. This
is the beauty, which the Church would now see in the return of the wandering
Shulamite, whether it be as in the days of old; that if so, she might admire
and cherish her.

2. The beauty of array, which has much decayed since our Congregations have
been diverted, our Families divided, our People scattered: We can no more see
men coming with their whole Train to the House of God, as they were wont to do:
And that was a beauty in the Streets of our Jerusalem: We cannot see their
order here, where their seats are void; so that our Churches look like great
Houses, that are specious to behold without, but being unfurnished within
afford the colder comfort: We cannot hear their voices in his holy Temples,
singing aloud, and praising God, making also melody in their hearts, so keeping
time on earth with the Saints and Angels that are in heaven: Much less can we
meet them, as we used to do, at the Lords Table, at that Feast of Feasts, the
only Feast of Loves, that Feast of marrow, and of wine refined on the Lees. And
when we remember these things (to use the Psalmists words) we pour out our
souls within us: for Psalm. 42. 4.
we had gone with the multitude, we went with them to the House of God with the
voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holiday: These are the
days that would return, o Shulamite, with thy return. Then if any unbeliever,
or any other bearing evil will to Zion, should look into our Assemblies, he
might be apt to be stricken, and to be driven to confess, that surely God were
amongst us, or in the midst of us. But now if he look in here, what shall he
see but a despicable emptiness? and if he go there, a more contemptible
multitude, for want of order, which is the beauty of holiness?

3. Lastly, Would but our divided Members return again, as Brethren, unto the
body of our Church, we should then come to have the strength of two Armies;
whereas we are now Gen, 49. 4.
unstable and weak as water, and cannot excel; we should then become strong and
invincible, and might boldly write upon our banner, Deus nobiscum, quis contra
nos? God is with us, who can stand against us? The gates of hell shall not
prevail, neither policy, nor power, nor any weapon that is formed against us.
We should then renew our strength like the Eagle; our youth should return to
us, as in the day when we came up out of the land of Egypt, in the beginning of
the Reformation: we should have strength within, and the blessings of peace
with it: we should become a terror unto foreign Nations, which do now despise
us, and mark us out for a prey, in the day of their power, and of our weakness.
Have we forgotten our deliverences from the power of Spain and Austria, and the
Pope of Rome? our Victories in Ireland? our Aids that we were then enabled to
afford to Henry (afterward the Great) King of France? and to the (then) poor
distressed States of Holland? Having at the same time a Superintendency over
all the Councils in the Realm of Scotland, and an influence upon diverse of our
Neighbors, with such a firm peace at home, that we hardly read of any
insurrection, worthy to be mentioned, in four and forty years and upwards:
Nay, the benefits of that blessed reign of Queen Elizabeth, did extend to
propagate a longer peace unto posterity, than ever Albion knew before. And if
we have not yet forgot those flourishing days of our renown, let us now
remember that they were the rewards of an unanimous Reformation: when the heart
of the people rose as one man to establish the Protestant Religion, as one
Religion in the midst of us. And oh! that any one could promise me such another
spirit to arise in England in these days of ours, and under God, I might as
boldly promise even greater things than these. But though there be but little
hopes of this, and but just reason to expect and fear, that all our labor
which is thus applied is like to be in vain; yet it is our duty to desire and
endeavor it. And with that I shall conclude.

Return, return, o Shulamite, return, return, that we may Applica.
look upon thee: You that have been offended with our Church, and have left us,
that have sadned our hearts, and weakened our hands thus long, return at last to
comfort us, that we may look upon you with delight, and that our hearts may be
stayed for you, and our fears stinted. Are you nothing moved by the force of
duty, considering that peace and love is the Legacy which our Lord has
bequeathed unto all his followers to the worlds end? and the great bond of
perfectness, which his Apostles labored to preserve entire, knowing that Unity
and Charity cannot be divided? Does it nothing move you to anticipate Christ's
intention, which is our Union, and to further Satan's, which is our division?
Are you nothing moved with the deluge of profaneness, that carries such a
multitude headlong into hell, whilst you dispute which is the way to save them,
and agree not on it? Are you nothing moved with the growth of Popery, which is
like to overrun all; and if it did, would make you glad to digest the hardest
morsel about which you are now so nice? considering that there is no other way
in probability to prevent this, but your return into the Tents that you have
left. Are you nothing moved by the judgments which have followed upon our
dissentions, and do still lie upon them as a just punishment? O God, thou have
cast Psalm. 60. 2.
us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been displeased with us, thou have
made the land to tremble, thou have broken it: O heal the breaches thereof, for
it shakes: Thou have showed thy people hard things: And nothing is more hard
than this, that our hearts are hardened against the ways of peace after all our
wars and unspeakable calamities: Our blood has been shed in vain. Quintili
Vare, read legiones quas perdidisti: O Church-divisions, restore again the
blood that has been spilt like water on the ground, never to be recovered:
Return the spirits which we have lost. We have undone the Posterity which is to
come: The children yet unborn are accursed in their Parents loins, by reason of
our divisions, and the issues that are thence to be expected: for as long as
there is such a temper that does overruled the Genius of the Nation, God, who
is offended with our prayers and services must needs withold that good that
should establish us; and though He should grant it, yet should we withold it
from one another, and sooner rend and tear it into pieces, than to let the
public be the better for it. It can never be well with us till there be an
healing, and till Reformation do begin (as was sometimes preached to the
Parliament) at the House of God. To your Tents therefore, To your Tents, o
Israel; not for war, but for peace; not to set up many Altars, but to compass
about the Tabernacle: for why should Cant. 1. 7.
thou be any longer as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions?
O thou that have turned thus aside, have thou any light more than others? We
are the darker for the want of it: Have thou any good affections more than
others? We are baren and unfruitful for the want of them. Have thou any power
to add unto the Ministry of the word? We are destitute thereof, while it seems
to be spent upon such as do the least need it: Do thou look upon us, as being
yet not fit nor worthy of thy Communion? Return and strengthen us with better
members (if thou have any such to add to us) and we shall be thereby the more
enabled to amend what is amiss. Can not thou serve God with so much purity
and power amongst us, as in separate Assemblies? Remember whence thou had
that purity and power, and restore the benefit thereof to the same Church from
which thou did at first receive it: Remember that heretofore thou could be
richly edified in the bosom of the same Church, and since thou have left it,
both the purity and the power (whereof thou speak) according to our
estimate, is much decayed and impaired: Nay, thou call that the power of
godliness, which we take to be another thing: Thou do but make excuses, not
only against thine own duty, but against an invaluable privilege, which is the
Unity of the Spirit; and if the Church cannot be complete without Thee, much
less can Thou be made perfect without the Body; either edified in the true
faith, or love; by which alone thou can expect to come to that peace of God
which passes all understanding, which should Phil. 4. 7.
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Wherefore let me end my own
Exhortation with that of the same Apostle in another place: Above all things
put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness; And let the peace of God rule
in your Col. 3. 14, 15.
hearts, to which ye are also called in one Body, and be ye thankful.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for Henry Brom since the dreadful Fire in London.
DR. William Lloyd's Sermon before the King against the Papists.

His Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester.

A Seasonable Discourse against Popery.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed, in fol.

A Sermon at the Assizes at Reading: by Jos. Sayer, M. A.

Mr. Stanhopp's four Sermons on several Occasions.

Mr. Hampton's Assize Sermon.

A Sermon at the Puneral of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury: by Dr. Du Moulin.

The Anthems of the Church.

The Controversial Letters, or Grand Controversy, concerning the pretended
Authority of Papists over the whole Earth.

Popery Manifested, or the Papist Incognito, made Known.

Toleration discussed.

The Vindication of the Clergy.

The Godly man's Companion.

The Guide to Heaven, with a Brief Rule of Life.

Manuductio ad Coelum, or a Guide to Eternity, extracted out of the Writings of
the Holy Fathers and Ancient Philosophers. Written originally in Latin by John
Bona.


