EUPHUIA, OR THE ACTS, AND CHARACTERS OF A GOOD NATURE.

Written By THO. TANNER G.J.E.

Nemo repent fit turpissimus.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1665.

Reader.
HAving well considered of my Friends, and acquaintance; I find that this piece
(such as it is) being writ by no one pattern, can deserve no other Patron, then
its own subject; the common Good Nature. Neither was it without some
reluctance, e're I could be brought to acknowledge it my self; being vanquished
(at last) in this: That it was the more shame (of the two) to seem to disown
it. As if I might not appear in public as confidently as another? Or were
afraid to justify the contents of it: since to write for simple virtue (not
pretending much to wit, or Learning) is but mean, and out of fashion? Or, in
fine, as if I would have it thought; That it is not worthy of my cognizance for
want of accomplishment both of Style and Method (having done it, indeed, in a
transitory state, as some of my friends know; and examined my references
since?) But as it is come to this pass, It was at first in my liberty to write
what I pleased (below the ambition of perpetuity) and to communicate with my
Friends, and it was in theirs afterward to commend it: and in the Stationers
(from them) to run the risque of its popularity. And now, it is in yours to
censure, as you think meet, which I know the common forms of Apology neither
can restrain, nor qualify. Nor can I be excused on pretense of necessity; if
that, of mere idleness in the making, and easiness in the parting with it, will
not serve. Only, if you purpose to proceed, I am to meet you with this
anticipation. That I do not account moral virtues to subside, or be determined
in the Acts of a Good Nature, (that flow, as it were, ex tempore, and ever bear
themselves in the same posture) but I suppose them to be virtuous; even
without, and beyond intention: not disparageable with imperfection in their
kind, or distinguishable from the matter or form of higher virtues: but rather
to be such fundamental rudiments, without which no virtue can be grounded, or
improved: such seeds of excellency as cannot be acquired by art of industry:
and native worth in some that is inimitable unto others. If moral virtue had
been my Argument, I should have founded it in rule, and reason, and will, and
the use of Fortune. A thing so considerable in it, that for that cause, of all
the lives that have been written, rarely can a man find an apt example for his
imitation. Or in all the Comments, apposite words and cases to apply to his
occasion: So that oftentimes the Learned and well-principled, when they come to
practice, act like other men, and are exceeded by (merely) prompter spirits.
Besides, that through necessity a man can hardly arrive to acts of generosity,
or come off with splendour: which in some sort of virtue is plainly requisite.
But in this subject, all magnificent pens have gloried: mine has only traveled
in the Accedence of Morality. And when I found some wit; that attireth all vice
in the dress of Nature; some Politiques, that make interest more intrinsecal,
then the common notions, and some Authority, slighting all actions not
intended, and squared to a prescript rule: I thought somewhat was (of right) to
be asserted from them, and not to let their Natural endowments deprive all
other of their Moral. Wherein (if I may be serious) I undertake the cause of
all ages, and of all particulars, since the same that seem to traduce this
simple Nature; in effect, do seek it most exquisitely in their wives, and
friends, and children. And so I pass, gentle Reader, into your power; as a
person bound by my own principles to be void of interest, and ambition. Though
I know I must be judged, like those that have written de contemnenda gloria.
But what I cannot possibly avoid in a matter of no greater moment, I may
readily embrace, and retire notwithstanding safe in obscurity.

Euphuia, etc.
. 1. AS the skilful Herbalists, when they go on simpling, do not make choice of
curious gardens, for the boundaries of their search, but rather choose to
traverse the wide World, to find the variety of Natures sprinkling. So if we
seek for strippes, and springs of goodly dispositions, we must not be confined
to noble Cultures; but every field, and Grove (with the wilds, and wastes of the
Hundred) may afford as well as they, somewhat worthy of our transplanting, or
collecting* For, as Marius pleads, in excusing the obscurity of his birth,
Natura una, and communis est omnium: fortissimus vero quisquam generosissimus
est. Salust.
that Nature is but one, and common unto all, so it is here. And wherever it is
found in greater force, or better temper, there it is the more generous. Why
should we stand gazing at the steps and nods of Princes, if not to lead us into
error, and admiration? It Is art, whatsoever we observe, Nature affords
nothing else but motion. Or why should we only wander in the Common, to regard
the rude and undisciplined? Nature is restrained there from play (wherein she
would affect to show her gayety) through ignorance, and want of conversation.
Or if we still hold our judgments unprejudicated, why should we not compare
them with the mean; while we often see the high born and bred to have but weak
and passive spirits, and some that sprout up among the stubs, to culminate with
the Cedars, and to gather as they grow, the flower of all accomplishments? But
we are not to travel in extremities. We may find the characters of beauty and
perfection in a Pastoral, as well as in a Tragaedy. And therefore we will take
all indifferently in our observation: though the Great are our only instances,
and the Mean, when they are produced, are not known.

What should we stand to dispute, whether virtue be more from Nature, or from
Discipline, since that would only be to argue in the figure of the word? We
take it not for strength Natural, which is equally applicable to good, or evil;
or for any Act according to election, which may be only from the dictate of our
reason, and besides our inclination; but we take it for a rectitude of moral
dispositions, from whence we account a person good, and well-conditioned, who
is so endowed. Education may teach us good manners, as they are in fashion; but
it does not weaken malice, but rather helps it to be more artificial. Study may
amend the Principles, restrain the progress of a vice, correct the tenor of our
Life: but it cannot render any one so gracious, or so acceptable, as a good
nature untutored. In fine, the force of fortune has no little influence upon
our tempers to disguise us from our selves and others.

Wherefore in enquiring after good Nature, we may sooner find our game among
the Humanists, then among the Schoolmen; and put her up with a pack of
descriptions, than take her in the chase (as it were) with one courser, by a
single definition. But the Huntsman (first) must appoint the grounds to us. And
they are thus ample.

1. That Nature has not been so much restrained unto any man, as to allow him
no good qualities. A fool may be kind and charitable. A slave obsequious and
loving to his Master. A deformed man ingenious. Thersites did not want somewhat
in him, to recommend him to some man's fancy, that could distinguish. Neither
Aesop, nor the Priest, whom the Queen descended to salute, as he lay in
sleeping. Nay, we see (sometimes) an ill-favored lout (as he seems to others
eyes) to be graced with the bed, and favor of a beauteous Lady, whom likelier
persons have sought; and have been repulsed. Not to speak of the most vicious,
whose evil parts may be but the corruptions of their excellent endowments
misemployed: the most contemptible have somewhat in them to bear them up
against neglect. A curr (that is unprofitable) has exquisite ways of fawning,
and insinuating with his Master, to save his skin, or fill his belly; so that
he may fare better than the Talbot. As we likewise see an empty droll better
feasted, then a Grave Philosopher, but they are not so much to be envyed for
what they have, as to be pityed for what they want.

2. That Nature has not given all good parts to any one man. [ Onc ne furent a
tous toutes graces don nees.] for if she had; her prodigality upon that one,
would cause that all the rest, that she has bestowed on others, should be in
vain. He, while he were as a God amongst men, would be insupportable in the
World; while all accumulation of honors and regards were devolved on him, a
general Ebb would leave the other fishes to perish on the dry shore: and this
Leviathan would scarce be covered in the middle of the waters. But she has
rather so provided, that somewhat there should be in one to recompense the
defect of another: and somewhat elsewhere to counter-balance men that are
excellent, that the World might not be too narrow to contain them.

3. That a crooked, maimed, or infirm body are to be allowed for their
imperfections, in so many grains extraordinary, whatsoever virtue you require
in them. for whatever noble instincts may be in them, Ad nullum consurgit opus,
cum corpare languet.
the soul cannot act without its organs; but when it is about to issue, it is
distorted. They cannot choose but be affected, as they ^el within themselves;
when they are about to show their courtesy, somewhat indiscernable may pain and
incommode them; as an aching tooth may interrupt one (if it be no more) in the
midst of his discourse; and then if you wonder to see the debonnaire on a
sudden to become tachy and unsociable, while he perceives, and strives to
correct it, he may falter upon some other passion, In vitium ducit culpae fuga
si caret art.
or disease, and make it worse by his endeavor of amending. To these, it may
be some fair quality may want a seat of action, or the faculty be sunk in the
rubbish, and ruin of a member.

4. That there are diverse other affections of the body, that (...) an influence
upon the soul. A ean one preyeth on the sweet and oily humors, and so consumes
the fuel of its own contentment. A little body is soon agitated, as if the
spirits wanted room to expatiate, and it is received (almost) among the vulgar,
that little heads are testy. But if there be excess of dimensions, it makes the
whole unactive, and the parts unwieldy. Besides, though you see nothing but a
body well-disposed, the parts within may be inordinate. The veins and arteries
may be strait, and subject to obstructions; so that transpiration is not free,
nor the course of the blood and spirits open to the extremities of the body,
whereby it cannot feel its self in an ((...), or) good estate, and habit of
complexion. Neither is it possible for some to obtain so good a temper, who are
born with evi humors; as we bring with us for the most part, some familiar
maladies (like evil Geniuses) attending on us all our life, Either thin and
fluid humors, or gross and tough, or fair and fiery spirits, or sharp and
subtle as if they were the rennet of Cold and melancholy.

5. Lastly, That therefore the agreement of body, and mind must be considered,
and then the field may be discreetly beaten for our prise. There is a kind of
Physiognomy, that discovers a good Nature, wherein any ordinary man may have
some insight. The beggar spyeth where to be importunate. The cheat where to
follow. The hector where to brave, or to beware. (...) Courtier where to
allure: but some aspects there are agreeable unto every one liking, where none
conceives a sudden prejudice; or hates at the first sight, or envyeth their
good estate, or affects to do them any hurt for their owe sakes, but finds
that humanity in them, which all the World respects. Such is that (most part)
that presents a clear and even skin, a ruddy countenance, a constitution full
and sound, that is neither apt to thrive not abate, and a mine of air and
behavior, neither flow, nor vehement, but strong and sweet, and such as
shows a promptness to intension, and remission, as occasion serves. A body
free from uneven parts, especially uneven eyebrows, prominent lips, or an
eminent (Roman) nose. If any other parts be unequal, one cannot therefore
exclude that party from having any good parts within him: but we cannot lightly
take him for the copy of our Character. But there is nothing more regardable
than the habit of the eyes: which if they bear that full and steady look, that
imports Confidence, and admit those repercussions that enkindle bashfulness,
and emit those casts and glances, that are significant of gentle passions, they
do undoubtedly evince the tokens of a likely person.

. II. But to leave it unto women to be pleased in the outside of a man, and to
allow them (what they affect in this case) to be the competenter Judges. Let us
pass to the habits of the mind: and then (to be sure) whatsoever we discover to
be good in one, is good in another, and indifferent to both our Sexes.

I take it once for granted, that a Good Nature enjoyes a constant sweetness
within it self, while it is endued abundantly with a free course of blood and
spirits, circling in its breast; and filling it with love of life both in it
self and others: and delighting most in interchanging of vivacity.

1. And first, That it does not owe its cheerfulness to any foreign cause, but
only to its native vigor, and source of anhelation. And whom does it not
revive to see alacrity in another without apparent cause? Especially, when
there is no insolence, or affected motion to be discovered. Who would not wish
and earn for such an acquaintance, and think himself happy to have a part in
one, that is (indeed) happy of himself? To see his action, observe his
countenance, note the harmony of his heart, and tongue; and hear the melody of
his speech, and tone; while every acent is a strain of birds, or Angels?

And yet the cause is not so abstruse, the ebullition of fresh and airy spirits
gently moves the blood, and excites the sweeter humors of the body, such M. de
la chamber.
as love and joy flow upon, and yield no place to a syncope, or intercision of
the soul, such as grief and sorrow do inflict by the sharper humors that they
prepare, and empty from the Gall, and other vessels ordained to sever them,
Besides, that innocence is a constant guard upon the blandishments of the mind,
and affords security to all the thoughts to play with their simplicity. For
bitter passions seldom come, till we begin to trade with fortune, and Sext
Empiricus.
taint our apprehensions with things preter-natural. Not as if a Good Nature
were beyond the reach of fortune (for the fair are commonly said to be
unfortunate) A Brother, or a Lover may be snatched away; or his time may travel
over barren ground, and make wast in his progress. But abstinence and
contentment are not difficult to a mind not debauched with Luxury, since Nature
is contented with a little, and it is more natural to such a temper to take
delight in the good that is present, then to wreek for that which is absent
(peradventure) more than wanting, but its power were not to be seen were there
nothing to oppress it. [ Marcet sine adversario virtus.] The breathing of a
spring will bear a light thing above the water; if it be stifled with earth and
rubbish, in time 'twill wear them quite away, or else it will rise again in
another Cistern of its own inventing. The Palm Tree shoots up with the more
vigor having weights hanged upon it. And the pressed Camomill yields with a
modest fragrancy, but as soon as the chastening Roller is gone beyond it, it
rears itself again to court the air and dew that cherish it, so a Buenco. racon
quebranta mala ventura.
Good Nature is not toiled with adversity or changed without subversion. But so
it lives with its self.

2. Next, let us see how it delights it self in the life of others, which we
may take some pleasure to observe in the vanity of little children. Whereas you
may observe some (as soon as they can express the primer copy of their reasons)
to be craving many things, making little difference of the hand, or the party,
so they be but gratified: because their delight is more in diverse toys than in
their play-fellows* or in their daily servants that attend to humor them: you
shall note some other better natured, that take no joy but in their companions,
that will not eat, nor drink, nor (by their good will) sleep without them. That
will not be pleased with any thing when they rise again, without restoring them
to their wonted pastime, and their known Associates. The same rejoice in
getting more acquaintance and making more friends to play with them: but yet
they will not endure to be with strangers without the company of some they
know, because they distinguish of whom they know, and of whom they love; not
through averseness unto any, but only of imbecility, when they find themselves
denuded of their proper Aids and Relyances. For, the same Nature, with the
benefit of experience, leads them on to an Universal Humanity. And it seems
that Humane Nature is rather to be learned by observing the respective
characters of growing years, then by forming notions out of their Maturest
actions; which it is most likely, are accommodated unto fortune, or necessity.
Neither is it wonder, if these have still impelled mankind to an Uniform mode,
or way of contending about the Partition of conveniences among men, but it
would be wonder, to see a child by Nature so Pugnacious, that without any
provocation, it should still be fighting. I am more inclinable to think with
Sir P. Sidney, that man is a Good Natured creature till he is injured. Neither
do I think, that every man could wish a great destruction, that he himself
might come to desolate possessions. But of this only en passant: I dare not
enter into an argument, at the porch of which, stat magni nominis umbra.

. III. To proceed from these two principles (that I suppose) I infer as
necessary consequents. 1. That a Good Nature is void of pride and ambition, 2.
Void of interest and design.

1. While it readily cleaves to what it likes, more or less as it finds
agreeableness; it is not averse to any other, much less is it apt to hate any,
seeing somewhat good in every one; so that though it do decline some qualities
that are in persons, and some persons for those qualities, yet it does not hate
them or despise them: Whereas all pride is founded in a secret malice.

The degrees of pride are two. The first, self-conceitedness, whereby one
esteems himself better then another. The second is ambition, whereby one seeks
in act to put a distance, or to make a difference betwixt himself, and those
that he despises, which do both necessarily induce hatred; inasmuch as the
proud conceives, that those whom he despises would oppose him, and arrogate
as much unto themselves, as he does to himself (if it lay in their power) and
therefore he does either in act, or intention seek to depress them. Now as
generous wines, when they retract their spirits to the Center of the vessel, do
become eager in the extremities: so it happens to men of spirit, when they
retire into themselves by self-conceitedness, they become unsociable in other
parts, and are only pleasant to their intimates, being such as serve to elate
them more; while they vainly nourish a caprice of grandeur with restraint of
generosity. But if their humor carry them abroad, to make it self observed, it
brings a restraint upon the public, imposes upon others, abridgeth liberty,
raises expectation, and meets (at the last) with such contempt and hatred
from other men, as they themselves have fostered. Or if fortune favor their
ambition, and bring the world about to their bent, so far as they have to do in
it; yet it cannot blot out the indelible characters of their usurpation, or the
tokens that they must leave behind of their injustice. If Caesar were the Tamer
of the World, he was the overthrower of his Country. And so (before) was
Marius: so was Sylla: nor was more to have been suspected from L. Catiline. But
the like success does not happen to one of a thousand, not in meaner
enterprises. And what (at length) is sought by attempting? When Pyrrhus, King
of Epire, prepared to pass into Italy, Cyneas, a Councellor in esteem with him,
demands to what end he made that great preparation? Said he, to make my self
Master of Italy. And what, replies Cyneas, after that? I will pass, says he
into Gaul* and into Spain. And what farther? I will go to conquer Africa, and
at last, when I have brought the world into my subjection, I will live at ease,
Live. 1.
and take my content. And I pray Sir, rejoyneth Cyneas, why may you not so do,
at this present, and save your self the hazards and the travels? It is the
treating of designs that removes present happiness, making us to go out of our
selves, and not to rest in what we are, which the truly 'Ev (...), Plotin.
happy only do, as the only means of their happiness. A Good Nature is
indifferently born to all mankind, and to all estates, and can never want
either complacency in the first, or contentment in the later. It exacteth
conversation to the utmost of its fortune, and excepts against none: for it
has no picque to make it eager against any. It esteems no better of its own
person or endowments, or fortunes then another. The beautiful despises not
the crooked, the strong does not violate the weak, nor the witty abuse the
simple, the rich and honorable do not scorn the company of the mean: Nor an
high mind grasp at other acquisitions, than what ly open to its own right, and
title. For of these things that are enjoyed in common, it reputeth: that as
good are they that want them, as they that have them; and as happy they that
are without them. The Prince, and the subject have the same Bread and Wine; the
same fish and fowl; the same cloth and silk; the same commodities, and
refreshments (in reality) in common to them; The rest is but imagination, the
King thinks the private man more happy, and the private man thinks the King:
But they both know their incommodities apart, and that no one man has any
reason to contemn another.

Nor is it the least restraint from pride of a free and ingenuous spirit, the
magnanimity that it has within it self. For as he does not undervalue, so
neither does he prefer any other before himself, whom he values only by his own
right intentions acquiescing in what he is, and not affecting to be any thing,
that is another. He neither covets to detract, nor to depend, nor to have any
others otherwise affected toward him, then he is toward them. For he is as
continent in himself, and holds himself as happy, as him that he sees to be
more wise, or more strong, or more allied, or befriended then himself. He
cannot therefore be discomposed with envy, or emulation, which are the
tormentors of a proud spirit. For envy is a sharp humor, that mantles the face
with wrinkles, and fennowes the complexion, while it seeks no less to procure
the dissolution of the subject, then of the object: whereas a good temper loves
and values the worth that is in another, respects his quality, covets to
support it, and desires to communicate with it in the common benefits of
vicinity. Emulation is more heinous, raising a sedition in the commonwealth of
virtue, and turning the fairest Machines of wit and courage against the seat of
aequanimity: for it propagates envy, scatters the contagion into many hearts,
and seeks to turn the balance to the contingency of force and violence, No
matter what succeeds, so that which stands in the way of its undue aspiring
be demolished. Such furious spirits do not only molest the world with their
actions; but bear a sway in civil companies by their passions, till they are
out of breath: and then those clear and even carriages, that were wont to
oblige and conquer men (more manfully) will be ready to evince them. But some
one may be instant with me here.

If it be to debase my self, being noble, to be Good Natured, is it not better
to be proud? If it be to stay my advancement, being capable of obtaining it, is
it not better to be ambitious? If it do not admit of Politic, and Martial
virtues, whereby the world is governed, were it not better to unlearn it, then
to study to be deceived with a vain name: Since assuredly, whatsoever makes men
excellent cannot be a vice, howsoever it is termed, and whatsoever does
restrain them cannot be of virtue, howsoever it is styled? Be it so, I do not
suppose, that all Heroic actions are the Acts of Good Nature: but only, that a
Good Nature is the aptest subject of all Magnanimons virtues, and a kind of
stock and fuel to them; but not to their contraries. If a man be noble, it
prompts and supplies him with an high and generous mind, far above the vulgar;
but it fails him in elation, or vain glory, or impotent domineering; which
only make men great in their own conceits, and less in other men's. If he tend
to advancement, the same incenseth him by all the means that are fair and
virtuous; for it is but sloth and degeneration not to seek to mend his fortune,
but to ambition his preferment with servility, or fraud, or cunning, his nature
starts back with abhorrency, Live. l. 42.
and reclaims him ( Interdum in praesens tempus plus profici dolo, quam
virtute) that craft, though it seem to profit, finds a great abatement at the
foot of the account, if it do not bring us back to begin again, or bring us
into great intanglements; for by one miscarriage more has been lost, then
accrued by many Acts of virtue. The like in Politic and military devoirs, it
boils under public spirits, and makes the love of ones country like the love
of Immortality: but it fails, if we begin to affect the Tyranny, to subvert the
liberty, to enslave the people, or exterminate the Nobility. Only here it
strikes and suffers violence. Happy was the Roman Commonwealth, while it had
Camillus, Cincinnatus, and such other Modest and invincible spirits upon all
emergences to deliver it; and immediately to deliver up their supreme
Authority. But after one ill exmaple (as Tacitus speaks in another case of the
Military election of an Emperor) when the mystery of Usurping was discovered,
and the power of the Senate found to be waved by C. Marius, a person of base
Original, and a barbarous mind, it was not possible to restore, or support it
from farther lapses.

2. Good Nature is void of interest, and design, Can thou love for love, and
make that the reward? Eld. Broth. Fletcher.
As the roundest mouthed of our Comaedians has placed the words for me. But
there is an end of all things and an action, or affection cannot be the end of
itself: for it must be needs to obtain the fruition of somewhat beyond itself.
How can this be? Yet to love for another love may import some valuable
consideration, for it cannot want effects and services: but to love and delight
in the acts thereof, when one knows the object to be insolvent, or ungrateful,
is not this a paradox of Good Nature? But what? Can the Sun forbear to shine,
because it raises stench from the dunghill? Or the Spring to flow, because the
stream is damned? Or the earth to yield its fruit, because the husbandman
permits it to rot upon the ground? To have a'kind and liberal disposition is so
natural to a gentle breast, that it cannot be abstracted, or in sense, or
reason. And that, although there be, that pay them with their own coin,
receiving all as freely as it comes, as if the Good Nature only did it to ease
it self, and were obliged to its percipients. But such a Nature soon becomes
Master of its second acts, and is not therefore foolish, because it is simple.
Though it take a pleasure in its first acts, or emanations, yet it can improve
it in its second, without any foreign interest. He knows his goodness does as
much consist in the object, as the subject, and that it cannot be complete if
the object be not capable, that is, if it be ungrateful. For it does not
derogate from goodness to delight in the proper consequents of its acts, as in
love and commendation: but rather, that it self is argument to commend it, for
Contemners of Cav. Biondi. Donz. Desterrada.
same are commonly despisers of virtue. To strew ones bounty, as a way to
lucre, or a step to ambition, these indeed are the trains of the Masquers,
which the Nobler Spirits value with that contempt, that it deserves: But if
veniality be professed, and it be in an honest Candidation, we may then come
in, not upon the score of Good Nature, but of liberality and Magnificence,
which are but superstructions. To advance yet a little farther, the most
discreet and prudent acts of a free spirit may be ill requited, and yet it is
not so weak as to repent them. As if one should argue, I have found benefit by
the free-heartedness of such a person, and yet, I have no particular obligation
to him: for he did not intend particular kindness unto me. What do we think?
would it be a plausible Compliment coming from the open house of a noble
person, to tell him, you had made your self welcome, and to bid him thank
himself? Or being beset with thieves or Ruffians, and by some liberal hand
rescued, to take your Congee, and bid him thank his own generosity: he would
have done no less for any other. Indeed, those offices, that humanity does
exact, I am bound to do to the ungrateful; but in others, reason will not
justify a profusion; howsoever a Good Nature is never discouraged, or diverted
by disappointments.

. IV. Hitherto in generals; by the clearing of which it remains, that a Good
Nature is most Amicable: under which, I entend to order all the subordinate
affections of my subject, comprising Amity and Humanity.

And First, I find Amity divided to my hand by an excellent Les Essais de
Michel Seigneur de Montaigne.
writer into four kinds. viz. Natural, Conjugal, Social, and Hospital: which
are apt to comprise the sum of my discourse on the first head, though otherwise
one might be styled so, more aptly than the rest.

1. Natural affection descends upon children like weights from a pulley, with
invincible springs of revolution, ever laboring to advance them, and never
resting in any measure of benevolence. All its benefits are solid, all its
passions are unfeigned, all its actions to the utmost. What bounds or limits
can circumscribe a thing that is indefinite, according to the goodness of the
Relatives? If we consider it at diverse seasons; Hope, and longing earnes
toward their tender years, expectation looks wistfully toward their growing,
endeavors always ready to promote their well doing. Joy in their prosperity.
Anxiety in their doubtful state. Solicitude for their recovery, and grief for
their miscarriages* And none of these indifferent. What delight may be
conceived in their presence can only be estimated by the grief of parting, and
tediousness of absence, and exultancy at their return. The Roman Dames have
dyed in embraces on their sons necks, returned from the fatal jour^ of Cannae
and Thrasymenus. And the Grecian Matrons for joy of their sons victories in a
Pythian or Olympian game. If these affections be not strong, the Parent is
unnatural, i. e. as vicious in this kind as can be: for he cannot do more* he
cannot hate his issue: No man ever hated his own flesh. Yet this affection
works diversely, according to the quality of the breasts wherein it is
somented, whereby we may see, what tyranny opinion may sometimes exercise over
nature. Brutus the first of the Roman Consuls, was accounted no ill man. Yet
when his 2 sons were convicted of conspiracy against the Commonwealth, he sat
over them (as his place required) and when all the eyes of the people were bent
upon him, to see how he would behave himself, he commanded them to be executed,
Live. l. 2.
[ eminente animo patrio inter publicae paene ministerium] his public spirit
overbare his private. He was able to keep his countenance unaltered. And this
was commended in him, not as inhumane, but as somewhat more then humane. But
when Torquains Manlius put his son to death for a prosperous fight without
authority, the Youth of Rome disdained his triumph, and hated to go out to meet
him, L. l. 8.
styling thenceforward severe commands Manliana Imperia. Yet he had public
reason, and is not yet acquitted to posterity. For the laws of Nature seem to
be greater then any laws of discipline; nay, then the laws of the Commonwealth.
It is not exacted in our law for a Wife, or a son to impeach a Husband or a
Father: nor are condemned if they be receivers of his stolen goods, because
they could not do less than obey his command, and conceal his trespass, which
the law does not imagine that a Wife, or a Son ought to judge, (...) to
suspect; although (indeed) it be evident that they know it.

But the temper of Zaleucus is most admired, who having made a law to exoculate
those, that were taken in adultery, and his Son being first taken he put out
one of his sons eyes, and another of his own. So at once appearing a most
indulgent Father, and an upright Judge; which I shall rather leave for a
subject of declamation, then examine here.

2. Such is love descending: The retribution is not expected to be so ample.
Persolui gratia non protest, nes malo Patri. The filial is rather duty, though
such as implies love and honor. It is insinuated to us from the first
stretchings of our arms and hands for succor, with the first stammerings of
our tongues, and earliest exertions of our reasons. Sense and experience trill
it down gently to the bottoms of our hearts* and custom and education combine
with Nature to augment and cherish it. Though we suffer many things in our
childishness which we take in evil part; yet flesh and blood is a faithful
Monitor to reduce us to submission; And that indelible obligation to refresh
our obedience. In the midst of a disgust, the misadventure of a parent will
bring the child into concern, and every ligament of its heart will ache at his
jeopardy; for every nerve in its body is a cord of affection, that binds to him
that gave them. When Craesus's son, who was born tonguetyed, saw his Father
like to be smitte^^ a Battle, he cried save the King, and dyed by ^at
endeavor. But if there be a true aversion, from thence a real longing for the
Fathers (...), ut sit divus, modo non sit vivus* There is no apology, no
reason, no virtue to excuse it. It Is incompatible with the temper of a Good
Nature, When the daughter of Servius Tullius, being married to a Tarquin,
conspired with her Husband the death of the King her Father through ambition of
the Kingdom, she made her Chareteere to drive over his dead body as he lay
slain in the streets, to the utter detestation of mankind; but with such a sort
of wickedness, as is yet untermed by any name. For if Solon thought fit to make
no law against Parricide, Cic. Pro Roscio ne non tam prohibere, quam admonere
videretur
because it had never been committed, least he should seem to admonish of a
crime unheard of, rather than to prohibit it: how could such a fact as hers,
(an instance once for ever) be known or branded by any common appellation? She
is an example without parallel. But should we go about to enumerate others on
the contrary, we might be infinite. Only that same Manlius, who was so severe a
Father, deserves to be commended as a Son. For whereas his Father was accused
by the Tribunes of the People (among other things) for ignoble and unworthy
breeding of himself, Live. l. 7.
he came to M. Pomponius, the chief Prosecutor, and entering with him, as it
were for farther information, into his appartment, he there obliged him, seting
his poniard to his breast, to dismiss the whole appeal, which when it came to
light procured him honor and advancement.

3. Fratrum quoque gratiarara est. It Is observed that Brothers seldom do agree;
whether through too much familiarity, which engenders contempt; or too much
competition, while they account themselves by nature equal, by favor
prejudiced, or by law and custom impeached of their native privileges,
interfering with one another. They are ost in brigues and skirmishes, and as
often in reconcilements, and recrudities. Their fallings out are but means of
their holding still together, and when they seem to be at the greatest
distance, they fall into an easy coalition against a stranger, that seeks the
wrong of either. Acquaintance from the cradle, similitude derived from their
parents, sympathy of affections, frequent broiles, and passions do the more
cement them* and though the wealth of one be the impoverishing of another, yet
the cause is foreign; and the stronger has a natural respect for the weaker,
and the weaker a natural dependence upon the stronger: which is more near, than
remote acquired aids, and less offensive (because more secret, and more due) to
the sense of honor, and reputation. So that brotherly love answers many
obligations, that are to be understood, and never to be expressed* And wherever
any Amity is comprehensive of more respects, it may multiply unto infinite:
especially where the ground of it is so pure, and unquestionable. Which has
moved the most intimate of friends to adopt this appellation, as the most
significant of perfect Amity. Cato the younger, who could find in his heart to
let his friend Munatius, coming kindly to see him in his province of Cyprus
Plutarch.
to part from him disobliged, and take no notice of it; neither was so ready
afterward to make him satisfaction: was so fond of his Brother Caepio, that
for 20, years he neither sup't, nor walked abroad without him, he followed him
into the Camp, he left his charge to visit him in another Country, being sick,
and finding him deceased, lamented over him in such manner, as was not
accounted seemly in a valiant, or a wise man (such as he was reputed) and being
ever counted parsimonious to it, spent the value of eight Talents upon his
Monument. So much may be in Brotherhood, when ingenuous Minds are brought up
both together. Nor (peradventure) whatsoever is conceited, can any other
friends depending upon will or fancy be any more, than an imitation of it, even
as art imitates Nature, or the shadow represents the life, for secondary acts
can but tend to make an union like the first. What can we do for a friend more,
than to make him as our self, to adopt him into our blood, and account him as
con-native to us?

4. The love of a Brother to a Sister is so pure and innocent by Nature, as if
it took no notice of any difference of sexes: save only as a Brother respects
the tenderness of a Sister, and a Sister honors the worth and valor of a
Brother, and is most passionate in his concerns and services. Q. Margaret de
valois has written her memoirs (almost) on purpose to show what affection she
bore the person, and the interests of her Brother the Duke of Alencon (the name
that was so gracious to our Q Elizabeth,) and what persecutions it did occasion
her. So that this sex may have a pure Amity toward men, and are most unjustly
bespattered anent their fairest offices. Their civility, their secrecy, their
pity, their sedulity, their pretty arts of covering, and dissembling (which are
unsearchable) when they seek to do a kindness, are traduced and profaned. The
abuse of them is the more heinous, especially where there should not be any
shadow of suspicion, as among relations. Incest is as Murder, or as treason, a
thing abhorrent unto Nature, which many brutes decline, and will rather wast
their solitude* And to bring dishonor on a kinswoman is conspiracy against the
whole blood, an act of malice greater than of lust* For the fences that are
between relations are but weak and moveable, being their distinct estates are
apt to be coincident into one family. Hence an uncle is collateral to a Father,
a Cosin-german to a Brother, and the more remote are but supplemental to
defects that may happen. The distinct and distant Mansions of a worthy kindred
are like City and Countrey-houses to one another where they have confidence and
community and are mutual stays, and pledges against vicissitudes and turns of
fortune. They are friends which nature gives, which use confirms, which are
made perfect at the first fight, if Relation be but mentioned. Cosins do as
frequently resemble one another as Brothers Uterines, They have somewhat in
them gentilitial to the family. Their lineaments, features, aires, graces,
manners, some or other, more or less do symbolize together, and call (as it
were) upon one another to be mutually ingratiated. Yet there are, that flight
these bonds as complemental and unnecessary* that hate an obligation coming on
them without election, that prefer any other of their own acquist; that think
themselves to be born at liberty, and not to be contracted but by their own
choice and pleasure. This I hear, but take it to be most ungrateful, and
unworthy of a noble spirit, if in what it vindicates to its own will, it
derogates from Nature, whose bond is indispensable. Neither can I judge that
person capable of a chosen friendship, who is but a formal and perfunctory
Courtier of his consanguinity, or allyances.

. V. Of the next sort of Amity, me-seemes there may be some doubt; whether the
Heroic love (which being in order to it, we will therefore consider under the
same head) be not greater then the conjugal* For so it seems by all the fables
of the Poets, which have raised this to admiration by variety of examples;
While the poor Penelope would have been but a solitary instance of Conjugal
affection: if the Virtuous Sir P. Sidney (sensible of that defect) had not once
supplied us with the story of Argalus and Parthenia. And it seems in Nature
that nothing can be greater then this Heroic flame, for it is the first
product of the excellency of strength both of soul and body. When the blood is
warm, the spirits light and airy, the humors soft and oily; when the fancy is
luculent, and most affected with the object of its brightness, the reason ever
agitated, and the memory most tenacious of impressions. Then the valiant youth
is urged by nature to the uttermost, knowing that youth is fleeting; and once
illuded, conceives flames no more. Wherefore here the incenseth him, here the
glories in his humbleness, no less then in his bravery, here she triumphs in
variety of affections. The mind is restless in devising how to take, oblige,
and compass; and the body as its instrument, must acknowledge no weariness,
shrink at no danger, omit no watching* but hold it self still in the brightest
armor, as if it were to revel in the midst of a battle. The eyes are scattered
like wandering spirits: the color comes and goes in longing, blushing, and
aspiring: the lips tremble, and the hands that took the boldness, shake in the
handling of the arms of love. The lover strait becomes a prisoner to a
labyrinth, where he counts his bondage the sweetest liberty, and to tread the
maze more desirable, then to find the clue.

If desire only (as Des Carts apprehends) do comprise horror and agreement.
Des pass. 1.2. artic. 86.
One of a sudden apprehension of miscarrying, the other in a settled
representation of enjoying somewhat most agreeable. If doubts and fears be a
tendency toward despair (the wretched sciatica of the soul) If hope it self be
but an unquiet inmate in a lovers breast, a vehement incendiary* and grief do
but dismally extinguish those flames. Judge whether this love be not made of
strong ingredients, more than any other. While desire rules, the good is
absent. Absence of the object pines the faculty. If hope relieve, fear
assayleth, delay tormenteth, disappointment drives unto madness; Longing
stays and reduces* The sweetness of imagination dandleth and demulceth the
eager spirits; until that air be vented in a sigh and grief succeed to
resuscitate the malignant humors. Such storms are frequent in a lovers breast,
such change of weather, such force of constellations, what can there be in any
other love, that is not here? Can we but laugh to hear a debauched gallant (at
last) to slight all womankind, to mock at love as folly, and in experience;
and to make only men to be objects to one another? As if a fond fancy of some
society, or a proud conceit of worth and merit; or in fine, a sense of
obligation (which by bringing the obliged person into bondage through the
tyranny of gratitude, does commonly undermine its own Empire with a faction of
liberty, since he that thinks himself more obliged to another, then he can
readily requite, begins to hate him that has a mortgage in him, and to have a
secret aversation to his person) could be more available then Nature*
procurement, which is a virtuous desire of conjunction between our sexes:
whilst in all motions, the Natural are more strong then the moral, and this
then any other Natural: A resolute, or a valiant man cannot be by reason, if he
have it not in the firmness of his mold or constitution; So as the soul is knit
to the body, it is able to act in it, or above it, or without it. If it be
weakly joined, it will be apt to serve. If strongly, it will make it suffer
hunger or thirst, or heat or cold, or cast it headlong upon danger to attain
its more heroic ends; and this of love, as its principal; but heroic love
cannot be but in a young and lively spirit chaste and inviolable.

And then, we may boldly say, that there cannot be such affection between two
parties of the same, sex, as between a pair of lovers; because other love does
only tend to bring conveniences together; but this to propagate its like (the
forciblest impulse and chief design of Nature) to make two inclined Relations
complete in Union: In a word, to join bodies, as well as souls, and only so to
make not as if it were another self, but a real and entire combination of two
in one. If therefore one man can love another, more then a woman; either he
that loves is no man, or he that is beloved is an Hermophrodite, or somewhat
more inhumane. But as this love (which we value by its energy in innocence and
chastity) has as its noblest end, the butt of wedlock: so gold itself may be
dear bought, and a thing highly prised may sink of value fruition. Who would
undergo what is necessary in love, or honor, if he knew the vanity of his
ends? Or serve an apprentiship, if he knew that that should be the best of his
time? Suffer so much in Amorous wooing, and in the remedy be worser ganched
then in the malady? For in marriage, how early is society, how ready is
neglect, how soon are other ends regarded, and the nimia of love as much
studied to be unlearned, as ever conn'd before? The servant practices now to
become a Master of his wife, a Father of his children, a Prince, or a Principal
man in his country, Honor, Wealth, and Providence do cut off all the
superfluity of affection; and leave little else but law to bind wedlock.
Whereas the Heroic love is ever longing, never satisfied, one desire answered
or attained multiplies a thousand: ever ardent and over-valuing, never
sleighting, or remiss: ever humble and obsequious, never haughty or imperious:
ever single, and solitary in its end and object: never interessed or employed
in any other, but what may serve it. In a word, lives not in itself, but in its
love. Much more of it might be said,
But its laws I once obeyed. Co. Mont. Vraniag.

Therefore say no more at first.

2. On the other side. There is no Faith in married men: some applauding it
through sensuality, others weary of it for want of virtuous usage, Others
seeming to contemn it, because they have attained; who were they widowed should
indeed be close mourners, and never rest till they had repaired it. If it be
the reward of noble services, the best of all possessions, the end and rest of
all turmoiled passions: We may rather blame the vanity of the World, that can
never answer expectation; then to blast those flowers that are ready to bud,
and teem with the choicest fruits of life. How incongruous is it to imagine
that the thirst should be sweeter then the wine, the hunger then the choicest
fare? Can Heroic love, as it is accompanied with so many pangs and
convulsions, be its own reward? Is there any pleasure in doubts and fears? Is
it better to be in the storm than in the bay, or to sail in a troubled sea,
only that one may sail, than to gain the port of enjoyment? Let it be the
paradise of a fool to be ever in contemplation, the feast of a Miser to look on
precious viands unassayed, or the punishment of a woman-hater to be Tantalized
with female objects. The noble conqueror in the midst of fruition shall find
his love to beget love infinitely, new delights to germinate in every change of
intercourse, and desires to issue without pain out of pregnant satisfactions,
while the gathering of one crop is but to prepare the ground for another. One
kindness draws another, one endearment claspeth with another, one heart
combineth with another: while the bounty of goodwil, the facility of flowing
spirits, the cession of gentle complacency, the undecaying youth of soul afford
contentment to extremity of old age. Those souls are now completed in their
union, which a part would have been like separate souls expecting the
resurrection: Their joys are conjoined to make each other happy: they live
each of them a double life, while a single lives but by halves. They live each
of them as much again as they did before. Before they knew not what it was to
live. Children succeed to augment and to perpetuate these felicities, house and
ornaments, and (erewhile) neglected furniture press to pay their contributions,
and all inferior states to veil to this their Paramount. Besides, whatever was
in Heroic love, or is in any other friendship is here more completely. Such
benevolence in either breast, as meets all evils to anticipate them from the
other: Such a well-wishing to one another, as is purely for one another sake;
though pleasure or advantage be removed, and sickness, poverty, or disgrace
come instead thereof: Such impatience of absence, as testifies what the dolor
of loss would be: such grief of loosing as can only show how exquisitly a
loving heart may be pained with compunction, how intolerable, how inexpressible
this resentment is. In brief, such constancy of obliging, such transcendency in
vigor, such inalterable honor and esteem: such vindication: such
condescension: such harmony and symbolizing of joys and griefs, that are able
to make a palace of a Cottage, and turn the darkest night of adversity into a
ballet till the morning.

And these undoubtedly are in wedlock they effects of a Good Nature, but if the
same that mock at love abandon such marriages (as we have magnified) to the
idolizing of their Paisans: it is because (no doubt) by thinking to be
exquisite in the objects of their pleasures, they have misplaced the true
object of their felicity, which is in one and not in many. Lust will incommode
itself sundry ways, and vitiate all those purest jewels that seem to be left
in another place, and at a distance from it. Who reproaches another behind his
back, thinks that other (who thinks nothing) does the like by him, and when
he meets him, shuns him to the others admiration, and (at last) brings
insensibly upon himself, and beyond intention, what at first he suspected. So
he that wrongs his marriage bed makes himself jealous at the first without a
cause, and at last not without reason. Howsoever it will withdraw affection
(which is the true bond of happiness, and not any sensual fruition) and then he
shall at once dissolve all the ligaments of his house, the contignation of his
family, for as he stands affected to the tree, he will stand to the branches,
and the children reciprocally to them both Luxury will not flow in without
other violations. But who think to retain the vice, and to provide against the
inconveniences will hardly escape others, that they foresaw not. Although what
arguments to such as can collude with virtue? Their prudence cannot be upheld
long, as it is disjoined from that connection: nor misfortunes be declined. Non
potest jucunde vivo, nisi cum virtute vivatur.

But shall we dare to oppose the Maxims of our Grandsirs? That persons are
equal, fortunes only do incline, that marriage is only for convenience, love
will follow, where it is well provided: that a beauty is no attractive, or
virtue any motive to a wiseman. That the fondnesses of youth are to be broken
otherwise, that wealth and honor may be espoused at the last, and a potent
family rather then a most accomplished person? Italian Contracts! where the son
sees not the daughter, which the Gente honorate have adjusted for him, till
the wedding day: As many of our heirs here until conveighances and settlements
be ready for the sealing. If these be occasion of like accord to follow, indeed
there is need of caution in the contract, but whether a Good Nature can suffice
to all adventures, I must rather crave time for experience, than undertake to
argue here.

. VI. While we treat only of the Amicable bent of a Good Nature, with the Acts
and characters thereof, though we may entrench somewhat upon the Topic of
friendship, yet we are not bound to follow the extent of that virtue (if I may
so call it) or systan rather of many singular excellencies, but only to trace
the rudiments of Social Amity in an incorrupted Nature: A sociable Nature I
take to be most humane, and apt to Amity, and the more Amicable, the more
sociable. Therefore first, let us take some notice wherein it seems to suffer
violence or restraint.

1. In altitudes, or acts of bravery: which extend the habit either of the
mind, or of the object, when it is discerned, we discover a ridiculous
pusillanimity; one making ombrage of a petty office with much estate, another
prodigal of officiousness about nothing. We despise a little spirit in
attempting a great matter, which we call offering at a thing; and an ostentator
of magnanimity in a thing mean and ordinary. Who would not laugh at a Spanish
smith, Mr. Howell.
coming with his long cloak and sword (to be put off, and laid aside in order)
to shoe an horse? Or a Mountebank descending from his Coach, or litter to draw
a tooth upon the stage? So in morals, to do any little acts of kindness with a
flourish and vapor, shows that there is not much goodness to be expected
there; but that it is intended, a little should go far, and be more requited,
then deserves. When we see another as busy as a nurse to please a child, (when
she gives it Porcelain, or Venice-glasses to break for its pleasure) to obtain
a little breath of favor. Do we not think strange of his profusion? If real
kindnesses be squandred away, without respect of times, or persons, only that
abundance of good will may be noted; those-uneven stretches will render Nature
low at another time, when it should rise up to be adequate to occasion: whereas
she delights to keep an even course of bounty, and not to strain but for some
advantage to herself, in the same individual, or another.

2. In indifferency, and remissness nature is no less restrained, whether it be
in sluggish flat demeanures, which are accounted good only because they are
thought to have no hurt in them; or in servile compliance, which seems to be
so loving, as if it loved all (and so it does alike) and hated none. It
contradicts not, nor admonishes, nor disliketh. Only to keep its own quiet,
set a compa^^ quite contrary, and it is not altered: but as this may admit of
some cunning, as well as the complaisance of some courtiers, we shall waive it,
as not intending to speak of things artificial. Our Good Nature toward its
proper objects is rational without studying, free without impulse, and keen and
active of its own vigor.

.. I. The first respect wherein we shall consider it, is in its love of
company, whether ordinary or adventitious.

1. With its confidents it is an hearts ease to communicate; the only pleasure
of the soul being in diffusion, and the only grief to be pent up in solitude,
and in silence. Retirement is an extinguisher to its flames, and obscurity
gives it night without either sleep or rest. Hence Philosophers have professed
to an excellent art of contemplation, to make the soul converse with it self,
as with another, that a man might be nunquam minus sola, quam cum maxim sola,
as the Emperor and Philosopher professed of himself. And as Divines teach us of
communion with the blessed Trinity to recompense the want of external
communications, knowing that a man's mind will ((...)) feed upon his heart, and
prey upon his spirits, if it have not some object, wherewithal to entertain
its spiritual appetite. Nor is it an easy death to be thus stifled; but it is
sensibly the sweetest life to impart our alacrity unto others, that can requite
it: to toss the ball of free discourse to them, that can take it on the racket
and return it (...) brea^ a jest where it may be sure to be well retorted. This
is to revive while we droop, to grow while we wast, and to thrive while we
play. To live our own lives and a part of theirs; to enjoy our own joys
multiplied with reflections, and enjoy others by inter-changing: to receive
innumerable quantity of spirits out of others breasts, and to dis-spirit none,
but to live one life of sense, another life of reason, and another life in the
common light of our acquaintance.

2. Which makes the same disposition as covetous to Ampliate this same number
out of every incident conversation. As it is an indecency to intrude into
strange company without occasion for fear of interfering in any businesses, or
interpealing privacy: So it is an inhumanity to have an aversation, or a
niceness of accosting, for I may disturb their apprehensions with somewhat that
is amiss in them, or me: Either weakness through disuse, or a certain pride in
prejudging of the company. What has hesitancy or suspicion to do amongst the
freer spirits? Or curiosity of knowing before we venture? Since there are as
many forms of receding without offense, as there are of fair access, and the
same rule of civility subservient to them both. Though women have not all the
latitude that men may use, yet hardly any but children are restrained for want
of discretion. Nay, a greater pleasure is conceived (oftentimes) in the company
of strangers, then of our familiars, either through variety, or exciting of the
spirits to accommodate our selves unto them, to gain their good opinion, or to
learn by them. Therefore are men brought up abroad in Schools, or Courts, or
Camps, or foreign Countries, that they may gain an universal humanity: which is
to enlarge their Capacity, and advance the common rudiments of Good Nature, but
our discourse is not of such as are highly accomplished, or utterly rude of
breeding. In the first, Nature not being so discernible by reason of its alloy;
nor in the second, because it lies invelopped in the Ore.

Wherefore a Good Disposition will meet those ends with as bounteous an humor,
as its measure of natural, or acquired good parts can afford it; and avoid all
impediments that encumber, or with hold it. Which is not done by strained
endeavor. The presence of what we love, will move alacrity in us, and in them
from whose presence we conceive it. Whereas a desultory humor, or exultancy
brought from abroad into an unconcerned company moves disdain. It Is fit we
should be modest in conversation, and not come puffed up with our own hopes or
fortunes (which a mind well-governed would conceal) despising others, but
applying our selves to accommodation: first by civility, which is prompt and
ready to such a temper, that esteems none inferior to it self, and is ready
to justify and assert to another all the honor that it finds in him (which we
have showed before of our Good Nature, as it is void of pride, and then by
courtesy; which is no less natural unto him, who also esteems himself equal
(in the rectitude of his mind) unto the best, and noblest. By which means
silence soon is broken, and complacency loosed, whether it be in serious
argument, or in pleasant entertainment. Once most sure it is, that nothing
agrees less then taciturnity. Should we be studying to be wise, when we should
use our wisdom? Should we be studying to excel, where if we did excel,
'twere' fit we should suspend the use, to make our selves equal? Are we afraid
to expose our selves? What account, what state do we make of our precious
selves, while we make so little of our company? Do we affect to be honored,
and not to be beloved? Or do we think, that to give occasion of suspicion by a
sullen silence, will be the best way to procure it? Though Cato was a wise man
repleat with solid virtue: yet for this reason he became oftentimes
unacceptable; and once in particular, when he came to visit Pompey, that noble
Captain did him all honor double, that he might be the more soon, and fairly
rid of that severity, which as Great as he was, he feared and hated while he
complemented. Deprive us of loquacity, and it is no matter what Government we
live under, a Tyranny is a good as a Royal Monarchy. It Is no matter what minds
we wear about us. Ignorance is as good as wit. Who will carry gold in his
pocket, if it be a shame to show it? I admire not (just at this point) that the
Ancient Philosophers complain of contempt, while I remember what Masters they
were of this Cynical Dogma of Taciturnity, an intolerable thing amongst men. I
had rather hear a fool prate, or a dog bark, then see a barbed Master sit
silent.

But if the argument be serious, the soft composure of minds, and expressions
(that follow) of mutual apprehensions have a singular power to attract, and
oblige acquaintance. A thing, which the virtuous Epaminondas valued so highly.
That he thought the day lost, if he went in public and did not gain a new
friend. Besides, that the thing bears a singular pleasure, and satisfaction in
it self, inasmuch as the soul sees it self by the light of those collisions;
which else would not know how to guess at the notions, that it has of it self,
or the things without it. Such company is a Mirror to ourselves, whereby we
know, when we want trimming, and wherein we want accomplishing.

Or if the entertainment of our time and coversation be only to refresh, and
divert one another, the most homilitical of all virtues is facetiousness, which
has a way to gain ones heart, to delight ones eye and ear, to quippe without
distaste, to insinuate with sweetness, and to make the Droll most beloved and
desired, for it is (indeed) a most Gentile Quality, and such as Princes have
found, whereby to remit their Majesty for their use and pleasure, and to resume
it without any Observation. But Satirical wit has too much malice in it, and
can hardly be ingenuous without aspersion; or fail to touch some person more
picquantly then another, which is contrary to the humor of our Good nature,
that avoideth all impediments of fruition in Society.

1. And First, in avoideth Melancholy, as it is a minding considering of our
selves, more then others: and instead of rendering us able to contribute delight
to the company does rather call them to succor, and relieve us, and is apt to
make us the subject of their notice. And what can they note in it but
imbecility and want of spirits? Or sloth and want of resolution? For a good man
will bear (at least) his own infirmities, as much as can be, that he may be
ready to aid another, if need require. Or if they be such as he cannor cover,
or dissemble, he will not come abroad with them. Affectus uti corporis vulner a
sunt celanda. When the Gracious Pyrocles was most frankly entertained at the
house of Honest Kalander, while they were at Table, a letter comes to him, that
his son Clitophon was taken Prisoner (if it were no worse) by the Savage
Helots. When he rises from the Table, and is two or three days sequestered in
his chamber with rending pangs and dolors for his only son: his guest could
learn nothing, not from his servants of the cause of so much absence. And this
you will say was noble, but it might be easily done in lesser cases.

2. Secondly it avoideth anger, and exception. Though Homer introduce his Gods
and Heroes brawling in their feasts and public councels; and the Ancient
Romans, as appears in their Orators and Historians (though I never read of
any duels among them upon these occasions) were wont to applaud themselves, and
reproach their adversaries both in their Comitia and their Senate; yet our
modern manners seem utterly to disallow it. The Italian will continue his fair
carriage, while he has retained Bravo's to revenge his conceived malice. The
French after some short Brouilleric will recollect his jollity, and send a
challenge to your lodging. The Spaniard will call you no worse then Senor at
the rapiers drawing. So much we must approve, as carries the shadow of virtue
along with it, and saves embroilments in civil conversation. For the rest, a
Good Nature is not subject to exception, is not lightly impelled unto anger;
but easily reduced unto satisfaction, and is never transported to revenge.

1. Not exceptious, for the causes of that are incompatible unto this. It is
not of a saint and wearish temper, having a sound mind in a sound body: the one
of which (however) is able to correct some imbecility in the other. It has
never been out of love, or use of conversation, whereby what liberty it has
wont to take to it self, it has still allowed to another. Ingenious persons
have a power over one another without usurpation. It is not shady or retired,
fancying it self to be unintelligible, and grieving when it is discovered: for
it desires nothing more then to be rightly understood, and if it find
otherwise, is glad of an occasion to vindicate itself without alteration. It
has no prejudice against any person or profession, or condition: neither
thinks itself to ly so much at open guard, as to be obnoxious to every pass of
wit, or censure; or is so tender as to be lightly hurt by them. And to blow
away a little dust, or to put by a ruder chocque in play, or exercise is but a
sport of Candor. In a word, being void of pride, it is not pricked about
punctilioes, that such an one saluted another, and passed him by. That another
observed not his right of precedence. That a third descanted upon his words. Or
that the company did not treat him with such respects, or caresses, as he might
have expected from them, for he is more magnanimous: and knows there can be no
violence upon men's minds, but that in their own free actions they ought to do
according to their discretions, though it be to do amiss: since the strictness
of equity is hard to be had even from law, and honor: and we do not live (as
Tully says) among men absolute, but such as are ( tanqua^ simulachra virtutum)
moving statues or apparitions of virtues.

2. Not lightly impelled unto anger. Because it valueth not it self higher then
another; nor prefers its own apprehension. Opiniastrete is commonly the
boutefeu of anger both in those that are lightly angry, and lightly pacified,
if they be humoured; and in those that are slow to anger: but tenacious, and
almost implacable. Which latter is tyrannical in some Natures: but with some
difference has been observed in persons of highest virtue.

M. Livius Salinator, after he had borne the Consulat, Live. 1.28.
was brought to judgment by the Tribunes of the people, and unjustly cast and
censured, which he took so hainously, that he absented himself from the City,
and all public meetings. Eight years after, the Consuls bring him back to
Rome, but he came in old clothes, hair and beard neglected, importing in his
habit, and countenance a signal memory of his disgrace. The Censors compel him
to be shaved, and to lay aside his obsolete weeds, and come into the Senate:
where he sat long without a word speaking, till the cause of one of his
Kinsmen forced him to arise: and thereby moved the Senate, and all the Roman
people with consideration of the indignity wherewithal they had disobliged such
a man, whose head and hand they had so long wanted, while Annibal had been at
their gates, and A sdrubal was now entered with another Army, no less formidable
then the other. They unanimously choose him Consul: only he himself stands our
accusing the levity of the City in choosing him, that was not yet acquitted of
their condemnation. After much submission and entreaty of the Commonwealth he
is contented to hold, and to be reconciled first to his colleague Cl. Nero (with
whom before he had had contention) but not without great difficulty, because he
thought the iniquity of his fortune did not set him on even terms in the
action. Then to go out and archieve his Province, which was to meet Asdrubal,
while his Colleague went to oppose Annibal and to impeach their conjuction. But
as he was about to go, when Fabius Cunctator advised with him, how he would
wage that war: He answered, that as soon as ever he should see his enemy, he
would engage him. But why in such haste replied Fabius. Aut ex host, egregiam
gloriam, inquit, aut ex civibus victis gaudium, meritum certo, eisi non
honestum capiam. Notwithstanding he acted in entire correspendency with his
Colleague, and they returned both in Triumph. But when afterward this
Magistracy was expired, aed they were both chosen Censors. Nero who before was
the more placable, discovered now his Malignity rather was the greater; for he
degraded Livius his Colleague, because he had been condemned by the people, and
in revenge, Livius did the same to him for false testimony, and reconcilement:
and withal left all the Tribes (but one which had no part in his censure) in
arriere, because they had condemned him unjustly, and after made him Consul,
and Censor, Itaque ibi foedum certamen inquinandi famam alterius cum suae famae
damno factum est. L. 29.
On the other side, when there had been most public, sharp, and inveterate
enmities and competitions between M. Aemylius Lepidus, and M. Fulvius Nobilior;
when they were both chosen Censors, and reconciled by Authority of Senate and
people, they continued so unanimous in it, that although their actions were
diverse between themselves, and disagreeable to the liking of the people, they
could not afterward be dis-jointed; though the people would have been as glad
to have made them appease one another, as ever they were to have reconciled
them. These great persons who have much reasons and reality in them, are the
more excusable if they do not remit of the height of their spirits, without as
good reason to return to a good will, as they had to turn from it. And yet many
times their mistake obstinacy may be such, as may render the task very
difficult to give them satisfaction. The misprision of Madam de Bar, the only
Sister of Henry le grand, about the Duke of Sully's traversing of her marriage
with the Comte of Soissons proved dangerous, Mem. de Max. de Bethunc.
and a long time unpracticable unto that favorite of the King her Brother, to
recover her good graces. And the Cardinal of Richelieu pined and languished,
and yet failed in his endeavor of appeasing the displeasure of the Q. Mother
of France, who had raised him, and afterward in hatred of him retired, and
dyed at Cologue.

There were great interests compounded in these passions, and the persons
great; If therefore they were bound to make account of themselves, and
peradventure did exceed in it, in the same act making too little of these
others whom before they had honored. What wonder if the indignation bare high,
and their own tempers suffered violence? In simple Nature, it not just to make
our selves the standard of another man's worth, or his approving of himself to
our judgments and apprehensions to be the exact quadrat of the rectitude of
his actions, or as he pleases or displeases us, so to set him by, or to set
by him: for we may value our selves as we are valued by others, but we may not
value others as they value us, to respect them just to that degree and no
otherwise: although it be (in effect) the more frequent use and practice.

Besides the same impulsives that are ordinary are not a Good Nature. For what
is a sense of incivility, or contempt to one that is void of pride? Or how weak
to one that is so full of goodness, that he rather accounts the same to have
been but a negligence or omission, or inadvertency? Or in fine, how null and
void to one, that does not more take upon him to be Judge of the Action, then
the party obnoxious, whom he presumes to have judged outherwise?

3. Wherefore it is easy to be pacified, having such arguments ready; and
being apt to coin more such out of the same mint, for it cannot retain its
anger without pain, though it have not had satisfaction It cannot so highly
resent opposition, since it knows none escape it. It cannot stick precisely to
its own rules or apprehensions, knowing that other men have others, either in
the general, or as to their particulars, no less convenient. It knows that no
man serves to all turns, but to be used as far as he is proper, more not to be
expected from him. That allowance is to be given to men's defects, and to some
men's wilful humors, which are not any just cause of anger, although
impertinent, or troublesome. It hates the acts as rude, and the effects of
anger it dreads as brutish, sometimes it cannot but remit its anger to
occasion, if the person be removed, or the like accident not probable to fall
again in the same manner. In effect, it considers, that all men cannot be
obliged by it self that has its common failings, and restraints of fortune:
And therefore having not expected overmuch, it has not been much disappointed,
nor cannot be much angry. In a word, it will do any thing to satisfy, or be
satisfied, rather than to quarter such a soldier long, as yields no quiet
where he is billeted, but drinks up all the oil and wine of cheerfulness. But I
shall either Tautologize, or anticipate; For I shall come again to border upon
this argument hereafter.

Yet it remains. That the best disposition may be moved to a just anger,
being quick and sensible as any other, and the more rational by the better
temper. Anger is a power given by nature (not a vice in it self) to repel
evils, or obstacles of good; and the exerting of its acts does more discover
what a man really is, then any other passion. Never any man was so innocent to
whom some cause of anger has not been administered: whose just and reasonable
designs have not been opposed, whose person has not been affronted, whose
rights have not been usurped, whose name has not been maliciously traduced. It
is but reason that these move anger, until the cause of anger be removed: our
rights be vindicated, our obstacles be removed, our opposites give way, and
those that abused us be brought to a sense and acknowledgement.

4. But, what difference is there in this act and passion in a good man and a
wicked? Where malice is, the first beginning moves toward revenge, and knows
no moderation in its progress, it intends to do as much mischief as it can for
the time, with more respect to the anger, then the cause of it; And it commonly
does so agitate, and discompose the countenance, and the violent motions of the
body, as renders it ungrateful and odious to spectators, even unconcerned.
Whereas a generous anger is becoming to many persons, such is the incension,
while it is opposed, such is the remission, when way is made to it. Such is the
motion of mind and body, as shows force and not violence. Such is the
progress, that if brave carriage will reduce the party, that is obnoxious to
it, the passion strait is in suspense, If not, yet it is not transported beyond
satisfaction; to bring as much more wrong (by way of revenge, and beyond the
Talion) on the subject of its displeasure. So can it rise, and fall with a
grace, and resume its equal temper without any straining. And where there is
such a just anger, and a government, and temper of reason in the prosecution,
it moves every one to be affected with the wrong, to respect the person that
seeks his own righting, and not to hinder. But against revenge all the world is
opposite, when it does discover the intention. For (indeed) there is no revenge
just, but in hostility: and there it may be acted beyond the law of nations
too; In private revenges, only pride and malice do exulcerate the kidneyes and
inflame the heart. What would we have for a word misplaced? An opprobrium? Or a
slander? Who shall judge of it? Will revenge let the cause go out of its own
hand? Will it suffer it to be extenuated, or argued? That indeed were against
it self: but to be aggravated, to make an Odium, to move the great Coloss of
honor (like the mighty shade that haunted Brutus to Philippi, that fatal day to
him) with the conjuration of arbitrary punishment. This it acts and executes
within it self and by that means never wants depending causes. For a suit
sometime commenced in the Court of revenge, upon a slight occasion, is
transmitted to the sons and Nephews to be finished. Neither are they small
matters, that revenge deals in; while it can look on blood spilt without
horror, on ruin brought upon its adversary with delight and glory, and on his
loss with the more content by how much it is the greater, and the provocation
given to the Procurer less. For in this, revenge does magnify its own Patron,
making it equal to offend a proud man and a Prince. But I dare not enter
farther into this Argument, least I be questioned into a Duel, which is a thing
now in fashion, and which I do not intend to answer at the present.

.. II. To come to particular affections in respect of friendship, so far as
they are coincident with a Good Nature, It may seem, that there three sorts, to
which we cannot deny this appellation, depending all, more or less, upon our
proper choice, and will. Our common, our concerned, and our dearest friends;
which may pass out of one sort into the other without any fault or violation.
For a common friend may prove beneficial, and a faithful friend to our concerns
may prove dear. And a dear friend may stand in every particular consideraton of
friendship. The observing of which distinction may serve to expedite us in some
questions, and save us in the mention of some others.

1. And first of common friendship there is difference of degrees. Some are our
acquaintance that salute us, and some come into our company, as occasion
serves; Others our familiars and confidents that usually converse with us.
Others our obliging friends, that inervisit us, entertain us, and study to
procure all mutual offices of kindness to us. How low might we descend in
division and subdivision of these orders, if we might be as curious in the
learning, as we ought to be in the life and practice of it? For of our ordinary
acquaintance, some are fleight and perfunctory; others ceremonious, that regard
our quality rather then our persons; others truly honourers and lovers of us,
as far as it happens to them to express it; some are accomplished with virtues,
some are superficial. Toward all a Generous spirit has a large and open heart
full of love unfeigned, as the merit of things and persons calls it out, you
shall see a fresh alacrity rise in the meeting of every of them, more or less,
according to the secret classis, wherein they are disposed in his mind (Neither
is that classis made fraudulently, or corruptly, but according to the true
knowledge, or genuine apprehension that he has conceived upon the measure of
his acquaintance.) You shall see what pleasure he conceives in parleying with
any of them, what delight in making, and receiving of addresses, what light in
his countenance when he congratulates, what shadow when he condoles, what
naturalness in his comportment, you cannot doubt of his reality. Neither, that
it ought so to be among good men, since all do dissemble the like behavior, as
the most effectual and commendable amongst men, And when we come to look into
it, none of these can be neglected. On the sleightest may depend our fame and
reputation, whereby we live in the common light, like Cameleons on the air. To
the Ceremonious we are beholden, that they think us worthy of that quality that
we obtain, and would not envy our Advancement. Though Alexander could
distinguish, and note the persons, that loved him, and that loved the King. Yet
he did not therefore hate them, Q. Curtius.
or think them Enemies. The virtuous command, regard, and honor, and nothing
is so superficial, but it may serve for ornament, if it be well disposed of. In
those that truly love and honor us, we have a seminary of succeeding
confidents, and a scope to exercise all obliging virtues, and fashion our times
to pregressive motion. Who are negligent of all degrees of friendship have
neither learned how to live, nor how to go about it. The source of all pleasure
and contentment! the treasure of all seasons! the communion of joys! the
Universal life! I know the Politiques that teach us so much caution, suspicion,
secret malice, and dissembling, and I contemn it, as the greatest vanity and
folly in the world, locked up in Archives. Wickedness as it were skrcen'd up in
sanctuaries, or Princely Cabinets, yet gathered up from the dregs of people.
Odi prosanum vulgus and arceo. For our familiar and obliging friends, we will
suppose them to be of spirit, and humor agreeable to our liking, for to build
upon a crafty nature, is to build upon an hollow ground undiscovered, and to
associate with persons that are humerous (self-lovers) is in vain, for they
will leave their companion in the middle of the way without reason, and if any
thing or person come to thwart them, they presently break into outrage, and
hate incontinent what even now they seemed to favor. It is enough to know
these, and a kindness, only not to have to do with them, beyond the hour of the
day, or the bon-jour. Yet we must acknowledge a good friend may be found
sometimes among the more morose Natures. And among the more severe, where it
happens; that is, among those that have a temperament of good qualities to
their seeming fowrness (they may have excellent virtues to it) none more noble.
But let us enter into our discourse, and stick in the Porch no longer, the Acts
of a Good Nature in these respects are diverse.

1. It loves to satisfy its own propension, having agreeableness for its proper
object. One may desire, but they cannot love for need. One may honor, but they
cannot love for an opinion of worth. One may revere, and accommodate ones
behavior; but one cannot love through the tyranny of duty or obligation. It is
so free, that it cannot be constrained from without; neither can the ultimate
dictate (as they say in the schools) of the practical intellect it self command
it. It is not a concession, or voluntary act merely, (though most voluntary)
but anemanation, Nay, many excellent persons, known and acquainted, may not be
the object of any great kindness to a Good Nature, for want of somewhat in them
suitable to a Gentle Heart. For what does it signify to be valiant, learned,
wise, it there be withal in the same person, an aversation or indisposition to
that, that I delight in? Or if he be a stranger? This love is nursed with
jocundity, and plays where Nature, or the use of fortune has prescribed it.
What though the objects be not so accomplished as others? Yet they are our
Brothers, or our Cosins, or our Comerades, or our daily Visitants. Or they are
most loving to us, most joyous in our company, most apt to please us, and most
concerned to serve us in any kindness. What though they may have their faults,
or miscarriages? The love is to the person. I love him as I love my self. Can I
hate my self for my failings, Deuc e amore, quivi e feed.
or misfortunes, that happen to me as their punishments? Or can I but desire
earnestly my own recovery, and better doing? There is a sort of friendship (if
I may so call it) or benevolence rather, grounded in a principle of virtue,
which when it fails, the virtuous lover withdraws his affection, misses of his
object, in the subject where it was before. But this is more Divine, and
Philosophical, then to be sought purely in a Good Nature; which having once
conceived an affection (upon liking) to a person cannot choose but prosecute
him with a good will, though he become vicious, even to the gallows or to the
utmost of disgraces. Whence it was never counted an unseemly thing to take
notice of condemned persons, and to salute them, and to cheer them up, going to
their executions. But a base thing to be ashamed of their chains, while they
retain any sparks of those good qualities, that we once respected in them, or
any. Color for their misfortunes.

2. It is born to go out of it self, and live among its friends, to be pleased
in their satisfaction, and advanced in their emolument, and afford its private
gustoes (if it have any) to their content, and pleasure. But I Will let this rest
a little longer.

3. It is not weak, or apt to be discouraged; Not of it self, for its love is
from pure Nature ( quea agit quando, and quantum potest) it cannot mantle, or
corrupt like a standing water: it is restless and never weary, but in every act
refreshes its own vigor, and buddeth in new desires of fruition. And which is
more. One friend cannot supply the defect of another; for a Good Nature has
sympathy with them all, that make up its body Politic of Civil life; uno
avulso non difficit alter. But the pain and grief of loosing, or of missing any
part shows by how quick a nerve it is united to the lover.

Nor by fortune, which though possibly an occasion, never was a cause of love.
And so, who loved not for need will not leave for need; or cease for fear of
loss; who never sought gain by his love, or ever knew any other use of wealth
but enjoyment, or any enjoyment like the pleasure of serving of his friends to
the utmost. If he joy and grieve with them, will he do it for nothing, Or stay
for asking? Or keep account of exchange of benefits or kindnesses, to do or
return only so much as he has before hand; or as he owes on interest, or in
strict gratitude? There is no account, where all is common. There is no
incentive of love like adversity, 'Twas but pretense what ever flaggs, or
droopes, while the Relative friend is in being: or droopes not when he deceases.

Nor at last by any other impeachments or prohibitions: for bars and walls
cannot sever true friends, and in this case (if in any other) Nitimur in
vetitum: we are the more invincible to attempt to succor, when we are
inhibited: either raise the siege, or loose the battle.

4. It is hardly dissolved, though possibly it may, if he that was once
familiar to us, do utterly neglect, or forget us; or fall to shameful vices,
and so precide the continuance of our correspondency; or if he prove
unnatural, or malicious, seeking as industriously to disoblige, as ever he did
to oblige us. Otherwise, how should enmities arise? Who never knew us do not
hate us: Nor is any disgust bitter, where the sweetness of mutual favor were
not more ancient. We may instance in all manner of examples. When Medea had
left her Country for the love of Jason, and found her self despised, and
forsaken, she could do nothing else but meditate on revenge, for (as she argued
with her Nurse,) Euripid. Med. (...).
A lofty mind cannot contain
When scornful wrong it bears in vain.
Nullae sunt inimicitiae, nisi amoris, acerbae.


When one Octavius had layen with Pontia Posthumia at Rome, and enflamed with
enjoyment of her, did in vain solicit her unto marriage, he slew her in
revenge of that repulse. When Caesar and Pompey (who had served one another in
the highest concerns of honor) the pledge of alliance failing, came to
contention, nothing but the ruin of one, or other could determine it. When
Lewis II. King of France came to quarrel with his Protector the Duke of
Burgony. When Edward the IV. King of England with his Restorer the Earl of
Warwick and Richard III with his supporter the Duke of Buckingham, what means
to compromise those differences but extremity? We see the same in private
friends, who once falling out run to duels; the sooner by how much the Amity
between them was the greater. Disdain on this part, blazeth suddenly, and
incenseth. Contempt inflameth, despite adds oil and brimstone to the fuel
of discontent: So that nothing rests, but a pointed most acumined revenge,
because there seems to be no other reparation of dishonor; Love and favor
(howsoever generous) are couditional to be understood: for they cannot consist
if they be not mutual and reciprocal, who fails once in such a point, he is
not to fail again: There cannot be a reconcilement, unless you can make a man
to be what he is not, or not to have done what he has done, which is impossible.

Pian piano! fair and softly! There is no such precipitancy incident to the
case, if a Good Nature (that is no Coward) might interecede in it. Medea was
not the best of women, and the Poet rather brings her in speaking as a fury,
then a Saint. He could not have put those words in Cornelia's mouth, when her
husband Anthony was in the Arms of Cleopatra (not superior unto her in wit or
beauty) and sought to withdraw her subsistence from her, and his own children
with her. Nor were Lewis, or the Crook-back equal Princes: Or the Earl and Duke
of the better subjects.

But when Caesor had overthrown his enemy, he pitied his misfortunes,
ingratiated his friends, restored his statue. When his head was brought to him,
he turned away from seeing it. When his ring was presented to him, he received
it with tears (being possibly the seal of many officious tables, that had past
between them) and showed in all his actions, that he did not seek to destroy
Pompey, but to save Caesar. In fine, what inward monster hurried on Octavius? A
woman is the more beloved, that repelleth her lover with disdain, and the more
sought, and the more honored, if not by him, who had before debauched her. Of
a villainy extroardinary, I need not undertake to give a reason.

But if we examine such contentions, Good Nature may seem in the origin to
have been depressed by passion, and suppressed afterward. For, at the first,
if a man thought modestly of himself, and honorably of his friend, he could
not have been so soon transported, nor so violently. Have we not seen a gentle
spirit submit his passions (for a time) and his reason too to his friend, and
accounted it no vileness? And have we not presently seen the submitter to be
the vanquisher, and accounted more noble? Either there was no cause of anger,
or not of so much, as is conceived. What, if that which is taken for contempt
(as it often happens, being misinterpreted) was intended for an office of
friendship, and that (it may be) not indiscreetly neither, if the reason had
been apprehended? What if it were but an escape? Or a little start of passion?
But I grant it was an injury. Goodness is a patient thing without the help of
Phlegm, and of it self will ventilate the heaving broiles within, without a
trifling fann, or Ombrella to allay them. It will make many good constructions,
ere it will admit a bad one. Or if it find (at last) so good cannot be made, as
it wished, La forza de amore non risquanda al delisto.
it cannot bear malice through excess of its own goodness and respect to its
friends, but it presupposed some excesses or defects in him from the first
beginning, and resolved not to cast away a jewel for a flaw.

Besides it cannot stand upon punctilioes, but rather bow the decorum, for it
suffers no otherwise from the injury of a friend, then it would do by some
great wrong that it had done it self by neglect, or indiscretion. And who that
has wrought his own dishonor or diminution by his folly, will add the madness
to it to stab himself? And will he add to his boisterous passion the reputation
of killing, or of seeking the life of his friend? Are not one and the same
bowels common to them both? To diminish the injury, and magnify other
kindnesses opposed to it, this is friendly. To condescend, to remit de jure, to
take a part of the blame upon himself, and to think of taking up, this were a
way to give a day to reason, and resolution, and a certain expedient to redeem
any lapse of reputation. But he has done what he cannot undo, and I have
suffered what I cannot wipe off, but with his blood, or the licking of his
tongue? Then you are both without my lists. To deprive his friend of his favor
is the greatest punishment here. And one true friend is impatient of that
displeasure from another; and cannot live in quiet under it, though he suffer
unjustly: He cannot but seek to be reconciled; and if he can obtain it, will
hardly ever need a second. These joints well set grow firmer than before, and
the cicatrice more callous against offenses, then the brawne and muscles.

To conclude. If our friend neglect us, it is but a lapse, and addresses
renewed may revive it: If he fall to vice, he retains only our wishes, and
endeavors to serve him another way, and to reclaim him. If he injure me, I may
be angry to reduce him. If he be ungrateful, or malicious, I have no other way
in nature but to punish him with aversation. It is against Nature that I should
seek his mischief, in whom a part of my self is lodged, in hope of a civil
resurrection, or entombed in his unworthiness; and there to ly sacred, and
inviolable. If I am necessitated to wrong him in my own defense: so I may be,
to cut off one limb to save my whole body.

II. While they strive for the glory of the price in a cornish hurling, they
sometimes cover the ball in the midst of the press; sometimes leave a single
observator to go way with it to the Jail: so in this contention concerning the
nobleness and use of friendship, while on one hand they admit no end, or fruit
of friendship but it self: no pleasure, no profit, no private or public
business to forge, or nourish it; on the other that all friendship is but an
idle fancy, a mere notion without some solid interest, as the basis of it; or
only an abstracted consideration, no more to be found in Nature, then materia
prima in things sensible: They may leave the truth in the middle. Which to find
and bear from them, let us first consider of the later. I must confess it
passes among the fineness of the age, as a paradox of courtship (and as if
untutored spirits were only kind and loving) to be civil among men: and more to
some then others; but indeed to have no friend, or friendship: as if it were
but a mere fondness, a feminine or a childish vagariness, not to be admitted
amongst the wise, or valiant part of men: to whom of all the rules delivered to
us from antiquity, there is none that sounds so authentic as that of Chito.
Ita ama tanquam os urus, ita odi tanquam amaturus. So love as if you were about
to hate, so hate as if you were about to love. For what account can be given of
this chariness, or these endearments betwixt two, or a few persons; but only to
humor one another fancies, or to bolster up one another in
self-conceitedness; and so take them off from action or design, wherein he
should be no friend, that stands in our way, though he were as a friend before?
There is a time in prudence to know, and to forget, to take acquaintance, and
to pass by without notice. As our ends alter, and as we advance, we must leave
those persons, and things behind us, that we cannot take along with us, it
being not sufficient only; but more then ample, if we have been just, or
courteous, or beneficial to them for the time, wherein we had to do with them.
All things slide, and nothing bide, (...).
is more true in this sense then then in the scepticks. And is it not a madness
to go about to stop a current, or impale a river for a fish pond: while every
man is bent upon his own concerns to hold them back to be intent upon ours; or
our own which are equally fleeting, upon theirs? To think to impropriate the
use of any man, or immancipate our selves, while on both sides we are bound to
covet liberty, and ampliate our scope of living, as much as possible? Besides,
that change and variety in friends and friendship is no less acceptible, than
in any other case: but far more commodious, since friends are to be used
sparingly, some in one thing, some in another, and our needs are various, and
our fortunes variable. Persons too do vary from themselves: wherein a man has
served us at one time, he cannot or he lists not at another, what we loved in
him, at another time is altered: And to pretend constancy to one, that is
become another, is but forced: So that we had need to be cautious and versatile
in this maneige, where we cannot depend upon any sure or certain points. When
did Caesar (the most sufficient man (per-adventure) in all assayes that ever
was) though he loved many women fore slow an hours march for any of them?
Though he entertained his friends and partisans at most prodigious charges,
when did he ever stick at any of them that halted in their carriere? Though he
were so liberal, he knew how to make more of them, then they had made of him.
And who would willingly come off a looser with a flourish of friendship? Qui
sibi Amicus est, scito hunc amicum omnibus esse. Aristides would acknowledge
friendship unto no man, Plut.
least by favor or disfavour he should be led into inconveniences. So little
estate have some men made of that, which others idolize, who had rather be
accounted Atheists then indifferent friends. Notwithstanding, we are not so
easily to be put by. To covet and to seek a pretended Amity for our own ends,
and cease as they are served, To use, Tuta frequensque via est, etc.
and leave a friend's a beaten way;
Yet beaten as it is, it leads astray.


To seem to have a multitude of friends, and have none is to deceive our selves
more then others, in the true solidity of our own concerns. He has but light
hold of another (however he imagine) whom he would oblige strongly for his
purpose who is but lightly affected within himself. The pack is discerned, and
the fraud as covertly returned? As if the language of those feigned courtesies,
colloguing passions, falsifying promises and Apologies were not understood!
Especially, when they are to court for advantage (as it often happens) the same
that have been legerly dismissed before, and have a sense of our ingratitude!
These are veiles only of pusillanimity, which in effect atchieve no great
matter: A Roman generosity will tread upon them. Loyalty is essential to a Good
Nature and business and commerce to express it. We cannot deny but mutual
interests are a solid ground of friendly correspondency, be it more or less.
Some are only in more trivial matters, wherein whatsoever is given to civility,
necessity, expediency does noth derogate from fidelity, integrity, and a good
mind. Others are more near and intimate to us. And is it not most natutural to
us to love our dependencies, our beneficiaries, our faithful co-adjutours, our
trustees and Relyances? And as we find the worth and value of them in reality,
so to prize, affect, and endear them. That is, to add them to the number of our
excellent friends, not according to the advantage only that we receive (for we
may love a friend more who is less useful) but the mind where withal we are
served. Who but these know our secrets? Who but these relieve us in our
straites? Who but these confirm us in our doubtful states? And who but these
have power to become our enemies if they prove unfaithful? Therefore who was
sought only that he might be used, may be retained, that he may be endeared. A
friendship may be refined from interest to virtue, but every one with whom we
may have to do, may not be worth the while: for who will go about to extract
gold out of lead or tinn, though he know it may be in it? Though Good Nature be
not interessed in design yet it is in consequence: for advantage and and
pleasure cannot be abstracted from benefits, and favors, and mutual aides and
offices. And it is but an ill constitution that does not thrive upon good diet,
and convert it into good humors, which is but a perpetual seading of new and
inexhausted gratifyings. Wherefore, under favor, it is no part of imbecility
to be chary of our friends, to commute and symbolize in all manner of
affections with them. Nor is it any restraint to a large heart to have
multiplicity, and retain a fresh affection to those, that have been contracted
from his infancy, with the rest that he shall collect to his last end; but
rather this is one, and the only accomtling of his felicity to be a Patron unto
one, a companion unto another, a correspondent unto others that are absent, an
Allie to more, and an intimate yet to a few confidents. All with frankness and
reality. This is no impeachment of just designs, but a sure Promptuary of ready
aides: no encumbrance in advancing, but a certain furtherance without seeking,
no ensnaring of our fortune; but a means to clear, and expedite it. Let Caesar
be considered, and he never slighted any of his true friends, never lost any
that he could retain: nay, had so good a way of ingratiating himself with his
soldiers, that hardly any of them ever did revolt from him. A Captain beloved
like Alexander, whole soldiers besieged him in his Tent, (their arms cast
down) with tears and groans three days together, till he was willing to come
out, and be reconciled to them in the same postures. Such is the power of
goodness, where it is mixed with greatness, whereas many triumphs of the Rigid,
and Tenacious Roman Captains have been disgraced with the murmuring of their
followers. And many battles only lost out of hatred, where there have before
been such defects of gentleness. Let us know then that a friendly nature is
bold and confident, not more actively with its friend, then passively toward
him. To spare him is to loose him, and disoblige him by the most unkindness;
spare your doubtful friends; but use your certain ones, and the more you use
them the more you have them; Only be sure you be certain, and most of all
confident in your own virtue, and generosity; which (like providence) produces
and maintains friendship with continuance of one perpetual Action.

III. But to descend to the other part and consideration of dearest friendship,
which (having spoke alreay of Heroic love) we may now term Heroic friendship,
which I take to be the meeting and coincidence of two good Natures, that
resemble one another, in identity of souls and wills: whereof many times the
likeness of outward features and complexions may be an indication, and a ready
token of commencement (where it happens) at the first encounter of such an
happy pair of lovers. So that this must be imagined to be somewhat rare, and
extraordinary: it being not only hard to find such a second self: in whose
bosom we may have equal confidence, as in our own: in whose help the same
assurance, who can have the same delight in our affection, that he has in
loving of himself, and in our embraces the same satisfaction, that he has in
cherishing of his own soul and body, and who can be equally concerned in our
welfare and his own, but also to find a first, who can love as much, as may
deserve such requital. Let every one try how he finds it in himself, how he
feels his pulse beating toward it, or his heart panting to escape from him
into another breast. Rel. Med. p. 2. s. 6.
This noble affection falls not on vulgar, and common constitutions, but on such
as are marked for virtue; he that can love his friend with this noble ardour,
will in a competent degree affect all. I begin with this sentence, since it
comes into my mind: That it is but ordinary for some men to have sometimes a
pheere, or concubine, Scudery.
as Mahomet the great (who after sacrificed her with his own hand to his pride
and tyranny) that takes up all their time, and pleasure. Others a Privado, or
only favorite, the solitary object of their fancy and delight, as our Edward
II, was accounted to have in Piers Gaveston, which was reputed (too) an
effeminate impotency, and enthralment of his mind. An affection springing out
of weakness and insufficiency, and only tending to ease and pleasure: When a
man is captivated with a man, as if he were enamoured of a woman; while his
time, his business, his honor is distracted: while a senseless humor is only
gratified: and he that is beloved (for the most part) knows how to make other
use of it, then his lover. A thing so fatal (notwithstanding) to that unhappy
Prince, that when sedition and rebellion had removed one he could not live
without the raising of another in the person of the Lord Spencer, whom the
other Lords finding to draw all the Kings heart one way; they never left till
they had ungraciously procured both their ruins. So we see in common
instances, who are fond of one, neglect all others, which breeds contempt and
hatred; for who are despised, despise again: and who think they ought to have
an interest in one that is transported, where they have it not, do envy the
transporter, and cannot well refrain from some attempt upon him. In vices it is
most common to have one seducer, who gains a power upon his ward. We must not
therefore measure this affection by intension, much less by excess, or
intemperance; but by adaequation of the object, virtue of the persons, and
regularity of the Acts. Let us therefore hear my Lord of Montaigne's report
(instead of many other) of his singular Amity with Monsicur de la Boitic, De l'
Amity chapter 27. l. 1.
which indeed he has propounded to us (though of himself as a rare example.

Which he affirms to have been such, that certainly the like was not be read
of; and that amongst us men, there is no track of it to be found in use. That
there needs so much happiness of rencounter to raise such another, that it is
much if fortune do afford the like once in three ages. They were first known to
one another by report they sought one another acquaintance, they found it by
chance at a feast, and became forthwith so taken, so known, and so obliged
betwixt themselves, that presently nothing became so intimate, as the one to
the other. That it was not one special consideration, nor two, nor three, nor
four, nor a thousand. It was, he knew not what, quintessence of all, which
having seized his whole will brought it to be plunged, and lost in his friends;
and his again in like manner with a pareil longing, and concurrence in his own:
not reserving any thing that was proper to either of them: nothing that was his
or mine. That such a friendship abolisheth all words of difference, benefit,
obligation, acknowledgement, request, remerciment, or the like: all in effect
being common between them; their wills, thoughts, judgments, goods, wives,
children, honor and life: and their agreement to be but one soul in two
bodies. And such a friendship he affirms to be discussive at all other
obligations, incompatible with any other friendship. Though his life had been
sweetly passed to the time of his writing, without any other great affliction,
then the loss of his friend: yet if he compare the whole to those four years,
wherein he enjoyed him, that all the rest was but smoke, or a dark, and a
tedious night to him. In fine, that thereafter, he abandoned all pleasure,
since his Participant was gone, since all the comforts in the world did but
redouble to him the regret of his loss, thus far that noble Humanist, Let us
yet hear another refined spirit of our own Nation. Dr. Brown loc. cit.
I confess (says he) I do not observe that order, that the Schools ordain our
affections, to love our Parents, wives, children, and then our friends: For
excepting the injunctions of religion, I do not find in my self such a
necessary and indissoluble sympathy to all those of my blood. I hope I do not
break the fifth Commandment, if I conceive I may love my friend before the
nearest of my blood, even those to whom I owe the principles of life. I never
yet cast a true affection on a woman, but I have loved my friend as I do
virtue, my soul, my God. -- There are wonders in true affection, it is a body
of Enigmaes, mysteries and riddles, wherein two so become one, as they both
become two, I love my friend before my self, and yet methinks I do not love him
enough; some few months hence my multiplied affection will make me believe I
have not loved him at all; when I am from him, I am dead till I be with him,
when I am with him I am not satisfied, but would still be nearer him: united
souls are not satisfied with embraces, but desire to be truly each other, which
being impossible, their desires are infinite, and must proceed without a
possibility of satisfaction. -- If we can bring our affections to look beyond
the body, and cast an eye upon the soul, we have found out the true object not
only of friendship, but charity, etc.

I am ashamed of transcribing, their sense and eloquence has imported me: And
yet I have maimed both by the culling: But it is more to my purpose then mine
own.

What shall we say to all this? If it were but wit, or generosity, pity to be
wrack't or chopped with Logic: but these are no ventets of smoke or chass. If
there be such an Amity, what shall I think of my self? if not, what of these
excellent persons, that have dilivered it? We must suffer such souls to have
suffered somewhat extraordinary. Therefore I am still either querulous, or
inquisitive.

For what is that, that I should love in such an Amity? The person of my
friend? not for one special consideration, nor two, nor three, nor four, nor a
thousand, but a quintessence of I know not what, that plungeth my will. Will it
not also plunge my reason, while agreableness to my fancy is all, that is in
view? While I seem to abstract from sense and pleasure, will not this ingulf me
in unwary sensuality? Is it likeness? How can I then love him before my self?
Or how can I have a principle before my self, though it be to love my Creator
and Redeemer? Is it the unity that is between us? Whether then do I love my
self in Him, or him in me? Whether more? Or how do I distinguish so, as to
prefer that in will and reason, which in Nature is the later? Besides souls
have no union but of consent, they know no plunging, or confusion. Therefore
still I am the rule and measure of my own affection, and the constant principle
to it: My friend can be but a moral or objective informer to me. He cannot
bound, or comprehend me; much less can he circumscribe all my powers and my
faculties; though I may yield them to be determined at his pleasure. So that I
am plunged indeed in this Rhetoric, though I would be loath to spoil so fair an
argument.

But in what order shall we place this Amity? The learned Doctor prefers his
Country: But Montaigne hesitates in a fine story. Chapter 27. l. 1.
When Tiberius Gracchus was condemned of conspiracy: C. Blosius, his principal
friend suspected of intelligence with him, was convented before the Consuls,
who demanding of him, what he would do for Gracchus? answered, All things. And
what if he had commanded you to burn our Temples? He would never have done it,
replied Blosius. But what if he had? said he, I would have done it. Whereupon
my Author. Those which accuse this answer as seditious do not apprehend this
mystery; nor presuppose (as it was in reality) that Blosius had the will of
Gracchus in his sleeve; both by power and cognizance They were more friends
then Citisens; more friends, then friends or enemies of their Country, then
friends of ambition and trouble: Having perfectly committed themselves one to
the other, they held perfectly the reins of one another inclination: And make
them to guide this harness by virtue, and the conduct of reason (as it is
impossible to suppose it without) the answer of Blosius was as it should be.
What do we think of this? If the judgment of one lead him unto Treason by
virtue, and the conduct of reason, as he supposes, must the others too? Again
must we prefer our friend, or virtue? If our friend, we are as before. If Cic.
de amicit. Sic definit. Haec habui de amicitia quae dicerem. Vos autem hortor,
ut ita virtutem locetis, sine qua amicitia esse non potest: ut ed excepta,
nihil amicitia praeftabilius esse puretis.
virtue, our wives and children (at the least) have a preobligement on us. And
virtue defends any intercession of a later act of choice, between the first,
and the pledges of God and Nature. Some things are incommunicable of their own
Nature; of all others friendship may have power. But it cannot by seizing of my
soul, procure, that I should not be persuaded as I judge, that I should not
will what I think most meet. Nay, external things, My Prince and Country bear
away my allegiance, and the rights of my wife and children are inviolate
against the necessities of my friend (but not the hazarding of them if it ly in
my power) I can do no more but communicate with him in all I am and have, that
is communicable.

But methinks, my Authors has improved this Notion very curiously; when he
tells us, that such a friendship abolisheth all words of difference, benefit,
obligation, request, or remerciement, etc. And so it seems to me in comparison;
that the dearest friends cannot be beholden the one to the other; cannot
exceed, or surpass one another: nor have any thing private, saving wherein
privacy advantageth community. For if our thoughts and apprehensions were
plainly one, now should there be place for advice and council? If our mutual
endeavors did meet one another in the same actions; how could their be
accommodation? If estates and interests were not distinct, how should one have
to supply what the other wanted? But such is the Candor of benevolence, making
no account, or difference of penury or abundance in one subject, so either be
supplied. or both alike miserable: Wherefore a miserable man is not capable of
this beatitude. Now 'twas ever agreed, that the friendship of dearness cannot
extend unto many. My Author seems to hold, not only that it cannot be beyond a
duality, but that one failing the other never can repair it. Though a man may
renew his espousals, he must live a perpetual widower to his friend. Indeed, we
cannot put but one in the superlative degree, but a father of 20. children may
have so natural an affection to them all, that he can hardly tell (in all
respects) which to forego, if he were put to the necessity of his choice. And
of a few friends, when one is present he may be as the dearest, when another
comes he may be in balance. Gold may weigh against Gold, when the pieces and
the scales are both even. And it is not probably want of high affections, that
holds the common lover of more friends in this suspense; but only want of
partiality, acting by the goodness of his Nature, and not calling reason to
distinguish. Of this unique Amity, we are the less sollicitous, because it is
not properly any part or consequent of a Good Nature, but only of some Heroic
virtue: if any such be in Nature, whose effects are impossible (to be truly
each other) and desires infinite (to be satisfied with enjoyment) whereas by
Nature, never any tendency was in vain.

But by this, I am put upon examining, what kind of passions I have ever found
within my own breast toward an high Amity. In my childhood, I found the first
allective of my affections was admiration. When I saw any of my play-fellows of
a jovial, hardy, and complyant Nature, fashioned to his own pleasure, and
others favor, I remember I were wont to have an unquiet fondness to be
endeared to him: sometimes with more, sometimes with less success, until my
passions, often returning weary and disappointed, (finding (as I imagine) spirits
light and aerie to be made to favor, rather then affection; and that
friendship could not be without somewhat of the deep humor) became timorous
and sollicitous about the next objects that I assailed; thinking that I wanted
wit or spirit to go about to gain any one; since I still seemed to my self to
love more, then to have been beloved. Therefore where I found my childish
accoglienzaes answered, I thought my self beholden, and were ready to spoil all
by being over-busy with my foolish kindnesses. But when I came to have learned
some letters, I found to be of one form, of one exercise, and often one in
fault together and one punishment, was a means of endearing me to one or other
of my Classis: and that indeed, there was some geniality in that affection,
that was able to hold us great friends in the University. Addicting my self to
some study, I had a fit of great regret of the times past (like the pang of
Doctor Faustus, who desired of his familiar to see Rosamond, that had been dead
an 100 years before) I could not be satisfied for want of pictures to represent
those brave men whom I read, and read of, thinking that they had left no
commendation possible for posterity. Nay at last, I could not be kind with my
stars, because I were not born to know, and live in the constant sight of that
most accomplished and taking person the immortal Sir P. Sidney, under whose two
pictures I have stood gazing at wilton-house, till shame has impelled me to
look on other things with little notice, and desire has brought me back again.
In the ardour of my youth, those same vagary qualities, that keep women from
being tame, and entice us, with we know not what Graces (as the birds in the
air, render themselves amiable, as they fly in their party-colored feathers,
which being taken are despised) allured me no otherwise in men; suspecting
still there was more in such persons, than I could discover, and holding me
enamored to the objects of my suspicion, which touched me in things as well as
persons. So that being ready to visit France, I expected to find as much
difference as if they had had another Heaven and Earth, then we enjoy, And so I
found my self in vain affected at the Key of Calais, there being a goodly high
wall and magnificent toward the sea, and an indifferent town within it. Since
I came to years of discretion (which I am feign to account by law, rather then
by reason) admiration ceased; but not that opinion; that there are some
inimitable qualities and graces in certain persons which do necessarily draw my
heart to a bien-veilance, and a passion of acquaintance, yet it seems to me,
when I have made my addresses, that not what i like in them; so much as what
they like in me is my assured ground of friendship: but if I am sought unto by
any, that has so mean a spirit, then what I like in them only; or in their
intention is my obligement: for I ask no more but rectitude; other
accomplishments I account matter of respect, but only this of true affection.
And having found this but in diverse breasts, I cannot complain of the falseness
of the world (as many do, which should rather reflect on the fallacy of their
former judgments, and their oscitancy of conversation) but rather of my own
deficiencies, if I have not any one friendship high and absolute. Nothing is
more molestation to me, then to apprehend, that the meanest of my friends is
unsatisfied in any thing of my behavior; that the best should not be highly
drawn and allured with the postures and expressions of my affection. Of
reality I cannot doubt, feeling how effectual it is within myself; but to noble
strains and advancements every wit and spirit is not proper: Only when Stars
meet they leap into conjunction, and accomplish their own orb, and amuse the
world with their light and splendor. In brief (that I may not spoil my
character with too much oftentation) I account my friendship my repast, my
entertainment, my diversion, my religion, and no fault to be so great as any
Act of pride, or ingratitude, that tends to dissolve it. I love with virtue,
and I love for virtue (to what degree soever I observe it) yet I do not covet
to Monopolize any one unto my self, that he should love no other besides me, (I
do not think that I can deserve so much of any man) nor am I myself willing to
be sequestered. But I love to walk, and talk, and intermingle with all the
world: taking such friendship for restraint, and no bounty, which shall go
about to abridge me, or confine me: save only in respect of special Acts, and
services. I am contented to live only at the rate of a Good Nature, without
attaining higher glory, or seeking of an Amity in Unity, and an Unity in
Identity of souls, or of Platonical Ideaes: which every man that can be a
friend, cannot understand; or hardly any other, who is so persuaded (as
generally we are) of creation, and production of things visible.

VII. When I would dispatch, I am encumbered; I did not think there had been so
much in hospitality. Whoever receives me with a good look is presently become
my Host; and a man's bounty is a much seen in his countenance, as at his Table.
Sometimes an invitation obliges more then an entertainment: commonly the
lesser feasts are the more gracious; and the meaner houses, and narrow entries
afford the more receipt within. The fair City of Siena has an ancient wall,
and a strait gate: but with his inscription (that slack'd my weariness when I
arrived there) Cor pandit tibi Sena magis. Thy heart Siena's more, enlarged
then thy door. And so it has reputation of the hospitablest Town in Italy. I
know not whether receives the more content in it: he that affords a
bounteous aspect, or he that accepts it: for it is no less hospitality to
accept of kindness worthily, then to bestow it freely. A Good Nature is seen
alike in both, what joy and promptness is there in the action? What love and
service in the addresses of mind and body? It stands not upon its provision.
Let decency, or magnificence see to that: If it have it, it is ready to produce
it: If not, it is not abashed, it absents not itself: it supplies, as much as
may be, with good will: and it may be grieved, if things necessary be not in
its power to procure. Caesar in an house where he was honestly entertained,
dipped his salad freely in corrupted oil (which by error was brought to the
Table) rebuking his company for taking notice of it; and eat of it yet more
freely to rebuke them; and save his Host from having any apprehension of it.
Such a value did he put upon a small punctilio of civility, as some other might
have reckoned it; but indeed it was no small matter in the reason, which
touched so nearly on the Coast of Gratitude. And so I leave the rest of this
virtue to liberality, and her associates.

I know not but I may borrow somewhat from the next title, if I entreat here of
Charity, first, of that which receives strangers in, and next of that, that
relieveth them without: whether it be Humanity or Hospitality: It is certainly,
a character of Good Nature, which is more apt to condescend, then to aspire,
and to yield to pity, then to rise to glory. The poor Mariner driven in by
tempest is not to be questioned for his pratique: nor an enemy ship-wrack't
upon our Coast to be treated as a prisoner of war. If it be in boistrous
weather, a poor Traveller is not sent to seek for a sign, where Gentle people
live: Nor a man that commits a trespass by his own misfortune: especially when
he seeks no more but succor, to be distrain'd, or roughly handled. I will
dismiss this also with a pleasant story. In the dreadful Massacre of Paris,
while the Catholic swords reak't in vengeance, a poor Huguenot, escaping his
pursuers, came violently bouncing with hands and feet at the chamber door of
the King of Navarre (at that time protector of the miserable party) crying
Navarre, Navarre. The King was gone forth: Mem. de la Reyne Mar. l. 1
a Lady of the bedchamber, thinking he was returned in have (and knowing that
mischief was abroad) hastily ran to open the door; and let in a wounded
Gentleman pursued instantly by four soldiers. To save his life, he cast
himself upon the Queens bed: who for fear leaped out, and he after her, holding
her always by the middle, and using her as his buckler. She, poor Lady knew
not the man, or whether he came to mischief Her, or whether the soldiers
intended it to him, or to Herself, but upon her outcries: in came the Captain
of the guards, who chasing at the rudeness of the Archers, he chased them out
of that presence; and granted the life of the poor Gentleman that embraced the
Queen, to her discretion; which was (though she her self were a zealous
Catholic) to lodge him in her own Cabinet, till he were cured of his wounds
was not this a noble act of bounty?

And yet could you but laugh, if you had seen
That chaste, Spectatum admissi, etc.
though rude embraces of the Queen?
2. For the other part of tenderness, which we call charity; it may admit of
some dispute, whether a Good Nature do it for the love of the Action, or of the
good that is in it; or only to gratify its own humor, or the importunity of
its own Nature? Once again: our most ingenious Doctor who has showed himself no
superficial Statist of his own, or our common humanity tells us thus. I give no
alms to satisfy the hunger of my Brother: but to fulfill and accomplish the
will, and command of my God. I draw not my purse for his sake, that demands it;
but his that enjoined it. I relieve no man upon the Rhetoric of his miseries:
nor to content mine own commiserating disposition; Rel. Med. l. 2. S. 2.
for this is still but moral charity, and an act that owes more to passion,
then to reason. He that relieves another upon the bare suggestion, and bowels
of pity, does not this so much for his sake, as for his own. For by compassion
we make others misery our own; and so by relieving them we relieve our selves
also. Yet (to do my noble friend, to whom I have a particular obligement the
more right) he had told us before. Sect. 1.
I have ever endeavored to nourish the merciful disposition, and humane
inclination I borrowed from my Parents, and regulate it to the written, and
prescribed laws of Charity.

Yet am I apt to imagine, that a Good Nature acting only to satisfy the
importunity of its own inclination, is more abundant in goodness, then acted by
a rule, or precept; unless it be a rule, that comes to it in effect, (though
not in form of words) by its proper observation.

We hang (a good part of mankind) wavering, and trembling in the balance, while
on the one hand, we are prescribed a strict and rigid virtue, consisting in
certain rules and dictates from which we may not vary without offense, and
danger. On the other; all kind of actions are presented to us so disguised with
the same titles, that there is nothing left to be vice: neither any part of
life to be serious, The Mantle of wit, or love, or honor serves to palliate
all, that were ugly in its proper colors, both to sense and reason. But if we
cannot easily be exact with the first, or dissolute with the later, it were
worth while to know this mystery: That to live by rule is but to hamper Nature,
to live in fear, and fall into superstition: but to live without it, (as it is
a glass or mirror, wherewithal to dress our Natures) is to steer our course
without a compass: for excess and defect consist in curious points: and our own
Natures (in the case) are the first Monitors, and the most intimate: and which
employ our reasons to be exact about it. Temperance, and abstinence are certain
and prescribed virtues: yet there is no written rule that can keep us entire in
the practice of them in particular cases: for the virtues are not in the
objects that are indifferent: nor in the acts that are variable (for that may
be excess to me, which is temperance to another; and the same act as to my self
at one time may be an excess, which at another time was just) but only in right
reason, according unto Nature; (...)
as a wise man shall judge (not another wise man; but the same that is to be
engaged in the action.)

To come to our purpose. To be moved with compassion upon the sight and sense
of another misery is a token of Good Nature, which is a divine instinct within
us, the Original (if I may say so with the favor of our Divines) of the second
table. Therefore to hear when the bowels of compassion call upon us, is to hear
when God calls, and to execute his will, though we do not think of his command.
Whereas to give liberally, merely on a sense of duty, if it may be called
obedience, it cannot be called Charity. And what avails it to give away 10000.
Manors without Charity? Indeed the Fathers Confessors are apt to teach their
suppliants of Absolution, that it is not Charity to give from a motive within
ones self; but only out of love to God, and obedience to his Commands; whereby
they have made themselves Masters of men's Charity: and have not been a little
charitable to themselves. I suppose we have the same sense amongst many of our
Religion: since only Rich and Old take themselves to be bound to Charity, and
to see a young Gallant drop an Alms in the street were enough to make him
questioned to be soft. I am (almost) of opinion, that who gives of compassion
(when he does not actually thing of God, or his command) is the more
charitable; and not the less obedient: and shall be noted, and rewarded, though
he forget, and take no notice of his own benefit. For (as I conceive) the
Samaritan, that took up the wounded Jew did it not out of Religion (because
they were as excommunicated persons to one another) but only out of sense of
humanity and compassion. And yet the Savior of the World commends that Act, as
true Religion. If a beggar importune us, shame may move us, though there be no
witness; and whereof, was that sense given us? If another do not give when he
thinks he ought, fear impels him. And whether is it better to act out of fear,
or out of shame? Notwithstanding, I am afraid of this argument, as intrenching
too much upon Divinity. I do not question, but it is a more excellent way of
Charity to give for the love of God, rather then for the love of our selves,
and our own quiet or any man, and his relief: but I do not think in Religion,
that they can be dis-joyned, or distinguished. As to say, I give out of
Charity: not because I campassionate my Brother; but because I am so commanded:
but I am commanded to have compassion (if Nature do not give it me) and so to
exhibit. I do not think, that to give out of Good Nature is so much as a Moral
virtue; but a good disposition: that by reason may be directed to any height or
perfection whatsover; but without it, that neither will not reason can produce
an Act of Charity. So that still to advance reason, or Religion is not to
derogate from the simplicity of Nature: which when Divines lay so low in
corruption, and imbecility, I suppose they mean in another sense, then I
intend.

. VIII. I reckon not much what entertainment I have made; but I am now ready to
serve up the disette with a few sprinklings yet remaining under the notion of
humanity; with its adjuncts and embellishments: knowing that the banquet is
oftentimes more valuable, then the whole meal.

1. And first, it is the part of humanity to refrain all disgusts, to restrain
all incommodities, and to aid against the incursion of any evils in our common
life. Therefore it does not cherish in it self any private humor of diet, or
repose, or singular mode of carriage to be allowed, or yielded to it by any
other: it affects not usurpation of precedences or accommodations; but is
contented with such part as time, and occasion, and the persons present do
freely and readily afford to it: nor to fill any place with it self through
vain glory, and self commendation; or assume all the talk; or take upon it self
to censure persons, or judge of things; nor admits of jeers, or abuses; or
suffers the dead, or the absent to be traduced; or the simple to be too much
disparaged. It questions not the merit or the quality, which any one pretends
to; though it discern an incomportment, it makes no semblance of it: it will
not expose any one, unless it be to detect some malice: it helps good
constructions, being tender of others fame, as it is of its own, and desires
to have others so: it takes notice of distinctions, being a sign of rudeness
to come a second time into the Company of any Noble Person, and not to know who
he is: it yields honor to men of spirit, and of virtuous acquirements (though
modest) and to their arrogance too sometimes. For in Ben Johnson's company,
they say, that an absolute domination ruled with the pleasure of his subjects.

Further, though a Good Nature do avoid oftentation for its own part; yet is it
not impatient of another impertinence, or idle commendations of himself: but
rather sollicitous and concerned for him how he will come off: it is apt to
bear a part of shame for him, if he be impudent: or with him, if he be sensible
(as it often happens) when he does not find that applause, that he expected. I
know not how it happens to ingenious spirits, such as have real wit, and real
courage to be bashful: when dunces and droans are confident: is it a virtue or
a weakness in them? Only this we may observe; as there is a laughter that
shows no complacency, so there is a blushing that argues sometimes a
conscious guilt and no goodness: sometimes a purpose of revenge. And how do you
think does blushing become a Blackmoor? But where this passion does express a
sense or doubt (thought it be but a misprision) of any indecency, or unhandsome
faltring, or miscarrying, I cannot say, it is it self a virtue, but a token of
it: nor a weakness, but a kind of remission: such as is an ample satisfaction
of it self for any small fault, and a tacit promise of amendment: for he that
has blushed for his mis-adventure has stopped all anger, and has his pardon
without asking: which is some relief to such an one, as knows, That apologies
are not to be made without reason; neither are as other Compliments, but
entrench so much upon the Quality, or discretion of the Author. I should say
more, that it is an excellent token when blushes do not put out of countenance;
for then a virtuous confidence is seen under it, which will soon recover and
overcome it: and then, these foolish blushes do not misbecome, but add a
singular grace and luster to a young face (especially) and to the other sex;
for who sees a Lady Blush, and take it up handsomely, can hardly escape to be
enamored. It is a sign of virtue, which is more alluring then the fairest skin
and neatest features in the world. But still it is to be regarded how this
suffusion is recollected; for if the shamefulness proceed from ignorance or
imbecility, it rather paints then lightens; if it happen to a sullen nature,
it dejects and stains it; they cannot presently resume their confidence, and
reduce it with a glory, as our Good Nature can, and can do no otherwise.

To restrain incommodities it behooves us also to bear our own infirmities and
inconveniences, and (as much as possibly) to conceal them, that we may not
disturb our friends or neighbors, or impede the alacrity of our company. Sick
persons do retire, and they that visit them come on purpose to condole and
sympathize with them; only they that have the Plague love to spread their
infection, and many that have the Itch; and of this latter sort are the
Querulous company, that are ever complaining or finding fault with one or
other, being either old, or crazy, or prejudiced, or otherwise distempered.

Nescio an Anticyram ratio illis destinet omnem.

Humanity requires us to take sometimes a part of others inconveniences upon
our selves to alieviate them; to personate another man (sometimes) to save a
mischief that is coming toward him: to bear a part of another blame, when we
are innocent, and to conceal his, to save anger, or divert punishment, for a
Good Nature is averse to all punishment and inclined to all lenity. It was a
speech taken well from Nero, and promising a better reign, when a table was
brought to him to be signed for the death of a malefactor, he took the style,
saying of his own motion. O quam mallem nescisse literas! O how I had rather
that I could not write! And as Tacitus has left the History, he became worst
the soonest, that we ever read of any. Nay, it is but humanity (sometimes) to
run voluntarily into danger to prevent a greater or a public jeopardy. And
some one man has taken strangely upon himself. A soldier of the Great Caesar
took a pile into his own body to cover his Commander. Curtius mounted and armed
at all points leaped into a gulf to divert an ill Omen. The two Decii devoted
their lives for two victories. Tribune with 400. soldiers took a mortal station
to redeem the rest of the Army out of straits.

We see, besides, when there is a fire, every unconcerned person will adventure
himself to extinguish it, when violence is done to an innocent, every one will
concern himself to rescue; when a man is in danger of being drowned, a stranger
will venture in to save him. So that Humanity and Good Nature are not only in
slight and superficial points, but extend to realities. On the contrary an ill
Nature, though it be strong, or wealthy, or well accommodated cannot find in
its heart to be helpful, or compassionate, or commucative with another; but if
it be in misery, it hates all that are more happy, and wishes it were but
able to involve them in the same state with it self, Medea (the fairest copy
that we have of an ill nature) in the Latin Tragedian:

And if thou perish, it delights
To draw with it Sicilian nights. Trahere cum pereas, libet. Sen.

Or with its death to conjure the dissolution of the Universe with the prayer
of Nero, Let earth and fire when I must die
Be mixed and tempered with the sky. (...).



Or as Perseus, the last King of Macedon, when he was taken captive by the
Romans (trained from a Sanctuary) cursed those Gods, that had not afforded him
protection.

Which makes me think of what an admirable temper that ignoble virtue patience
is compounded, while it is either not at all regarded, or noted only by
superficial animadverters, as a mark of abjection, or a poor spirit; it
signifies an excellent aequanimity, an invincible fortitude, a certain
prudence, and a singular piece and proportion of good humors, which neither
taxes fate, nor providence, nor repineth at seeming inequalities, while it
sees its inferiors preferred, its fortunes dissipated, its merits undervalued,
its friends disheartened; while nothing in the world seems to favor it; it is
not curdled, or turned, but saves it self with salt, and reserves it self for
the fresh water: what were all the arguments of Philosophy concerning vanity,
indifferency, metriopathy, if they had not this subject? What were all valor,
or hardiness, or skill of enterprizing, if there were not patience to endure
incommodities, and expect the best seasons? In fine, what end would there be of
injuries, if there were not this Good Natured quality to bound, and determine
them? Either to subside in oblivion, or a voluntary sequestration of revengeful
thoughts? When we read that Wine, and Women, and Truth are strongest, why was
not time thought upon, which conquers and preys on all things? (...). Yet
patience bows the fangs of time, and brings about that victory by culling
seasons out of it, which neither force nor fortune could complete at once,
compatible but to a Good Nature and an high Spirit, if it be not maliciously
mistaken, a stupidity (suppose) or a rest after weariness, or a manicle of pure
force and necessity are no more then brutish.

Lastly, as an aid against incursion of evil accidents humanity is never out of
one office or an other, either to procure Amities, or prevent enmities, or
reconcile breaches, or to clear some men's reputations, or to cover some men's
disgraces, or palliate others just designs that they may gain effect, it being
most essential to a Good Nature to be loyal and trusty, and as secret as its
discretion serves to be. It delights in speaking praises, and in relating any
man's goods fortune, without any glance of envy or detraction: Nay, it is not
much concerned with the success of an enemy, or repineth at another gain
obtained to its own prejudice, if not unjustly. For it seeks its own interest
with a most indifferent industry in respect of passion; though a most intense
in respect of action, because it moves only in a straight line, and will rather
waive its own advantage, then interfere with another, that seeks it in the same
way. In fine, a Good Nature is entirely so just, that a dog, or an horse, or an
old tree fare the better for it.

II. It is the part of Humanity to ampliate all favors, to extend all
bounties, to share and not exempt it self from common lot and fortune.

To begin with affability, which is an exhibiting of ones own person to
ordinary use and accommodation, to confer and to converse among men without
exception; it has ever been in such honor amongst all civil Nations, and in
such restraint amongst the barbarous, as argues it to be an excellent point of
humanity, though nothing seem more natural and familiar. The life and
institution of King Cyrus was formed to this kind of liberality, insomuch that
if any of his friends were disjoined from him at the Table, he would not fall
too, Xenoph
with any cheer, till he had sent somewhat of his own service to each of them.
Alexander was free and open to all his soldiers: Mithridates could call whole
regiments by their names; and Caesar was so conversant amongst his men, that
every one was ambitious to be known to him, and by him to be called upon by
name gave each man invincible resolution. M. Antonius, Herodian. l.1.
who alone of all the Emperors (in the judgment of the Historian) did apply the
study of Philosophers not to terms of speech, or knowledge of opinions, but to
use and practice in his life; did demean himself so civilly and agreeably unto
all men, that he gave his hand freely to all that came to him, and suffered not
his Guards to prohibit any one.

On the other side the Kings and Emperors of the Barbarous Nations have used
from ancient times hitherto, to keep themselves at a great distance from the
people, rarely to be seen, never to be spoken to but by some few of their
favorites. As at this day the Russian, the Mogul, and the Grand Seignior; a
thing that renders them as odious, as contemptible to our European manners;
which exact from our greatest Persons (one time or other) the greatest
affability. Much more of meaner subjects to be easy of access, ready of
speech, and speedy of dispatch.

And to this it may seem that courtesy properly does belong giving and
receiving all kind of favor in comportment, wherein it is a shame to be
vanquished, and a glory to contend in condescension. Every Complimenter knows
this, but he turns his back and laughs, and this that is not seen makes the
compliment (as the vulgar count it) the other is but obligation, and ought to
be sincere. And it implies two things; first, that a man does not esteem
himself better then another (saving his quality, if there be any diffrence.)
And secondly, that he is sensible of any favor, and does not take a kindness
(as I have heard the French to tax the humor of us English) for an obligation,
which also implies two things farther, first, that a courteous person gently
weighs the tendency of a fair address; and secondly, that he answers it with
reality according to import. If it be an excuse, he takes it in good part, and
is not difficult: if it be a tender, he receives it with remerciment: if it be
a benefit, he shows what account he makes of it by his expressions of alacrity.
And when the party is gone, the sense is doubted, by how much assentation is
removed, and to acknowledge now is more free, for what else can a man justly
glory in, but in that wherein he secretly rejoices? Gratitude in a generous
heart is sweet, and most prolifique of good humors. It gurgleth with the
heart-bloud out of one ventricle into another, till it be heated to perfection,
and fit to engender more kindness, And what pleasure does it multiply in that
conceit? how does it prefer to live in other breast, more then in its own? And
to perish that it may revive to a loving remembrance? Which is the reason why
it is perpetual, and can never be disobliged; boundless, and thinks it never
has requited; and insatiable in the covering of new exchanges.

It is a part of courtesy too, to be ready to be acquainted, as well as
accosted; but there is a secret difficulty, which I have observed ordinary in
this particular amongst the better spirits; and that is, from whence in point
of decency, or expediency an acquaintance should begin, if two persons be well
disposed to it. One is loath to seek: the other loath to interpret such
appearance, before it is expressed (though possibly perceived) least he should be
overforward, or mistaken: for a free spirit cannot be like Horace his tantum in
seeking of acquaintance: he cannot impose himself, or demit of his own spirit,
to be ingratiated with a stranger: Occurrit quidam notus mihi nomine tantum,
etc. Ser. 1* Sat. 9.
but they do not observe while they affect to reserve to each other a
particular point of grandeur, they stand off in punctilio's, which are petty
feminine intrigues, and not magnanimous: whereas true greatness is preserved
only by generosity. Every man is open to another, when occasion brings them
into presence: and every good intention justifies it self, if there be no
interest to draw it into suspicion. Access and recess are free, and to fashion
an occasion more particular out of a general, with a natural address; adds
more grace to him that commenceth, then to him that secondeth an application;
and it should be considered; that to enterprise was ever more noble, then to
hold ones self passive, wherefore, where there is such a sense betwixt two, it
becomes both to become discreet essayers, and not to affect the glory to be
later: for it is the more Humane to be confident, where a retreat is always
Generous. It is another point of this Good Quality to be complaisant in
Company; serious where they are so disposed; free and merry when time serves:
composed, when we are to conserve dignity. Light and active, when we are to
entertain, or to be diverted. The humor is not to be brought with us; but to
be taken up at the sight of the presence. Such is the correspondency of
discourse. Not to bring in Cato among Poets, nor Lucian among Divines and
tender consciences. Nor a Council of war into a banqueting house, nor the Privy
Council into a Ladies Chamber, nor a subtle Contract into the Temple: but to
show our selves well affected and delighted with the ball that is in hand, or
the argument that we find upon the Carpet, And such must be the procedure to
the persons, in whom we are to take content: and acknowledge their variety. If
there be of the ( beaux esprits) the refined wits among them, or of the (
Cavaglien garbati e politi) more accomplished Gentlemen; or a mixture of
Qualities and Tempers; Humanity requires us to consort withal for the time, as
far as our sufficiency conduces, and forbids not to delight more in what we
find agreeable, and to make our own company out of any number, when it may be
done without Scism: for we may not break up a society, till it is for their own
ease, or intercourse. But if (perchance) our fortune bring us into company,
where the defects exceed the treat; Humanity will hardly allow (unless by the
way of wit; which is either of little force, or apt to afford more matter to
their peculancy) least we seem to make our selves Masters where we have no
Authority: much less to condemn like judges in full commission: but yet
obliges us to disprove without disgust, and to retire without passion, if
occasion do not bind us. But if it do, a good countenance may be able to
qualify the company, or to keep any thing that is unhandsome, or over-bold from
fastening on it self. Not, but that reproof may be sometimes very natural; and
sometimes necessary; where it is like to do more good then hurt. Especially,
ones private friends humanity calls upon one to admonish: but not to
entermeddle (though with one particular) where the ill qualities surpass the
good. [ Je trouve rude de juger celuy-la, en qui les mauvaises qualitez
surpassem les bonnes. Montaigne. l. 3. chapter 13.]

To pass from words to act; we are bound in humanity to direct a stranger upon
his request; to reduce him, if we perceive him in an error, without asking: to
assist him in attaining his desire, when we can do it without indecency, or
impediment to ourselves: but we are bound to guard some decorum, even against
civil offices: for a man may not offer his service to a virtuous Lady, that is
a stranger to him, when she wants a ready servant, though peradverture it would
be a kindness to her, because it will bring a point of decency on both sides in
question: but if there be any great need, it will not only excuse, but
over-balance it to the side of high civility. So it does not befit a person of
Quality to aid a porter, though he be nearer then another; but if it be to save
the poor man from any great harm, he ought to consider himself also to be but a
man. And the like instances we might deduce to other cases. Therefore to
proceed a little farther, when we fee another laboring about a business, that
we can do without pains, it is a part of Good Nature to relieve and expedite
him. Some smaller inconveniences we are to take upon our selves for the greater
commodity of another, and a little greater on our selves, if they be diverse
that shall perceive the benefit of our decession. Why should I take up a great
room by preoccupation, to straiten others, if I may do as well or (almost) as
sweetly with a less? Why should I eat alone if I have to spare and others want?
Nay, why should not I delight, or at least command my self (sometimes) to want
for company? Alexander the Great, when he was with a choice party of his horse
in pursuit of Darius, was like to perish with his men for want of water. At the
last, some of his men brought a small quantity, whereof when he was about to
drink, seeing how wistfully his Gentlemen, that were about him looked upon it,
he returned the water back, saying, he would not drink and they faint. And when
they saw his continence and generosity; (...). Plut.
they all cried out, they were neither thirsty nor weary, nor wholely mortal,
while they had such a King. In the Sacred Story King David would not drink of
water that his Champions brought him though his soul thirsted, because they had
ventured their lives for it. And never was a King of Israel so beloved as he.
Sir P. Sidney, when he had recovered his mortal wound near Zutphen, and
thirsted by reason of the inslammation; while he was setting the bottle to his
mouth, espied a poor soldier, S. F. Grevill
who had likewise took his last at the same break fast, looking ghastly toward
it. To whom the noble Knight, my friend, says he, thy necessity is yet the
greater, And so made him drink first, and then pledged him. And what English
man was ever so lamented at a Funeral? A Good Nature is not willing to exempt
it self from its part of suffering, Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes nemo
recuset.
when it may, or can: but a Noble Nature will suffer voluntarily to excuse a
weaker. Which is yet more: Humanity will offer violence to the stoutest soul
breathing, when it self suffers, and cannot surmount the rage of destiny.
Marcellus, who was the most pugnacious, earnest Captain of his age, when he saw
the City of Syracuse, which he had so long besieged sacked and burned by his
soldiers, while he could not help it, wept in grief, and indignation. And so
did Titus, called the delight of mankind, at the subversion of Jerusalem,
complaining of the Jews rebellions that had constrained him. These were manly
tears, that are able to affect men, more then all the art, or eloquence in the
world: for they cannot happen without a great commotion; nor come from a brave
man without a vehement disturbing the spectators: yet when common Nature
suffers every man must be moved. If a man weep easily, he is soft and childish;
but if he can weep at his own discretion, I would not undertake to write his
character. I think I have heard, that the Fox and the Crocodile can dissemble
weeping, but they are both but dissembling. Ingenuity can only press them from
a noble heart through pity of some irreparable loss; or grief of some indignity
that deprives it of the honor and favor that it most esteems with a Prince,
or a Parent, or some Heroic lover. Shall I add to these, that it is a part of
the bounty of a Good Nature, that it delights in men's affections, and real
inclinations? That it thinks it not worth the while to live in this light, if
there were not a mutual transmigration into one another breasts? If it were
not to raise our memories above the level, and to live upon the wings of favor
after we are dead? And as no Appetite is given in vain, this makes it do
acceptably, and avoid all things ungrateful. But however, it is its own reward
at present, for what in this life is so sweet as favor? If we are present with
our friends, this only makes us feel the value of our enjoyments: If we are
absent, or dejected, or fallen into disgrace: that they will vindicate and
recommend us is our hope of recovery* And when we die, we feel (almost) within
the Coffin the wind and showers of sighs and tears, wherewith they follow us to
our graves: from whence we may chance to answer them in a pale Violet, or a
lock of time, or (it maybe) in the sprig of a Palm Tree, with this Motto,
Depressa resurgo.

.. III. To conclude with some embellishments, which we consider as attractive
qualities in a Good Nature. A person may be more beloved for a little virtue
well managed, then for many great ones, which (peradventure) cannot be made to
serve the ends of meaner qualities. There are excellent virtues, that are not
properly the objects of our love, but rather of our honor and admiration, and
so by consequent have not their attraction so much to sense as reason, for
wisdom, and learning, and constancy, and severity, and courage, and resolution
are only good bottoms: if they come to be nealed with an amiable temper, they
may then affect with advantage, and gain more by their light, then they could
have done by their heat. For commonly the fortune of men's fancies plays more
with superficial graces, and makes the plausible and compliant more happy then
the Valiant or the Politic. As if it were more humane, and obliging to be
versatile, facile, temporary, then stout, invincible, constant and immovable.
Though these be the more Heroic virtues, which turn the world about in spite
of meaner courages. For attraction, it is it self no virtue, but a splendour of
liberty, that gives grace and honor to every action; it is a coruscation of
many fair qualities in diverse postures, as a Diamond has a luster from diverse
points according to the polishing. Here there issues a ray of wit, promising
more in reserve, then an height or flight of spirit, not to be defined by any
other; here alacrity, there resumption; here a lovingness, there a chastity,
not to be attempted; here a little courage (and not too much, for a rampant
lustiness does not become, not a valiant man; and among meticulous women, we
prise not a Virago) there a deal of pity. Here is bounty, there is modesty. In
fine, that which is reserved, or seems to be, though it is not seen what,
gains more, then that which is discovered. There is one sort of attraction
that affects our superiors, and infallibly draws their favors and
condescentions, which is more in the manner of submissions, then in the thing
it self. Where there is a sensibility of their pleasures, a resentment of their
concerns, a convenance with the points of their honor and tenderness, and a
promptness of address to usher up those tendencies; they are taken with their
servant, as if it were with their own familiar Genius. There is another to
raise the benevolence of our inferiors, which is in courtesy, modesty,
reservation, and permission. And another of obliging equals, which depends upon
their various inclinations.

A liberty of address, a grace of motion, a roundness of recess, an alacrity in
presence, and secret forms of transition affect all Gentile spirits, and leave
an admiration in the vulgar. To appear to be kind, and loving, and yet to be
choice in bestowing of its favors makes every one, that is not haughty, or
stupid, to seek to render themselves worthy. To be free and pleasant, and as
dextrous to take it up, and become what is requisite to deceive the
expectation; when it begins to be bold and thinks of discovering and mastering
what before it admired, trains a lover into new mazes. Expectation is to be
answered, and not satisfied, suspicion to be dissappointed. Besides, there are
several suits and modes of temper, which a rich spirit has ever ready in its
wardrope: the dress may be altered every day with a little cost or pains. Who
appears still in one habit of mind and humor is soon comprehended, and
contemned, though he pretend plainess, it is taken for simplicity. What took at
one time will not please at another. But a subtle spirit will soon find in
company what is acceptable, and how to train and divert discourse before
satiety; while we give our selves freely, we should not nostri copiam facere,
but from the best entertainment rise with an appetite, and part cleanly, that
the next meeting may be more sweet.

The rest I believe are inexplicable, but if they were to be discabined by Art,
they could not be translated, where Nature were not a bounteous Mistress.

FINIS.

