NOTITIA MONASTICA OR A Short History OF THE Religious Houses IN ENGLAND and
WALES.

By THOMAS TANNER B. A.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, and are to be sold by A. and J. Churchill at
the sign of the Black Swan in Paternoster Row, LONDON. 1695.

Imprimatur,

Henr. Aldrich VICE-CAN. OXON.
Martii 13. 1694/5.
TO THE Honorable and Reverend Dr. Leopold-William Finch WARDEN OF ALL SOULS
COLLEGE In Oxford.
SIR,
FROM the Popular Clamours, that have been raised and carried on against the
Old Monks ever since the Reformation, it is easy to foresee, what cold
reception a Book of this nature must meet with. The reflections of the witty,
and the censures of the prejudiced, are the best entertainment it must expect,
and the Author is too mean to afford it the least protection. In this
melancholy condition, it flies to Your Patronage; when nothing but such a Great
Name can defend it against the ill usage of ignorance and malice. For the World
must needs be convinced, that the Knowledge of Monastical affairs is neither
barbarous nor insipid, when it is countenanced by One, in whom are to be found
Politeness, Exactness, and all other Accomplishments becoming a Noble Birth and
Academical Education.

You well know, Monasteries were in those dark Ages the only Preservers of
Learning, and maintainers of Hospitality; Orders and Statutes for the relief of
the poor were never known till after their Dissolution. Their Founders were men
of the greatest Honor and Virtue in their respective Ages; and it cannot but
be some satisfaction to the remaining branches of the Nobility and Gentry, to
survey the Pious Monuments of their Ancestor's Greatness, best expressed in
these splendid Acts of their Liberality and Devotion. Among many other reasons
assigned for the founding these Religious Houses, it was usual to erect them
after their returns from foreign Wars, both as an acknowledgement of Praise and
Gratitude to their Maker for their Success and Safety, and also out of Charity
(according to the Religion of those times) to the Souls of their slain Friends.
It was to the Conquest of France, that Noble College, wherein You preside, ows
it is Birth; which never had a Governor, from whom that Society and the whole
University could expect more, than from You, who fill that Place with all those
Qualities, which exactly answer the very mind, Idea, and desire of the great
CHICHLEY.

It cannot be denied, but that our Historians and Lawyers must have constant
recourse to their Annals; and whatever some modern Authors may in Essays
pretend against their Learning, most certain it is that the more judicious draw
their best arguments from them. And those that neglect such Records, find great
reason sooner or later to repent their ignorance, especially when their Faults
come to be discovered and exposed. Those Great Men of the latter Age were of
another opinion. Archbishop Parker, Sir Henry Savil and Mr. Camden, thought
they did the Public good service, when they brought to light those valuable
writings of Asserius, William of Malmsbury, Tho. Walsingham, Ingulphus, and
other Monks. Mr. Seldom and Sir Roger Twisden thought they could not join their
Studies more to the honor of England, than in retrieving from oblivion those
excellent Pieces of Simeon Dunelmensis, Joh. Brompton, Stubbs, Thorn, etc.
which will ever remain a noble Monument of their Pains, and Affection to their
Native Country. And the great design of that excellent Bishop to publish from
our Theater all the Latin Writers of the English History, met with universal
Applause: a Work, the Learned World may hope, waits for Your Care to see
carried on and finished.

I shall rather choose to trespass against the Custom of such Addresses, than
make the least approaches to offend You with those Characters of respect, which
Your Virtues exact from all that have the Honor and Happiness to be known to
You. So that I shall only crave leave to acquaint You, that I presumed to
Dedicate this Treatise to You, out of an innocent ambition to publish, how
freely You have been pleased to encourage this sort of Learning, in which the
Author, because of his natural inclination to History and Antiquities, has been
thought by the partial kindness of his Friends in some measure fit to serve his
Country. It Is this grateful remembrance of Your late generous kindness to a
Person altogether unknown to You, and without which he must have left this
beloved Place and his Studies, that obliges him to offer these his First Fruits
of Duty and Gratitude, and will also give You a right to command all his future
Labors.

That therefore Your Health and Vigor may be such as to complete the hopes and
expectation of all good Men, in seeing You a Glory to Your Function, Age, and
Country; and that You may by your Learning, Prudence and Conduct, be a support
and credit to the Church and Universities, is, as a Public Wish, so in a more
particular manner the sincere Prayers of

Reverend Sir, Your most obliged and most Obedient Humble Servant, THOMAS
TANNER.

THE PREFACE.
THE advances that all parts of Learning have within these few years made in
England, are very obvious; but the progress is visible in nothing more, than in
the illustrations of our own History and Antiquities. To which end we have had
our ancient Records and Annals published from the Originals, the Chorographical
Description of these Kingdoms very much improved, and some attempts made toward
a just body of English History. For those also that are more particularly
curious, we have had not only the Histories both Natural and Civil of several
Counties, the descriptions of Cities, and the Monuments and Antiquities of
Cathedral Churches accurately collected; but even the memoirs of private
Families, Villages, and Houses, compiled and published. And the great prices
those Books bear in our public Auctions are a sufficient demonstration of
their Credit and Esteem with Men of Learning* seeing no Library is thought
complete without them. For the inquisitive Men of the Nation now find the
pleasure and use of being well versed in the History and ancient customs of
their own Country, of reading the Acts of their renowned Ancestors, and of
having their own Names recorded to posterity.

So that to satisfy the curiosity of those who are willing to know, when, by
whom, and for whom these Religious Houses were Founded, (the Majesty of whose
very ruins strike Travelers with admiration:) To preserve some remembrance of
these Structures, once the Glory of our English Nation, and of their Founders,
that so highly deserved of the several Ages they lived in, is the design of
this Book. Though I am not ignorant that the generality of people ever since the
Dissolution, have through a mistaken zeal, and false prejudices, thought that the
very memory of those Great Men, who erected these places, ought to be buried in
the rubbish of those Structures that they designed should perpetuate their
Names to Eternity. Thus, they have been always censured as well wishers to the
introducing of Popery, who endeavored to give any account of Monasteries. Such
unjust and ill-natured Reflections have been the principal reasons that have
deterred several of our Historians from discoursing so largely about them, as
they could or indeed their occasions required; and have been the chief causes
why so few have treated purposely of them, or published any things immediately
relating to them or their Lands. It Is well known, Mr. Camden I^ Praef. ad
Britanniam.
and Mr. Weaver F^n. M^^.
were forced to apologize for barely mentioning the Monasteries; and what
outcries were made upon the Publication of that glorious work the Monasticon?
In so much that a very Learned and ingenious person Dr. Ralph ^athu^st Pres. of
Trin. Coll. Oxon.
wroto a Latin Letter to Dr. Langbain (to whom Mr. Dugdale had communicated his
Collections) to encourage the design, by showing the great use of such a work,
and removing all objections that could be raised against it. Which is printed
in some few Copies of the first Volume. Nay, so much are some people possessed
against them, that the least mention is odious and ungrateful. But there are no
grounds for it; seeing these Religious places were by the well intended charity
of their Founders and Benefactors built, endowed and adorned (how much soever
they were afterward abused) to the Glory of God, the service of Religion, and
the relief of poor Christians. But I would not be thought in this or any other
expressions that may be found in this discourse, in the least to vindicate the
Superstition or vices of the Monks; though perhaps it would be but common justice
to infuse a better opinion of Monasteries into the generality of Protestants.
And indeed, considering the provisions that are made in the Universities, for
the encouragement and attainment of Learning, and the many Hospitals that have
been since the Reformation built for the relief of the poor, there is less
reason to lament their loss.

It will be here expected that something of the general state of Monasteries
should be said by way of Preface. And it is readily owned that this would have
been a very proper place for a Dissertation concerning the first beginners of a
Monastic life, the Original of Monasteries in this Isle, the Institutions of
the old British Monks and Clergy; the Monks of the Roman Communion; the manners
of Secular married Clergy before the Conquest; the introducing of the
Benedictine Order into this Kingdom, and the several Tribes of it, viz. the
Cluniac, Cistercian, Carthusian, and other Orders, as also of the Regular
Canons, Austins, Praemonstratensians, Gilbertines, etc. giving a summary of
their Rules, Habits, and the most remarkable of their local Statutes. To this
might be added an account of the Original and Constitutions of the Templers,
Hospitalers, of Collegiate Churches, Frieries, Gilds, and Hermitages. The whole
might have been interwoven with pertinent digressions touching the state of
Learning among the Monks, their Privileges, Riches, and contentions with the
Friars and Secular Clergy. The reasons pretended for founding and endowing
Religious Houses, the methods of the Suppression, and several other things
would naturally fall in with these, and very much tend to the illustration of
our English Civil and Ecclesiastical History. Something of this nature was
intended to have been drawn up and prefixed to this Book, but the completing
of it requiring more time and pains, than a greater work (which I have now upon
my hands) would permit, and more materials than my years and small reading
could furnish me with; I am forced to lay aside that design at present; and
must desire the Reader to be content with the following lines, which will serve
to explain the subject and method of this Book, and in some measure to
understand the Rise, Progress, State and Suppression of Monasteries in England.

It was before observed, that little had been done toward the History of
Monasteries in this Kingdom; for which reason some well versed in Antiquities
were pleased to think that this Manual would not be ungrateful to the World. At
the Dissolution of these Places, King Henry VIII. wisely ordered the famous
Antiquary John Leland, under the Broad Seal to examine all their Archives, and
to take an account of their Founders and Benefactors. The effects of whose
labors in this kind, we have the rude draughts of in his MSS. Collections, but
he di^d and left this with several other Noble Designs unfinished. His MSS.
coming into the hands of Mr. Burton of Leicestershire, he drew up a Catalogue
of the Religious Houses within the Realm of England and Wales, with their many
Orders, Founders, and Values, most of them being Suppressed by King Henry VIII.
Together with such other sacred places, as either then mere by him left
standing, or since have been erected. This Catalogue, which is Printed at the
end of Mr. Speed's Reign of King Henry VIII. I ever thought to have been drawn
up by Mr. Speed himself, and have still mentioned it under Mr. Speed's name;
but Sir H. Spelman Council. Tom. 1. p. 215.
has better informed me, and restored it to it is genuine Author. As for the
Orders, Names, and true Valuations of the Monasteries, the Author in the
Preface owns he had them out of the Original Book taken by Commission and given
to the King: the Founders and the time of the Foundations, in all probability
he had out of the imperfect Notes of Leland, and Camden's Britannia. How
defective and erroneous this Catalogue is, may b^ seen by our Notitia, in which
the Reader will find some hundreds of mistakes and omissions corrected and
supplied out of the Monasticon and other good Authorities.

Besides, this Catalogue or Table of Mr. Burton^s, I could never find any thing
done to this subject, till the publication of the Monasticon by the joint
labors of those two famous Antiquaries Roger Dodsworth Esquire and Mr. Will.
Dugdale. Indeed Mr. Rich. Broughton a Missionary Priest, and Author of the
Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain, from the Nativity of Christ unto the
happy conversion of the Saxons, etc. Doway 1633. fol. had collected a rapsody
of stories which he entitled Monasticon Britanicum, or an Historical Narration
of the first Founding and flourishing estate of the ancient Monasteries,
Religious Rules and Orders of Great Britain in the times of the Britains and
primitive Church of the Saxons, etc. This was not Printed till after the
Author's death, (which was in A. D. 1634.) viz. A. D. 1655. 8^^. The very same
year was published at London the First Tome of the Monasticon, containing the
Charters and Muniments of the Benedictine, Cluniac, Cistercian and Carthusian
Orders. The Second Volume did not come out till A. D. 1661. In this were
comprised the Houses of the Regular Canons of St. Austin, the Hospitalers,
Templers, Gilbertines, Premonstratenses and Maturins or Trinitarians. The Third
and last Volume of the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches with Additaments to
the two former, was published in the year 1673. These three Folio's being too
voluminous and costly for the generality of Readers, I am willing to believe,
that this Short History will be grateful to those, that have neither leisure to
consult, nor money enough to purchase the Monasticon. And it may likewise be
useful to those that have the Monasticon already, upon account of the
Additions and Corrections, the Arms, the Repertory of MS. Registers and
Charters, and the references to the Monasticon and other Printed Histories. For
it cannot be denied but that the Monasticon is capable of many Additions. The
principal design of the Editors of those Noble Volumes being to collect
Charters and other Authentic Muniments, they neglected several short notes,
which give an account of the Foundation, Order, and Dedication of several
Monasteries. This is evident from Leland's MSS. which though Sir Will. D^gdale
frequently perused and partly transcribed, yet short accounts of great many
Religious Houses are to be met with therein, which are totally omitted in the
Monasticon. And the greatness of that work forced the industrious ^ublishers to
let slip several mistakes, which we might expect to have found corrected in the
late Epitome of it. But therein, to the errors of the Original are added
several of the Translator; and it is pity that Charters and Records should loose
their use and authority by being thus curtailed and mangled, or as the term is,
abridg'd. Though it is not pretended that this short History of Religious Houses
is complete or free from all errors, (which is impossible considering the great
loss of Monastic Records) yet all imaginable care was taken that it should be
more full and correct than any Book of this kind extant. To which end all our
printed Historians were examined, that might any way conduce toward the story
of these Places; as also Leland's Collections and Itinerary, and several other
MSS. Two particularly were very useful; one of which was an old Parchment MS.
wrote by a Monk of Canterbury, about the later end of Henry VI. Reign. It is in
the Bodleian Library, (NE. E. 2. 17) and contains the Names, Dedication, and
Orders of all the Religious Houses in every Shire. Wherein though the Monasteries
were often false placed, yet it gave great light toward recovering of the
Order and Dedication of several of them. The other was a fair paper MS. in the
Ashmolean Musaeum, (Number. 839.) collected not long after the Dissolution, by one
who probably had a sight of Leland's Collections. This chiefly supplied me with
the Names of several Founders, which were before wanting. More errors might
possibly have been amended, and defects supplied, could we but have got the
sight of that Book (which I am afraid is now lost) which Henry Crump a
Cistercian Monk and Doctor of Divinity of this University wrote about A. D.
1380. Concerning the Foundation of all the Monasteries in England, from the
time of S. Birin the first Bishop of Dorchester, till the age of Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln.

The method observed in this Book is to take the Counties according to
Alphabetical order, and in them to describe the Monasteries according to the
seniority of their Foundations. The time when some of them was built, is not
yet discovered; and those are put behind all the rest, but before the Colleges,
because we may take it for granted, that all or most of the Monasteries were
founded before the Statute of Mortmain, whereas few or none of the Colleges
were ^ounded before.

Now the Reader may be pleased to know something more concerning the subject of
this Book, The Religious Houses in England and Wales. By Religious Houses are
only implied Cathedral Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Priories-Alien, Colleges and
Preceptories. Houses of Friars are pur^osely omitted, because not endowed with
Lands; Chantries, because they were not incorpo^ate; Hospitals and Gilds,
because they consisted of Lay-Brethren. Few are ignorant of what is meant by
Cathedral Churches; but the distinction ^etwixt an Abbey and a Priory, and the
Names of Priories-Alien, Colleges and Preceptories are not ^o well understood.
An Abbey was a Society of Religious People wherein presided an Abbat ^r Abbess;
and a Priory was where the chief ^erson was termed a Prior or Prioress. Not but
in every Abbey there was a Prior immediately under the Abbat, who, during the
Abbat's absence had the chief care of the House; under him was the Sub-Prior,
and in great Abbeys the third and fourth Prior, who were Officers in the House,
and all removeable at the will of the Abbat, as were also the other
Obedientiarii. And here by the way, we may take notice that in every Abbey and
great Priory there were four great Obedientiarii (or Officers) viz. (1) the
Sacrista or Sexton, who took care of the buildings, the vessels, the Books and
Vestments of the Church. (2) The Thesaurarius or Bursar, who received all the
Rents and Revenues of the Monastery, and disbursed all expenses. (3) The
Cellerar, who provided food for the Monks. (4) The Camerarius or Chamberlain,
who found the Monks clothing. These were the four chief Officers; but beside
these was also the Hospitalarius, who took care that Hospitality was kept up,
and that entertainment was afforded to strangers who resorted to the Monastery.
The Eleemosynarius or A^moner had the oversight of the alms of the House which
were daily distributed at the gate to the poor. The Infirmarius had the charge
of the Infirmary and the sick Monks, who were carried thither out of the common
Dormitory. Many other Officers there were in Monasteries, but these were the
chief. But to return to Priories; which were of two sorts, one where the Prior
was chief Governor, as absolute as any Abbat in his Abbey, and was chosen by
the Convent; such were the Cathedral Priors and most of those of the Austin
Order. The other was where the Priory was a Cell, subordinate to some great
Abbey, and the Prior placed and removed at the will of the Abbat Sovereign: and
even among these there was a great deal of difference; some were altogether
subject to their respective Abbeys, who sent them what Officers and Monks they
pleased, and the revenues of these went to the common stock of the Abbey; others
consisted of a certain number of Monks, only had the Prior from the greater
Abbey, and paid a small pension yearly as an acknowledgement of their
subjection. These Priories were allways of the same Order with the Abbeys on
whom they depended, though sometimes of a different Sex; it being usual after the
Conquest for some great Abbeys to build Nunneries in some of their Manors,
which were Priories to the Abbeys, and subject to their Visitation.
Priories-Alien were when Manors or Tithes were given to any foreign Monastery:
the Monks either to increase their own Rule, or rather to have faithful
Stewards of their Lands, built convenient Houses for the reception of a small
Convent, and then sent over such a number as they thought fit, constituting
Priors over them successively as occasion required. Colleges or Collegiate
Churches were a certain number of Secular Canons living under the government of
a Dean, Warden, Provost or Master: There belonged to these Foundations
sometimes Chaplains, Singing-men, Clerks and Choristers. Preceptories or
Commanderies were Manors of the Knights Templers and Hospitalers, where
erecting Churches for the Service of God and convenient houses for habitation,
they sent part of their Fraternity thither, who were to be under the government
of the Preceptor or Commander, and to take care of the Lands and Rents
belonging to the Order in the neighboring Country, and so they were Cells to
their principal Mansions in London.

Of all these Religious Houses in England and Wales, the Reader may expect a
Short History, viz. the Foundation, the Order, Dedication, and Valuation.
Concerning the Foundation the Reader will be troubled with no more than barely
the Names and Qualities of the Founders, and the time of the first Foundation.
It may be necessary here to note, that in our Monastic Writers we find often
mention of the First, Second, etc. Founder; and I have seen the Sixth Founder.
But the first may only be properly said to be the true Founder; the others by
their great Benefactions either restoring the old o^ making some new additional
Foundation. I^ may be also observed, that the Successors of the Founders, the
Patrons and chief Lords of the Fee, were sometimes styled Founders.

The Orders were either Religious or Military; of the first were all Monks and
Canons. Of the Monks, the most ancient an^ the Benedictines or those that
follow the Rul^ of St. Benedict or Bennet, who was born at Nu^sia in Italy
about the year 480. He founded twelve Monasteries, in his own Country the chief
whereof was Mont Cassin, and gav^ them a Rule, which was afterward approved
(...) by Pope Gregory the Great A. D. 595. They were called also Black Monks,
from the color of their Habit, which was a black loose Coat of stuff reaching
down to their heels, with a cowl or hood of the same, and a Scapular; and under
that Coat another white Habit as large as the former, made of white flannen,
and boots on their legs. Of this Order were all our Cathedral Priories, except
Carliol, and most of the richest Abbeys in the Kingdom.

The Reformation of some things that seemed too remiss in St. Bennet's Rule, by
Odo Abbat of Cluny in Burgundy about A. D. 912. gave occasion to the rise of
the Cluniac Order. Most of our English Houses of this Order were subordinate to
the Abbey of Cluny or some other foreign Cluniac Monastery, and so were seis^d
as Alien-Priories during the wars with France: but were afterward made
indigenae, and so discharged from all subjection and obedience to any foreign
Abbey. Their Habit was little different from the Benedictines.

The Carthusians were also a branch of the Benedictines, whose Rule with the
addition of a great many a^sterities they follow. Their Author was one Bruno
born at Colen in Germany, who first instituted this Order at Chartreuse in the
Diocese of Gren^ble about A. D. 1080. Their Rule is the most strict and severe
of any of the Religious Orders; they never eat flesh, always wear a hair Shirt
next their skin, none ever stir out of their Monasteries (which are called
Charter-houses) upon any pretense whatsoever, except the Prior and Procurator.
Their Habit is all white, except their plaited Cloak, which is black.

Rob. Harding (an English man Bromton col. 994.
) Abbat of Molisme in Burgundy, first planted the Cistercian Order at
Cistertium or Citeaux in the Bishopric of Chalons, A. D. 1098. They were
called Bernardines from St. Bernard Abbat of Clarevall, a great propagator of
this Order, and also White Monks from the whiteness of their Garments. For
their Habit was a white Cassock with a narrow Scapulary, and a black Gown with
long sleeves when they went abroad; but going to Church they wore it white.
Their Monasteries were all of them dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary. These
were all the Orders of Monks that were to be met with in England?

The Canons were either Secular or Regular. The Secular Canons were ^^ergy men,
called Secular because they served the world (Seculum) in performing spiritual
Offices for the Laity, and taking upon them the care of Souls, which the
Regulars were incapable of. They differed in nothing from ordinary Priests,
save that they were under the government of some local Statutes, but were not
so strictly obliged to live under one Roof as the Monks and Regular Canons; but
generally lived apart, and were severally maintained by distinct Prebends, in
almost the same manner with the Canons and Prebendaries of our Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches a^ this day.

Regular Canons ^were so called because they were obliged to a strict
observance of the Rule of St. Austin, which enjoined them to have all things in
common, etc. Their Habit is a long black Cassock, a white Rochet over it, over
all a black Cloak and Hood. They wear also beards (the Monks were always
shaved) and a Cap upon their heads. They pretend St. Austin of Hippo to have
been their Founder, but they were not eminent till the tenth or eleventh
Century, and not in England till after the Conquest. For Authors disagree about
the time when this Order was first brought into England. John Rosse Mon. Angl.
Tom. 2. p. 572.
says that it was placed first at Colchester in the reign of King Stephen.
Reyner p. 158.
tells us, Nosthell in Yorkshire was the first this Kingdom had, which was
founded temp. Hen. I. Stow Surv. Land. 930.
says that Trinity within Aldgate London was the first, which was founded A.
D. 1107. But Mr. Somner's Antiquities of Canterb. p. 89.
opinion is more consonant to truth, who tells us that S. Gregorie's in
Canterbury was the first, that being built by Archbishop Lan^ranc A. D. 1084.
So that the Reader is desired to take notice, that though he may find mention
made in this book of Black or Regular Canons before the Conquest, yet they were
the same at the foundation with Secular Canons, but afterward assumed the
Habit and Rule of St. Austin. For it was usual in those old times to style the
Secular Canons of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches Canonici Regulares, to
distinguish them from ordinary Parish Priests.

The Premonstratensian Canons lived according to the Rule of St. Austin
reformed by one Norbert, who instituted this Order about A. D. 1120. at
Praemonstratum in Laon in France. They were called also White Canons from their
Habit, which was a white Cassock with a Rochet over it, and a long white Cloak.

The Sempringham or Gilbertine Canons were instituted by St. Gilbert at
Sempringham in Lincolnshire A. D. 1148. His Rule is composed out of those of
St. Austin and St. Bennet, with some special Statutes of his own. The Habit of
these Canons is a black Cassock, over which they wear a furred Cloak and a Hood
lined with Lamb skins: The Monasteries of this Order consisted both of Men and
Women, who lived under the same Roof, and were separated by a wall.

Canons Regular of the Holy Sepulcher, were founded in imitation of those
Regulars instituted in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher of our Savior at
Jerusalem. Their Habit was the ^ame as of other black Canons, with the
distinction of a double red Cross upon the breast of their Cloak or upper
garment. The endeavors of these Religious for the regaining of the Holy Land,
after the loss of Jerusalem, coming to nothing, their Lands, Revenues and
Privileges, were transferred to the Maturines or Friars of the Order of the
Holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives, who were instituted by S. John de
Matta and Felix de Valois about A. D. 1200. It was confirmed by Pope Innocent
III. who gave them white Robes with a Cross red and blew on their breasts, and
appointed that all the possessions which they should enjoy, should be equally
divided into three parts, one for the entertainment and reception of Religious
persons, the other to relieve the poor, and the third to redeem Christians kept
Captive by the Infidels. These Canons were also called Trinitarians, because
all their Churches were by the Rules of their Order to be dedicated to the Holy
Trinity. And here in England, they were said to be of the Order of I^gham,
because that Monastery (in Norfolk) was the chief House of that Rule.

There were another Order of Canons of the Austin Rule in England called
Bonhommes or Good-men; They were first brought into this Kingdom A. D. 1283.
11, 12. Edw. I. and placed in a Rectory or College founded by Edmund Earl of
Cornwall at Asser^g in Bucks. Of which Order in England there was but one more,
viz. at Edingdon in Wiltshire. The Reader may observe that they were not the
same with the Friars Minimes or Franciscans, whom some Authors call Bonhommes,
because our Bonhommes were amply endowed with Lands and Rents, which that
Mendicant Order could never be possessed of. Neither could they be of the Order
of Grandmont, the Religious whereof were called Bonhommes; because these were
only Benedictines reformed.

As for the Nunneries of the Benedictine, Climiac, Cistercian and Carthusian
Rules, and the Austin, Premonstratensian and Gilber^ine Nuns, they were
^nstituted by the same as the Monks of those Orders; they follow the same Rules
with the Monks, omitting only that which is not convenient for their Sex, and
wear habits of the same color, their Heads being always covered with a Vail.
Besides these, we had in England three other Orders of Religious Females, (1)
Clarisses or of the Order of St. Clare, who instituted it at Assise in Italy
about A. D. 1225. (2) Brigettan Nuns, who were founded by St. Bridget Queen of
Sweedland about A. D. 1360. (3) Nuns of the Order of Fontevrault, who wear a
black Habit with a white Vail. This Order was a Reformation of the Benedictine
begun by Robert de Arbusculo at Font Ebrald in Poictiers, A. D. 1117. There
were also Monks of this Rule, but none, I think, in England, except it were in
such Alien-Priories as were Cells to that Abbey. So without doubt other
Alien-Priories that were subordinate to St. Victor at Paris and Grandmont in
France, (the Canons of the first and the Monks of the last having particular
Rules distinct from any other Order) were of the same Constitutions with those
Abbeys.

Of the Military Orders there is mention made but of two in this book, viz. of
the Knights Hospitalers of S. John of Jerusalem, and the Knights Templers. The
Hospitalers since called Knights of Rhodes or Malta, were first taken notice of
about A. D. 1090. and were mightily favored by Godfrey of Bullen, and his
successor Baldwin King of Jerusalem. They followed partly St. Austin's Rule,
and wore a white Cross upon their black Habit. There was also in England one
House of Nuns of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, viz. Buckland in
Somersetshire. The Knights Templers, so called from having their residence in
certain Rooms adjoining to the Temple at Jerusalem, were instituted A. D. 1118.
They followed the Cistercian Rule, and their duty was to guard Pilgrims
traveling to the Holy Land. Their Habit was white, with a red Cross.

Thus I have in short traced the several Monastic Orders by their Original,
Institutions, and Habits, and in the Notitia have been very careful to note the
Order of every Religious House, which may be very useful, (besides the
curiosity of knowing what sort of Monks inhabited every Country) in the matter
of tithes especially. The Cistercians, Premonstratenses, H^spitalers and
Templers, being discharged from the payment of tithes in their own Dem^snes.
Such Monasteries, I mean, of those Orders as were founded before the Council of
Lateran, A. D. 1215. and such of the Cistercians and Premonstratensians, being
valued above 200l. per an. as were not dissolved by the Statute of 27. Hen.
VIII. See Sir Sim. Degge's Parsons Counselor, Lib. II. Cap. 21.

The next thing the Reader will be informed of, in this Short History of the
Religious Houses, is their Dedication, which is very necessary to be known, for
distinction sake in great Towns or Cities, where are two or more Monasteries.
This may be also of some use in reading our old Historians; for in them the
Monastery is often mentioned under the bare name of the Saint to whom it is
dedicated. Thus we frequently meet with Monasterium or Abbatia S. Aldhelmi, for
Malmsbury in Wiltshire, S. (...) for Chich in Essex, Prioratus S. Swithini for
the Cathedral at Winchester, and several other instances of the like nature,
which some, even the more understanding Readers, may stick at. But this is
remedied in the following book by turning to the Index of Names, wherein under
the Saints Name may be found the Pages, in which are any Monasteries dedicated
to that Saint. The Virgin Mary must be excepted, because she being the
Patroness of all the Cistercian Houses, and of a great many other Monasteries,
is mentioned once or twice in almost every Page.

And that the Reader may know what revenues every Religious House had, and so
partly guess at the number of the Foundation, here is set down the valuation of
them; which was taken by the Kings Commissioners 26. Hen. VIII. Of this
valuation we have two very different Copies, the one given us by Mr. Burton or
Mr. Speed, in the Catalogue of Religious Houses, which was taken from the very
Original delivered in to King Henry VIII. by the Commissioners. The other at
the end of the first Tome of the Monasticon taken by Sir Will. Dugdale out of
an ancient Copy in the Cottonian Library. These two valuations seldom or never
agree in the same sum, and for that reason, because there is good Authority for
both, it is thought fit that the revenues according to both Rates should be
inserted. That of Dugdale's in the Monasticon generally amounting to a less
sum, than that of Speed^s, I shall not endeavor to reconcile them or to give a
reason of the difference. It was once thought that Dugdale's valuation had been
the clear revenues over and above all Pensions, Corrodies, Alms, etc. but
adding the sums of these Reprises (which are at large mentioned in Sir Will.
Dugdale's History of the Monasteries in Warwickshire) to the value in the
Monasticon, it would not even then agree with Speed's. It is also very probable
that there are other Copies of the valuations of the Religious Houses besides
those two. For Leland gives us the worth of the annual revenues of several
Abbeys in Lincolnshire altogether different from Dugdale or Speed. So the
Charter of Henry VIII. by which he re-founds the Priory of Stixwold in Com.
Linc. tells us, that the value of the old Priory was 152l. 10s. 7d. whereas
according to Mr. Speed's Rate it is 163l. 1s. 2d. ob. and according to Sir.
Will. Dugdale but 114l. 5^. 2l. ob. And in Warwickshire the valuation, which
Sir Will. Dugdale had out of a MS. in the custody of Sir Sim. Archer, is also
very different from the rest.

Having thus explained the use and several parts of the following book, and let
the Reader understand that he will find the Foundation, Order, Dedication and
valuation, of these Religious Houses, but barely hinted to in this Manual; It
will be convenient for such whose business or curiosity require a more large
account of them, their Foundations, Endowments, etc. to have directions where
they may be satisfied. To which end, after the account of every Monastery,
References are made, not only to the Tome and Page of the Monasticon, but also
to all other Printed Books, wherein is any thing relating to the History of
that House, and to all MSS. whether original Charters, Registers or Annals
thereunto belonging, that are yet preserved. All men that know what memoirs are
contained in these MSS. will readily own that no body that is engaged in the
public or private History of this Kingdom or any part of it, should omit to
consult these Records. For as to the general History of England, what can be of
greater authority than the Chronicles that were compiled every year by those
persons, who were eyewitnesses of some, and lived in the time when all the
actions which they mention were done? For in all the greater Abbeys there were
persons appointed to take notice of the principal occurrences of the Kingdom,
and at the end of every year to digest them into Annals Vid. Edm. Gib^oni Pr^f.
in Chron. Saxon. and Angl Sa^r. T. 1. p. 4^9.
. And not only so, but the Constitutions of the Clergy in their National or
Provincial Synods, and, after the Conquest, Acts of Parliament were sent to the
Abbeys to be recorded. Here may be found Letters to, and Treaties with foreign
Princes, Provisions, Proclamations, Charters, and almost all other things that
relate to the Prerogative of the King, or the Liberties of the Clergy and
People Ibid. p. 274.
. The story of King Edw. I. is well known, how he sent to the Religious Houses
to search for his Title to the Kingdom of Scotland, in their Leigers and
Chronicles, as the most authentic Records for the proof of his right to the
Crown. And it is easy to observe, that the Learned Seldom has from old
Monastic Charters the greatest evidences, for asserting the Dominion of the
Narrow Sea to belong to the Kings of Great Britain. And how helpful these
Muniments were to that great Antiquary Mr. John Stow, who was the first that
drew up our English History in any tolerable method, appears from that Learned
Man's collecting above threescore Chronicles and Leiger-books of Monasteries,
and acknowledging that he made great use of them in the compiling his Annals.

As for the History of Counties and Towns, it is impossible to recover any
tolerable account of them, except the Charters and Couchers of the adjacent
Abbeys be carefully perused. For the quantities of Land these Religious Houses
had in all parts of England being so great, and the Monks so accurate in
Registring the Donations, and preserving all Charters, Leases, and other Deeds,
relating to their possessions not only after, but also before it came into
their hands, here we may find the succession of the mean Lords of their Manors
and Fees, the Privileges, Tenures, and Rents of them; the Foundation,
Endowment, and Appropriation of several Parochial Churches, with the
Ordinations of their Vicarages: as also very frequently the ancient bounds of
Forests, Hundreds, Parishes, and lesser Estates. And then as to the histories
of private Families, these Books are of unspeakable use. For the gratitude of
the Religious would not suffer the memories and Charity of their Pious Founders
and Benefactors to be buried in oblivion. In their Leiger-books we have not
only the bare mention of the Benefactors, but something of the lives of their
Founders and their successors their Patrons. We have in them, generally, the
days and years of their Births and Obits, their Marriages, Children, and the
most considerable of their actions: Here are also very often we find their
Coats of Arms and Seals delineated and preserved. How useful these Records are
to the Histories of places and Families, the numerous references in Sir Will.
Dugdale's Warwickshire to MS. Charters and Registers, and the quotations of the
Monasticon in every column of the Baronage, sufficiently manifest: which two
Noble Volumes, though they are the most perfect pieces in that kind that ever
were published, might yet have been in several particulars more complete, if
that Learned and industrious Author had had the opportunity of consulting more
of these Monastic Books. I shall add but one thing more; and that is
concerning the great use that some eminent Common Lawyers have made of these
Registers; who wish that those who apply themselves to that study would have
oftener recourse to these Records. Here they may find all sorts of Writs, old
forms of Grants, Leases and Wills; the original and several kinds of Tenures,
the Privileges, Customs, Homages, Services and Rents of the mean Tenants; Cases
concerning Reservation of Quitrents upon Gifts in puram and perpetuam
cleemosynam, concerning Mortmains, Corrodies, and Pensions. The methods of
Pleading in the Abbat's Courts; the manner of appropriating Churches, and
endowing Vicarages. These and several other Law-matters an industrious Student
may find in the Cartularies; and make use of to many good purposes; and so will
have no reason to repent of the time and pains he shall bestow in reading these
Books. And if we are willing to take example in this from the French, whom we
are ready enough to imitate in several other things, we shall find that the
most eminent of their Advocates and Counselors of Parliament, make it their
business to be well versed in the Muniments of their Religious Houses, as the
best places to be informed in the customs of their Country, about all matters
relating to estates either personal or real.

I am last of all to account for the Coats of Arms of the Religious Houses,
which (in hopes that they will be grateful to the Curious, because most of them
were never before published) I have caused to be engraven on five Copper
plates. Most of these I took out of an ancient MS. in the Ashmolean Library,
wrote about the ^ime of the Reformation, the rest I had from good Authorities;
the Arms of the Episcopal ^ees are also added in their proper places, not that
they are rare, but because I was willing ^o make the Collection as complete as
possible; ^he Arms also of the six new Bishoprics found^d by King Henry VIII.
are the same with the ^ld Priories. I am not ignorant that several Monasteries
had no Arms, and of those that ^ad, few used them in the Common Seal of the
House, that being generally the Saint or Saints to whom it was dedicated, though
the Arms are sometimes found at the lower part of the Seal, or else they are
used as a Counter-Seal.

Thus here is given, as briefly as the matter would permit, some account of the
method, contents, and use of the following Book. In the sequel of this
discourse some attempts will be made toward a brief History of the general
state of Monasteries in this Island, from the time of the Britains till the
Dissolution, with some reflections on their Learning.

The original of Monks in Britain may be dated from the first plantation of
Christianity therein, if we may give any credit to a very Learned Gentleman Sir
G. Mackensy in his defense of the Royal Line of Scotland p. 13.
, who tells us, That it is probable that some of the Druids having been
converted from the Pagan Religion, whereof they were the Priests, became our
first Monks; being thereunto much inclined by the severity of their former
discipline. But however, it is just to suppose, that several Christians to avoid
the heat of the persecution, which raged so fiercely here in the reign of
Dioclesian, did withdraw into solitary places, and there accustoming themselves
to live, were our first Ascetics. This retired life afterward became more
eligible, when Britain was in a combustion by reason of the wars between the
Usurpers of the Roman Empire, which were followed by the incursions of the
Picts, and the Conquest of the Saxons. These troublesome times without doubt,
inclined contemplative persons to fly into the most private solitudes, Caves,
Forests and Mountains, where they spent their time in reading the Scriptures,
and other duties of Religion, having no tie or vows, but what they from time to
time imposed upon themselves. There is great question among the Learned, who it
was that brought over the Monastic Rules and first instituted Abbeys in
Britain. It is the opinion of the Right Reverend Bishop of Worcester, (to whom
the Church Antiquities of these ages owe their greatest light) Antiq. of the
British Churches p. 185.
That the British Monasteries were no older than S. Patrick's time. Indeed the
Winchester Historian would make the World believe Th. Rudburn Hist. Maj. L. I.
Cap. 3.
, that there was an Abbey founded in that City for Monks of the Order of St.
Mark the Evangelist by King Lucius A. D. 194. who endowed the Bishops and them
with the Lands and Privileges of the Flamen, viz. all the Country twelve miles
round the City. But every part of this ill grounded story is so erroneous, that
it is not worth the while to confute it. Besides this, Capgrave and from him
Bale and Pits, seem to contradict the forementioned opinion, by asserting that
Pelagius the Heretic who flourished about A. D. 400. was Abbat of Bangor. But
there is no probability at all in the Monkish tradition of Pelagius's being
Abbat of Bangor; and there is not much more of Bangor's being so famous a
Monastery at that time, or of Pelagius's being a Monk therein. For the British
Monasteries were no elder than St. Patrick's time. -- And in Pelagius's time,
those were called Monks at Rome, who had no office in the Church, but yet
retired from the common employments of the World for sacred Studies and
devotion; and where any number of these lived together, that was called a
Monastery. Thus that great Prelate. And it is likely that Congellus about A. D.
530. was the first that converted the House of Bangor into a Monastery, though
not the first that brought the Monastic way of living into Britain, as Mr.
Camden Britannia edit. 1607. p. 457.
will have it. As for St. Patrick, after he had converted the Irish to the
Christian Faith A. D. 433. he came over into this Isle, and finding at
Glastonbury Wi^h. Malmsb. de Antiq Glas^on. Oxon. 1691.
twelve Anchorites he gathered them together, and making himself Abbat taught
them to live according to the Monastic Rules. And this is the more probable,
because he was Nephew to St. Martin of Tours, who brought this manner of life
into France, and from whom St. Patric^ might easily have learned it. Malmsbury
De Regibus l. I. c. 22.
also calls this Monastery in another place the oldest that he knew in England.
In the next age the British Historians report Spelm. Co^^ T. ^. p. 25.
, that St. Dubriciu^ Archbishop of St. David's founded twelve Monasteries, and
taught his Monks to live after the manner of the Asians and Africans upon the
works of their own hands; This was about the year 512. Not long after, as 'twas
before observed, the Abbey of Bangor was instituted which, as Bede Eccl. Hist.
Lib. II. c. 2.
says, consisted of seven Classes, each Class containing three hundred Monks
who all lived on their own labors. What other things were enjoined them we
have no account, but that they had a Rule is plain from Gildas, who mentions
Monachorum decreta Edit. Oxon. 1691. p. 20.
, and Monachi Votum Ibid. p. 21.
; but whether the Rule of the Welsh Monasteries was the same with that St.
Patrick instituted at Glastonbury? Or if different, whether either was the same
used in any other parts of the World, we have no light from Antiquity to
discover. Indeed that great Antiquary Sir Roger Twisden MS. discourse
concerning the beginners of a Monas^ick Life.
tells us, The Monks of Bangor were not unlike the Order of St. Basil, if not
of it.

Upon the Conversion of the Pagan Saxons, (who then domineered over the largest
Province of Britain since called England) Monasteries were founded in all
parts, where Christianity had any footing. Thus St. Austin and his followers
erected Monasteries in Kent, and the Scottish Bishops and Monks propagated the
Christian Faith after the same way among the Northumbrians. Though it appears by
a passage of Bid, that after the death of St. Austin, the Monks found no great
encouragement in the South parts. For that Venerable Author says Eccl. Hist.
II. 8.
, that about A. D. 640. Earcongota daughter to Earcombert King of Kent, was
made Nun at Brige (in France). Because at that time there being very few
Monasteries in Britain, many went to the Religious Houses of France, for the
sake of a Monastic life; and also they used to send their daughters thither to
be taught and devoted to the service of God, etc. But about this time the
West Saxons and Mercians were converted to Christianity, upon which Monasteries
were every where built with great zeal for God's glory, and liberally endowed
by the Saxon Kings.

It will seem strange to some, that nothing should be hitherto said about the
Order of St. Austin the Monk, and to prove that the old Saxon Monks were
Benedictines. But if I might presume to offer any thing in this case, I should
rather think that the Benedictine Rule was scarce heard of in England till some
hundred of years after, and never perfectly observed till after the Conquest.
There is no great credit to be given to the Chronicle X. Script. Lo^d. 1651.
col. 2232.
, that records, how that St. Wilfrid A. D. 666. introduced that Rule, or rather
(as others XV. Script. Oxon* 1691. p. 58.
say) improved the Orders of the English Churches by it. And as for the Bull of
Pope Constantine, commanding that the Monks of Evesham should live under that
Rule, there are great probabilities that it is forged and spurious; and though
'twas genuine, it does not make much for the Patrons of the Benedictines,
because it follows in the next words, that at that time ( A. D. 709.) that Rule
was very little used in England. Forbid who has given us a very accurate
account of the state of Religion in this Isle till A. D. 731. has nothing of
Saint Bennet or his Rule. And at the first Regulation of the Monks in England
by Archbishop Cuthbert A. D. 747. in the great Synod at Clovesho, there is not
the least mention of it. In this Council several things were amended relating
to the Habit and manners of the Monks; and according to the Canons thereof
without doubt the Religious, especially of the Province of Canterbury, walked
till the fatal invasions of the Danes; who were very barbarous, where ere they
came, in rifling and burning Monasteries, and stripping, wounding, and very
often killin^ the poor Monks. During their incursions, Monkery and with it
Christianity had almost been extinguished, and there were scarce any remains of
a Monastery Leland. Coll. MS. Vol. 1. fol. 8.
save at Glastonbury and Abingdon. And even at Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 2^6.
Winchester and X. Script. col. 1643.
Canterbury in King Alfred's time, there was such a scarcity of Monks, that
Seculars were permitted to assist them in performing the Divine Offices. Nay,
Gervasius says Ibid. col. 1645.
, that before St. Dunstan's time the name of Abbat was scarce heard of, and
very few had seen a Convent of Monks. This Dunstan being promoted to the
Archiepiscopal Se^, and countenanced by King Edgar, was the great restorer of
the Monastic way of living, by repairing the ruinous Churches and Religious
Houses, and placing Monks and Nuns in the room of Secular Canons. It was by his
advice that King Edgar made the second Reformation of our ancient English Monks
in the Council of Winchester, A. D. 965. To this end several Monks were sent
for from Fleury and Corby in France, who were to inform them in the particulars
of St. Bennet's Order. So little was that rule known then in England, which
several fondly imagine was generally received some hundreds of years before. At
this Synod was framed a general Constitution for our English Mon^s, composed
partly out of the Rule of St. Bennet, and partly out of the ancient customs of
the English Devotees. This was called Regularis concordia An^licae Nationis,
and is published in Saxon and Latin by the Learned Seldom in his Spicilegium
after Eadmerus Land. 1623. p. 145.
. According to this Rule were Monasteries founded and governed in the Southern
and more civilized part of Britain: and their number increased so very much,
that (...) is King is recorded to have erected or rather re-founded forty
seven. Neither were new Monasteries only founded, but all the Lands, which by
the iniquity of the times had been taken away from Religious places, were
restored by the authority of the King, and the care of Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, and Wulstan Bishop of Worcester.
After this Kings death, the Secular Clergy began to lift up their heads again,
and were encouraged by Elfere Prince of Mercia, who expelled the Monks out of
all the Monasteries in that Province, and restored the Secular Canons. These
things occasioned the contests between the Monks and Seculars at the Synods of
Winchester, Caln, and Ambresbury, in the time of King Edward the elder. Where
being convinced by pretended miracles, or else overruled by the power of
Archbishop Dunstan and others of the Monks party, the Seculars made no great
stir afterward, and so the Monks quietly enjoyed their Lands till the Conquest.

But this must be understood only of the state of Monasteries in the South
parts of the Isle; in the Kingdom of the Northumbrians Monasteries were more
frequent even from their first receiving Christianity. For here the new
Converts being mightily taken with the powerful Preaching and exemplary lives
of Aidan and the Scotch Monks, were very zealous in building and endowing
Religious Houses. So great an opinion had they of the sanctity of those Monks,
and their way of living, that it was very usual for their Nobles, and very
often their Kings and Queens to renounce the world, (as they called it) and put
on Religious Habits. Not to make any mention here of the old Scottish Monks or
Culdees, of whom we had none in England, except at St. Peter's in York, because
they were the same with the Monks of the Irish Rules. As in the South parts of
England 'twas usual to send their children to France to learn the Monastic way
of living, so in the North they were sent into Ireland to the Monasteries
there, to be instructed in Learning Bed Eccl. Hist. Lib. III. cap. 27.
. But (as Sim. Dunelmensis X. Script. col. 206.
says) after the devastation of that Country by the Danes, (A. D. 867.) who
reduced the Churches and Monasteries to ashes, Christianity was almost extinct,
very few Churches (and those only built with hurdles and covered with straw)
were rebuilt, but no Monasteries were re-founded for almost two hundred years
after. The Country people never heard of the name of a Monk, and were frighted
at their very Habit, till three Monks from Winchelcomb brought again the
Monastic way of living to Durham, York, and Whitby.

It may be necessary here to note, (1) Something concerning the Nunneries
before the Conquest. That we had Nuns in the time of the Britains is very
probable, because the Irish and Scots allowed of them before St. Austin came
into England, and the Constitution of the British Churches were in a manner the
same with them. But if Leland's authority be allowed in this case, I think it
is clear enough to decide the controversy; for he tells us of Nunneries in the
time of the Britains more than once, particularly of one at Collect. vol. 4.
fol 37.
Caermarden. What Monastic Rules so ever St. Austin might introduce, we meet
with none relating to religious Virgins. Yet in the next Century we find them
very frequent among the Saxons. King Eadbald is recorded to have founded about
A. D. 630. a Nunne^y at Folkstone in Kent, which it is likely was the first in
England. So according to this, it must be an oversight in Mr. Weaver F^n. Monu^
and Sir W. Dugdale Warwicksh. p. 797.
to say, that Barking in Essex was the first Nunnery in England, which was not
built till A. D. 680. About which time (without doubt) Nuns were in great
plenty, because we find in that year Domneva to have presided over no fewer
than seventy in one Monastery in the Isle of Thanet. And A. D. 694. Abbesses
were in so great esteem for their Sanctity and Prudence, that they were
summoned to the Council at Becanceld, and the names of five (and not one Abbat)
subscribed to the Constitutions there made. Bishop Aidan made Hieu (who was
afterward Abbess and Foundress of Hartlepool) the first Nun among the
Northumbrians A. D. 640. And 'twas afterward a custom in Northumberland and
Scotland in these old times for Monks and Nuns to live together in the same
Monastery, who were all subject to the government of the Abbess; thus it was at
Whitby, Repingdon, Coldingham, etc.

2. Some account of the Secular Clergy (who make so great a noise in the
Ecclesiastical History of the Saxon times) would not be impertinent. But the
Monks having so blackened them, it will be a very hard matter to recover their
just character. The invective Oration King Edgar made against them, has given
us a catalogue of their crimes, but probably their memories had not suffered so
much, if their defenses had been as carefully preserved. I am not satisfied
what was the distinction between the old Secular Canons and the Monks, for
Historians by calling the Houses of Monks Collegia B^d. Eccl. Hist. III. 5. IV.
11.
, and the Chapters of Secular Canons Monasteria (...) Gloss. (...) Monasterium.
, confound these two sorts of Religious Persons. Nor does the opinion of the
Learned Mr. Wharton Angl. Satr. T. 2. p. 91.
seem unlikely, when he tells us, that before the Reformation by King Edgar and
St. Dunstan, our Monasteries were nothing but Convents of Secular married
Clergy. This conjecture he confirms by a great many quotations, which must be
here omitted. I shall only presume to acquaint the Reader farther, that it is
probable the Monks and Nuns in the first ages of Monkery might marry; a
pregnant proof of which we have from Bid Eccl. Hist. Lib. V. p. 3.
, who reports, that in St. John of Beverley's time the Abbess of a Monastery
called Vetadun had a carnal daughter, who was Nun of that House. And on the
contrary some of the Seculars obliged themselves to the vow of chastity. It is
certain they observed some regular Constitutions, for the Canons of Durham Sim.
Dunelm. Praef.
read the Psalms in the same order, as they were appointed in the Rule of St.
Bennet. At Peykirk, as Ingulphus Edit. Oxon p. 40.
relates, they observed the Canonical hours of the Monks, and took the vows of
Chastity and Obedience. And at Canterbury they wore the very Habit of the
Monks, but indeed (as Gervasius notes) did not strictly observe the Rule. So
that in all likelihood the terms of Monk and Secular Canons were indifferently
used, or at most with very little distinction, till King Edgar's time, when St.
Dunstan enforcing a stricter observation of St. Bennet's Rule, those that were
willing to retain their wives and Parochial Cures were termed Secular Clerks,
and those came to be called Monks or Regulars, who quitted both, according to
the Constitutions of that Order.

Lastly, The Monks of this Isle were never under one Rule before the second
Reformation. For not to mention the difference between the British, Scottish,
and Roman Monks, we may observe, that every holy Man that was an Abbat, laid
down particular Rules of the Monastic way of living for those under his
jurisdiction. Hence it is that we meet with the Rules of St. Patric, S.
Congall, S. Columba, Molva, S. Columban, S. Carthagus, Segenius, Fursaeus, S.
Coman, and others among the Irish and Scots; S. David, S. Asaph, S. Cuthbert,
S. Aldhelm, etc. among the Britains and Saxons. Neither did Archbishop
Cuthbert's Regulation make an uniformity in these matters, for in King Alfred's
time there were diversi generis Monachi X. Script. col. 132.
. And even after the Conquest at a general Visitation of Religious Houses A. D.
1232. among the Benedictines, there were not two Monasteries that lived after
the same manner M. Paris. Land. 1684. p. 322.
.

At the Conquest, Monasteries had a deep share in the afflictions of the
Conquered Nation. Some of the best of their Manors were sacrilegiously taken
away, their Treasuries were rifled, and their Liberties infringed by the
insulting Normans. Most of the English Abbats being deposed for small or no
causes, strangers were preferred to the richest Abbeys in the Kingdom: who
introduced several new customs to the grievance of the old Saxon Monks. One
thing that seemed very hard, was the altering their Missals: Upon this account,
what heats were in the Abbey of Glastonbury? when Thurstan the pragmatical
Norman Abbat would needs compel the Monks to lay aside the old Gregorian
service, which had been sung in that Abbey time out of mind, and to make use of
the new devotions of one William of Fiscamp. These and several other
innovations in the Divine Worship, were growing up apace in the Church, had
they not been stopped by the pains of Osmund Bishop of Salisbury, who composed
a new Ritual, which was afterward known by the name of Missale in usum Sarum,
and generally used in England, Scotland, and Ireland.

2. Another thing, that was a burden to the Religious, especially those of the
Cathedral Convents, was the making of Secular Priests Bishops of those
Churches. Of this the Monks made loud complaints, because it was rarely, or, as
they pretended, never heard of in the Saxon times, and even forbid by a
positive Canon made in the time of Archbishop Theodore, and afterward
confirmed by King Edgar X. Script. col. 1639.
. And this was so strictly observed among the Saxons, that though a Secular
Priest was nominated or elected by a Conventual Chapter, yet he was forced to
be made Monk, before he could be consecrated. Thus Odo Bishop of Shirburn being
chose Archbishop of Canterbury, could not get his Pall or be Installed, till
he had received the Religious Habit from the Abbat of Fleury. Thus the Monks,
who after the Conquest would be as exempt as possible from the jurisdiction of
any Secular, made this a plea for all or most of their quarrels with the
Bishops. They were always very jealous of their privileges, and upon the least
occasion were ready to publish, how much the Secular Bishops acted to the
disadvantage of the Cathedral Priories, by imposing several things repugnant to
the Immunities of their Order.

3. The third disadvantage, that was occasioned in Monasteries by the Conquest,
was the distinction, that was afterward made between the Lands of the Bishop
and the Convent. For during the Saxon times whatever donations happened, they
were given Deo and Ecclesiae to the Bishops, Priors and Monks in common X
Script. col. 1310.
. But after the Conquest the Bishops assigned what revenues, they thought
sufficient to maintain the Prior and Convent, and reserved the rest and best
part of the Church Lands to the use of themselves and their successors. This
division, I am afraid, fell very hard upon the Monks in several places, for the
Canterbury Historian Ibid. col. 1311.
complains, that their Archbishop had retained the Services and Fees of the
Earls, Barons and Knights, and allowed the Monks none but Yeomen and
Husbandmen. Certain it is, that this gave occasion, at first for the
distinction in other Monasteries of the Lands of the Abbat and Convent, and
afterward of the several great Officers of the House. So that we never read
till after the Conquest, that any grants were made in usum Prioris, Sacristae,
Eleemosynarii, Cellerarii, Camerarii, etc. or as others run in more particular
terms, ad vestitum Monachorum, ad victum, ad luminaria, ad hospitalitatem
faciendam, ad fabricam Ecclesiae, ad reparanda Ecclesiae ornamenta, and other
uses, to which those revenues were particularly appropriated.

The last grievance that shall be mentioned, which indeed affected the Clergy
in general, was the Conqueror's charging Church Lands with Military Services.
This is taken notice of by Matthew Paris; but I shall crave leave to describe
it in the words of a late ingenious Writer Sir Will. Temple in his Intr. to
Engl. Hist. p. 175.
, Whereas (says he) before (the Conqueror's time) the Clergy held all their
land by Franc Almonage, and subject to no duties or impositions, but such as
they laid upon themselves in their Ecclesiastical Assemblies. This Prince
finding above a third part of the Lands of the Kingdom in the possession of the
Clergy, and the Forces of the Crown, which consisted in Knights service,
lessened in proportion by their Immunities. He reduced all their Lands to the
common tenure of Knight's Fees and Baronage, and thereby subjected them to an
attendance upon the King in his wars, and to other services anciently due, and
sometimes raised upon all Lands, that held in Fee from the Crown. This
innovation touched not only the Bishops, but all the Abbats throughout the
Kingdom, many of whom were endowed with great Lands and Revenues. But Sir Will.
Temple must pardon me, if I suspend my opinion in this particular, till better
informed, viz. That the Conqueror found above a third part of the Lands of the
Kingdom in Possession of the Clergy. 'The truth of this may be examined with
more certainty, than any other part of English History, the Lands of the
Ecclesiastics being all particularly recorded in Doomsday-book, so that it
will be easy to compute the proportion. But not having in this place the
opportunity of consulting the Original, it cannot be very accurate. However by
the transcript of those few Counties we have, a pretty exact guess may be made.
In Cheshire See Sir Peter Leiceste^'s History of Cheshire.
were but twenty seven Manors belonging to Churchmen; in Transcript. Co^.
Warwic. ex (...) inter MSS. Dugd^l. in Musaeo
Warwickshire not forty; in Ashmol. Oxon. ^c,
Berkshire about sixty; in Transcript Com. B^^ks. and S^^^^ord ibid (...) MSS.
Ashmol.
Staffordshire about fifty; and in Nottinghamshire Dr. Thoroton's Hist. of
Nottinghamsh
but forty. Besides it ought to be considered, that one fourth of the Lands,
that were in Church-men's hand in the time of King Edward III. (at which time
the Commons showed the King that the Temporalities of the Clergy amounted only
to above a third part of the Kingdom) was not given to Religious places at King
William's first coming to the Crown. For there were not above an hundred
Monasteries and endowed Churches founded before the Conquest, which, though they
were richer for the most part than any after founded, yet according to the
highest account, the revenues could not amount to above a fourth part of the
incomes of the Religious Houses in the time of Edward III. And if so, then the
Ecclesiastics had but, at most, a twelfth part of the Lands of the Kingdom in
their hands at the time when the Conqueror imposed these services, viz. A. D.
1170.

After this digression we must again carry on some brief account of the state
of the Monastic Orders here in England. It was in the Conqueror's time, that
the third and last Regulation of Monks was made, by Archbishop Lanfranc in the
Council held at London, A. D. 1075. This Reformation brought the English Monks
nearer the Benedictines than ever before, I mean those of the old Foundations;
but as for the new Monasteries, they were replenished with Monks of what Order
the Founder pleased. For during this Reign were brought into England the Orders
of Regular Canons of St. Austin and of Cluniac Monks. Of each sort were six
founded in this Kings time; as also sixteen Benedictine Abbeys and Priories,
besides fourteen Alien-Priories. A note annexed to an old MS. book of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions in the Bodle^^n Library Inter MSS. Junian 121.
desires us to note the slyght of the Pope, that when he had caused the Deuke
of Normandy to Conquer England; under pretense of penance caused him to give
much Lands to Abbyes, and that Deuke did bylde many of the Order of Cluny,
because Pope Gregory VI. was a Monk of Cluny. Tho^ I cannot find that ever he
founded any of this Order, yet he built and endowed the great Abbeys of Battle
Com. Suss. and Selby in Com. Ebor. and the Priory of Hitchinbroke in Com. Hunt.
and the Alien-Priories of Frampton in Com. Dors. Paunsfeld in Com. Essex,
Derehirst in Com. Gloc. Andover in Com. Hants. and Stayning in Com. ^uss.

Will. Rufus succeeded next, heir to the vices, not the virtues of his Father.
He miserably oppressed the Religious, seized upon the Revenues of the vacant
Abbeys and Bishoprics, and would never let them be filled without some
Simoniacal bargain. In this Kings Reign several of the Bishops, X. Script. col.
2363. and Angl. Saer. T. 1. p. 255.
of whom Walkeline Bishop of Winchester was the chief, made strong efforts to
expel all the Monks out of Cathedral Churches, and to place Secular Canons in
their rooms. This infallibly they had accomplished, having got the Kings
consent, had not Archbishop Lanfranc (a man of universal Goodness and approved
Wisdom See Sir Will. (...) p. 2^4.
) maintained the cause of the Monks with a great deal of courage; and not only
brought the King to change his mind, but also procured a Bull from the Pope,
prohibiting the like attempts for the future. In the thirteen years of this
Kings reign were not above thirteen Religious Houses (except Priories Alien)
founded, viz. seven of the Benedictine, four of the Cluniac, and two of the
Austin Order, and about nine Alien-Priories; but not one Collegiate Church in
this or the preceding Reign. The King built only the small Priories of
Armethwait in Com. Cumb. and S. Nicholas in Exeter.

King Henry I. is recorded to have been a very pious good Prince, an encourager
of Learning and Piety, and one that had a great esteem for the Church and all
Religious Persons. His founding nine or ten Monasteries confirms the truth of
this character, viz. the Episcopal See and Priory of Regular Canons at
Carlisle, the Abbeys of Cirencester in Com. Gloc. and Mert^n in Com. Surr. with
the Priories of Dunstable in Com. Bedf. St. Dennis at Southampton, and Wells
near Grims^y in Com. Linc. of the same Order; as also the stately Benedictine
Abbey at Reading; besides the Alien-Priories of Steventon in Com. Berks. Tackley
in Com. Essex, and Newent in Com. Gloc. In the beginning of this Kings Reign
the Knights Hospitalers settled in London; A. D. 1128. the Cistercians were
first brought into England, and placed at Waver^^y in Surrey: and about this
time the Canons (...) the Holy S^pulcher came to Warwick. The number of
Religious Houses founded in the Reign of King Henry I. were above an hundred
viz, about thirty of the Benedictine Monasterie^ forty of the Austin Order,
five Cluniac, ten Cistercian Houses, four Colleges, two Preceptories and
thirteen Alien-Priories.

King Stephen was Virtuous, Religious and Liberal, and after the wars between
him and Maud the Empress were ended, a great builder of Religious Houses. To
him the Benedictines at Carow in Com. Norf. and at Heyham in Com. Cant. the
Black Canons at Thorn^olm in Com. Linc. and the Cluniac Monks at Feversham in
Com. Cant. owe their Foundations and endowments, and the Knights Hospitalers
their Commanderies at Cressing Temple in Com Essex, and at Egle in Com. Linc.
A. D. 1146. the Prem^nstratensian Order was brought into England, their first
Monastery being Newhouse in Lincolnshire. Two years after, the Gilbertine ^rder
had its rise at Sempringham in that County. The troubles, the Kingdom was for a
great part of this Reign embroiled in, could not restrain the Piety and Charity
of the English from building Religious Houses, to the number of fifteen of the
Benedictine Order, twenty five Priories of black Canons, thirty five Cistercian
Abbeys, six Houses of the Premonstratensian, six of the Gilbertine, and four of
the Cluniac Rule; one College, two Preceptories, and three Alien-Priories.

King Henry II. was very obliging to the Clergy, especially after the murder of
S. Thomas Becket of Canterbury. He founded the first house the Carth^sians had
in England, viz. Witham in Somersetshire, as also Waltham in Com. Essex,
Newstede in Com. Not. Ivy Church in Com. Wilt. and Marton in Com. Ebor. of the
Austin Order; Newstede in Com. Linc. for Gilbertine Canons; Stonely in Com.
Warw. for Cistercian Monks, and the Alien-Priory of Hagh in Com. Linc. In his
Reign were founded twenty two Benedictine, thirty Austin, eight
Premonstratensian, four Gilbertine, and six Cluniac Monasteries, three
Collegiate Churches, six Preceptories, (for in the year 1185. the Templers came
into England) eight Alien-Priories, and what is more remarkable, almost twenty
Cistercian Abbeys, notwithstanding it was contrary to a Canon made at the
general Chapter of the Cistercian Order A. D. 1152 A^nal. Waverl. in e^d. anno.
and Mat. Paris. in A. D. 1151.
wherein the erection of any more Abbeys of that Rule was expressly forbid,
because there were above five hundred of them already founded.

In Richard I. time, the humor of going to recover Holy Land from the Saracens
mightily prevailed in England, as well as in all other parts of Christendom.
And the money designed for pious uses being expended in those Wars and for the
Ransom of the King, there were few Monasteries built in this Reign, viz. six of
the Benedictine, four of the Austin, one of the Cistercian, four of the
Premonstratensian, and two of the Gilbertine Order, with one Alien-Priory. This
King is said Walt. Hemingford Lib. II. cap. 73.
to have mortally hated the Black Monks, the Cistercians and the Templers, and
not only those three sorts, but also all Religious Men, for we do not find that
he built one Monastery in England.

King John though he was always prejudiced against the Ecclesiastics, yet he
founded a stately Abbey for the Cistercians at Beaulieu in Com. Hants. to which
he made Farendon in Com. Berks. a Cell. He built also the Ben. Nunnery of
Lambley in Com. Northumb. and made Otterington in Com. Devon an Alien-Priory.
In his Reign were founded seven Benedictine Abbeys and Priories, eleven for
Regular Canons, seven for Cistercian Monks, one Preceptory, two
Premonstratensian Abbeys, six of the Gilbertine Order, and two Alien-Priories.

In King Henry the third's long Reign we find but four Benedictine Abbeys and
Priories built, fifteen of the Austin, nine of the Cistercian, and of the
Gilbertine and Cluniac Orders each one, as also one of the Premonstratensian,
viz. Tichfield in Com. Hants. which was the last of that Order that was built
in England, and one Alien-Priory, viz. Rumney in Com. Cant. the last that was
subjected to any foreign Monastery. And the King himself founded only the small
Gilbertine Cell of Fordham in Com. Cantab. For during this Reign came the
Dominican or Preaching Friars into this Kingdom, A. D. 1217. and the
Franciscans or Friars Minors A. D. 1224. who for the pretended severity of
their lives, and their frequent Preaching, were at first mightily admired by
the people, to the great loss of the parish Priests, as well as the Regulars.

King Edward I. succeeded next* who built the stately Abbey of Vale-Royal in
Com. Cest. In this King's time the Charity and Devotion of the English began to
be very cold; the greatness and riches of the Ecclesiastics being envied by
the Nobility and Gentry, and the affections of the people alienated by the
Sermons, Pamphlets, and secret insinuations of the begging Friars. The Nobility
and Commons being thus prepared, the Statute of Mortmain easily passed, A. D.
1279. 7. Edw. I. By this Act Pulton's Stat^^^ p. 43.
it was not allowed to any Religious person to enter upon any Fees, either to
buy them or to receive them of the gift of others, without license of the chief
Lords, upon pain of forfeiture; and the reason of this Statute was, because the
services due from such Fees, and which at the beginning were provided for the
defense of the Realm, are wrongfully withdrawn, and the chief Lords do loose
their escheats of the same. Upon the making this Statute the Religious seemed
to complain X. Script. col. 1691.
, and to supply the loss of new benefactions, procured pensions, privileges
from paying Tithes, and, what the Church finds the inconvenience of to this
very day, Impropriations. These last, tho^ they were sometimes used before, yet
after the enacting this law were obtained by Bulls from Rome on every small
occasion. A. D. 1295. the King seized all the Ali^n-Priories, the rents and
profits, which issued out of them to foreign Monasteries, in case they received
as formerly, being conceived of advantage to the Kings enemies. In this King's
time were founded three Monasteries of the Benedictine Order, two Austin
Priories, three Cistercian Abbeys, one Preceptory and nine Colleges, as also
one Gilbertine Priory, viz. Pulton in Wiltshire, which was the last House of
that Order in England.

In King Edward II. his Reign we find no great stir made about the Monks or
their lands. Indeed the Knights Templers were seized, and their goods and
revenues confiscated; though they were not appropriated to any Secular use, but
settled on the Knights Hospitalers by Act of Parliament, 17. Edw. II. In which
Statute Pu^tons Statutes p. 1^^.
there are some things very remarkable, which show the opinion Parliaments in
those times had of Church Lands. It seems good (these are the words of the
Act) to our Lord the King, the Noblemen and others assembled in Parliament, for
the health of their Souls, and the discharge of their consciences, that whereas
the Military Order of Temples were originally instituted for the defense of
Christians and the Universal Holy Church, subversion of the enemies of Christ
and Christians, and canonized to the augmentation of the honor of God and
liberal almsgiving. That the foresaid lands and tenements in demesnes,
Lordships, Services, etc. according to the wills of the givers, shall be
assigned and delivered to other men of most holy Religion, to the intent the
fruits, obventions, and profits of the same lands, tenements, and other things
may be converted and charitably disposed of to godly uses. I cannot meet with
any Monastery founded by this unhappy Prince, and indeed but two of the
Benedictine, and two of the Austin Order during his whole Reign.

King Edward III. is charactered by the Monks to have been a pious, as well as
a valiant Prince. For though his wars with France would not suffer him to give
much to Religious Houses, and forced him to be severe upon the Alien-Priories.
Yet there were a great many Monasteries founded in his Reign, viz. three
Benedictine Houses, six of the Austin Order, one Cistercian, and seventeen
Colleges. And notwithstanding his own extraordinary charges, he founded and
liberally endowed the Austin Nunnery at Dertford in Com. Cant. with the two
large Colleges of St. George at Windsor and St. Stephen at Westminster.

In King Rich. II. his time Wicklive's Doctrines were greedily embraced, and
the Mendicant Friars began to lose their reputation. There were no Monasteries,
except two or three Charterhouses, founded in this Reign, besides ten or eleven
Colleges. Thus after the Laity were prohibited to erect and endow Houses for
the Regular Orders, the Secular Priests became more in vogue. It being perhaps
more easy to get Mortmain's for them, who had not so many privileges as the
Regulars had; or else they were maintained by Appropriations, which were no Lay
Fees, and so not within the reach of the Statute; or lastly, it was no hard
matter to enfeoffe such a number of persons with lands for the payment of
certain annual stipends to the Dean and Prebendaries. To the same reasons may
be referred the erecting so many Chantries and Hospitals in the two Centuries
before the Reformation. This King founded no Monastery or College, but gave
several Alien-Priories, that had been seized into his Grandfathers hands, to
the Carthusians at Mountgrace in Com. Ebor. St. Anns near Coventry, etc.

In the sixth year of Henry the Fourth's reign A. D. 1404. was the Parliamentum
indoctum, so called, because none that were learned in the Laws of the Land
were suffered to be chosen Members of it. Herein, methods were to be considered
on to raise money for the defense of the Realm against the Welsh and Scots at
home, and for carrying on a war against the Britains, Flemings and Frenchmen
abroad. Among other resolutions, some forward men among the Commons moved, that
the Clergy should be deprived of all their Temporal possessions, to the relief
of the King's necessities. In answer to this Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury showed, what great service the Clergy did the Crown for their lands,
how that more of their tenants went forth to the King's wars, than the tenants
of the Lay-Fees. And after he had at large set forth how ready the Clergy were
to assist the King with their Prayers, Counsels, and Purses: kneeling before
the King, he humbly desired his Majesty to remember his Coronation Oath,
wherein he swore to advance the honor of the Church, and to maintain and
cherish the Ministers thereof: He prayed him also to think on the Curses which
those incurred, that took away any Lands or Privileges from the Church, etc. To
this the King gave a gracious answer, saying, That he was fully resolved to
leave the Church in as good state, or better than he found it. When the
Archbishop heard this, he turned to the Commons, and told them, That some had
advised the King and his Predecessors to seize on the Alien-Priories,
affirming, that thereby great riches would accrue to the Crown, and indeed
their goods and possessions were worth many thousands of gold, and yet the King
was not at that day half a mark the richer, because they had begged them: That
it was easy to conjecture, that they had now requested the Temporalities of
the Clergy, not to advance the Kings profit, but to satisfy their own
covetousness: for most certain, if the King should in this (which God forbid)
gratify their wicked desires, he would not be one farthing the richer the next
year after (...)
. Yet A. D. 1410. there was a new bill exhibited against the Cler^y, showing
how great an Army the Temporalities of the Clergy would maintain. But the King
after he had fully considered the matter, misliked this motion, and commanded,
that for the future, they should not presume to think of any such thing (...).
. This King built the College of Battlefield in Com. Salop. which with two or
three Colleges more, and a Carthusian Priory, were all the Foundations during
this Reign.

In 2. Henry V. there was another attempt made against the possessions of the
Church, but Archbishop Chichley earnestly pressing the young King to recover
his right to the Crown of France, and for the vigorous carrying on of a war, he
promising in the name of the Clergy, such a benevolence as scarce ever had been
given by the Subject. The King readily embraced this proposal, and so the
Church was once more preserved from Sacrilege. But in a Parliament held this
same year at Leicester, all the Alien-Priories were given to the King, with all
their Lands, Houses, etc. except those that were Conventual, i. e. that had
liberty to choose their own Prior. For after the first sei^ures of these Cells
by King Edw. I. and afterward by King Edw. III. the greatest of them got to be
made Prioratus indigenae or Denison, such were all those who have any
valuations in the Noti^i^. By this Naturalization they were freed from
subjection to any foreign Monastery, had power to elect a Prior, and to use a
common Seal, etc. But of the rest few were given or sold to the Laity, but most
of them were still continued for sacred uses, being bestowed by Richard II.
Henry IV. Henry V, VI. and Edw. IV. on several Monasteries and Colleges. In
this Kings short reign were founded only six Colleges and an Austin Priory,
besides the Carthusian Abbey at Sheen in Com. Surr. and the House of the
Brigettan Order at Syon in Com. Middl. which were built and liberally endowed
by the King himself.

King Henry VI. succeeded next, a Religious but unfortunate Prince, he founded
Eaton College in Com. Bucks. and Kings in Cambridge, and endowed them chiefly
out of the suppressed Alien-Priories. Beside them were six Colleges founded in
this Reign.

During the Civil wars between the York and Lancaster parties in the time of
Edw. IV. we must not expect to meet with any considerable additions to the
Church, it being very good fortune that she had prudence enough to keep her own
in those troublesome times. There were some few Colleges built in this Reign.

The Reader is desired to observe, that though here is noted, how many Religious
Houses were built in every King's Reign, yet it is not pretended that the
numbers are exact, because there are almost two hundred and fifty Abbeys,
Priories and Colleges mentioned in this Book, the times of whose Foundations
are yet unknown.

As for what relates to Monastic affairs in the Reigns of Richard III. and
King Henry VII. our Histories are silent, so that there is nothing remarkable
till the Dissolution, which happned in the very next Reign. For the 27. of
Henry VIII. all the lesser Monasteries not having 200^. per ann. (of which
there were above three hundred and seventy) were dissolved, and all their
Lands, Rents, Houses, etc. with their stock of Cattle, Corn, etc. given to the
King. In the 31st. year of his Reign all the great Abbeys to the number of six
hundred forty and five had the same fate. And in the 37th. year, ninety
Colleges, one hundred and ten Hospitals, and two thousand three hundred seventy
four Chantries and Free Chapels, were granted to supply the Kings necessities;
besides the Houses, Lands, and Goods of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem,
which were suppressed 32. Hen. VIII. These things I have but barely named,
because the account Sir Will. Dugdale has given us of the methods used in the
Dissolution of Monasteries shall be here subjoined at large out of his
celebrated History of Warwickshire Warwickshire p. 80^, 8^1, 8^2.
.

After he had told us that the Commissioners had signified to the Visitor
General, MS. in Bibl. Cotton. (...).
That after strict scrutiny, not only by the fame of the Country, but by
examinati^n of several persons, they found the Nuns (of Polesworth) Virtuous
and Religious Women, and of good conversation. He goes on and tells us, That it
was not the strict and regular lives of these devout Ladies; nor any thing,
that might be said in behalf of the Monasteries, that could prevent their ruin
then approaching, so great an aim had the King to make himself thereby
glorious, and many others no less hopes to be enricht in a considerable manner:
But, to the end that such a change should not overwhelm those that might be
active therein, in regard the people every where had no small esteem of these
Houses for their devout and daily exercises, in Prayer, Alms-deeds,
Hospitality, and the like; whereby, not only the Souls of their deceased
Ancestors had much benefit, as was then thought, but themselves, the poor, as
also strangers and pilgrims, constant advantage, there wanted not the most
subtle contrivances to effect this stupendous work, that (I think) any age
has beheld; whereof it will not be thought impertinent I presume, to take here
a short view.

In order therefore to it, was that which Cardinal Wolsey had done, for the
founding his Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich, made Letter of T. Norton to a
Parl. Man in (...). 1581. (...). R^g. Twisd^^ Bar. Life of Henry VI^I. by Lord
Herbert p. 173.
a president: viz. the dissolving of above thirty Religious Houses, (most very
small ones) by the license of the King and Pope Clement VII. And that it might
be the better carried on, Mr. Thomas Cromwell who had been an old servant to
the Cardinal, and not a little active in that, was the chief person pitched
upon, to assist therein: For I look upon this business, as not originally
designed by the King; but by some principal ambitious men of that age, who
projected to themselves all worldly advantages imaginable, through that deluge of
wealth, which was like to flow amongst them by this hideous storm.

First, therefore having insinuated Coke's (...)
to the King matter of Profit and Honor; scil. Profit by so vast enlargement
of his Revenue; and Honor in being able to maintain mighty Armies to recover
his rights in France; as also to strengthen himself against the Pope, whose
Supremacy he himself abolished, and make the firmer alliance with such Princes,
as had done the like, did they procure Cranmer's Letter of T. N. (...) supra.
advancement to the Sea of Canterbury, and more of the Protestant Clergy (as my
authority terms them) to other Bishoprics, and high places; to the end that
the rest should not be able in a full Council to carry any thing against their
design; sending out Ibid
Preachers ^o persuade the people that they should stand fast to the King,
without fear of the Popes Curse, or his dissolving their allegiance.

Next, that it might be the more plausibly carried on, care was taken so to
represent the lives of the Monks, Nuns, Canons, etc. to the world, as that the
less regret might be made at their ruin: To which purpose T. Cromwell being
constituted Life of (...). VIII. ut supra p. 398. and MS. in Bibl. Cotton. ut
supra f. 13. a.
General Visitor, employed sundry persons, who acted therein their parts
accordingly; viz. Life of (...). VIII. ut supra p. 398. and MS. in Bibl.
Cotton. ut supra f. 13. a.
Rich. Layton, Thomas Legh, and William Petre Doctors of Law, Dr. John London
Dean of Walingford, and others; to whom he gave instructions in eighty six
Articles; by which they were to enquire into the Government and behavior of
the Religious of both Sexes; which Commissioners, the better to manage their
design, gave encouragement to the Monks, not only to accuse their Governors,
but to inform against each other; compelling them also to produce the Charters
and Evidences of their Lands, as also their Plate and Money, and to give an
inventory thereof. And hereunto did they add certain Ibid. fol. 21. a. and 33.
b.
injunctions from the King, containing most severe and strict Rules; by means
whereof diverse being found obnoxious to their censure, ^were expelled: and many
discerning themselves not able to live from some exception or advantage, that
might be taken against them, desired to leave their Habit Ibid. ^ 252. b.
.

And having by these Visitors, thus searched into their lives; which by a
Letter of T. N. ut supra.
Black Book containing a world of enormities, were represented in no small
measure scandalous; to the end that the people might ^e better satisfied with
their proceedings, it was thought convenient to suggest, that the lesser Houses
for want of good Government, were chiefly guilty of these crimes that were laid
to their charge: and so they did, as appears by the preamble of that Act Cap.
28.
for their Dissolution, made in 27. Hen. VIII. which Parliament, consisting of
the most part of such Members as were packt for the purpose, through private
interest; as is evident by diverse MS in Bibl. Cotton (Cl^op. E^ 4.) f. 178, and^
original Letters of that time; many of the Nobility, for the like respects
also favoring the design, assented to the suppressing of all such Houses, as
had been certified of less value then 200^. per ann. and giving them, with
their lands and revenues to tho King: yet so as not only the Religious Persons
therein should be committed to the great and honorable Monasteries of this
Realm, where they might be compelled to live religiously for reformation of
their lives; wherein, thanks be to God, Religion is well kept and observed, (as
are the very words of that Act) but that the possessions belonging to such
Houses should be converted to better uses, to the pleasure of Almighty God, and
to the honor and profit o^ the Realm.

But how well the tenor thereof was pursued, (...) shall soon see; these
specious pretenses being mad^ use of for no other purpose, than by opening this
gap to make way for the total ruin of the greater Houses^ wherein it is by the
said Act acknowledged, tha^ Religion was so well observed. For no soone^ were
the Monks, etc. turned out; and the House d^molish'd (that being it which was
first thought r^quisite, least some accidental change might conduce to their
restitution) but care was taken to prefer MS (...)
such persons to the Superiority in Government, upon any vacancy of those
greater Houses, as might be instrumental to their surrender, by persuading with
the Covent to that purpose; whose activeness was such, that within the space of
two years, several Covents were wrought upon, and Commissioners sent down to
take them at their hands to the Kings use: of which number I find (...)
, that besides the before specified Doctors of Law, (scil. Legh, Petre, and
Layton, and Dr. London Dean of Walingford) there was Rob. Earl of Sussex, Sir
John St. Clear, Sir Will. Pirton, Sir Henry Farington Knights, and Richard
Devereux sometimes a Friar: And of Gentlemen Anthony Fitz-Herbert, (afterward
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas) John Gage, Will. Leland, John
Williams, Tho. Mildmay,... Jobson, Richard Cromwell, Rob. Southwell, Will.
Parr, Thomas Bedyll, Henry Polsted, John Anthony, Edmund Knightly, John Lane,
George Giffard, John Grevill, Sim. Mountfort, Thomas Holt, Roger Wigston, Rob.
Burgoin, Richard Pollard, Philip Paris, John Smith, Edw. Carn, Rich. Gwent,
Will. Barners, John Arnold, John ap Rice, and Rich. Paulet.

The truth is, that there was no omission of any endeavor, that can well be
imagined, to accomplish these surrenders, For so subtly did the Commissioners
act their parts, as that after earnest solicitation (...)
with the Abbats, and finding them backwards, they first attempted them with
the promises of MS. in Bibl. Cotton. (Cl^op. E. 4.) f. 33. b. and f. 218. b
good Pensions during life; whereby they found some forward enough to promote
the work, as the Abbat of Hales in Com. Gloc. was, who had high commendation
for it by the Commissioners, as their Letters Ib. f. 254. b.
to the Visitor General do manifest: So likewise had the Ib. f. 204. b.
Abbats of Ramsey and the Prior of Ely. Nay, some were to be obsequious, that
after they had wrought the surrender of their own Houses, they were employed
Ib. fol. 48. a.
as Commissioners to persuade with others, as the Prior of Gisborn in Yorkshire
for one. Neither were the Courtiers unactive in driving on this work, as may
seem by the Lord Chancellor Audley's employing a special Agent Ib f. 113. b
to treat with the Abbat of Athelney, and to offer him an hundred marks per
annum Pension, in case he would surrender; which the Abbat refused, insisting
upon a greater sum: And the personal endeavors that he used with the Abbat of
St. Osithe's in Essex, as by his Letter Ib. 201. a.
to the said Visitor; wherein it is signified, That he had by great
solicitation prevailed with the said Abbat; but withal insinuated his desire,
that his place of Lord Chancellor being very chargeable, the King might be
moved for an addition of some more profitable Offices unto him. Nay, I find
that this great Man the Lord Chancellor hunting eagerly after the Abbey of
Walden in Essex, (out of the ruins whereof afterward that magnificent
Fabric, called by the name of Audley-end was built) as an argument the sooner
to obtain it, did, besides the extenuation of its worth, allege, MS. in Bibl.
Cotton. (Cl^op. E. 4.) f. 197. a
That he had in this world sustained great damage and infamy in his serving the
King, which the grant of that should recompense.

Amongst the particular arguments, which were used by those that were averse to
surrender, I find, that the Abbat of Feversham alleged Ib. f. 33. b
the antiquity of that Monasterie's foundation: scil. by King Stephen, whose
body with the bodies of the Queen and Prince lay there interred, and for whom
were used continual suffrages and commendations by Prayers; yet it would not
avail: For resolved they were to effect what they had begun, by one means or
other; in so much as they procured the Bishop of London to come to the Nuns of
Sion with their Confessor, to solicit them thereunto; who, after many
persuasions Ib. f. 109. a.
Took it upon their consciences, that they ought to submit unto the King's
pleasure therein by God's Law. But what could not be effected by such arguments
and fair promises, which were not wanting nor unfulfilled, as appears by the
larg^ Pensions Ex Reg. in (...) Aug^.
that some active Monks and Canons had, in comparison of others, even to a fifth
and sixth fold proportion more than ordinary, was by terror and straight
dealing brought to pass; for under pretense of MS. in Bibl. Cotton. ut supra f.
43. a.
suffering dilapidation in the buildings, or negligent administration of their
Offices; as also for breaking the Kings injunctions, they dep^ived some Ibid.
Abbats, and then put others, that were more pliant in their rooms.

From others they took Ibid. f. 250. a.
their Covent Seals, to the end they might not, by making Leases, nor sale of
their Jewels raise money, either for supply of their present wants, or payment
of their debts, and so be necessitated to surrender. Nay to some, as in
particular to the Canons of Leicester, the Commissioners threatened MS. in Bibl.
Cotton. (Cleop. E. 4.) f. 131. b.
That they would charge them with Adultery and Buggery, unless they would
submit: And Dr. London Ib. f. 228. ^.
told the Nuns of Godstow, That because he found them obstinate, he would
dissolve the House by virtue of the Kings Commission in spite of their teeth.
And yet all was so managed, as that the King Ib. f. 68. b.
was solicited to accept of them, not being willing to have it thought they
were by terror moved thereunto, and special notice was taken of them Ibid.
as did give out that their surrenders were by compulsion.

Which courses, after so many, thro^ under hand corruption, had led the way,
brought on others apace, as appears by their Dates, which I have observed from
the very Instruments In Curia Augm.
themselves: in so much as the rest stood amazed, not knowing which way to turn
them. Some therefore thought fit to try, whether money might save their Houses
from this dismal fate so near at hand, the Abbat of Peterburgh offering MS. in
Bibl. Cotton. ut supra f. 205. a.
2500. marks to the King, and 300l. to the Visitor General therein. Others with
great constancy refused to be thus accessory in violating the donations of
their Pious Founders: but these as they were not many, so did they taste of no
little severity: For touching the Abbat of Fountains in Yorkshire, I find Ib.
f. 114. b.
that being charged by the Commissioners for taking into his private hands some
Jewels belonging to that Monastery, which they called Theft and Sacrilege, they
pronounced him perjured, and so deposing him, extorted a private resignation.
And it appears MS. in Bibl. Cotton. (Cleop E. 4.) f. 217. a.
that the Monks of Charterhouse in the Suburbs of London were committed to
Newgate; where, with hard and barbarous usage five of them died, and five more
lay at the point of death, as the Commissioners signified MS. in Bibl. Cotton.
(Cleop E. 4.) f. 217. a.
; but withal alleged, MS. in Bibl. Cotton. (Cleop E. 4.) f. 217. a.
That the Suppression of that House, being of so strict a Rule, would occasion
great scandal to their doings, forasmuch as it stood in the face of the world,
infinite concourse from all parts coming to that populous City, and therefore
desired it might be altered to some other use. And lastly, that Ib. f. 133. b.
under the like pretense of robbing the Church (wherewith the before specified
Abbat of Fountains was charged) the Abbat of Glastonbury, with two of his
Monks, being condemned to death, was drawn from Wells upon a Hurdle, then
hanged upon the Hill called the Tor, (near Glastonbury) his head set upon the
Abbey gate, and his quarters disposed of to Wells, Bath, Ilchester, and
Bridgewater. Nor did the Abbats of Colchester and Reading speed much better, as
they that shall consult the story Life of Hen. VIII. ut supra p. 422.
of that time, may see: And for farther terror to the rest, some Priors, and
other Ecclesiastic persons, who had spoke against the Kings Supremacy (a thing
then somewhat uncouth, being so newly set up) were condemned as Traitors Ib. p.
^^1.
and executed.

And now that all this was effected; to the end it might not be thought, that
these things were done by a high hand, the King having protested Life of Hen.
VIII. p. 398.
That he would suppress none without consent of Parliament. A Parliament 30.
Hen. VIII.
being called April 28. Anno 1539. to confirm these surrenders so made, as has
been said, there wanted not plausible ins^^^ations to both Houses, for drawing
on their consent with all smoothness thereto; the Nobility being promised large
shares in the spoil, either by free gift from the King, easy purchases, or
most advantageous exchanges; and many of the active Gentry, advancements to
honor, with increase of their estates: all which, we see, happened to them
accordingly: And the better to satisfy the vulgar, was it represented to them,
Coke's Instit. Part IV. p. 44
that by this deluge of Wealth the Kingdom should be strengthened with an Army
of forty thousand Men, and that for the future they should never be charged
with Subsidies, Fifteens, Loans or common Aids. By which means the Parliament
ratifying the before specified surrenders, the work became completed; for the
more firm setttling whereof, a sudden course was taken to pull down and destroy
the buildings, as had been before upon that Dissolution of smaller Houses,
whereof I have touched. Next to disperse a great proportion of their Lands
amongst the Nobility and Gentry, as had been projected, which was accordingly
done, Vide Pat de an. 30. Hen. VIII.
the Visitor General having told the King, Life of Hen. VII. ut supra p. ^^6.
That the more had interest in them, the more they would be irrevocable.

And least any domestic stirs, by reason of this great and strange alteration
should arise, rumors Life of Hen. VIII. ut supra p. 442.
were spread, that Cardinal Pool labored with diverse Princes to procure forces
against this Realm, and that an invasion was threatened; which seemed the more
credible, because the Truce concluded betwixt the Emperor and the French King
was generally known, neither of them wanting a pretense to bring them hither.
And this was also seconded by a sudden journey of the King unto the Sea
Coasts: unto diverse parts whereof he had sent sundry of the Nobles and expert
persons to visit the Ports and places of danger; who failed not for their
discharge upon all events, to affirm the peril in each place to be so great, as
one would have thought every place had needed a Fortification. Besides, he
forthwith caused his Navy to be in a readiness, and Musters to be taken over
all the Kingdom: All which preparations being made against a danger believed
imminent, seemed so to excuse this Suppression of the Abbeys, as that the
people willing to save their own Purses, began to suffer it easily, especially
when they saw order taken for building such Forts.

But let us look a little upon the success; wherein I find Ib. p 456.
that the said Visitor General (the grand Actor in this tragic business)
having contracted upon himself such an Odium from the Nobility, by reason of
his low birth, though not long before made Knight of the Garter, Earl of Essex,
and Lord High Chancellor of England; as also from the Catholics, for having
thus operated in the Dissolution of Abbeys, that before the end of the before
specified Parliament, wherein that was ratified, which he had with so much
industry brought to pass; the King, not having any more use of him, gave way to
his Enemies accusations; whereupon being arrested 13. ^unii 32. Hen. VIII.
by the Duke of Norfolk at the Counsel Table, when he least dreamed of it, and
committed to the Tower, he was condemned by Ib. p. 457.
the same Parliament for Heresy and Treason un^eard and little pitied; and on
the xxviii. of July, viz. four days after the Parliament was dissolved, had Ib.
p. 462.
his head cut off on Tower Hill.

And as for the Fruit, which the People reapt, after all their hopes built upon
those specious pretenses, which I have instanced, it was very little: For plain
it is, that Ib. p. 457.
Subsidies from the Clergy, and Fifteens of Laymens goods were soon after
exacted: And that in Edw. VI. time, the Commons were constrained to supply
Stat. 2, 3. Edw. VI. cap. 36.
the Kings wants by a new invention, viz. Sheep, Clothes, Goods, Debts, etc.
for three years: which Tax grew so heavy, that the year following they prayed
the King Stat. 3, ^, Edw. VI. cap. 23.
for mitigation thereof. Nor is it a little observable, that whilst the
Monasteries stood, there was no Act for the relief of the Poor, so amply did
those Houses give succor to them that were in want; whereas in the next age,
viz. 39. Eliz. no less than eleven Bills were brought into the House of Commons
for that purpose.

So far this Learned Knight. Many other ill consequences, that attended the
Suppression of these Religious Houses, might be here farther observed; but,
besides that they would lead me into a long and tedious digression, it is an an
invidious subject, which few in this age can bear. So that it is my design at
present to take notice only of the great decay of Learning, that was like to
ensue the Dissolution: in so much that in the Parliaments held 2. Edw. VI. and
3. Edw. VI. there were Bills brought in for encouraging men to give lands for
the maintenance of Schools of learning Discourse concerning the origina^ of a
M^nastick life, by Sir Rog. Twisden MS.
And the loss of good Books was irreparable, for Bale honestly tells us,
Comment. on Lelan^'s New Year Gift. Land. 1549.
Never had we been offended for the loss of our Lybraryes, being so many in
nombre, and in so desolate places for the more part, if the chief monumentes
and most notable workes' of our most excellent writers, had been reserved. If
there had been in every Shyre of England, but one solemn Lybrarye to the
preservacyon of those noble works, and preferrement of good learning in our
posteritye, it had been sumwhat. But to destroy all without consideracyon, is
and will be unto England for ever, a most horrible infamy among the grave
Senyours of other Nacyons. A great nombre of them, which purchased those
superstycyouse mansyons, reserved of those Lybrary books, some to serve their
Iakes, some to scour their candelstyckes, and some to rub their boots. Some
they sold to the Grossers and Sopesellers, and some they sent over See to the
Bokebynders, not in small nombre, but at times whole Ships full, to the
wonderynge of foren Nacyons. Yea, the Vnyversytees of this Realm are not all
clear in this detestable fact. But cursed is that bellye, which seeks to be
fed with such ungodly gaynes, and so depelye shameth his natural Country. I
know a Merchaunt Man, which shall at this time be namelesse, that boughte the
contents of two noble Lybraryes for xl. shyllynges price, a shame it is to be
spoken. This stuff has he occupied in the stead of graye paper by the space
of more than these ten years, and yet he has store enough for as many years to
come. A prodyg^ouse example is this, and to be abhorred of all Men which love
their Nation, as they should do. Thus Bale, one of the bitterest enemies the
Monks ever had, is forced to lament the great damage the Learned World
sustained at the Dissolution. Indeed, those well furnished Libraries, that were
in most Monasteries plainly show, that we are too much prejudiced against the
Monks, when we rashly condemn them, as idle, ignorant, and discouragers of
Learning; and that on the contrary we ought to esteem many of them to be
Learned and industrious, and promoters of several useful parts of knowledge.
In every great Abbey there was a large Room called the Vide Du Fresne Gloss. in
voce and Vitas Abbat. S. Albani ad sin. M. Paris. Land. 1684. p. (...).
Scriptorium, to which belonged several Writers, whose whole business it was to
transcribe good Books for the use of the public Library of the House. Though
sometimes they wrote the Leiger-books, as also Missals, and other Books used in
Divine Service, yet, generally they were upon other Works, viz. Fathers,
Classicks, Histories, Philosophy, etc. And to give but one instance; the care
they had to increase the number of good Books will appear by the large
Catalogue of Books, which were transcribed at Glastonbury Ex Registro Abb.
Glaston. MS.
in one Abbat's time, and are as follow, Bibliotheca una. Plinius de Naturali
Historia. Cassiodorus super Psalteriam. Tria Missalia magna. Duo Lectionaria.
Breviarium (in domo infirmorum.) Jeronimus super Ieremiam and Isaiam. Origines
super Vetus Testamentum. Ejusdem Omeliae. Idem super Epistolam Pauli ad
Romanos. Hieronymus super Epistolam ad Galathas and ad Ephesios, and ad Titum,
and ad Philemonem. Vitae Patrum. Collationes Patrum. Breviarium (Hospitum.)
Antiphonarium. Pars una Moralium. Cyprianus. Registrum. Liber dictus Paradisus.
Jeronimus contra Iovinianum. Ambrosius contra Novatianos. Septem Volumina de
Passionibus Sanctorum per totum anni circulum. Vit^e Caesarum. Gesta Britonum.
Gesta Anglorum. Gesta Francorum. Pascasius. Radbertus de corpore sanguine
Domini. Summae quaedam. Liber Abbatis Clarevallensis de amando Deo. Hugo de S.
Victore de duodecim gradibus Humilitatis and de Oratione. Physionomia,
Lapidarium, and Liber Petri Alfimii in uno volumine. Rhetorica prima and
secunda. Vnum Volumen Quintiliani de causis. Epistola Augustini de oratione
Dominica and super Psalmum Miserere mei Deus. Benedictionale unum Episcopale.
Decreta Juonis Carnotensis Episcopi. Jeronimus super XII. Prophetas and
Lamentationes Ieremiae. Augustinus de Trinitate. Augustinus super Genesin.
Ysidori Etymologiae. Paterius. Augustinus de verbis Domini. Hugo de
Sacramentis. Cassianus de Incarnatione Domini. Anselmus cur Deus Homo.
These valuable Books could never have been without the expense of a great deal
of time and money transcribed, had not the Monks had a Spirit of Learning and
industry. There were no less than Matricularium Libr. M^n. (...). at the end of
the history of the (...).
1700. MSS. Tracts in the Library at Peterburgh; and the Catalogues In Bibl.
Bodl. Arch. B 24. and ^and. I. 75.
of Books belonging to the Priory of Dover, and the Abbey of St. Mary de la Pre
at Leicester clearly evince, that those Houses had no mean Libraries, and those
kept in very good order. Nay, so zealous were the Monks for the encouragement
of Learning, that they very often got Churches Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 278, 619,
634. Men. Angl T 1. p. 1^7.
appropriated ad libros faciendos. And in the Abbey of St. Austin at Canterbury
(...) W. Thorn. inter X. Script. Land. 1652. col. 2008.
there was (temp. Edw. II.) an order made by Thomas the Abbat, with the
unanimous consent of the whole Convent, that yearly on the first day of Lent,
Prayers should be made for the Souls of the dead, and the good estates of the
living Benefactors to the Library; that for the living the Mass of the Holy
Ghost should be solemnly sung, and for the dead the Mass Pro Defunctis, with
the Prayer Inclina, etc. And not only their diligence in procuring new Books,
but their care in preserving the old, was very commendable. Of this St.
Aldhelm's Psalter at Malmsbury Leland. Coll. Vol. IV. p. 79.
, and St. Cuthbert's J. Selden^ (...) Land. 1652.
Gospels kept till the Dissolution in Durham Abbey, (and now among that curious
Collection of MSS. belonging to Sir John Cotton at Westminster) are pregnant
instances. And Leland Coll Vol. IV. p. 122.
tells us, that in Bath Library he found several Books given them by King
Ethelstan. To this end they had in some Monasteries Librarians, as Flaccus
Albinus Coll. Vol. IV. p. 87.
at York, and William Somerset at Malmsbury, and in others there is reason to
believe, the Libraries were under the care of the Camerarius. It would be too
hard a censure to think that those, who were so great lovers of Books, should
not make some use of them. The ancient British, Irish, and Saxon Monasteries,
we find Account of Chapter Governm. in Britain and ^reland, by the Bishop of
Litchf. and Cov. Chap. VII. 7.
, were the Schools and Universities of those times; they were not only Cells of
Devotion, but also Nurseries of Learned Men for the use of the Church. The
works of Bid are a sufficient argument of the knowledge the Monks of those
times had in all parts of Learning. Their skill in the Learned Languages was so
very eminent, that it is reported X. Script. col. ^7. l. 39.
some of them understood Greek and Latin, as well as their Mother Tongue. But
it is to no purpose to enlarge any more in this matter, which requires a
particular Treatise. When the Monks were rooted out by the Danish wars, an
universal ignorance overspread the land, in so much that there was scarce any
one in England, that could read or write Latin Praef. Saxon. Pentateuch. MS. in
Bibl. Bodl.
. But when by the care of King Edgar and Archbishop Dunstan, Monasteries were
restored, Learning found it is former encouragement, and flourished very much
within the walls of the Cloisters. So that Leland (who was no great friend to
the Monks) often confesses Collect. Vol IV. p. 44, 51, 63, 138, 149, etc.
, that in these old times there few or no Writers but Monks, and that all the
knowledge of those dark ages was amongst them. Even after the Conquest, though by
reason of the introducing several new Orders of Religious, (who minded their
Devotions, more than Books) there were but few Learned Men, yet all or most of
the Writers were Monks and Regular Canons till the rise of the Mendicant
Orders, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry III. In the preceding
Centuries Learning began to flourish in our Universities, though the original,
or, at least, the Restoration of one of them is owing to the ^onks Contin.
Histor. Croiland per Petr. Blesens. edit. Oxon. 1684. ^14.
of Croiland. In them were taught ^chool Divinity and Canon Law, then mightily
(...) vogue, and the Friars resorting thither in ^reat numbers, and applying
themselves to ^earning with indefatigable industry, went be^ond the Monks in
all parts of the then fashio^able knowledge. But in the next age the ^onks had
Colleges in the Universities found^^ and liberally endowed for the education of
^^eir Novices. Thus Leland Itiner MS. Vol. VI. fol. 30.
tells us, The ^^mes of Peterburgh Haulle, Semplingham and ^auldey remain at
Stanford, as places for those ^ouses of Men of Religion, that sent their
Scholars ^^ther to study. And in Oxford we had Gloucester, ^^rham, Canterbury
and London Colleges, for (...) Benedictines, St. Marie's (near North-gate)
(...) the Austin Canons, and the College of St. (...) for the Cistercians. Here
the young ^onks were instructed for some years, in Grammar, Rhetoric,
Philosophy, School Divinit^ etc. and then returning home, improved the^^
knowledge by their private Studies, to the se^vice of God and the honor of
their respecti^^ Societies. So that a little before the Reformation the
greatest part of the Proceeders in Divini^^ were Monks and Regular Canons, as
will (...) appear from the Fasti Oxonienses (...) London 1691.
. It farther observable, that when Printing was (...) known, the Monks were the
chief promote^ of that excellent invention in England. (...) Hollingshead
Ho^lingsh. Vol. II. p. 6^8.
says, William Caxton of Lond^^ Mercer, brought Printing into England about
(...) year 1471. and first, practiced the same in the (...) of St. Peter at
Westminster, after which time was likewise practiced in the Abbeys of St. (...)
at Canterbury, St. Albans, and other Monaster^ These are all the remarks that I
shall (...) in favor of the Learning of the Mon^ though I pretend not to
justify the ignora^^ of some of them, or to compare the (...) lege of those
dark ages with that of (...) times: but it is my design only to show, (...)
there were some persons among the (...) who were (allowance being made for the
(...) wherein they lived) very good Scholars the^ selves, and encouragers of
Learning in other^

Having detained the Reader with such a^dious Preface, I shall make no other
apol^ for it and the whole Book, than in the (...) of our Great Master Camden
(...)
who says, (...) are some, I hear, who take it ill, that I have mentioned
Monasteries, and their Founders; I am sorry to hear it; but (not to give them
any just offense) let 'em be angry if they will. Perhaps they would have it
forgotten, that our Ancestors were, and we are Christians; since there were
never more certain indications and glorious Monuments of Christian Piety and
Devotion to God, than those; nor were there any other Seminaries for the
propagation of the Christian Religion and good literature, however it came to
pass, that in a loose age some rank weeds run up too fast, which required
rooting out.

I shall crave leave to suggest but one thing more, which is, that some able
pen would give us an exact and full account of all, that Protestants have given
or laid out for the Public Good since the Reformation, in works of Piety and
Charity, for the promotion of Learning, the relief of the Poor, and the honor
of the Nation. Some such thing was attempted by Dr. Willet in his Synopsis
Papismi; but that being imperfect, by reason of the almost innumerable
Benefactions bestowed since; a Book of this nature deserves the encouragement
of all Public spirited Men and true English Protestants: because it would be a
standing Monument of the Public affection and zeal of this Protestant Kingdom
to Piety and good works. By such a Book as this it would appear, That there is
no pretense (that I may use the words Dr. Stilling^leet's Reasons for
contributing to the building of St. pa^^'s London. (...) 1686.
of a Right Reverend father of our Church) to upbraid us, that error and
superstition could make Men more zealous of good Works, than the Doctrine of
the true Religion; and that our adversaries of Rome may be convinced, that our
Piety is as generous and charitable as theirs, but would not be so arrogant and
presumptuous; and that whilst we disclaim merit, yet we do most steadfastly
believe the obligation and necessity of good Works.











NOTITIA MONASTICA: Or A SHORT HISTORY Of the RELIGIOUS HOUSES IN ENGLAND and
WALES.
BARK-SHIRE.
1. Abingdon.
THIS Abbey was founded about A. D. 675. by Heane Nephew to Cissa Viceroy of
the West Saxons, but the Monks forsook it in K. Alfreds time for fear of the
Danes. It was restored A. D. 955. by the munificence of K. Edred. and K. Edgar
and by the care of Ethelwulfus, afterward Abbat here. This Monastery being of
the Benedictine Order and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary, was endowed at
the Suppression with 1876l. 10s. 9d. according to Sir William Dugdale's
Valuation, or according to Mr. Speed with 2042l. 2s. 8d. ob. q. per an.

Vide Monasticon Angl. T. 1. p. 96. Angliae Sacr. T. 1. p. 163. Reynerii
Apostolat. B^ned. in Anglia: Tract. 2. p. 124.

Historiam MS. de primis Fundatoribus Abbendoniae in Bibl. Cotton. Vitellius A.
13.

* Registrum de Abbendon MS. quondam penes Baron. Fenton, nunc in Bibl. Cotton.
Claudius C. 6.

* Cartas de terris pertinentibus ad Monast. de Abbendon in Bibl. Cotton. Jul.
C. 2. 21.

* Cartularium de Abbend. MS. penes... Berry de Cullam prope Abbend.

* Registrum aliud MS. penes Magistrum Wray de Ricot in Com. Oxon.

* Apographa Cartarum etc. ad hoc coenobium spectantium in Volum. secundo
Collectionum MSS. Briani Twine in Bibl. Coll. Corp. Christi Oxon.

2. Hellenstow This Nunnery is omitted by Mr. Speed, and the Charters belonging
to El^stow or Hell^^stow in B^dfordshire, are (Mon. Angl. T. 1. 359.)
erroneously ascribed to this in Berkshire. Whereabout this Monastery was
situated I was wholly ignorant, (seeing there is no Village of this name at
present in this County) 'till informed by Leland That there was a Nunnery in
the time of K. Ina at Abendon in the place where S. Hellen's Church now stands.

Here was a Nunnery built by Cissa or Cilla Sister to Hean Founder of Abingdon
to the honor of the Holy Cross and S. Helen; not long after it is Foundation it
was removed to Witham, from whence also the Nuns were forced to fly by reason
of the Wars.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 97. 99.

3. Hurley.
A Cell of Benedictine Monks to the Abbey of Westminster, to which it was given
by Ieffrey de Magna-villa or Mandevil in the reign of William the Conqueror. It
was dedicated to St. Mary, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 121l. 18s. 5^. Dugd.
134l. 10s. 8d ob. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 363.

4. Walingford.
The Church of the Holy Trinity here, being given to the Abbey of St. Albans,
Paul the Abbat (temp. Will. Conq.) sent hither a Convent of Monks, and so made
it a Cell to that Monastery.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 11. T. 1. p. 326.

5. Reading.
In the Saxon times here was a Nunnery Leland tells us, That the old Nunnery
was where the Parish Church of St. Mary now is. Most of our Historians record
the building of Wherwell and Ambresb^ry by this Queen Alfrith, wife to King
Edgar; but I could never find any hint of her Founding of this Nunnery at
Reading, so that I am afraid Mr. Speed is under a mistake.
built by Queen Alfrith, but that being destroyed and the lands alienated, King
Henry I. A. D. 1225. founded an Abbey here to the honor of the Holy Trinity,
the Blessed Virgin, St. James and St. John the Evangelist, for two hundred
Black Monks. The yearly Revenues of this Abbey, were worth at the Dissolution,
1938l. 14s. 3d. ob. q. Dugd. 2116l. 3s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 417.

Reyner. Apostolat. Benedict. Tr. 2. p. 152.

Registrum Abbatiae de Reading in Bibl. Cotton. Vespasian. A. 1.

* Aliud in eadem Bibliotheca Domitian. A. 3.

* Aliud penes... Davies de Pangburn in Com. Bercher.

* Catalogum Benefactorum Mon. Radingensis in Bibl. Lambeth. 4^o. XLVII.

* Registrum mutilum hujus Abbatiae penes V. Rev. Rob. Woodward L. L. D.
Decanum Eccl. Cathedr. Sarisbur.

* Cartularium de omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus, placitis, etc. ad
Abbatiam de Reading pertinentibus, manu antiqua in membrana pulchre exaratum.
fol. Continens paginas 500. Hunc quantivis pretii Codicem MS. inter alia
vener^^dae Antiquitatis monumenta religiosissime conservat Vir Dignissimus
Henricus Worsley, nuper Aulae S. Edmundi Oxon. nunc Hospitii Lincolniensis
Armiger.

6. Steinington This is falsely placed by the Monasticon, (T. 1. p. 1035.) in
Wiltshire.
or Stiventon.
An Alien Priory, Cell to the Abbey of Becc in Normandy, to which it was given
by King Hen. I.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 2. p. 954.

7. Sandford or Sandleford The Monasticon (T. 1. p. 482. T. 3. p. 1, 13.)
confounds this Sandleford (which is near Newbury) with Sandford or Littlemore
in Oxfordshire.
.
Galfred Earl of Perch and Maud his wife, (temp. R. Johan.) founded a Priory
here for Canons of the Order of St. Austin, and dedicated it to St. John
Baptist. About A. D. 1480. the Monks forsook this Monastery, which was
thereupon annexed to Windsor College, by Richard Beauchamp then Bishop of Sarum
Frith. Cat. Decan. and Canon. Windsor.
.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 481. T. 3. P. 1. p. 66.

8. Farendon.
A Priory of Cistertian Monks founded by King John A. D. 1200. it was
subordinate to the Abbey of Beaulieu in Hampshire.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 926.

* Cod. antiquum MS. membran. (inter MSS. Barlovianos in Bibl. Bodl.)
continentem Taxationes, Regulas compoti, Consuetudines and alia spectantia ad
maneria Domus de Farendon. Fol.

9. Poghley.
Here was a Priory founded by Ralph de Chaddeworth, (temp. Hen. III.) for
Canons Regular of the Order of St. Augustine; and dedicated to St. Margaret. It
was rated at the Suppression at 71l. 10s. 7d. Speed.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 266.

10. Walingford.
Edmund Earl of Cornwall (10. Ed. I.) built in the Castle here, a Collegiate
Church to the honor of St. Nicholas, and endowed it with Lands and Revenues
for the maintenance of a Dean, six Prebends, six Clerks, and four Choristers
for ever. It was endowed at the Dissolution, with 147l. 8s. per an.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 34.

* Evidentias quamplurimas Originales de Wallingford and Ecclesits ibidem inter
munimenta Oppidi de Burcester in Com. Oxon.

11. Bustleham v. Bisham.
A. D. 1338. William Montacute Earl of Sarum built a Priory here, for Canons
Regular of St. Austin's Order, to the honor of Christ Jesus and the blessed
Virgin Mary. At the survey of the Religious Houses made 26. Hen. VIII. this
Abbey was worth 285l. 11s. ob. per an. Dugd. 327l. 4s. 6d. Speed. The Prior and
Convent of this Monastery having surrendered it to the King 28. Hen. VIII. The
following year it was restored by the same King, and endowed with the lands of
the late dissolved Priories of Ankerwike, Little Marlow, and Mendham, with
several other Revenues, to the value of 661l. 14s. 9d. per an. for the
maintenance of an Abbat and thirteen Monks of the Benedictine Order; but this
was also soon after dissolved.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 12. p. 355. T. 3. P. 1. p. 21.

12. Windsor.
King Henry I. founded a Chantry for eight Priests, neither endowed nor
incorporate, but maintained by an annual pension out of the Exchequer. King
Edward III. (anno regni 22.) founded this College for a Custos, twelve Secular
Canons, thirteen Priests or Vicars, four Clerks, six Choristers, twenty six
Alms Knights, besides other Officers, to the honor St. George and St. Edward
the Confessor.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 67.

* Elias Ashmole's Institution of the Garter, Cap. 4.. 3. In hoc libro habetur
Historia hujus Ecclesiae Collegiatae satis accurata, cum relationibus ad Cartas
Originales and Registra penes Decanum and Capitulum, and alibi.

13. Bromhall.
Here Edw. the Black Prince founded a House of Benedictine Nuns, and dedicated
it to S. Mary Magdalene This account we have from Mr. Speed, who places it
again in Norfolk. The MS. Catalogue of Religious Houses under Sir Will.
Dugdale's own hand (inter MSS. Barlovi^^.) tells us of a Monastery of this name
in Surry, which probably is a mistake for Berkshire. Reyner reckons this Priory
among those of the Order of St. Austin.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 899.

14. Noion and Novo Mercato. Qu.
A Cell of Benedictines to the Abbey of S. Ebrulf in Normandy. After the
suppression of Alien-Priories, it was given by King Henry V. to his new erected
Monastery at Sheen.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 975.

15. Shottesbrook.
A College valued at 33l. 18s. 8d. Dugd. Speed.

* Vide Cartas Autographas ad hoc Collegium spectantes penes Will. Cherry
Armigerum ejusdem Manerii Dominum. 1694.

16. Hamme.
A Nunnery of Benedictines dedicated to St. Mary Magd. Speed. Qu.

The Priory of Donington is not mentioned here, because 'twas only a House of
Friars. The Monasticon places Stratfield-say in this County, but it is in
Hampshire. And I shall take notice of Murresley in Buckinghamshire, which Mr.
Speed has erroneously reckoned among the Religious Houses in this Shire.

BEDFORD-SHIRE.
1. Bissemede.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Hugh Beauchamp, (temp. Will. Conq.)
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It Is annual value at the Suppression, was 71l.
13s. 9d. ob. according to Dugdale; 81l. 13s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 157. Registrum de Bissemede penes. Anth. Trevor Int.
Templi Soc.

* Registrum penes... Geary de Bishmed.

2. Helenstow v. Elstow It is before observed that Hellenstow in Berks is
mistaken for this in Bedfordshire. Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 359.
.
Here was a Priory for Nuns of the Order of St. Benedict, built by Judith wife
to Waltheof Earl of Huntingdon, to the honor of the Holy Trinity, St. Mary,
and St. Helen, (temp. Will. Conq.) It was worth at the Dissolution 284l. 12s.
11d. ob. q. Dugd. 325l. 2s. 1d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 359.

3. Newenham.
Roise wife to Pain Beauchamp, (temp. Henr. I.) founded here a Priory of Canons
Regular of St. Austin's Order, whither she translated the Canons Secular from
St. Paul's in Bedford. It was dedicated to St. Paul, and it is annual revenues
were rated in 26. Hen. VIII. at 293l. 5s. 11d. Dugd. 343l. 15s. 5. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 238.

4. Bello-loco ol. Moddry nunc Beaulieu.
A Cell of Benedictine Monks to the Abbey of St. Albans in Hertford-shire,
thereunto given by Robert de Albini and Cecily his Mother, about A. D. 1130. It
was dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 325.

5. Dunstable.
Here King Henry the first built a Priory of Black Canons to the honor of St.
Peter the Apostle. It was valued at the Suppression, at 344l. 13s. 3d. Dugd.
402l. 14s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 132.

* Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Cartularium hujus Prioratus olim in manibus Magistri Will. Duncombe.

6. Chicksand.
A Priory for Nuns of the Order of St. Gilbert of Sempringham, founded by Roise
wife to Pain de Beauchamp, (temp. Hen. I.) It was dedicated to St. Mary, and
endowed at the dissolution with 212l. 3s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 230l. 3s. 4d.
ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 793.

7. Wardon.
A. D. 1136. This house of Cistertian Not White Nuns, as in MS. Bodl.
Monks was built by Walter de Espec, to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary.
It Is annual revenues at the Suppression, were worth 389l. 16s. 6d. q. Dugd.
442l. 11s. 11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 784.

8. Woburn.
Hugh de Bolebec founded here an Abbey of the Cistertian Order, A. D. 1145. and
dedicated it to St. Mary. It was valued in 26. Hen. VIII. at 391l. 18. 2d. per
an. Dugd. 430l. 13s. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 829.

9. Bosco juxta Mergate.
A Nunnery of Benedictines founded A. D. 1145. either by the Dean and Chapter
of St. Paul's, London, (as Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 872.) or by Galfred Abbat of S.
Albans, (as Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 350.) It was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and
accounted a Cell to the Abbey of St. Albans; being possessed of revenues to the
yearly value of 114l. 16s. 1d. Dugd. 143l. 18s. 3d. Speed Besides this Nunnery
at Bosco, Mr. Speed tells us of another at Mer^yate built in 6. Ed. I. by
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, to the honor of St. Giles. What authority
Mr. Speed has for this, I know not, no warrant for any such thing is to be
found in any Authentic record.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. ut supra.

* Cartas quamplurimas Originales ad hoc coenobium spectantes penes Johannem
Coker de Burncester in Com. Oxon. Generosum.

10. Harwood.
Here Sampson de Forte founded a Nunnery of St. Austin's Order, about A. D.
1150. and dedicated it to St. Peter. It was worth 47l. 3s. 2d. per an. at the
dissolution.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 202.

11. Caldewell.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Simon Basket Alderman of Bedford, A. D.
1152. It was dedicated to St. Mary and St. John Baptist, and rated at the
suppression at 109l. 8s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 148l. 15s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 257.

12. Eaton.
A College dedicated to Corpus Christi, valued at 7l. 16s.

13. North-Yevel Dugd. Northyle Speed. v. Norhill.
A College built by Sir Gerard Braybrook Knight. 6. Hen. IV. to the honor of the
blessed Virgin, valued at 61l. 5s. 5d. Harp. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 14.

The College of Bigleswade in this Country, mentioned by Speed, was only a
Gild. (Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1038.)

BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
1. Luffield This Priory is falsely placed by the Monasticon, (T. 1. p. 520:) in
Northamptonshire, It was not of the Proemonstratensian Order, as Mr. Speed will
have it.
.
A Benedictine Priory (Cell to the Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster) founded by
Robert Earl of Leicester, temp. Will. Rufi, to the honor of the Virgin Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 520.

Registrum de Luffeld pen. Decanum and Capit Westmonast. 1640.

* Fundationem Mon. de Luffeld. in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. C. 3.

* Reg. pen.... Okely de... in Com. Salop. 1649.

2. Newport In Bedfordshire MS. Bodl.
or Tickford.
A Priory of Cluniack Monks dedicated to St. Mary, and a Cell to the Abbey of
Marmonstier in France, to which Abbey it was given by Fulk Painel, temp. Will.
II. It was not dissolved till 17. Hen. VIII. at which time Cardinal Wolsey
procured a Bull from Pope Clement to suppress this and twenty other lesser
Monasteries, and to annex their lands and revenues (which of this Priory
amounted to 126l. 17s. per an.) to his two Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 685, 1037. T. 2. p. 910.

3. Newinton-Longavile Reyner falsely places this Cell in Norfolk
.
An Alien Priory given to the Abbey of S. Faith at Longavile in Normandy, by
Walter Giffard Earl of Buckingham, temp. Hen. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. p. 111.

4. Missenden.
A. D. 1293. Thus the Monasticon (T. 1. p. 541) But the Inquisition there
recited is false. For the Abbey of Missenden was founded in the reign of Hen. I.
and the Hermitage of Musewell in Pidington then given to it. Mon. Angl. T. 3.
p. 1, 18.
William Missenden Knight, built an Abbey for Black Monks here, to the honor of
the blessed Virgin Mary. It was rated at the Dissolution at 261l. 14s. 6d. q.
Dugd. 285l. 15s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T 1. p. 541. Tom. 3. P. 1. p. 18.

* Registr. in manibus Dominae Dormer.

* Munimenta quaedam hujus Abbatiae in MS. Cartulario Dominorum de Borstall
penes D. Johannem Aubrey de eadem Baronettum. 1694.

* Parochial Antiq. of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc.

5. Wenge.
This place being given by Maud the Empress to the Abbey of St. Nicholas at
Angiers, it became a Cell to that Abbey. After the Dissolution of these
Alien-Priories (2. Hen. V.) it belonged to the Abbey of St. Albans Dugdale's
Baronage. T. 2. p. 428.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1000.

6. Bittlesden.
An Abbey of Cistertian Monks founded by Ernald de Bosco, A. D. 1147. Not A. D.
1127. as in Speed.
and dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It Is annual revenues in 26. Hen. VIII. were
rated at 125l. 4s. 3d. q. Dugd. 142l. 1s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 783.

Registrum de Bittlesden penes G. ducem Buckinghamiae A. D. 1640.

7. Ivingho.
Here was a Nunnery of Benedictines dedicated to St. Margaret, Leland and the
MS. Catalogue of Monasteries in Ashmole's Musaeum.
founded by Henry Bishop of Winchester, about A. D. 1160. valued at the
Suppression at 14l. 3s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 22l. 6s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 490.

8. ^^utley or de Parco Crendon ^ take Mr. Speeds Paratrendune to be only a
corruption of Parco Crendon, so that it is an error in him and the MS.
Catalogue of Religious Houses, (in Bibl. Bodl. NE. E. 2. 17.) to make this and
Nutley two different Monasteries.
.
A. D. 1162. Speed is mistaken, when he writes, that this Monastery was founded
A. D. 1112.
Walter Giffard II. Earl of Buckingham, here built a Priory for Black Canons to
the honor of St. Mary. It Is annual value at the Dissolution, was 437l. 6s. 8d.
Dugd. 495l. 18s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 154.

* Parochial Antiquities first attempted in the history of Burcester,
Ambrosden, and other adjacent villages in the Counties of Oxon. and Bucks. by
White Kennet M. A. Vicar of Ambrosden. In hoc libro eruditissimo, quem, jam sub
proelo Sheldoniano sudantem, Antiquitatum studiosi avidissime expectant, passim
occurrunt Cartae nunc primum ex Autographis and MSS. Cartulariis editae ad hoc
and alia hujus viciniae Coenobia spectantes.

* Rotulum MS. Abbatiae de Parco Crendon in Thesaurario Aedis Christi Oxon.

9. Ankerwik.
Here Gilbert and Richard Muntfichet Knights, built a Nunnery of the
Benedictine Order, to the honor of St. Mary Magdalene, temp. Hen. II. It was
valued at the Dissolution at 32l. 2d. Dugd. 45l. 14s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 482. T. 3. P. 1. p. 25.

10. Mendham or Medmenham.
A Priory for Monks of the Cistertian Reyner erroneously says, 'twas of the
Cluniack Order.
Order, founded by Hugh de Bolebec, 2. Ioh. and annexed as a Cell to Woburn in
Bedfordshire. It was dedicated to S. Mary, and valued at the Suppression at 20l
6s. 2d. Dugd. 23l. 17s. 2^. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 31, 926. T. 3. P. 1. p. 25.

11. Snelshall.
Ralph Martell A. D.... founded a Priory of Black Monks here, to the honor of
St. Leonard. This small Priory was at the Dissolution, endowed with no more
than 18l. 1s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 24l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 483.

12. Chetwood Not in Staffordshire, where Mr. Speed places it.
.
A Cell of Black Canons to the Abbey of Nutley, founded about A. D. 1240. by
Rob. Grosteste Bishop of Lincoln Thus the Translator of the Monasticon, though I
cannot perceive how the words of the Original can signify any more, than that
the Bishop granted license that a Monastery might be founded on the ground of
Ralph de Norwich, which could not entitle the Bishop to be Founder, because by
the Canon Law no Monastery could be built without leave from the Diocesan.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 340.

13. Burnham.
A. D. 126^. Richard King of the Romans built here a Priory of Benedictine Nuns
to the honor of St. Mary. It Is annual revenues were worth at the Suppression
51l. 2s. 4d. q. Dugd. 91l. 5s. 11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 534.

14. Ravenston Falsely pla^ed by the Monasticon in Lincolnshire.
.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of St. Austin, founded by Peter de Chaceport
and King Hen. the third in the 39th. of his reign. It was dedicated to... and
valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 66l. 13s. 4d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 337.

15. Asserugge or Ashridge.
Here was a College or Priory of those Canons, which were called Bonhommes,
founded by Edmund Earl of Cornwall, 5. Ed. I. It was dedicated to St. Mary, and
endowed with lands at the Suppression to the yearly value of 416l. 16^. 4d.
Dugd. 447l. 18s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 344. T. 3. P. 1. p. 67.

* Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc.

16. Lavenden.
An Abbey of Praemonstratenses built by Ioh. di Bidun A. D.... to the honor of
St. John Baptist. It Is revenues at the Dissolution were worth 79l. 13s. 8d. per
an. Dugd. 91l. 8s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 613.

17. Bradewell.
Speed tell's us, one Manefelmus built here an Abbey for Black Monks, and
dedicated it to St. Mary. A. D....

18. Little-Merlow.
A house of Black Nuns founded by Galfre^ Lord Spensar The time when this Lord
lived is uncertain, because there no mention of him in the Baronage.
.... It Is annual revenues were (26. Hen. VIII.) rate^ at 23l. 3s. 7d. q. Dugd.
37l. 6s. 11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

19. Eaton.
A Collegiate Church, consisting, at its first ^oundation, of a Provost, ten
Priests, four Clerks, six Chorister-boys, twenty five poor Grammar Scholars,
with a Master to teach them, and twenty five poor old men, it was founded by
King Henry VI. (anno regni 19.) to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 195.

* Cartas and Registra penes Praepositum and socios.

20. Murresley Speed says it was in Berkshire, but there is no Town of that
name in that County.
.
A Priory valued at 14l. 3s. 1d. per an.

21. High-Wickham.
A Priory dedicated to S. Margaret, endowed at the Dissolution with 14l. 3s.
1d. per an. Dugd. 22l. 6s. 7d. Speed.

22. Risburg.
A Cell of fourteen Monks to Christ-Church in Canterbury. Reyn. Apost. Ben.

The Monasticon (T. 1. p. 802.) falsely places Tame in this County, but it is in
Oxfordshire; and Mr. Speed has in this Shire Bordesley, which is in
Worcestershire, and Sandwell which is in Staffordshire.

CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE.
1. Ely.
ETheldreda wife to Egfrid King of Northumberland, built a Nunnery here A. D.
673. which was destroyed by the Danes A. D. 870. but rebuilt about A. D. 970.
by the munificence of King Edgar, and the care of Ethelwold Bishop of
Winchester, who placed here a Convent of Benedictine Monks, and dedicated it to
St. Etheldreda, commonly called St. Audry. This Abbey was changed into a
Bishopric A. D. 1108. It Is annual revenues at the Dissolution were worth
1084l. 6s. 9d. ob. Dugd. 1301l. 8s. 2d. Speed. King Hen. VIII. changed the
Prior and Black Monks into a Dean and Secular Canons, which yet continue.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 87. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. Reyner. Ap. Bened. Tr. 1. p. 36.

* Historiam MS. Eliensis Ecclesiae per Thomam Monachum in Bibl. Cotton. Dom.
A. 15.

* Historiam Insulae Eliensis a tempore Lucii ad Rob. Orford Episcopum. P. I.
in Bibl. Cotton. Nero. A. 15. A Roberto Orford ad Johannem Morton Episcopum. P.
II. In ead. Bibl. Nero A. 16.

* Gesta Abbatum and Episcoporum Eliensium ad A. D. 1434. In Bibl. Cotton.
Titus. A. 1.

* Histor. Ecclesiae Eliensis in Bibl. Bodl. MS. Laud. L. 57. and 69. and in C.
C. C. Cantabr.

* Hist. Ecclesiae Eliensis penes... Glapthorn de Wittlesey in Com. Hunt. Arm.

* Cronicon de statu and Fundatione Eccl. Eliensis cum successione Abbatum ad
tempora Hen. VIII. In Bibl. Lambeth. 4^o. 124.

2. Thorney.
An Abbey of Benedictine Monks founded by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, A. D.
972. It was dedicated to St. Mary and St. Botulph, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
411l. 12s. 11d. Dugd. 508l. 12s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 242.

Registrum MS. de Thorney penes Comitem Westmorlandiae. 1640.

* Annals de Thorney ab an. Chapter 961. ad 1421. in Bibl. Cotton Nero. C. 7.
Fragm. Reg. Vitell. D. 5.

* Reg. penes Edm. Mounsteven de Paston. Arm.

3. Chatteriz.
About A. D. 1010. Ednod Abbat of Ramsey built here a Nunnery for Benedictines
to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was endowed at the Suppression with
97l. 3s. 4d. q. per an. Dugd. 113l. 3s. 6l. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 251. T. 2. p. 869.

Cronica Fundationis Mon. de Chatteriz, and Registrum Cartarum ejusdem
Monasterii. In Bibl. Cotton. Jul. A. 1. 9.

4. St. Edmunds.
A Priory of White Canons founded by King Canute This is an error of Mr.
Speed's, for there were no White Canons in England till A. D. 1146. and the
Order it self began but A. D. 1120. Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 587. There is no place
of this name in Cambridge-shire, so that it might be probably St. Edmunds in
Norfolk Qu.
. Valued at 14l. 8s. 8d. Dugd. 16l. 16s. Speed.

5. Eltessey.
A Nunnery dedicated to S. Pandionia a Scottish Virgin, who was here buried. It
was translated by William the Conqueror to Hitchinbroke in Huntingdon-shire.
Leland.

6. Cambridge.
In St. Giles's Church here, Picotus placed a Convent of six Black Canons A. D.
1092. which was twenty years after removed to

7. Barnwell.
By Pain Peverell, where he built a Priory to the honor of S. Giles and S.
Andrew, and endowed it with revenues for the maintenance of thirty Canons of S.
Austin's Order Not Black Monks as MS. Bodl.
, the yearly value of which at the Dissolution was 256l. 11s. 10d. q. Dugd.
351l. 15s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 33.

* Reg. penes Dominum Edw. Peyton mil.

* Cartularium in manibus... Haggard de Bourn.

* Registrum de Barnwell olim penes Magistrum Ric. S. George.

8. Swadesey.
An Alien-Priory of Benedictines, Cell to the Abbey of St. Sergius and Bachus in
Angiers, to which it was given by Alan Rufus Earl of Britanny and Richmond,
(temp. Will. Conq.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 572.

9. Shengay.
A Praeceptory of Knights Hospitalers of St. John, this Manor being given to
them by Sibilla de Raines daughter to Rog. Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury, A. D.
1140 A. D. 1130. Speed.
. It was worth at the Suppression 171l. 4s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 175l. 4s. 6d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 546.

10. Denny.
Robert Chamberlain to Conan Duke of Britain and Albericus Picot, founded a
Priory here, about A. D. 1160. for Monks of the Order of St. Benedict,
subordinate to the Abbey of Ely. In 20. Ed. III. Mary de St. Paul Countess of
Pembroke changed the Monks into Nuns of the Order of St. Clare, and annexed to
it.

11. Waterbeach.
A house of the same Nuns, built by Dionisia de Monte Canisio, 22. Ed. I. to
the honor of St. Mary. The Nunnery of Denny was dedicated to St. James and St.
Leonard, and was at the Dissolution able to expend yearly 172l. 8s. 3. ob.
Dugd. 218l. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 492, 543. T. 2. p. 883.

12. Cambridge.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Malcolm King of the Scots, to the honor of St.
Mary and St. Radegund, about A. D. 1160.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 480.

13. Ikelington v. Ickleton.
About A. D. 1190. Aubery de Vere Earl of Oxford, founded a little Benedictine
Nunnery here. It was dedicated to... and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 71l. 9s. 10.
ob. Dugd. 80l. 1s. 10d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

14. Mirmaud.
A Cell to Sempringham, to which Abbey it was given by Radulf de Hauvill, about
A. D. 1200.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 107.

15. Fordham.
King Henry the third (anno Regn. 21.) endowed the Abbey of Sempringham in
Lincolnshire, with the Church of Fordham, and so it became a Cell of Gilbertine
Monks to that Abbey. It was dedicated to... and valued at the Suppression at
40l. 13s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 46l. 3s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 791.

16. Anglesey.
A Priory of Canons of St. Austin's Order, founded by Richard de Clare There
are several of this family named Richard in the Baronage of England, T. 1. p.
206. etc. though I am not certain, to which of them the Foundation of this
Monastery is to be ascribed.
Speed. It Is annual revenues at the Dissolution were 24l. 19s. Dugd. 149l. 18s.
6d. Speed.

17. Spinney.
Beatrix Malebiss and Mary de Bassingburn, (temp. Hen. 5.) built a Priory of
Black Canons here to the honor of St. Mary and St. Cross. It was annexed to
Ely, (temp. Hen. VI.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 320.

Regist. penes Sym. Dewes de Stow in Com. Suff. and Isaac Barrow de Spyney Arm.
A. D. 1638.

18. Soffam-Bulbeck.
A Priory of Black Nuns founded by... Bulbeck,... It Is annual revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 40l. Dugd. 46l. 10s. 8d. Speed.

Romberg and Royston are falsely placed by the Monasticon in this County; so
that I shall give account of the former in Suffolk, and of the latter in
Hertfordshire.

CHESHIRE.
1. Chester.
HEre was an ancient Nunnery dedicated to the memory of St. Werburga daughter
to Wulpherus King of Mercia, which being destroyed in the Danish wars, King
Edgar A. D. 858. founded a Convent of Canons Secular here to the honor of the
forementioned Saint; but these also were expelled by Hugh Lupus Earl of
Chester, A. D. 1095. who placed Benedictine Monks here, by whose liberality
they were able to dispend yearly at the Dissolution 1003l. 5s. 11d. according
to Dugd. 1073l. 17s. 7d. ob. q. Speed. King Henry VIII. placed here a Dean and
Prebendaries in the room of the Monks, and made it a Bishops See.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 199, 985.

Registra penes Decan. and Capitul.

* Fundationem Abbatiae S. Werburgae in Bibl. Cotton. Faustina B. 8.

* Cestriae Annals ad A. D. 1255. Otho B. 3. in Bibl. Cotton.

2. Cumbermere.
A. D. 1133. William de Malbede^g, Speed.
Hugh de Malbanc Lord of Nantwich, founded an Abbey for Cistertian Monks here,
and dedicated it to St. Mary and St. Michael. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
225l. 9s. 7d. per an.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 764. T. 2. p. 913.

* Fundationem Abbatiae de Cumbermere MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Faustina. B. 8.

3. Norton
Here was a Priory of Canons Regular of the Order of St. Austin, built by
William Fitz-Nigel A. D. 1135. to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is annual
revenues at the Suppression were worth 180l. 7s. 6d. ob. Dugd. 258l. 11s. 8d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 185.

4. Chester.
A Nunnery of Benedictines Not a Priory of Black Canons as in Speed's Catalogue*
dedicated to St. Mary, and founded by Ranulph Earl of Chester about A. D.
1140. It was rated at the Dissolution at 66l. 18s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 99l. 16s.
2d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 507.

5. Pulton.
A Cistertian Abbey founded A. D. 1153. by Robert Pincerna, but upon the account
of the incursions of the Welsh, it was translated A. D. 1214. to Deulacres in
Staffordshire, by Ranulf Earl of Chester.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 890.

6. Stanlaw.
John Lacy Constable of Chester, founded here an Abbey of Cistertian Monks A. D.
1172. who were translated to Whalley in Lancashire A. D. 1296.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 896.

* Chonic. MS. Abb. de Stanlaw in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. C. 3. 26.

* Cartularium Abbatiae hujus in Bibl. Arundel 1647.

7. Modberley.
Here Patric de Modberley built a Priory of Black Canons to the honor of St.
Mary and St. Wilfrid A. D. 1206.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 320.

8. Dernhale.
A. D. 1273. King Edward the first built an Abbey here for an hundred Monks of
the Cistertian Order; but A. D. 1277. he laid the foundation of a stately
Monastery at

9. Uale-Royal.
To the honor of Christ Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and the Holy Confessors St.
Nichasius and St. Nicholas, which was not finished till A. D. 1330. at which
time the Monks of Dernal were translated hither. It was endowed with land^ and
revenues 26. Hen. VIII. to yearly value of 118l. 19s. 8d. Dugd. 540l. 6s. 2d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 936. T. 2. p. 921.

Registrum Abb. Vallis-Regalis penes Th. Marbury de Marbury in Com. Cestr.
1658. MS.

10. Berkinhead.
A Priory of sixteen Benedictines dedicated to St. Mary and St. James, and a
Cell to Chester Leland. Itinerary Vol. 5. f. 42.
. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 102l. 16s. 10l. per an. Speed. 90l.
13s. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 484.

11. Ilbre.
A Cell of Black Monks to Chester, dedicated to our Lady Ibid. f. 41.
.

12. Bunbury.
Here Hugh Calvely Knight, A. D. 1388. founded a College for a Dean and six
Secular Canons in the Church of St. Boniface.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 107. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 450.

10. Macclesfield.
A College of Secular Canons founded by Tho. Savage Archdeacon of York, A. D.
1508. Speed.

CORNWALL.
1. S. Germans.
A Collegiate Church founded by King Aethelstan and endowed by King Canute, (in
whose time the Bishops Seat for Cornwall was here* which was after united to
Credition) but about A. D. 1050. Leofricus the first Bishop of Exon* changed
the Seculars into Black Canons Thus the Inquisition, (Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 5.)
but Lelan^ Mon. Angl. T. 1. P. 2. p. 13.) says that the Regulars were
introduced by Barth. Bishop of Exon. who lived about A. D. 1170
. It was endowed at the Suppression with 243l. 8^. per an* Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 213. T. 2. p. 5.

2. Bodmin What Leland says of this Monastery is very observable, th^^ at
Bodmin were first Monks, then Nuns, then Secular Priests* then Monks again,
then Canons, the last foundation was by Will Warlewast Bishop of Exon. Speed
farther adds, that after the Black Canons, were Gray Friars, but this is one of
his errors, (...) also is his assigning St. Peter to be the Patron of this
Priory. This last Author tells us of a Priory of Black Canons founded (...)
King Aethelstan, to the honor of St. Petrorsi at Bonury: bu^ in all
probability it is the same with Bodmin.
or Petrocstow.
A. D. 926. King Aethelstan founded here an^ Abbey for Benedictine Monks, and
dedicated it to St. Petroc a religious Hermit of these parts. It was destroyed
by the Danish Pirates A. D. 981. and reedified by Algar about A. D. 1110. who
placed Black Canons here. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 270l. 11d. per an.
Dugd. 289l. 11s. 11d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 213. T. 2. p. 5.

3. S. Burien.
King Aethelstan Camden in Damnoniis.
built the Church, in which (temp. Will. Conq.) there was a College of Secular
Canons, which consisted of a Dean and three Prebendaries, 20. Ed. I. Taxatio
Bene^ic. Angliae 20. Ed. I. MS. in Bibl. Bodl.


4. Lanceston.
Here was a College of Seculars before the Conquest dedicated to St. Stephen,
which was suppressed by Will. Warwast Bishop of Exon. who placed here Canons
Augustines. It was rated at 354l. 11d. q. per an. Dugd. 392l. 11s. 2d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 107.

* Reg. penes Mr. Ric. Escot de Hosp. Lincoln.

5. S. Michaels Mount.
A Priory of Benedictines founded by King Edw. Conf. annexed by Rob. Not
William, as Mr. Speed has it; whose two Monasteries of St. Michael de Monte and
St. Michael de magno Monte, were without doubt the same.
Earl of Morton, (temp. Will. Conq.) to the Abbey of St. Michael in periculo
maris in Normandy. After the Suppression of Alien-Priories, it was given to
Sion Abbey in Middlesex.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 551. T. 2. p. 901.

Reg penes Wilh. Com. Sarum.

6. Tywardreth.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Sergius and Bachus in Angiers, to which it was
given by Rob. Cardinan (temp. Ric. I.) It was dedicated to St. Andrew, and was
not dissolved till the general Suppression, at which time it is annual revenues
amounted to 123l. 9s. 3d. Dugd. 151l. 16s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 586.

7. Penryn or Glassoney.
Walter Bishop of Exon. It was an oversight of Mr. Speed to tell us, that
Walter Bronescone was Bishop of Oxford A. D. 1288.
A. D. 1288. built a Collegiate Church here, consisting of a Dean and twelve
Prebends, to the honor of the blessed Virgin and St. Thomas of Canterbury. It
was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 205l. 10^. 6d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 56.

8. S. Anthony.
A Cell of two Canons to Plimpton Priory.

9. Helston.
A Priory dedicated to St. John Baptist, endowed with 12l. 16s. 4d. per an.
Dugd. 14l. 7s. 4d. ob. Speed.

10. Sylly.
A Cell of Benedictines to Tavestock Abbey, dedicated to St. Nicholas.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 516.

11. S. Syriac. Sp. S. Caricius. Mon. Angl.
A Cell to Montacute Priory in Somersetshire.

12. Munstre.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of S. Sergius and Bachus at Angiers.

13. Crantock.
A College valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 89l. 15s. 8d. per an.

14. Talcarn.
A Monastery of Black Monks of the Angels I am yet to learn who are meant by
Mr. Speed's Black Monks of the Angels, of which Order, he says, were three
Monasteries in this Shire beside this, viz. S. Mary de Val, S. Michael de
Monte, and S. Anthony.
, dedicated to St. Andrew.

15. S. Mary de Ual. Speed.
A Monastery of Black Monks of the Angels.

Mr. Speed mentions the Monastery of Hesteland in this County, which probably
is the same with Hertland in Devonshire.

CUMBERLAND.
1. Carliol.
HEre a Convent of Monks and a Nu^nery were built by St. Cuthbert, A. D. 686.
But these, together with the Town being destroyed by the Danes, King Henry I.
(who established the Bishops See here) founded a Priory of Black Canons to the
honor of the blessed Virgin, whose yearly revenues at the Suppression were
rated at 418l. 3s. 4d. ob. q. Dugd. 482l. 8s. 1d. Speed. King Henry VIII.
placed a Dean and four Secular Canons here.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 73.

* Notitiam Eccl. Conv. Sanctae Mariae de Carliol MS. per Hug. Todd S. T. P.
and hujus Eccl. Canonicu^, in Bibl. Carliol.

* Registra and Cartas Autographas penes Decanu^ and Capitulum hujus Ecclesiae.

2. Dacre.
An ancient Monastery founded not long after the first planting of Christianity
in these parts* It is mentioned by Bid Eccl. Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 32^

3. Armethwait.
A little Priory of Benedictine Nuns, built b^ King William Rufus, and
dedicated to Christ Jesus and St. Mary, valued but at 18l. 18s. 8d. per an.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 324.

4. Wetherall Falsely placed in Yorkshire by Rey^er and Speed.
.
A Cell of Benedictines to the Abbey of S. Mary at York, given thereunto by
Ranulph de M^^cenis Earl of Chester and Cumberland, (temp. Will Rufi) and
dedicated to the Holy Trinity. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 117l. 11s. 10d.
per an. Dugd. 128l. 5s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 389, 397.

Reg. de Wederhall pen. Wilh. Dom. Howard de Naworth, 1638. MS.

* Notitiam MS. Ecclesiae de Wetherall per V. Rev. Hug. Todd. S. T. P.

* Cartularium de Wedderhall in Bibl. Ecclesiae Cathed. Carliol.

5. S. Bees.
William brother to Rani^f de Maecenis (temp. Hen. I.) built a little Monastery
in Coupland to the honor of St. Bega. It was a Cell to St. Mary's at York, and
endowed at the Dissolution with 143l. 17s. 2d. ob. per an. Dugd. 149l. 16s. 6d.
Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. P. 389, 395.

* Regist. pen. Dominum Joh. Lowther de Lowther Baronettum.

6. Caldre Not in Lancashire as in Speed.
.
A. D. 1134. Ranulph II. Not Ranulph I. as in the Baronage, T. 1. p. 38. for he
died A. D. 1129.
Earl of Chester founded here an Abbey for Cistertian Monks. It was endowed at
the Dissolution with 50l. 9s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 64l. 3s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 774.

7. Holme-Coltram.
An Abbey of White Monks founded by Henry Earl of Huntigdon A. D. 1150.
dedicated to the blessed Virgin. At the Suppression it was valued at 427l. 19s.
3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 535l. 3s. 7d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 885. T. 3. P. 1. p. 34.

Reg. de Holme-Coltram pen. Wilh. Dom. Howard de Naworth.

* Registrum hujus Abbatiae in Biblioth. Eccl. Carl.

8. Lanercost.
A. D. 1169. Rob. de Vallibus built here a Priory of Black Canons to the honor
of St. Mary Magdalene. It Is yearly revenues were worth at the Dissolution 77l.
7s. 11d. Dugd. 79l. 19s. Speed.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 130.

* Cartular. de Lanercost pen. Wilh. Dom. Howard de Naworth.

* Cronicon de Lanercost MS. in Bibl. Cotton.

9. Graystoke.
A College of Secular Canons founded by Ralph Ld. of the Barony of Graystoke,
about A. D. 1392 Leland. Coll. vol. 1. p. 46.
.

10. Seton.
A Nunnery of the Benedictine Order dedicated to S. Leonard, valued at 12l.
12s. ob. per an. Dugd. 64^. 16s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 484.

11. Rirk-Oswald.
A College of twelve Secular Canons founded by Robert Threlkeld, 20. Hen. VIII.

DERBY-SHIRE.
1. Calk.
A Priory of the Order of St. Austin dedicated to St. Giles, and founded by...
but the Canons being removed to

2. Repingdon.
A. D. 1172. by Maud widow to Ranulph II. Earl of Chester; Calk became a Cell
to this Monastery. Here had been in ancient times a famous Monastery, wherein
several of the Saxon Kings of Mercia were interred; but it was destroy^d in the
Danish wars. This latter foundation was dedicated to the holy Trinity and St.
Mary, and valued at the Dissolution at 118l. 8s. 6d. Dugd. 167l. 18^. 2^. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 280. T. 3. P. 1. p. 97.

3. Derby.
A College dedicated to All Saints, and valued at the Dissolution at 38l. 14s.
per an.

4. Derby.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Hellen.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 61.

5. Gresley.
An Abbey founded by one Will. Fitz-Nigel This Will. Fitz-Nigell was probably
the same with the Founder of Norton Priory in Cheshire, who lived about A. D.
1140.
, ^... to the honor of St. George. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppressio^n
were worth 31l. 6^. Dugd. 39l. 13s. 8d. Speed.

6. Da^leigh.
Hugh Dean of Derby (temp. Hen. II.) built here a Priory of Black Canons to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were
worth 258l. 14s. 5d. Dugd. 134l. Le^.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 230. T. 3. P. 1. p. 57.

Regist. MS. in Bibl. Cotton.

7. De Bello-Capite, or B^anchief.
A Priory of Praemonstratenses founded (temp. Hen. II.) by Rob. Fitz-Ranulf one
of the Murderers of Thomas Becket, to whose memory this Monastery was
dedicated. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 126^. 3s. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 607.

* Kalendarium Mon. de Bello-capite inter MS. Dugdal. 74.

8. Dala or de Parco Stanley.
Serlo de Grendon () founded here a Cell of Black Canons to the Abbey of Calk:
but afterward (about A. D....) Galfred de Salicosamora and Maud his wife,
brought hither a Convent of eight Praemonstratensian Canons from Newhouse. It
was dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed with lands to the yearly value of 144l.
12s. at the Dissolution.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 616. T. 3. P. 1. p. 73.

* Registr. penes Sam. Roper de Heanore in Com. Derb.

9. Derby juxta.
A Nunnery of Benedictines called the Monastery of St. Mary de Pratis, founded
by... rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 18l. 6s. 2d.

Vide Mon. Angl* T. 1. p. 505. T. 2. p. 897.

10. Yevelay Yevelay and Barrow were not both Praeceptories as Mon. Angl. T. 1.
p. 1039. but Yevelay only, as Tom. 2. p. 546.
.
A Praeceptory of the Knights of St. John, to whom it was given by Will.
Meynill A. D. 1268. at the Suppression it was worth 93l. 3s. 4d. ob.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 2. p. 546.

11. Bredsall or Brisol.
An Abbey of... valued 10l. 17s. 9d.

12. Brend in the Peak.
A Monastery founded by Sir Rob. Duin Knight Speed.

13. Barrow.
A Priory of Black Monks subordinate to St. John's in Colchester Leland. Coll.
voll. 1. p. 60
, endowed with 107l. 3s. 8d. per an. Speed.

14. Derby
A Cell of Cluniack Monks to Bermondsey, dedicated to St. James Reyner. Catal.
Mon. MS. Bodl.
.

Mr. Speed places Faverwell in this Shire, but it is in Staffordshire; and as
for Pollewerk, I take it to be the same with Pollesworth in Warwickshire,
Chesterfield was but a Gild of Lay Brethren.

DEVON-SHIRE.
1. Exeter.
IN ancient times within the precincts of the Close, were three Religious
Houses I Hooker's History of the Cathedral Church of Ex^ter, in Hollingshed.
Vol 2. p. 1027.
. The first was a Nunnery, which is now the Deans house, the other was a house
of Monks reported to have been built by King Ethelred, about A. Chapter 868. The
third was a Monastery of Benedictines founded by King Aethelstan A. D. 932. but
the Monks not long after his death, forsook it for fear of the Danes, till A.
D. 968. at which time King Edgar restored them. Upon the removal of the Bishops
See hither from Crediton A. D. 1050. the Monks were translated to Westminister.
Bishop Leofricus uniting the three forementioned Monasteries into his Cathedral
Church, placed here some Secular Canons; but the Chapter was not settled till
Bishop Brewer A. D. 1235. established and endowed a Dean, and twenty four
Prebendaries. This Church is dedicated to St. Mary and St. Peter.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 220.

Quaedam Historica ad Ecclesiam S. Petri Exon. spectantia, cum Catalogo
Reliquiarum MS. super D. 1. Art. 76. in Bibl. Bodl.

* Chronicon Exoniensis Ecclesiae MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Laud. I. 71.

* Registr. MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Wood. 9.

2. Crediton.
Upon the division of the Diocese of Shirborn A. D. 985. by King Edward and
Archbishop Plegmund, Eadulphus was made Bishop of Devonshire, who built his
Cathedral Church here. And though the Bishops See was removed to Exeter A. D.
1050. yet here remained a Collegiate Church dedicated to the Holy Cross,
consisting of a Dean and twelve Prebendaries, till the general Dissolution, at
which time it was endowed with 140l. 14s. 5d. per an.

3. Pilton.
A Benedictine Priory founded by King Aethelstan, and dedicated to St. Mary. It
was subordinate to Malmsbury in Wiltshire, and rated at the Suppression at 56l.
12s. 8d. ob. Dugd.

4. Tavystock.
An Abbey of Benedictines founded here by Ordgar Earl of Devonshire, A. D. 961.
and dedicated to St. Mary and St. Rumon. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 902l.
5s. 7d. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 217, 995.

Cartularium penes Joh. Maynard Arm. MS.

5. Clive. Qu.
About A. D. 1005. Ailmar Earl of Cornwall built a Monastery of Black Canons to
the honor of St. Mary Magdalene. Speed.

6. Plimpton.
Here was a Collegiate Church of the foundation of some of the Saxon Kings, for
a Dean and four Prebendaries, which being dissolved, W. Warwast Bishop of Exon.
(temp. Hen. I. Not founded by Baldw. Redvers of Devon. temp. Hen. III. as in
Speed.
) founded a Priory of Black Canons, and dedicated it to the Apostles St. Peter
and St. Paul. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 912l. 12s. 8d.
ob.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 6.

7. Ottery.
Made a Cell to the Abbey of St. Mary in Roan by King Edward the Confessor A. D.
1060. but granted by the Abbat and Convent 8. Ed. III. to Ioh. Grandison Bishop
of Exeter who A. D. 1337. founded a College here, consisting of a Warden, eight
Prebendaries, ten Vicars, a Master of Music, a Master of Grammar, two Priests,
eight Deacons, eight Choristers, and two Clerks Leland. Coll. vol. 1. p. 76.
, to the honor of Christ Jesus, the blessed Virgin Mary, and King Edward the
Confessor. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 303l. 2s. 9d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 549. T. 3. P. 2. p. 59.

8. Hertland.
Githa wife to Earl Godwin, placed Secular Priest's in the Church of St. N^ctan
here, who were changed into Canons of the Order of St. Austin by Galfrid de
Dynam, (temp. Hen. II.) It was rated at the Dissolution at 306l. 3s. 2d. q. per
an.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 285.

9. Totteness
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Sergius and St. Bachus at Angiers, to
which Abbey it was given by Speed says that one Roger Newman was founder of
this Priory.
Iuhellus fill. Aluredi, (temp. Will. Conq.) It was dedicated to St. Mary, and
was not suppressed till 27. Hen. VIII. at which time it was endowed with
revenues to the value of 24l. 9s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 124l. 10s. 2d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1023.

10. Barnstaple.
Joel fill. Alluredi (temp. Will. Conq.) founded here an Abbey of Cluniack Monks,
and dedicated it to St. Peter and St. Paul and St. Mary Magdalene. It was
subordinate to St. Martin de Campis in Paris, and rated at the Dissolution at
123l. 6s. 7d. Dugd. 129l. 15s. 3. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 684, 1024.

11. Exeter.
A little Priory built by Will. Rufus, to the honor of St. Nicholas, and by
him annexed as a Cell to Battle Abbey, valued at 154l. 12s. Speed. 147l. 12^.
Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 352.

* Registrum quondam penes D. Wilh. le Neve Regem Armorum, nunc in Bibl. Cotton.

12. Axmouth.
An Alien-Priory Cell to the Abbey of Mount-borow, to which it was given by
Richard de Redvers, temp. Hen. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 992.

13. Brightley.
Here Richard Redvers Sheriff of Devon-shire, A. D. 1136. founded an Abbey for
Cistertian Monks, who afterward removed to

14. Ford.
Which place was given to them A. D. 1142. by Adelicia wife of Richard de
Brioniis. It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, and endowed at the
Suppression with 374l. 10s. 6d. ob. per an. Dugd. 381l. 10s. 6d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 785.

15. Exeter.
Baldwin de Riveriis Earl of Exeter about A. D. 1146. founded here a Monastery
of Cluniack Monks, and dedicated it to St. James. It Is yearly revenues were
worth 26. Hen. VIII. 502l. 12s. 9d. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 643.

16. Buckfastre.
An Abbey of Cistertians founded by Ethelwerd son to Will. Pomerei, (temp. Hen.
II.) to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued at the Suppression at
466^. 11s. 2d. ob. q. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 792, 945.

17. Torr.
An Abbey of Praemonstratenses founded by Will. Briwere, (temp. R. Ricardi I.)
and dedicated to St. Mary, S. Savior, and the holy Trinity. It Is yearly
revenues were worth at the Suppression 396l. 11d. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 652.

Reg. Abbati^ d^ Torr MS. in S^actario pen. Remem. Regis.

18. Dunkeswe^l. Falsely placed by Mr. Speed in Somersetshire.

A. D. 1201. Will. Briwere built an Abbey of White Monks to the honor of St.
Mary. By the charity of the Founder and some other benefactors, it was endowed
26. Hen. VIII. with 294l. 18s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 298l. 11s. 10l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 925.

19. Otterington.
King John gave this Manor to the Monks of St. Michael in periculo maris in
Normandy, to which Abbey it afterward became a Cell.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 569.

20. Can^^dnleigh.
Walter Clavel first founded a Monastery for Canons of the Order of St. Austin,
who were expelled by Maud de Clare Countess of Hereford, (temp. R. Hen. III.)
and Nuns placed in their room. It Is yearly revenues were worth at the
Suppression 197l. 1d. Dugd. 202l. 15s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

21. Frithelstoke.
A Priory of Black Canons A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Nicholas,
MS. Bodl.
built by Robert Beauchamp (temp. Hen. III.) to the honor of St. Mary and St.
Gregory. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 127l. 4d. q. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 326.

22. Exeter.
Gilbert and John Long Merchants of Ex^ter, built a Priory of Canons Not
Grey-Friers as in Speed's Catalogue.
of the Order of St. Austin, A. D. 1273. to the honor of St. John Baptist. It
was rated at the Suppression at 102l. 12s. 9d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

23. Pollshoo.
Will. Briwere Bishop of Exeter (temp. Hen. III.) built here a Benedictine
Nunnery to the honor of St. Katherine. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 164l.
8s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 170l. 2s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

24. Newenham,
A. D. 1246. Reginald de Moh^^n founded here an Abbey for Cistertian Monks, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was endowed at the Dissolution with
227l. 7s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 231l. 14^. 4^. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 928.

* Reg. de Newenham in Bibl. Arundel 1647. nunc in Bibl. Coll. Gresham. Norf.
147.

25. Modbury, Molerey. Sp.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Peter super Dinam in France, to which it
was given by... Ruan or... Exton Leland. Itin. Vol. 3.
. It was of the Benedictine Order, and dedicated to St. Gregory. After the
Dissolution of these Priories, King Henry VI. gave it to Eton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 507. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

26. Buckland.
A Priory of Cistertians founded by Amicia Countess of Devon, A. D. 1278. and
dedicated to St. Mary and St. Benedict. It was valued at the Dissolution at
241l. 17s. 9d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 790, 939.

27. Cowike or Cuich. Not two distinct Priories as in Speed.

An Alien-Priory Cell to the Abbey of Beck in Normandy, being thereunto given by
Will. fill. Baldwin Founded by Thomas Earl of Devon-shire. Speed.
, A. D.... It was dedicated to St. Andrew.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 954.

28. Slapton.
A College of Prebendaries founded by Guy Brien about A. D. 1350. Lel. Itin.
vol. 3.

Vide Histor^a^ Fundationis Cantariae de Slapton in Dioc. Exon. MS. In Bibl.
Bodl. inter libros ab Ant. Wood. emptos. 3.

29. Sidmouth.
An Alien-Priory to Mountborow Abbey in Normandy. Lel. Itin. vol. 2.

30. Dartmouth.
A little Cell of St. Patric in the Castle here, annexed to some great Abbey.
Lel. Itin. vol. 3. p. 40.

31. S. Michael.
A Priory of Black Monks, being a Cell to Malmsbury Speed. Reyner.
.

32. Careswell In (...).
.
A Cell to Montac^te Priory in Somersetshire. Leland. Er^oneously reckoned
among the (...).


33. Spelep^^^^.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Peter de Fulgeriis in Britanny.

34. Tunstal.
An Alien-Priory.

35. Berleston.
A Priory of Black Canons. Speed.

36. Cornworthy. Lel.
A Nunnery valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 63l. 2^. 10d. Speed. Dugd.

37. Exeter.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Katherine.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 503.

38. Clovely.
Will. Carry founded here a College for a Dean and six Prebendaries, 11. Ric. II.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 109.

39. Marsehe.
A Cell to Plimpton.

Mr. Speed places in this County Christ-Church-Twinham, which is in Hantshire;
and Syo^ which should be in Middlesex.

DORSET-SHIRE.
1. Winburn.
A. D. 715. St. Cuthburga, Sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, here founded
a Monastery for Benedictine Nuns. It was afterward changed into a Collegiate
Church, consisting of a Dean, four Prebendaries, five Singing-men, three
Vicars, and four Deacons.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 163.

2. Middleton Falsely reckoned among the Wiltshire Monasteries by Mr. Speed.
.
King Aethelstan here built an Abbey for Monks of the Order of St. Benedict, to
the honor of St. Mary, St. Michael, St. Sampson, and St. Branwalader Dedicated
to St. Mary and St. Savior. Sp.
, A. D. 840. It was ra^ed 26. Hen. VIII. at 578. 13s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 720.
4^. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 193.

Reg. Abbatiae de Middleton in Scaccario MS.

3. Shaftesbury.
A Nunnery of Benedictines founded by King Alfred about A. D. 888. and
dedicated to S. Mary. St. Edward the Martyr was here buried, so that this
Church was also called after his name. It Is yearly revenues were worth at the
Suppression 1166^. 8^. 9^. Dugd. 1329l. 1s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 213, 983.

Registr. MS. Abbatiae de Shaftonia in Bibl. Deuvesiana.

* Cartular. de Shafton. penes D. Joh. Low de Shafton.

4. Cranburn.
One Haylwardus Snew A. D. 930. built here a Monastery of Black Monks to the
honor of St. Bartholemew. About A. D. 1102. the Convent was removed to
Teuxbury in Glocestershire by Rob. Fitz-Haimon, who leaving only a Prior and
two Monks here, it became a Cell to that Abbey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 154, 163.

5. Cern.
A. D. 987. Ailmer Earl of Cornwall founded a Benedictine Abbey here, and
dedicated it to St. Mary, St. Peter, and St. Benedict S. Adelwold was also
Patron of this Abbey according to Speed.
. It was valued at the Dissolution at 515l. 17s. 10d. q. per an. Dugd. 623l.
13s. 2d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 253.

6. Horton.
A Monastery of Benedictines founded by Ordgar Earl of Devon. (temp. K. Edgari)
but annexed by Roger Bishop of Sarum to Shirburn, about A. D. 1120.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 62, 220.

7. Abbotesbury.
A. D. 1026. Orcus and Tola his wife built an Abbey for Black Monks to the
honor of St. Peter. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 390l. 19s. 2d. ob. Dugd.
485. 3s. 5d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 276.

* Reg. penes D. Joh. Strangways de Abbotsbury.

8. Frampton.
An Alien-Priory being given by R. Will. Conq. to the Abbey of St. Stephen at
Caen in Normandy.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 571. T. 2. p. 955.

9. Shirburn.
Not long after the removal of the Bishop's See to Sarum, the Canons Secular
here were changed into Benedictine Monks by Roger Bishop of Sarum, about A. D.
1122. This Abbey was dedicated to St. Mary Dedicated to St. (...) MS. Bodl.
, and endowed with 682l. 14s. 7d. ob. q. per an. at the Suppression.

Vide Mon. Angl, T. 1. p. 62, 423.

10. Lodres.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Mountborow in Normandy, to which it was given
by Ri^^ard de Redveriis, (temp. Hen. I.) King Rich. II. bestowed it upon the
Priory of St. Ann near Coventry.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 570, 966. T. 2. p. 992.

11. Warham Erroneously placed by the Editors of the Monasticon (T. 1. p.
1036.) in Wiltshire.
.
The Church of St. Peter and St. Ethelwold here being given by Rob. Bossu Earl
of Leicester, about A. D. 1160. to the Abbat and Convent of Lira in Normandy,
it became a Cell to that Abbey. But during the wars between England and France,
the Alien-Priories were seized into the King's hands: so that King Rich. II.
gave this to the Abbey of Mount-grace in Yorkshire.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 968. T. 2. p. 985.

12. Bindon.
Rob. de Novo-Burgo built an Abbey for Cistertian Monks here, to the honor of
St. Mary, A. D. 1172. It was valued at the Dissolution at 147l. 7s. 9d. per an.
Dugd. 229l. 2s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 911.

13. Tarent It Is a wide mistake of Math. Westminster Lib. 2. p. 145. to tell
the World that this Nunnery was in Wiltshire.
.
A Nunnery of the Cistertian Order founded by Richard Poor Bishop of Sarum,
about A. D. 1228. It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and at the
Suppression found to be seized of revenues worth 214l. 7s. 9d. per an. Dugd.
239l. 11s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 887.

14. Bridport.
An Alien-Priory dedicated to St. John Baptist, valued at 6l.

15. Stowre.
An Alien-Priory Cell to the Abbey of Preaus in Normandy.

16. Holme Not an Alien-Priory as in the Monasticon.
.
A Cell to Montacute in Somersetshire.

17. Camestrum. Qu.
A Monastery of White Nuns dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Speed.

DURHAM.
1. Hartlepool, Heortu, Bed.
A Very ancient Nunnery founded by a Religious woman named Hieu. But among many
other outrages committed by the Danes in these parts, this Monastery was razed
to the ground.

2. Iarrow, ol. Gyrwi, and 3. Wermouth.
King Egfrid A. D. 644. founded these two Abbeys, they were ruined in the
Danish wars, and never after recovered their former glory; but became Cells to
Durham for two or three Black Monks in each. The former being dedicated to St.
Paul, was endowed 26. Hen. VIII. with 38l. 14s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 40l. 7s. 8d.
Speed. The latter dedicated to St. Peter, was rated at 25l. 8s. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 96.

4. Chester, ol. Cuncacester.
Bishop Eardulfus being forced A. D. 875. to fly from Lindissam, founded the
Bishops See here A. D. 883. which was A. D. 995. translated to Durham. But at
this Chester was afterward built a College for a Dean and seven Canons, of the
foundation of Ant. Beck Bishop of Durham, 20. Edw. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 38. T. 3. P. 2. p. 44. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 699.

5. Durham.
The Bishops See was removed hither by Bishop Aldwin A. D. 995. The Secular
Priests were changed into Benedictine Monks, 18. Will. Conq. by Bishop Will. de
Carilepho. The Tutelar Deity of this Abbey and Country was St. Cuthbert. It was
endowed at the Dissolution with 1366. 10s. 9d. per an. Dugd. 1615l. 14s. 10d.
ob. Sp. K. Hen. VIII. A. D. 1540. restored the Secular Canons.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. ^. p. 38. T. r. p. 845.

Angl. Sacr. T. 1.

Simeonis Dunelmensis aut potius Turgoti Historiam de Ecclesia Dun^lmensi.
Impress. inter X. Scriptores Hist. Angl. Land. 1652.

The Legend of St. Cuthbert, with the Antiquities of the Church of Durham, by
Rob. Hegge, Land. 1663. 12^. The ancient Rites and Monuments of the Monastical
and Cathedral Church of Durham, published by Io. Davis. Land. 1672. 12o.

* Cartular. Eccl. Dunelem. in Bibl. Cotton. Faust. A. 6. Titus A. 2.

* Nomina Benefactorum Ecclesiae Dunelm. ab Edwino ad Hen. VIII. in Bibl.
Cotton. Domit. A. 7.

Collectanea MS. Aug. Baker in Bibl. Coll. Jesu Oxon. Vol. IV.

* Reg. penes Decanum and Capitul. Dunelm.

Chronica Ecclesiae Dunelmensis MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Laud. H. 7. and L. 53.

* Historiam de vitis Episcoporum, Abbatum and Religiosorum de Lindisfarn and
Dunelmia MS. in eadem Bibl. Fairfax. 6.

* Catalogum Reliquiarum Ecclesiae Dunelmensis. MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Digb. 11.

* Boldon-book sive Inquisitionem de Consuetudinibus and redditibus Episcopatus
Dunelmensis A. D. 1183. captam. MS. in eadem Bibl. Laud. I. 52.

6. Finchale.
A Benedictine Priory of thirteen Monks subordinate to the Abbey of Durham,
built by Hugh Pusar Bishop of Durham, about A. D. 1180. to the honor of St.
Godric the Hermit. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to 122l.
15s. 3d. Dugd. 146l. 19s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 512.

7. Egleston.
A Priory of White Canons, MS. Bodl. and Leland.
Black Canons founded by Gilbert de Leya Founded by Ralph of Multon; MS Ashmol.
By Conan Earl of Britanny and Richmond. Speed.
, about A. D. 1200. and commended to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin and
St. John Baptist.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 196.

8. Overton.
Alan de Wilton (temp. Reg. Ioh.) founded a Priory of Gilbertines here, and
made it subordinate to Sempringham. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 11l. 8s.
per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 825.

9. Langcester.
About 20. Ed. I. Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, built and endowed a College
here for a Dean and seven Prebendaries.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 38.

10. Aukland.
A Collegiate Church dedicated to St. Andrew, founded by Anthony Beck Bishop of
Durham for twelve Prebendaries.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 39.

11. Staindrop.
A Collegiate Church founded by Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, (temp. Hen.
V.) for a Master, six Priests, six Clerks, six decayed Gentlemen, six Grooms,
and six poor men. Endowed with 126l. 5s. 10d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 142.

12. Bernard-Castle.
Richard Duke of Gloucester (17. Edw. IV.) built a College here for a Dean and
twelve Secular Canons, ten Clerks, and six Choristers, to the honor of Christ
Jesus, the Virgin Mary, St. Margaret, and St. Ninian.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. p. 203.

13. Nesseham.
A Nunnery valued at 26l. 17s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 26l. 9s. 9d. Speed.

14. Derlington.
A College of a Dean and six Prebendaries Leland. and Liber Taxat. MS.
.

15. Sampford or Stampford, Qu.
A Cell to Durham Abbey Reyner. and Speed.
. Endowed with 36l. 17s. per an. Speed.

The Priory of Letham which is in Lancashire, is falsely placed by Mr. Speed in
this Bishopric.

ESSEX.
1. Barking.
THe first Weaver's Funeral Mon.
Nunnery in England founded about A. D. 680. Not A. D. 630. as in R^^ner.
because Er^^nwald was not made Bishop of London. till A. D. 675.
by Erkenwald Bishop of London. It was of the Order of St. Benedict, and
dedicated to St. Ethelburg or Alburg, and St. Mary, and endowed at the
Dissolution with 862l. 12s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 1084. 6s. 2d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 79. Bed. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 1. p. 64.

* Librum Abbatiae de Barking in Bibl. Cotton.

2. Waltham.
A College of Secular Canons founded by Earl Harold, A. D. 1062. for a Dean and
eleven Canons, who were changed into Regulars, and their number increased to
twenty four, by King Hen. II. A. D. 1177. It was dedicated to the Holy Crofs
and St. Laurence, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 900. 4s. 3d. Dugd. 1079l. 12s.
1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 11.

Dr. Tho. Fuller's History of Waltham-Abby, at the end of his Church History.
Land. 1655.

Reg. de Waltham MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Tib. C. 9. 3.

* Registr. penes Carolum Comitein Carleol. apud Castrum de Naworth in Com.
Cumb. A. D. 1694.

* Cartularium olim in manibus Rog. Dodsworth.

3. Earles-Colne.
Alberic de Vere (temp. Will. Conq.) founded a Priory of Benedictine Monks
here, to the honor of St. Mary and St. Andrew, and annexed it as a Cell to the
Abbey of Abbington. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 156l.
12s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 175l. 14s. 8d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 436. T. 2. p. 877.

4. Thremhale.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Gilbert Montfichet (temp. Will. Conq.) to
the honor of St. James. It was rated at the Dissolution at 60l. 18s. 7d. ob.
per an. Dugd. 70l. 19s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 23.

5. Paunsfield.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Stephen at Caen in Normandy,
thereunto given by K. Will. Conq.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 956.

6. Horsley.
Roger Earl of Shrewsbury (temp. Will. Conq.) gave this Manor to the Abbey of
St. Martin de Troarno in Normandy, to which Abbey it was a Cell till 45. Ed.
III. at which time they exchanged it with the Prior and Convent of Bruton in
Somersetshire.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 604. T. 2. (...)

7. Colchester
A. D. 1096. Eudo Steward to King Hen. I. built an Abbey here for Benedictine
Monks to the honor of St. John Baptist. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 523l.
17s. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 889.

Reg. MS. penes Johannem Dom. Lucas.

8. Dunmow.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by the Lady Iuga Baynard, A. D. 1104. and
dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was endowed at the Suppression with 150l.
3s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 173l. 2s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 75.

Chron. de Dunmow per Nicholaum Bromfield ibid. Canonicum in Bibl. Cotton.
Cleop. C. 3. 16.

9. Colchester.
About A. D. 1110. Eynulfus founded a Priory of Canons of the Order of St.
Austin, and dedicated it to St. Botulph and St. Julian. It Is yearly revenues at
the Dissolution were worth 113l. 2s. 8d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 44.

10. Chich.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Richard (...) Bishop of London, A. D. 1120.
to the honor of St. Osith. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 677l. 1s. 2d. Dugd.
758l. 5s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 182.

11. Hatfield-Peverell Not in Hertfordshire, where it is placed by the Editors
of the Monasti^o^.
.
A Priory of Benedictine Monks founded by Will Peverell (temp. Hen. I.) and by
him made a Cell to the Abbey of St. Albans. It was dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, and endowed with 60l. 14s. 11d. ob. per an. Dugd. 83l. 19s. 7d. Speed.
at the Dissolution.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 330.

12. Wikes.
Walter Mascherell (temp. Hen. I.) founded a Nunnery of St. Austin's Order
here, and dedicated it to St. Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 282.

13. Tackly.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Valery in Picardy, to which it was given by
King Hen. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1003.

14. Stratford-Langthorn.
A. D. 1135. William Montfichet founded here an Abbey for Cistercian Monks. It
was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and it is yearly revenues were worth at the
Dissolution 511l. 16s. 3d. q. Dugd. 573. 15s. 6d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 883.

15. Walden parva, or Saffron-Walden.
A. D. 1136. Galf. de Mandevil Earl of Essex built an Abbey of the Order of St.
Benedict here, to the honor of St. Mary and St. James. It was valued at the
Suppression at 372l. 18s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 406l. 15s. 11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 445.

Regist. de Walden MS. penes Com. Suffolchiae A. D. 1640.

Chron. de Walden in Bibl. Cotton. Tit. D. 20.

Fundationem coenobii de Walden olim in Biblioth. Arundel. nunc in Bibl. Coll.
Gresham. London.

16. Coggeshale.
King Stephen and Maud his wife, founded a Monastery for White Monks here A. D.
1142. It was dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed with 251l. 2s. per an. Dugd.
298l. 8s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 821.

Chron. de Coggeshale ab A. Chapter ^114. ad 1155. in Bibl. Cotton. Vespas. D. 10.
2.

17. Cressing-Temple
A Preceptory of the Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem, given them by King
Stephen.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 543.

18. Horkesley.
A Cell of Cluniack Monks to Thefford, founded by Rob. fill. Godeboldi about A.
D. 1150. to the honor of St. Peter. It was rated 26. Hen. VI. at 27l. 7s. 11d.
per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 30.

19. Tiltie or ^udeham.
An Abbey of White Monks built by Maurice Fitz-Ieffery A. D. 1152. to the honor
of S. John Baptist. It was valued at the Suppression at 167l. 2s. 6d. per an.
Dugd. 177l. 9s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 889. T. 3. P. 1. p. 75.

20. Prittlewell Erroneously called Pipewell by Mr. Speed.
.
A Cluniack Priory subordinate to the Abbey of Jews, to which it was given by
Rob. Fitz-Swain, temp. Hen. II. dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed at the
Dissolution with 155l. 11s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 194l. 14s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 619.

21. Bileigh or Maldon.
A. D. 1180. Rob. Mantell built here a Monastery for Praemonstratensian Canons
to the honor of St. Nicholas. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 157l. 16s. 11d.
q. Dugd. 196l. 6s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 626.

22. Hatfield Regis, or Bradoke It Is a great mistake in Reyner, to place this
Priory in Wiltshire.
.
Alberic de Vere (the third of that name) Earl of Oxford, about A. D. 1190
Founded ^mp. Hen. III. Speed.
. founded a Benedictine Abbey here, whose yearly revenues at the Dissolution
were worth 122l. 13s. 2l. ob. Dugd. ^^7l. 3s. 2d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

23. Heningham.
Lucia Founded by John Hawkwood Knight, John Oliver and Tho. Newe^ton Esquires.
Speed.
wife to the said Alberic III. built a little Benedictine Nunnery here to the
honor of the Holy Cross and St. Mary. Valued at 29l. 12s. 10d. per an. Dugd.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

24. Stanesgate.
A Priory of Cluniack Monks subordinate to the Abbey of Jews, and dedicated to
St. Mary Magdalene. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 43l. 8s. 6d. ob. per
an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 623.

25. Mercy Falsely placed in Hertfordshire by Mr. Speed, who also confounds it
with Mattersey or Marsey in Nottinghamshire.
.
A Cell of Benedictines to the Abbey of St. Audoen in Roan. Given by King Henry
V. to the Collegiate Church of Higham-Ferrers.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 552. T. 3. P. 2. p. 176.

26. Lighes or Leez.
A Priory founded by... Gernon... valued 114l. 1s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 141l. 14s.
8d. Speed.

27. Bierdon.
A Priory valued at 29l. 6s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 31l. 5s. 1d. ob. Speed.

28. Blackmore.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Jordan de Sampford to the honor of St.
Laurence. Speed.

29. Ginge-Atteston. Qu.
A Priory of Black Canons. Speed.

30. Thoby.
Sir Michael de Capra here founded a Priory of Canons of the Order of St.
Austin, whose yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 75l. 6s. 10d. ob.
Speed.

31. Tiptree.
A Priory of Black Canons valued at 22l. 16s 4d. Speed.

32. Sopwikes.
John de Oxenford built this Nunnery to the honor of the holy Trinity. It was
of the Benedictine Order MSS Bodl. and Ashmol. Quaere whether it is not the
same with Wkes?
.

33. Plecy.
A College for a Master and eight Priests, two Clerks, and two Choristers,
founded by Tho. de Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, 17. Rich. II. to the honor of
the holy Trinity. At the Suppression it was endowed with 139l. 3s. 10d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 120.

34. Halstede.
A College founded by Rob. Bourchier, rated at 23l. 16s. 5d. ob.

35. Latton. MS. Dugd.
The Monasticon places Romberg and Snapes in this County, but they are in
Suffolk; as also Wells, which is in the County of Norfolk.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
1. Gloucester.
HEre was a Nunnery founded about A. D. 682. by Osrich then a Tributary Prince
to Ethelred King of the Mercians, but afterward King of Northumberland, who
dedicated it to St. Peter. This Monastery, after it had been honored in having
three Queens successively Lady Abbesses of it, was destroyed by the Danes,
afterward part of the lands belonging to it were enjoyed by Secular Priests
till A. D. 1058. at which time Aldred Bishop of Worcester placed Benedictine
Monks here, who were at the Dissolution endowed with 1946l. 5s. 9d. per an.
Dugd. 1550l. 4s. 5d. ob. Speed. King Henry VIII. appropriated these revenues to
the maintenance of a Bishop, a Dean, and six Prebendaries.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 108, 993. T. 3. P. 1. p. 7.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc. by White Kennet. A. M.

Cronica MS. Gloucestrensis coenobii in Bibl. Cotton. Domit. A. 8.

* Registra, etc. pen. Decan. and Capitulum Ec^. Cathedral. Glocestr.

* Historiam Abbatum S. Petri Gloucestriae a Petro Abbate secundo post
conquestum ad Walterum Froucestre vigesimum A. D. 1381. Kalendarium etiam
Maneriorum, Ecclesiarum, Tenementorum, etc. praedictae Abbatiae ordine
Alphabetico digestum, cum nominib^s Benefactorum, etc. In manibus Viri
Reverendi Timothei Halton SS. Th. Prof. and Coll. Regin^^ Oxon. Praepos^ti
dignissimi.

* Donationes omnium bonorum Monasterii S. Petri Glocestriae tam Temporalium
quam Spiritualium. MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. Ma^shall 45.

2. Theokesbury, v. Tewksbury.
A Monastery of Black Monks first built by Oddo Duke of Mercia, A. D. 715. to
the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was restored by Rob. Fitz-Haimon A. D.
1102. By the pious munificence of whom, and several other Benefactors, the
yearly revenues of this Abbey were worth at the Suppression 1598l. 1s. 3d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 153.

* Chroniea MS. de Tewksbury (...) Edw. Conf. ad A. D. 1263. in Bibl. Cotton.
Cleop. A. 7. 2.

Registrum Mon. de Theokesbury in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. A. 7. 3.

Registr. penes... Dominum Spenser.

3. Winchelcomb.
A. D. 787. King Offa built a Nunnery here, and about ten years after, King
Kenwulf said the foundation of a stately Abbey for three hundred Black Monks,
and commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Kenelm. In succeeding
times it became a College of Seculars; but Oswald Bishop of Worcester A. D.
985. restored again the Benedictines. It was rated 26. H. VIII. at 759l. 11s.
9d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 187. T. 2. p. 854.

Annals MS. de Winchelcumb ab Incarn. Domini ad A. Chapter 1205. in Bibl. Cotton.
Tiber. E. 4.

* Registrum Abb. de Winch. per Richardum Kedermister Abbatem compilatum,
continens, 1. Historiam Fundationis hujus Abbatiae. 2. Historiam Abbatum de
Winchelcomb a Germano Abbate A. D. 988. ad Rich. Kedermister A. D. 1487. 3.
Renovationes Privilegiornm, Chartarum, ac aliorum munimentorum Monasterii de
Winchelcomb. Hic magni valoris liber, tunc Domini Will, Morton militis peculium
in flammis Londinensibus periit. A. D. 1666.

4. Derehirst.
Bid makes mention of a Monastery here in his time; but that being destroyed
by the Danes; this Manor was given by King Will. Conq. to the Abbey of St.
Dennis in France, to which Abbey it afterward became a Cell, which was made
Prioratus Indigena. 1. Hen. VI.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 547.

5. Berkley.
Here was a Nunnery before the Conquest.

6. Gloucester.
About A. D. 910. Ethelred Earl of Mercia, and Ethelfleda his wife, translating
the Relics of St. Oswald from Bardney hither, built a College of Secular
Priests here to the honor of that Saint, who were (temp. Will. Rufi A. D.
1153. Regular Canons were placed here by Henry Archbishop of York, Io.
Hagustald
) turned into Regular Canons of the Order of St. Austin. It was endowed at the
Dissolution with 90l. 10s. 2d. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 2. p. 28.

7. Cirencester.
Leland says here was a College of Prebendaries before the Conquest; but the
Abbey of Black Canons was founded by King Henry the first, A. D. 1117. and
dedicated it to St. Mary and St. James. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 1051l.
7s. 1d. ob. per an. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 89.

* Registra duo penes W. Masters de Cirenc. Arm.

* Registr. penes D. Henr. Pool de Saperton in Com. Glouc.

8. Boxwel.
A Nunnery destroyed by the Danes. Lel.

9. Newent, Niwetton, Speed.
King Henry I. gave this Manor to the Abbey of Cormeiles in Normandy, and so it
became an Alien-Priory to that Monastery. King Henry IV. gave it to the
Collegiate Church at Fodringhey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 962. T. 3. P. 2. p. 159.

10. Lanthony.
A. D. 1136. Milo Earl of Hereford founded a Monastery at Hyde near Gloucester,
for the Black Canons of Lanthony in Monmouthshire, from which Abbey this was
also called Lanthony. It was dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed with 648l. 19s.
11d. ob. q. per an. Dugd. 748l. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 60.

* Historiam Abbatiae de Lanth. in Bibl. Cotton. Jul. D. 11.

11. Kingswood.
An Abbey of Cistercians built by William de Berkele, A. D. 1139. to the honor
of the blessed Virgin; but immediately after the foundation the Monks were
removed to Tettebury, then to Hasilden, and at last fixed again at Kingswood
about A. D. 1170. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. 244l. 11s. 2d. per an. Dugd.
254l. 11s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 811.

Reg. penes Joh. Smith de Nibley in Com. Gloc. A. D. 1651.

12. Flexely.
Roger Earl of Hereford (temp. R. Steph.) built an Abbey here for Cistercian
Monks. The blessed Virgin was the Tutelar Saint of this Monastery, whose annual
revenues were worth at the Suppression 112l. 13s. 1d. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 884.

13. Stanley.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Peter in Gloucester, to which it was given by Roger
de Berkele A. D. 1146. St. Leonard was Patron of this Priory, whose annual
revenues amounted at the Dissolution to 126l. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 64.

14. Bekeford.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Martin and St. Barbara in Normandy, to which it was
given by Rob. Fitz-Alan,... King Henry VI. bestowed it (after the Dissolution
of the Alien-Priories) upon Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1010. T. 3. P. 2. p. 200.

15. Brimsfield or Bromfield. Not in Wiltshire, where it is placed, Mon. Angl.
T. 1. p. 1^^5.
.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Stephen de Fontney in Normandy. King
Edw. IV. gave it to the College at Windsor.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 75.

16. Hales.
A. D. 1246. Richard Earl of Cornwall and King of the Romans, founded an Abbey
here for twenty Cistercian Monks. It was dedicated to St. Mary and All Saints;
and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 357l. 7s. 8d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 928.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc. by White Kennet. A. M.

Chron. MS. Monasterii de Hailes ab initio mundi ad A. D. 1304. in Bibl.
Cotton. Cleop. D. 3. 1.

17. Queinington.
A Preceptory of the Templars founded by Agnes Lacy, William of Poictou, and
the Countess Cecilia, A. D.... It was valued at 137l. 7s. 1d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 548.

18. Lechlade.
A Priory of Black Canons of the Duke of Clarence's Patronage. Lel.

19. Magnotsfield.
A Nunnery, part of the Cloister remained in Leland's time.

20. Minchin-Hampton.
A Nunnery. Camd. Speed.

21. Westbury Not in Somersetshire as in Speed.
.
A College consisting of a Dean and five Prebendaries, founded by William
Cannings Mayor of Bristol. A. D.... It was endowed at the Suppression with
232l. 14s. q. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 202.

Goldcliff is said to be in this County by the Monasticon, but it is in
Monmouth-shire.

HAMP-SHIRE.
1. ^edbridge.
HEre, Camden tells us, was that ancient Monastery called by Bid, (Eccl. Hist.
Lib. 4. Cap. 16.) Arundinis vadum, or Redford.

2. Winchester.
Although the foundation of the Church and Bishopric here, may be ascribed to
Kinewalcus King of the West Saxons about A. D. 640. yet the original of the
Monastery What Rudburn (Hist. Maj. Lib. 1. cap. 3.) relates concerning placing
of Monks here by King Lucius, A. D. 169. is very fabulous.
was of later date; for it was in A. D. 963. that Ethelwold the Bishop by the
command of King Edgar, expelled the Secular Canons, and placed here Monks of
the Order of St. Bennet, who remained till the general Suppression, at which
time they were endowed with 1507l. 17s. 2d. per an. St. Swithin was the Tutelar
Saint of this Church. King Henry VIII. in the room of the Monks, put in a Dean
and twelve Prebendaries.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 31, 979. Angl. Sacr. T. 1.

Annals Winton. in Bibl. Cotton. Domit. A. 13.

* Cartas Originales and Registra penes Decanum and Capitulum.

3. Winchester.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Alswitha wife to King Alfred, to the honor of
the blessed Virgin and St. Edburg, about A. D. 900. Its yearly revenues at the
Dissolution amounted to 179l. 7s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 212.

4. Winchester.
Here was a College of Secular Canons built by King Edward the elder, according
to the Will of his Father King Alfred. It was called New-Minster, to
distinguish it from the Old-Minster or Cathedral. The neighborhood of these
two Monasteries, occasioned great differences between them: so that the Monks
of this New-Monastery (who were placed here in the room of the Secular Canons
by Bishop Ethelwold, A. D. 963.) were removed without the walls to

5. Hide.
Where King Henry I. and Will. Giffard Bishop of Winchester founded a stately
Abbey for them. Which was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, St. Peter and St.
Grimbald, and rated 26. Henry VIII. at 865l. 18s. ob. q.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 208.

Chron. MS. Abb. de Hide in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. F. 2. Domit. A. 14.

* Annals Mon. de Hida extra Winton. MS. in Bibl. Bodl. NE. A. 13. 19.

* Reg. penes Chapter Hatton Mil.

6. Rumsey.
A. D. 907. King Edgar founded a Nunnery here of St. Be^net's Order, and
commended it to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin Mary. It was rated at 393l.
10s. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd. 528l. 8s. 10d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 219.

7. Wherwell.
A Benedictine Nunnery of the foundation of Elfrid^ wife to King Edgar. It was
dedicated to Holy Cross and St. Peter, and endowed at the Suppression with
339l. 8s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 403l. 13s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 256. T. 3. P. 1. p. 9.

Registr. MS. Abbatiae de Wherwell penes Carol. Dom. de la Ware A. D. 1669.

8. Christ-Church or Twinham Placed also in Devon-shire by Mr. Speed.
.
Here was a College of Prebendaries before the Conquest, but Baldwin de Redvers
Earl of Devon. brought in Black Regular Canons (temp. Reg. Steph.) It was
dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 312l. 7s. q. per
an. Dugd. 544l. 6s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 177. T. 3. P. 1. p. 45.

Registr. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Tiber. D. 6.

9. Andover.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Florence at Salmur, to which it was given by King
Will. Conq. But this with the rest of the Alien-Priories being dissolved, 2.
Hen. V. King Edw. IV. gave it to the College of St. Mary near Winton.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 552. T. 3. P. 2. p. 135.

10. Carisbrook. Wight.
Will. Fitz-Osbern (temp. Will. Conq.) gave the Church of St. Mary in
Carisbrook to the Abbey of Lira in Normandy, which thenceforth became a Cell to
that Abbey. King Rich. II. gave it to the Abbey of Mountgrace in Yorkshire, but
Henry V. bestowed it on the Cistercians at Shene.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 968. T. 2. p. 905, 985.

11. Winteney.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Leland. Collect. Vol. 1. p. 66.
Roger Colrith Esquire and Thomas his son, (temp. Will. Conq.) to the honor of
the blessed Virgin and S. Mary Magdalene. It Is yearly revenues at the
Suppression were worth 43l. 3s. Dugd. 59l. 1s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 483.

12. Shirburn.
An Alien-Priory of Benedictine Monks dedicated to St. Mary, Cell to the Abbey
of St. Vigor at Cerasie in Normandy, thereunto given by Henry de Port, (temp.
Hen. I.) King Edw. IV. bestowed it upon the Hospital of St. Julian in
Southampton.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 441.

13. Southampton juxta.
King Henry I. built a Priory of Black Canons here. It Is Tutelar Saint was St.
Dennis, and it is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 80l. 11s. 6d.
Dugd. 91l. 9s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 108.

14. Quarrer. Wight.
A. D. 1132. Bald. de Redveriis Earl of Devon, built an Abbey of Cistercian
Monks here, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were
worth at the Dissolution 134l. 3s. 11d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 760.

15. Bromere Not in Wiltshire as in the Monasticon.
.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by the said Baldwin de Redveriis; and by him
commended to the Patronage of the Holy Trinity and St. Michael. It was rated
26. Hen. VIII. at 154l. 14s. 1d. ob. per an. Dugd* 200l. 15s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 201.

16. Southwyke.
King Henry I. A. D. 1133. founded here a Priory of Canons of St. Austins
Order, and dedicated it to St. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 257l. 4s.
4d. per an Dugd. 314l. 17s. 10d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 134.

17. De Bello-Loco or Beaulieu.
An Abbey for thirty Cistercian Monks founded by King John A. D. 1204. and
dedicated to St. Mary. It was rated at 326l. 13s. 2d. ob. q. per an. Dugd.
428l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 925.

Registr. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Nero A. 12. Vitellius. F. 1.

18. Motisfont.
Will. Brewere (temp. Ioh. Founded by Ranulph Flammard Bishop of Durham, Rich.
de Ripariis Earl of Devon, and Will. de Brewere, (temp. Gui^. Rufi.) Speed.
) built here a Priory of Canons of St. Austins Order to the honor of the Holy
Trinity, which was endowed at the Suppression with 124l. 3s. 5d. ob per an.
Dugd. 167l 15s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 322.

19. Tychfield.
Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester, 16. Hen. III. built an Abbey here for
Praemonstratensian Canons to the honor of the blessed Virgin. At the
Suppression it was endowed with 249l. 16s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 280l. 19s. 10d.
ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 660.

20. Seleburn.
A. D. 1233. Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winton built here a Priory of Black
Canons to the honor of the blessed Virgin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 343.

21. Lettely or de Loco Sancti Edwardi.
King Hen. III. A. D. 1239. founded an Abbey here for Cistercian Monks, and
commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Edward. It was valued at
100l. 12s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 160l. 2s. 9d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 933.

22. Hamele.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Tiromo in France, dedicated to St. Andrew.

23. Badeisley.
A Preceptory valued at 118l, 16s. 7d. per an. at the Suppression. Speed.

24. Andewell Quaere, Whether it should not be Andever?
.
An Alien-Priory to Tyrone in France.

25. Apple-Durcomb. Wight.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Mary de Montisburg in Normandy, founded by one
Nicholas Spenser and Margaret his wife. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 571.

26. Ellingham.
A Cell to St. Saviors in Normandy, given by King Hen. VI. to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 199.

27. Hailing.
An Alien-Priory to Gymeges in France, bestowed by Henry V. on Shene.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 975.

28. S Cross. Wight.
An Alien-Priory to Tyrone in France.

29. S. Helen. Wight.
An Alien-Priory of Cluniack Monks given by King Hen. VI. to Eaton Coll.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 199.

30. Burton. Wight.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of S. Austin Leland. Itin. Vol. 8. p. 88.
.

31. Winchester.
A Monastery built by one Adam Martin to the honor of St. James. MS. Ash.

32. Stratfield-say Erroneously placed in Berkshire by the Editors of the
Monasticon.
.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey de Valido-monte in France.

33. Winchester.
A College of a Provost, six Priests and six Clerks, founded by Ioh. de
Pontissar Bishop of Winchester, A. D. 1301. and dedicated to St. Elizabeth. It
was endowed at the Dissolution with 112l. 17s. 4d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 46.

34. College juxta UUinton.
That Munificent Prelate William of Wickham Bishop of Winchester, A. D. 1387.
built this College to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary. It consists of a
Warden, ten Fellows, a School Master, an Usher, and seventy Scholars, besides
Chaplains, Clerks, etc.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 106, 133.

* Munimenta hujus Collegii penes Custodem and Socios.

Beside these, Durford or Dertford is sometimes reckoned in this County, but I
choose rather to place it in Sussex.

HEREFORD-SHIRE.
1. Hereford.
THis was a Bishop's See ever since the year 680. But Milefrid King of the
Mercians founded the Cathedral Church about A. D. 825. to the honor of St.
Ethelbert King and Martyr.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 180.

2. Leominster, Leot, Knight. v. Le^ster.
Merwald King of the Mercians first built a Nunnery here about A. D. 800. which
was destroyed in the Danish wars; after that here was a College of
Prebendaries, until Hen. I. annexed their lands to the Abbey of Reading, and so
it became a Cell of Benedictine Monks to that Abbey. It was dedicated to St.
James.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 420.

3. Monkenlane.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of Conchis in Normandy, to which it was
given by Ralph Tony the elder, (temp. Will. Rufi.) Given by King Edw. IV. to
Windsor College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 597. T. 3. P. 2. p. 74.

4. Ewias.
A. D. 1100. Harold Lord of Ewias built a Priory of Benedictines here, which
was subordinate to the Abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester, and was dedicated to St.
Michael and St. Nicholas.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 114, 413.

5. Wigmore Not in Shropshire, where it is placed by Mr. Speed: who is also
mistaken as to the Order of this Priory, for it was not of White Canons.
.
A. D. 1100. Ralph de Mortimer founded a little College for Secular Canons
here; which was A. D. 1197 A. D. 1172. Ann. Wigorn.
. changed into a Priory, and endowed with more lands by his son Hugh Mortimer,
who removed hither the Black Canons from Scobbedon, there placed by Oliver de
Merlymond his Steward. It was commended to the Patronage of St. James, and
rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 267l. 2s. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd. 302l. 12s. 3d* ob.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 213.

* Cartular. penes Domini Edw. Harley de Brampton Bryan in Com. Heref.

* Registrum penes Tho. Baronem Bruce Comitem Elginiae.

6. Hereford.
Hugh de Lacy A. D. 1101. gave the Church of St. Peter here (founded by his
Father) to the Abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester, to which Abbey it afterward
became a Cell.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 406.

7. Clyfford.
A Priory of Cluniack Monks subordinate to the Abbey of Jews, and founded by
Simon Fitz-Richard-Fitz-Ponce, (temp. Hen. I.) It was dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 57l. 7s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 65l. 11s. 11d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 623.

8. Kilpeke.
The Church of St. David at Kilpeke being given by Henry de Kilpeke to the Abbey
of St. Peter at Gloucester A. D. 1134. it became a Cell to that Monastery.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 116.

9. Door.
Rob. de Ewias The Translator of the English Monasticon makes Robert Earl of
Ferrers founder; but he was only a Benefactor, Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 865.
(tem. Hen. II.) built an Abbey for Cistercian Monks here, to the honor of St.
Mary. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 101l. 5s. 2d. Dugd.
118l. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 826. T. 2. p. 918.

* Regist. penes ^... Dominum Scudamore.

10. UUormesly olim Pyonia.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Leonard, founded MS. Ashmol.
by Richard Talbot Lord of Painswike, (temp. Hen. II.) valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
83l. 10s. 2d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 261. T. 3. P. 2. p. 48.

Registr. de Wormesly pen. Ed. Harley Mil. Baln.

11. Acornebury.
A Nunnery of St. Austin's Order Not White Nuns as in Sp.
, built by Margery de Lacy (temp. Reg. Johan.) to the honor of the Holy Cross
and St. Catherine. It was endowed at the Suppression with 67l. 13s. 2d. per an.
Dugd. 75l. 7s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 330.

Registr. in Curia Augmentationis apud Westmon.

12. Hereford.
A Benedictine MS. Bodl. falsely said to be Grey-Fryers in Speed.
Nunnery dedicated to St.p Guthlac, valued at 121l. 3s. 3d. ob. per an. Dugd.
Speed.

13. Lymbroke.
A Nunnery of Benedictines White Nuns MS. Bodl. Speed.
, endowed at the Suppression with 22l. 17s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 23l. 17s. 8d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 474.

14. Cressewell.
An Alien-Priory Cell to Grandmount in France, dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 504. T. 3. P. 1. p. 17.

15. Flanesford.
A. D. 1347. Richard Talbot founded a Priory of Black Canons here. It Is Tutelar
Saint was St. John Baptist, and it was valued at the Dissolution at 14l. 8s.
9d. per an. Dugd. 15l. 8s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 356.

16. Titley.
An Alien-Priory.

17. Barrone Speed. Bartone MS. Bodl. Qu.
A Priory of Benedictines. Speed.

HERTFORD-SHIRE.
1. S. Albans.
KIng Offa founded this noble Abbey here at Verlamceaster A. D. 794. and
dedicated it to the Proto-martyr of the Britans St. Alban. It was of the Order
of St. Benedict, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 2102l. 7s. 1d. ob. q. per an.
Dugd. 2510l. 6s. 1d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 176. Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 97.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Tib. E. 6.

* Reg. penes... Gwyn de Hosp. Furnival.

* Collectanea MS. Aug. Baker Ord. S. Ben. in Anglia Generalis in Bibl. Coll.
Jesu. Oxon. vol. 111.

* Acta Mon. S. Albani tempore Joh. Whethamsted Abbatis in Bibl. Arundel. 1647.
^ nunc in Offic. Armorum.

2. Hertford.
A Priory of Benedictines dedicated to St. James, and subordinate to the Abbey
of St. Alban, built by Ralph de Limesie (temp. Will. Conq.) to the honor of
the blessed Virgin Mary, and endowed at the Dissolution with 72l. 14s. 2d. ob.
q. per an. Dugd. 86l. 14s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 331.

3. Flamsted or De Bosco juxta Flamsted.
Roger Toney (temp. R. Steph.) founded here a Benedictine Nunnery. St. Giles
was the Tutelar Saint of this Monastery, which was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 30l.
19s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 46l. 16s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 503, 545.

4. Sopewell.
A Benedictine Nunnery subject to the Abbey of S. Alban, being built by Gaufred
the fourteenth Abbat thereof, about A. D. 1140. to the honor of the blessed
Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 40l. 7s. 10d. Dugd.
68l. 8s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 347.

5. Rowney ol. Mundene.
Conan Earl of Richmond founded a Nunnery here of the Order of St. Benedict,
(temp. Hen. II.) It was dedicated to St. John Baptist; but in 36. Hen. VI. the
Priory being dilapidated, and the revenues so wasted, that they were not
sufficient to keep the buildings in repair, and to maintain the Prioress and
Nuns, it was by them resigned into the hands of their Patron John Fray chief
Baron of the Exchequer, who with the Kings license appropriated the lands to
the maintenance of a Chantry Priest: and so it continued till the Dissolution,
at which time it was valued at 13l. 10s. 9d. per an. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 516.

6. Royston Placed in Cambridge-shire, Mon. Angl.
.
A Priory of Black Canons of the foundation of Eustace de Merc, (temp. Rich.
I.) and by him commended to the Patronage of St. Thomas the Martyr. It was
endowed at the Dissolution with 89l. 16s. per ann. Dugd. 106l. 3s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 264.

7. S. Mary de Pre.
About A. D. 1190. Garinus Abbat of St. Albans founded this Priory for leprous
Nuns.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 347.

8. Wymondley.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Rich. Argentine, (temp. Hen. III.) It was
rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 29l. 19s. 11d. ob. per an. Dugd. 37l. 10s. 6d. ob.
Speed.

9. Chesthunt Not in Hereford-shire, as in the Monasticon.
.
A Benedictine Nunnery valued at 14l. 10s. per an. Dugd. 27l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 512.

10. Ware.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Ebrulf at Vtica in Normandy.

Vide Reg. in Bibl. Cotton.

11. Thele.
A College of a Warden and four Secular Canons, founded or rather restored by
William Bishop of London, A. D. 1429. It Is lands were annexed to Elsing-spittle
in London 10. Hen. VI.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 190.

12. New-bigging, or Hichin.
A Priory... Endowed at the Suppression with 13l. 16s. per an. Dugd. 15l. 1s.
11d. Speed.

13. Burton Sp. Barden Lel.
A Priory dedicated to St. Mary founded by... Bishop of London, for Canons of
St. Austin's Order Monks, Speed.
.

14. Chille. Qu.
A Benedictine Nunnery. Speed.

15. Chil^tree. Qu.
A Benedictine Nunnery. Speed.

16. Mirdiall. Qu.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary. Speed.

17. Redburg.
A Cell to St. Albans Reyner. Apost. B^ned.
.

Mr. Speed places Mersey in this County, which is in Essex, in which Shire
also is Hatfield-Peverell erroneously said to be in Herfford-shire by the
Editors of the Monasticon.

HUNTINGDON-SHIRE.
1. Ramsey.
A Benedictine Abbey built by Ailwine Duke or Earl of the East Angles, A. D. 969
A. D. 986. An^al. Wigorn.
. to the honor of St. Mary and St. Benedict. It Is yearly revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 1716l. 12s. 4d. Dugd. 1983l. 15s. 3d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 231. T. 2. p. 869.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 149.

Registr. de Ramsey in Scaccario ex part Rememoratoris Regis.

* Nomina and gesta Abbatum Rames. ab Ednotho ad Joh. de Santrey MS. in Bibl.
Cotton. Vesp. A. 18.

* Collectanea MS. Aug. Baker. in Bibl. Coll. Jesu Oxon. Vol. IV.

* Collectanea MS. Rogeri Dodsworth in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 41, and 68.

* Librum MS. de Homagiis and Sectis Abbati debitis in custodia Roberti Hewes
de Hosp. Grayensi Land. 1638.

2. S. Neots olim Einulfesbury.
The body of St. Neot being translated hither out of Cornwall, here was a
Monastery founded to his memory, which was destroyed in the Danish wars; but
restored by Roisia the wife of Rich. Fitz-Gilbert A. D. 1113. who by the advice
of Archbishop Anselm, replenished it with Monks from the Abbey of Beck in
Normandy; so it became a Cell to that Abbey. It was endowed 26. Hen. VIII. with
256l. 1s. 3d. ob. per an. Speed. 241l. 11s. 4d. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 368. T. 2. p. 876.

Regist. S. Neoti in Bibl. Cotton. Faust. A. 4.

3. S. Ives olim Sleep.
About A. D. 1000. Aednoth Abbat of Ramsey (...) by Earl Adelmus, (temp Edmundi
Irons^^e.) Speed.
, built here a Priory of Benedictine Monks, and dedicated it to St. Ivo and
All Saints. It was a Cell to Ramsey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 255.

4. Hitchinbroke.
A little Priory founded by William the Conqueror, who removed the Nuns from
Eltesley (in Cambridge-shire) to this place (...)
. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 17l. 1s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 19l. 9s. 2d. Speed.

5. Huntingdon.
Eustace de Luvetot about A. D. 1140. built a Priory of Black Canons here to
the honor of St. Mary. It was endowed at the Suppression with 187l. 13s. 8d.
q. per an. Dugd. 232l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 24.

6. Saltry.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Simon Earl of Northampton A. D. 1147. and by him
commended to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were
worth at the Dissolution 141l. 3s. 8d. Dugd. 199l. 11s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 850.

7. Stonely.
Will. Mandevile Earl of Essex about A. D. 1180. built a Priory of Canons of
the Order of St. Austin here, which was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 46l. 5d. ob.
per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 319.

8. Huntingdon.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. James.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 530.

9. Modney.
A Cell to Ramsey Reyner. Apost. Bened.
.

KENT.
1. Canterbury
HEre was an Abbey founded by King Aethelbert Not King Aethelred as in Speed.
A. D. 600. and dedicated by St. Austin the Monk to Christi Jesus. In it were
Secular Priest's till A. D. 1003. at which time Archbishop Elfric placed
Benedictines here. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to 2489l.
4s. 9d. King Henry VIII. turned the Monks into a Dean and twelve Canons.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 18. Angl. Sacr. T. 1.

The Antiquities of Canterbury by Will. Somner. London. 1640.

Evidentias Ecol. Christi Cant. inter X. Script. Hist. Angl. edit. Land. 1652.

Gervasii vitas Pontificum Cantuar. etc. Ibid.

* Collectanea MS. Augustini Baker Mon. Ord. Bened. in Bibl. Coll. Jesu Oxon.
Vol. 1.

* Registrum sive Martyrologium Ecclesiae Christi Cant. In Bibl. Coll. Gresham.

* Librum Obitualem Ecclesiae Christ Cantuar. In Bibl. Lambeth. fol. 20.

* Registrum Benefactorum Ecclesiae Christi. In Bibl. Cotton. Galba. F. 2.

2. Rochester.
A. D. 602. King Aethelbert built a Monastery for Secular Priests, to the
honor of St. Andrew. A. D. 1089. Bishop Gundulf introduced Black Monks; but
Secular Canons were brought in again by King Hen. VIII. It was valued 26. Hen.
VIII. at 486l. 1s. 5d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 27. Angl. Sacr. T. 1.

Textum Roffens. MS. apud Rochester reserv. penes Dec. and Capit.

Annals Roffenses in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. E. 14.

* Statuta Ecclesae Roff. autoritate Hen. VIII. edita. In Bibl. Bodl. in
Musaeo. A. 136.

3. Canterbury.
King Aethelbert and St. Austin A. D. 605. founded another Monastery here, and
commended it to the Patronage of St. Peter and St. Paul. This was afterward
called St. Augustine's Abbey, and was endowed at the Suppression with 1413l. 4s.
11d. ob. per an. It was of the Benedictine Order.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 23. Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 1. p. 46.

Guil. Thorn de rebus gestis Abbatum S. Aug. Cantuar. inter X. Script. Land.
1652.

Et Chronologiam quondam spectantem ad praedictum Coenobium. Ibid.

* Collectanea MS. Aug. Baker Ord. S. Bened. in Anglia Generalis in Bibl. Coll.
Jesu Oxon. Vol. 1.

* Registra penes Heneage Finch de Ravenston in Com. Buck. In Scaccario penes
Remem. Regis. and penes W. Howard de Naworth Castro.

* Cronicon S. Aug. Cant. ad An. 1220. cum successione Abbatum. In Bibl.
Lambeth 4^o. 95.

* MSS. de Historia hujus Coenobii in Bibl. Cotton. Vitellius. A. 2. E. 4. D.
10. D. 11. Faustina A. 1. Claudius. D. 10. Julius D. 2. 6.

Historiam MS. de Abbatibus S. Aug. Cant. ad Hugonem III. in Bibl. publ. Cantab.

4. Folkstone.
An old Nunnery founded by King Eadbold about A. D. 630. which was destroyed
during the Danish wars. Nigell de Munewell gave the Church of St. Mary and St.
Eanswith here to the Abbey of Lolley in Normandy, A. D. 1095. to which it became
an Alien-Priory. It was able to dispend 41l. 15s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 63s. 7d.
Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 85, 560.

5. Liming.
A Nunnery for Benedictines founded by St. Edburgh or Ethelburg Sister to King
Eadbald about A. D. 630.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 85.

6. Re^ulver.
An Abbey of Black Monks built by one Bassa A. D. 669. It was annexed to
Christ-Church in Canterbury by King Eadred, A. D. 949.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 86.

7. Thanet.
A Nunnery founded by Domneva about A. D. 670. and dedicated to St. Mildred. It
was united to the Abbey of St. Austin in Canterbury, A. D. 1033.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 83. Reyner. Apost. Benedict. Tr. 1. p. 61.

8. Elflet. Sp.
A Nunnery of Domneva's foundation. Speed.

9. Dover.
A. D. 696. Wictred King of Kent founded a College of Secular Priests here, who
were turned into Benedictine Monks by Archbishop Theobald, A. D. 1139. St.
Martin was the Tutelar Saint of this Monastery, whose yearly revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 170l. 14s. 11d. ob. Dugd. 232l. 1s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1.

Chronica S. Martini de Dover. in Bibl. Cotton. Jul. D. 5. Vesp. B. 11.

* Catalog. Bibliothecae Prior. Dovorrae A. D. 1389. compilatum MS. in Bibl.
Bodl. Arch. B. 24.

* Registrum in armario Archiepiscopi Cantuar.

10. Shepey.
A Monastery for Benedictine Nuns first built by Sexburg Queen of Kent, about
A. D. 710. but being burned by the Danes, it was reedified by William
Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 1130. to the honor of St. Mary and St.
Sexburg. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 129l. 7s. 10d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 152.

11. Malling.
A Benedictine Monastery founded by King Edmund A. D. 944. and commended to the
Patronage of St. Mary and St. Andrew. It was afterward converted into a
Nunnery by Gundulf Bishop of Rochester, and endowed with 218l. 4s. 2d. ob. per
an. Dugd. 245l. 10s. 2d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 352.

12. Lewesham.
An Alien-Priory of Black Monks to the Abbey of St. Peter at Gant, to which it
was given by King Edward the Confessor A. D. 1044. It was (after the
Suppression of these houses) annexed by King Hen. V. to Shene Abbey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 550. T. 2. p. 890, 902.

13. Canterbury.
A. D. 1084. Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury built here a Priory of Black
Canons, to the honor of St. Gregory. It was valued 26. H. VIII. at 121l. 15s.
1d. per an. Dugd. 166l. 4s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 373.

14. Herbaldown.
Archbishop Lanfranc Ioh. Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury was Founder
according to Speed.
founded a Hospital here, and annexed it to a Priory of Black Canons, both
which were valued at 266l. 4s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 109l. 7s. 2d. Speed. It
was dedicated to St. Michael.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 418.

15. Canterbury.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by Archbishop Anselm, about A. D. 1100. and
dedicated to St. Sepulcher. It was able to dispend at the Dissolution 29l. 12s.
5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 38l. 19s. 7s. ob. Speed.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

16. Leedes.
A. D. 1119 A. D. 1137. Chronol. S. Aug. Cant.
Rob. de Crevequer Knight, built a Priory of Black Canons here, to the honor
of St. Nicholas. It was endowed with 362l. 7s. 7d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 110.

17. Tunbridge.
A Priory of Black Canons erected by Rich. de Clare Earl of Hertford, (temp.
Hen. I.) Its Patroness was St. Mary Magdalene. Its yearly revenues amounted to
169l. 10s. 3d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 258.

18. Boxley.
A Cistercian Abbey founded A. D. 1144. by Will. de Ipre Earl of Kent, and
dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 204l. 4s. 11d.
per an. Dugd. 218l. 19s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 827.

19. Feversham.
A. D. 1148. King Stephen built a Cluniack Abbey here to the honor of St.
Savior. It was endowed at the Suppression with 286l. 12s. 6. ob. q. per an.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 687.

Monasticon Fevershamense, or a Survey of the Monastery of Feversham, by Tho.
Southouse, London. 1671. 12o.

* Reg. penes... Diggs fill. and haer. D. Dudl. Diggs.

20. Bradsole, or St. Radegund's juxta Dover.
A Priory of Praemonstratensian Canons founded by Hugh I. Abbat of St. Austin's
in Canterbury, (temp. R. Steph.) and commended to the Patronage of St.
Radegund. It was rated at 98l. 9s. 2d. ob. per an. Dugd. 142l. 8s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 244. T. 3. P. 1. p. 69.

Regist. penes Will. Pierpoint arm.

* Cartularium penes Henr. Hamon de Seling in Com. Cant. Armig.

21. Heyham.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by King Stephen. It was Suppressed by Dr. Fisher
Bishop of Rochester's means, and given to St. Iohn^s College in Cambridge
Leland. Itin. Vol. 6. p^ 28.


22. (...).
A Priory of White Canons dedicated to St. Michael MS. Bedl.
, at first a Cell to Lavin^^n in Burkinghamshire; but afterward annexed to St.
Radegunds near Dover.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 71.

23. Otteham and 24. Beigham Neither of these places are in Sussex, where they
are placed in the Monasticon and Speed.

Ralph de Dene (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Priory for Praemonstratensian Canons
at Otteham, whom Ela de Saukvile his daughter translated to Begham. St.
Laurence was Patron of this Priory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 636. T. 3. P. 1. p. 77.

Registrum in Bibl. Cotton. Otho. A. 2.

25. Horton.
A Cell of Cluniack Monks to the Abbey of Jews, built by Rob. de Vere (temp.
Hen. II.) to the honor of St. Mary and St. John the Evangelist. It was endowed
at the Suppression with 95l. 12s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 111l. 16s. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 621.

* Reg. penes... Rooke de eadem.

26. Cumbwell.
Rob. de Turnham (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Priory of Black Canons here, and
dedicated it to St. Mary Magdalene. It was valued at 80l. 17s. 5d. per. an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 270.

* Cartas Autographas penes Gul. Campion de ^adem Armig.

27. Newington.
A Nunnery till the time of Henry II. in whose reign it was turned into a
College for seven Secular Canons.

Vide Cronica Will. Thorn. col. 1931. inter X. Scriptores Historiae Angl. Land.
1652.

28. Lesnes or Westwood.
A. D. 1178. Rich. de Lucy built a Priory of Black Canons here, to the honor
of St. Thomas the Martyr. It Is annual incomes at the Dissolution amounted to
186l. 9s. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 301.

29. Langdon.
Will. de Aubervill (temp. Rich. I.) built a Priory here for Praemonstratensian
Canons, and dedicated it to St. Mary and St. Thomas the Martyr. It was endowed
at the Suppression with with 56l. 6s. 9d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 622.

Registr. de Langdon in Scaccario penes Remem. Regis.

30. Patricksborn.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Beaulieu in Normandy, to which it was given by
John de Pratellis, (temp. R. Ioh.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 576.

31. Daunton.
Fulk de Neweham built a Benedictine Nunnery here, to the honor of St. Mary
Magdalene.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 501.

32. Ulcomb.
A. D. 1220. Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, founded a Collegiate
Church here ^* Somner's, History of Canterbury p. 253.


* Vide Cartas penes Franc. Clerk de ead. Armig.

33. Mottinden.
A Priory of the Order of the holy Trinity, founded by Rob. de Rokesly A. D.
1224. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 60l. 13s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 833.

34. ^reweleigh.
An Alien Priory.

35. Li^^^ Cherche.
A Priory of Black Monks dedicated to S. Mary MS. Bodl.
.

36. ^ilsington.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Job. Maunsell Provost of Beverley, A. D.
1253. and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 81l.
1s. 6l. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 333.

37. ^umney.
An Alien-Priory founded by Ioh. Maunsell Provost of Beverley, A. D. 1257.

* Vide Munimenta penes Custodem and Socios Coll. Omn. Anim. Cxon.

38. Wingham.
A College for a Rector and six Canons founded by John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, A. D. 1280. and endowed with 84l. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 52.

39. Ospring.
A Preceptory of the Templers.

40. Swingfield.
A Preceptory of the Knights Templers, valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 87l. 3s. 3l.
ob. per an.

* Vide Mun. penes Tho. Gomeldon Armig.

41. Badlesmere.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Bartholomew Badlesmere 13. Edw. II.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 351.

42. Cobham.
John Lord Cobham A. D. 1362 Leland. Co^l. Vol. 1. p. 84.
built a Collegiate Church here, to the honor of St. Mary Magdalene. It Is
yearly revenues at the Suppression amounted to 128. 1s. 9d. ob.

Vide Hollinshed's History, Vol. II. p. 1500.

* Cartas penes D. D. Jos. Williamson Eq. Aur.

43. Dertford.
A Nunnery of the Order of St. Austin founded by King Edw. III. A. D. 1373. and
commended to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Margaret. It was rated 26. Hen.
VIII. at 380l. 9s. ob. per an. Dugd. 400l. 8s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 357.

* Particulas terrae ad Mon. de Dertford spectant. in Bibl. Arundel 1645. nunc
in Bibl. Coll. Gresham. Land.

44. Bredgare.
A College built by Rob. de Bradgare Clerk, 16. Rich. II. and dedicated to the
Holy Trinity.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 117.

45. Maidstone.
Will. Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury, 19. Rich. II. founded a College here
to the honor of All Saints. It was endowed with 159l. 7s. 10d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 132.

46. West-Peccam.
A Preceptory of the Templers founded by Ioh. Culpeper 10. Hen. IV. valued 26.
Hen. VIII. at 63l. 6s. 8d. per an.

47. Way.
A College of Secular Canons built by John Kemp Archbishop of Canterbury, (10.
Hen. VI.) St. Gregory and St. Martin were the Tutelar Patrons of this House,
whose yearly revenues were worth 93l. 2s. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 191.

48. Ashford.
A College founded (temp. Edw. IV.) by Sir John Fogg.

LANCASHIRE.
1. Lancaster.
AN Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of St. Martin de Sagio in Normandy,
whereunto it was given by Roger Earl of Poictiers A. D. 1094. after the
Dissolution of these Priories it was appropriated by King Hen. V. to Syon
College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 566.

2. Furnes.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Stephen Earl of Morton, (afterward King of
England) A. D. 1127. and commended to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin Mary.
It was endowed at the Dissolution with 805l. 16s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 966l. 7s.
10d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 704.

Registra duo in officio Ducatus Lancast. MS.

* Rog. Dodsworthi Collectiones MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. vol. 39.

3. Cokersand, or Pyling.
Theobald Walter (temp. Hen. II.) Founded by Will. of Lancaster, (temp. Hen.
II.) Leland. Itin. Vol. 5. f. 71. It was of the Cluniack Order, founded by
Ranulph de Meschines. Speed. Reyner.
built an Abbey for Praemonstratensian Canons here, which he dedicated to the
blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 228l. 5s. 4d. ob. per an.
Speed. 157l. 14s. ob. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 631.

Registr. MS. vel penes Rob. Bolton de Thornham in Com. Lanc. vel in Bibl.
Hatton.

* Coll. MSS. Rog. Dodsworth in Bibl. Bodl. vol. 149.

4. Burscough.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Rob. Fitz-Henry Lord of Lathom, (temp.
Hen. II.) It Is Tutelar Saint was St. Nicholas, and endowed at the Dissolution
with 80. 7s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 129l. 1s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 303.

Cartular. de Burscough in officio Ducatus Lancastriae.

5. Conisheved.
A Priorv of White Canons. MS. Bodl.
Black Canons dedicated to St. Leonard, and founded by Will. Lancaster Baron of
Kendal, (temp. Hen. II.) Valued at 124l. 2s. 1d. per an. Speed. 97l. 2d. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 424.

6. Cart^cle.
A. D. 1188. Will. Marshall Earl of Pembroke, founded a Priory here of Canons
of the Order of St. Austin. It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and rated
26. Hen. VIII. at 124l. 2s. 1d. per an. Speed. 91l. 16s. 3d. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 300.

7. Lythom Erroneously placed by Mr. Speed in the Bishopric of Dur^em.
.
Rich. Fitz-Roger (temp. R. Ioh.) built a Priory of Benedictines here, to the
honor of St. Mary and St. Cuthbert, and annexed it as a Cell to Durham Abbey.
It Is annual revenues at the Suppression were worth 48l. 19s. Dugd. 53l. 15s.
10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 499.

* Registrum penes Tho. Clifton de Lythom.

8. Penwortham Placed also in Worcestershire by Mr. Speed, where it is valued at
99l. 5s. ^d per an.
.
Warin Bussel (temp....) built a Priory of Benedictines here, to the honor of
the blessed Virgin, which was subordinate to the Abbey of Evesham, and rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 29l. 18s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 114l. 16s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 360.

* Reg. penes Joh. Fleetwood de Penwortham Armig.

9. Whalley.
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, gave the Church here to the White Monks of
Stanlaw, (in Cheshire) whereupon they removed their Abbey hither A. D. 1296.
It Is yearly revenues were worth at the Suppression 321l. 9s. 1d. ob. Dugd.
551l. 4s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 897.

Registr. penes Rad. Ashton. Mil. and Bar.

10. Holland.
A. D. 1319. Walter Bishop of Litchfield by the consent and at the petition of
Sir Rob. Holland Knight Patron, changed the Collegiate Church of St. Thomas the
Martyr into a Benedictine Priory. It was valued at 53l. 3s. 4d. per an. Dugd.
61l. 3s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 544. T. 2. p. 889.

11. Horneby.
A Cell to the Abbey of Croxton in Leicestershire The history of Leicestershire
by Will. Burton.


12. Manchester.
In 9. Hen. V. Thomas Lord De la Ware obtained license of the King to found a
College, consisting of a Warden and a certain number of Priests in the parish
Church of this place.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 174.

* Cartas etc. penes custodem and Socios.

LEICHESTERSHIRE.
1. Belvoir This Monastery is falsely placed in Hertfordshire by Mr. Speed, and
the Monasticon says it is in Lincolnshire: but that famous Antiquary Mr. Burton
in his description of this County, tells us, that though the Castle is in
Lincolnshire, yet the Priory is in this County.
.
A Priory of Black Monks subordinate to the Abbey of St. Albans, to which it was
annexed by its founder Rob. de Totney about A. D. 1080. It was dedicated to S.
Mary, and endowed with 129l. 17s. 6d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 327.

Registrum penes Thomam Dom. Brudnell.

Registrum penes Math. Hales de Hosp. Lincoln. A. D. 1629.

* Cartularium penes Ducem Buckinghamiae.

* Registrum in Bibl. Cottoniana.

2. Leicester.
Rob. Earl of Leicester (temp. Hen. I.) founded a College of a Dean and twelve
Prebendaries, the Church of St. Mary the less, in the Castle. It was valued 26.
Hen. VIII. but at 23l. 12s. 11d. per an. because the lands of this College were
alienated and annexed to the Abbey of

3. S. Mary de Pratis, juxta Leicester.
An Abbey of Canons Regulars of St. Austin's Order, built by Rob. Bossu Earl of
Leicester to the honor of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, A. D. 1143.
Its revenues were worth at the Dissolution 951l. 14s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd.
1062l. 4d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 308.

Wilhelmi Charity Rentale novum generale Abb. S. Mar. de Pratis Leicestriae. In
Bibl. Bodl. Laud. H. 72.

* Wilh. Charity Catalogum Librorum MSS. in Biblioth. Monast. S. Mariae de
Pratis. In Bibl. Bodl. Laud. I. 75.

4. Launda.
Rich. Basset and Maud Ridel his wife, (temp. Hen. l. Not (temp. Hen. III.) as
in Burton.
) founded here an Abbey of Black Canons, and commended it to the Patronage of
St. John Baptist. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 399l. 3s.
3d. ob. q. Dugd. 510l. 16s. 5d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 90.

5. Bredon.
The Church of St. Mary and St. Hardulf being given by Rob. Ferrers Earl of
Notingham about A. D. 1144. to the Abbey of St. Oswald at Nosthell in Yorkshire,
it became a Cell of Black Canons. to that Abbey. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
24l. 10s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 25l. 8s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 39. T. 3. P. 1. p. 62.

Registrum pen. Rob. Shirley de Stanton-Harold A. D. 1670.

6. Hinkley.
An Alien-Priory to Lyra in Normandy, to which it was given by Rob. Bossu Earl
of Leicester. King Richard II. gave it to the Abbey of Montgrace.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 603, 983.

7. Gerondon or Garradon, Gerewerdon, Werewordon, Speed.
A. D. 1169. A. D. 1132. Monast. But as the Monasticon in another place and
Burton A. D. 1169. Though Rob. Bossu died A. D. 1167.
Rob. Bossu Earl of Leicester founded here an Abbey for Cistercian Monks, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 186l. 15s.
2d. Speed. 159l. 19s. 10d. ob. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 768.

* Registrum penes Illustrissimum Ducem Buckinghamiae.

8. Dalby, 9. Hither, 10. Rodely.
Three Preceptories of the Knights Templers; the first of which was founded by
Rob. Bossu Earl of Leicester, (temp. Hen. II.) The second was given to those
Knights by Galfrid de Gresley A. D.... Who was the donor of Rodeley I cannot
find. The yearly revenues of these three amounted to 231l. 7s. 10d. Vide Burton.


11. Croxton.
An Abbey of Praemonstratenses built by William Parcarius Burton says this Abbey
was founded by Sir Andrew Lutt^rell, but he lived (temp. Hen. III.) not (temp.
Hen. II.)
, (temp. Hen. II.) and dedicated to St. John the Evangelist. It was valued at
the Suppression at 385l. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd. 458l. 19s. 11d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 603. T. 3. P. 1. p. 73.

Registr. pen. Com. Rutlandiae apud Castrum de Belvoir.

12. Olveston or Osulveston.
Robert Grimbold (temp. Hen. II.) built a Priory of Black Canons here to the
honor of St. Mary, St. Andrew and All Saints. It was endowed at the
Dissolution with 161l. 14s. 2d. q. per an. Dugd. 173l. 18s. 9d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 276.

13. Charley.
A Priory of the Order of St. Austin, founded by Robert Blanchmaines Earl of
Leicester, (temp. Hen. II Burton
.)

14. Bradley.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Ro^. Bundy, (temp. R. Ioh.) valued at 20l.
3s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 20l. 15s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 334.

15. Langley.
William Pantulf and Burgia his wife (temp. R. Ioh. Not (temp. Regis Conuti) as
in Burton.
) built a Benedictine Nunnery here, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is
yearly revenues were worth at the Suppression 29l. 7s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 34l. 6s.
2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 481.

16. Grace-Dieu
A Cistercian Nunnery dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and founded by Roisia de
Verdun 24. Hen. III Founded A. D. 1226. Annal. Waverl.
. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 101l. 8s. 2d. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 933.

17. Ulvescroft.
Rob. Quincy Mr. Burton tell's us, that Rob. Blanchmaines Earl of Leicester,
(temp. Hen. I^.) was Founder of this Priory.
Earl of Winchester, built here a Priory of Regular Canons of the Order of St.
Austin, (temp. Hen. III.) It was endowed at the Dissolution with 83l. 10s. 6d.
per an. Dugd. 101l. 3s. 10d. Burton.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

18. Stave Speed. Stane MS. Bodl. Qu.
A Benedictine Nunnery.

19. Melton-Moubray.
A Cell to Jews in Sussex Leland.
.

20. No^sley.
A Collegiate Church consisting of three Priests, three Clerks, and four
Choristers, founded (temp. Edw. I.) by Rog. de Martival afterward Bishop of
Sarum Burton.
. Valued at 6l. 13s. 4d.

21. Kirkby-Beller.
Roger Beller (temp. Edw. III.) built a College here for a Warden and twelve
Secular Priests, which his son changed into a Priory of Black Canons So that
Reyner must be in an error, when he says that this was a Priory of the
Cluniack Order, founded by Roger Beller and Amicia his wife, (temp. Hen. II.)
. It was dedicated to St. Peter, and endowed at the Suppression with 142l. 10s.
3d. q. per an. Dugd. 178l. 7s. 10d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 344. T. 3. P. 2. p. 49.

22. Leicester.
Collegium Novi Operis, or the Collegiate Church of St. Mary the great,
consisting of twelve Prebendaries besides the Dean and Choristers, was founded
by Henry Duke of Lancaster, (temp. Ed. III.) It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
595l. 7s. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 139.

23. Sapcote.
Here was a College founded by Sir Ralph Basset, 50. Ed. III.

Mr. Speed places in this County Canwell, which is in Staffordshire, and Comb
which is in Warwickshire. The Monastery also of Cale which the same Author
reckons among the Religious Houses of this Shire, is mistaken for Calc in
Derbyshire.

LINCOLNSHIRE.
1. Bardney.
AN Abbey of Benedictine Monks founded by Ethelred Earl of Mercia A. D. 712. but
being destroyed by the. Danes, it was reedified by Walter de Gaunt A. D. 1115.
It was dedicated to St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Oswald the King, and valued
26. Hen. VIII. at 366l. 6s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 429l. 7s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 142. T. 2. p. 847.

Reg. penes Wilh. Thorold Equit. Aur.

Transcript. Registri penes Hon. Dominum Willoughby de Parham.

2. Crowland.
A. D. 716. Ethelbald King of Mercia built here a Abbey for Black Monks to the
honor of St. Guthlac. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
1803l. 15s. 10d. Dugd. 1217l. 5s. 11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 163. T. 2. p. 853.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 139.

Historiam Croiland. per Ingulfum and Petrum Blesensem cum continuatione per
Anonymum ad A. D. 1486. Oxon. 1684. fol.

Vitas Abbatum MS. ad A. D. 1427. in Bibl. Cotton. Vespas. B. 11.

* Reg. penes Rob. Com. Ailesbur.

* Cartul. penes... Comitem Exon.

3. Stow.
A Priory of Benedictines founded by Godiva wife to Earl Leofric, about A. D.
1050.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 262.

4. Spalding.
A. D. 1052. Thorold founded a Priory of Black Monks here, and first annexed it
as a Cell to Croiland. A. D. 1074. it became an Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St.
Nicholas at Angiers. St. Nicholas was the Tutelar Saint of this Priory, whose
lands at the Suppression were rated at 767l. 8s. 11d. Dugd. 878l. 18s. 3d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 306. T. 2. p. 871.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 156.

Registr. penes Joh. Oldfield Arm. A. D. 1659.

* Cartul. penes Rich. Ogle Mil.

5. Covenham.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Karilefus at Main, to which it was given by
the Conqueror, A. D. 1082. This Cell was by that Monastery made over to the
Abbat and Convent of Kirksled, 31. Edw. 1.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 555.

6. Lincoln.
When by a Constitution made at the Synod of London in the time of William the
Conqueror, all Bishops were obliged to remove their Sees to great Towns.
Remigius then Bishop of Dorchester fixed his residence here, who with his
Successor Robert Bloet, founded the Cathedral, and endowed the Dean and Chapter.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 257.

* Cartas Registra, etc. penes Episcopum, Decanum and Capitulum.

7. Bru^me.
Baldwin de Wake (temp. Hen. I.) founded here a Priory of Black Canons, to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 101^. 11^. ob.
per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 235.

8. Frisetun or Freston.
A Cell of Black Monks to Croiland, to which it was given by Alan de Croun
about A. D. 1130. It was dedicated to St. James.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 443. T. 2. p. 69.

9. Grimesby or Welhove.
King Hen. I. built here a Priory of Black Canons, to the honor of St.
Augustine, which was endowed at the Dissolution with 9l. 14s. 7d. per an.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 316.

10. Swineshed.
An Abbey of Cistercians dedicated to St. Mary, and founded by Rob. de Greislei
A. D. 1134. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 167l. 15l. 3d. per (...) Dugd. 175l.
19s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 773.

Founded A. D. 1148. Mon. (...)
11. Deping.
A Cell of Black Monks to Thorney Abbey, whereunto it was given by Baldwine de
Wake, (temp. Hen. I.) St. James was the Tutelar Saint of this House.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 469.

12. Minting.
Ranulph Earl of Chester gave the Manor and Church of St. Andrew at Minting to
the Abbey of St. Benedict upon Leyr: so it became an Alien-Priory to that Abbey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 591.

13. Hyrst.
A Cell of Black Canons to the Abbey of Nosthell in Yorkshire, to which it was
given by Nigell de Albini, (temp. Hen. I.) It was dedicated to St. Mary, and
valued at 5l. 10s. 1d. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 42.

14. Willesford.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Bec in Normandy, to which it was given by Hugh
Wake, temp. Hen. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 954.

15. Thornholm.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of St. Austin, founded by King Stephen. It was
valued at the Suppression at 155l. 19s. 6d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 230.

16. Sempringham.
A. D. 1139. Gislebert Gaunt gave St. Gilbert the founder of the Gilbertine or
Sempringham Order, thirteen carucates of land here, on which he built this
Abbey; which by the bounty of benefactors was able to dispend 317l. 4s. 1d. per
an. at the Dissolution, Dugd. 359l. 12s. 7. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 791.

Privilegia Caenobii Sempringham MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. B. 1.

* Munimenta penes Franc. Com. Lincoln.

17. Haverholm.
A Monastery of Gilbertine Nuns built by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln A. D.
1139. to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were worth at
the Dissolution 70l. 15s. 10d. Dugd. 88l. 5s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 2. p. 792.

* Reg. penes Gervas. Hollis de Grimsby.

18. Thorneton.
A. D. 1139. William Earl of Albemarle founded a Monastery of Black Canons
here, and commended it to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It was valued
26. Hen. VIII. at 594l. 17s. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd. 730l. 17s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 198.

Cronica penes Gervas. Hollis de Grimsby in Com. Linc. 1640.

19. Parco-Luda or Louth-Park.
A Cistercian Abbey built by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln A. D. 1139. to the
honor of the Virgin Mary. It was endowed at the Suppression with 147l. 14s.
6d. per an. Dugd. 169l. 5s. 6d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 805.

20. Kirksted.
Hugh Brito A. D. 1139. founded a Cistercian Abbey here, which was dedicated to
St. Mary, and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 286l. 2s. 7d. ob. per an. Dugd. 338l.
13s. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 806.

Reg. in Bibl. Hatton. 1640.

* Evidentias ad hanc Abbatiam spectantes penes Montagu Com. Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp in Com. Linc. 1646.

21. Nocton.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene, and founded by Rob.
de Areci about A. D. 1140. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
44l. 3s. 8d. Dugd. 52l. 19s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 211.

22. Nun-Ormesby or Newnersby.
Gilbert de Ormesby (temp. Reg. Steph.) built here an Abbey for Nuns of
Gilbertine Order, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen.
VIII. at 80l. 11s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 98l. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 809.

^ Reg. pen.... Rokesby de (...) in Co^. Ebor.

23. Revesby.
An Abbey of Cistercian Monks Not a Nunnery as in Speed's Catalogue.
founded by Will. de Romar A. D. 1142. and by him commended to the Patronage of
St. Laurence. It was endowed at the Suppression with 287l. 2s. 4d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 349l. 4s. 10d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 822.

24. Aquilae Ballivatus, v. Egle.
A Commandery of the Knights Templers, to whom it was given by R. Stephen.
Valued at 124l. 2s.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 548.

25. Newhouse or Newsom.
The first Monastery of the Praemonstratensian Order in England, built by
Pet^r. de (...) A. D. 1146. It Is Tutelar Saint was St. Martial, and its yearly
revenues were worth 99l. 2s. 10d. ob. Dugd. 114l. 1s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 589.

* Registrum penes Wilh. Pelham Mil.

* Cartas ad Mon. de Newhouse spectantes penes Hon. Montagu Com. Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp in Com. Linc. 1646.

26. Stixwould.
Lucia first Countess of Perch built (temp. R. Steph.) here a Monastery for
Praemonstratensian Nuns, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 114l. 5s. 2d. ob. per an. Dugd. 163l. 1s. 2d. ob. Speed. After
its first surrender, King Hen. VIII. refounded it ( Anno Reg. 29.) but it
continued only till the Dissolution of the greater Abbeys, 31. Hen. VIII.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. P. 489. T. 2. p. 809. T. 3. P. 1. p. 81.

* Reg. penes Joh. Coventre Arm. fill. Th. D. Coventre.

27. De Valle-Dei ol. Bitham vulgo Uaudey.
A. D. 1147. Founded by Gilbert Gaunt Earl of Lincoln, Speed.
William Earl of Albemarle founded here a Cistercian Abbey, and commended it to
the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression
were worth 124l. 5s. 11d. q. Dugd. 177l. 15s. 7d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 747, 831.

* Evidentias ad hanc Abbatiam spectantes penes Montagu Com. Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp 1646.

28. Lincoln.
A Gilbertine Priory dedicated to St. Katharine, founded by Rob. II. Bishop of
Lincoln, (temp. Hen. II.) It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 202l. 5s. ob. per an.
Dugd. 207l. 1s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Augl. T. 2. p. 814.

29. Berlings or Dxeney.
Ralph de Haya built a Monastery here for Praemonstratensian Black Canons. MS.
Bodl.
Canons, ( temp. Hen. II.) to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary; which was
endowed at the Dissolution with 307l. 16s. 6d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 643.

Reg. in Bibl. Cotton. Faustina B. 1.

30. Bolyngton.
A Gilbertine Priory founded by Simon Fitz-William (temp. Hen. II.) and
dedicated to S. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 158l. 7s. 11d. per an.
Dugd. 187l. 7s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 794.

* Reg. penes... Metham.

* Evidentias ad hunc Prioratum spectantes penes Montagu Comitem Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp in Com. Linc. 1646.

31. Run-Cotton.
Alan Muncels about A. D. 1160. built a Cistercian Nunnery here, to the honor
of the blessed Virgin Mary. It was able to dispend at the Suppression 46l. 17s.
7d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 922.

Registr. penes Dudley North A. D. 1652.

* Rog. Dodsworthi Collectiones MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 74.

32. Greenfield.
A Cistercian Black Canons MS. Bodl. Black Nuns Speed.
Nunnery founded by Eudo de Grimesby and Ralph de Abi his son, ( temp. Hen.
II.) and dedicated to St. Mary. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 63l. 4s. 1d. Dugd. 79l. 15s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 880.

* Cartas ad Abbatiam hanc pertin. penes Montagu Comitem Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp. 1646.

33. Hagneby.
Agnes de Orreby (22. Hen. II.) built a Praemonstratensian Abbey here, to the
honor of St. Thomas of Canterbury. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 87l. 11s.
4d. per an. Dugd. 98l. 8s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 616.

Chronica de Hagneby ad A. Chapter 1307. in Bibl. Cotton. Vespas. B. 11.

34. Heinings or Heveringes.
A Gilbertine A Cistcrcian Nunnery. Leland.
Priory founded by Reyner de Evermue about A. D. 1180. and endowed at the
Suppression with 49l. 5s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 58l. 13s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 815.

35. Elsham.
Walter de Amundevill about A. D. 1180. founded a Priory of Black Canons here,
and commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Edmund. It was rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 70l. 8d. per an. Dugd. 83l. 17s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 421.

* Cortas Mon. de Elsham penes Montagu Comitem Lindsey apud Grimesthorp in Com.
Linc. 1646.

36. Newstede in Axholm.
A Gilbertine Priory of the foundation of King Henry the second. It Is yearly
revenues at the Dissolution were worth 38l. 13s. 5d. Dugd. 55l. 11s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 811.

37. Stanford.
A Benedictine Nunnery Not an Abbey of Black Monks as in Speed.
built by Will. Abbat of Peterburgh, (temp. Hen. II.) to the honor of St.
Michael. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 65l. 19s. 9d. per an. Dugd. 72l. 18s.
10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 488. T. 2. p. 881.

Reg. penes Galfred. Minshull genesis 1657.

38. Stainfeld.
Henry de Percy founded here ( temp. Hen. II.) a Benedictine Black Canons. MS.
Bodl.
Nunnery, which was endowed at the Suppression with 98l. 8s. per an. Dugd.
112l. 5s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 506.

39. Tupholm.
A Praemonstratensian Abbey built by Alan and Gilbert de Nevill, (temp. Hen.
II.) it was dedicated to St. Mary, and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 100l. 14s. 10d.
per an. Dugd. 119l. 2s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 596.

40. Urford, Irford or Ixford.
A Benedictine An Abbey of the Praemonstratensian Order. Mon. Angl. T. 1. p.
1042.
Nunnery founded by Ralph de Albini, (temp. Hen. II.) valued at 13l. 19s. 9d.
Dugd. 14l. 13s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

41. Santof and Henes.
Cells to the Abbey of St. Mary at York, to which they were given by Rog.
Mowbray, (t. H. II.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p 405.

42. Hagh.
King Henry II. gave this Manor to the Abbey of St. Mary de Voto at Cherburgh
in Normandy, to which Abbey it afterward became a Cell. This Priory King Rich.
II. gave to the Carthusians of St. Ann's Priory near Coventry.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 602, 966. T. 2. p. 1009.

43. Cameringham.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Blancalanda in Normandy, given thereto by Rich.
de Haya, temp. Hen. II.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1015.

44. Leyburn or Lekeburn.
A Nunnery of the Cistercian Order, founded by Robert de Lekeburn (temp. R.
Ioh.) and dedicated to St. Mary. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 38l. 8s. 4d. Dugd. 57l. 13s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 894.

Registr. penes Georgium Heneage mil.

45. Lorkesey.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by King John to the honor of St. Leonard. It
was valued 26. Hen. III. at 13l. 1s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 27l. 2s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 278.

46. Sixle.
A Gilbertine Priory founded by... Gres^e^ temp. R. Ioh. and dedicated to the
blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 135^. 9^. per an. Dugd. 170l.
8s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 810.

47. Wells
A Monastery of the Order of St. Gilbert of Sempringham, built by Ralph de
Hauvill, temp. R. Johan. It was endowed with 95l. 6s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 152l.
7s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 826.

48. Ravendale.
A. D. 1202. Alan the son of Henry Earl of... gave this Manor to the Abbey de
Belloportu in Normandy, and so it became a Cell to that Monastery. King Henry
VI. gave it to the Collegiate Church of Southwell in Notingham-shire.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 1016. T. 3. P. 2. p. 15.

49. Fosse.
A small Benedictine Nunnery, valued at 7l. 3s. 6d. Dugd. 8l. 5s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 502.

50. Newb.
Richard de Malebiss built a Praemonstratensian Abbey here, it was dedicated to
the blessed Virgin, and endowed with 71l. 8s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 115l. 11s. 8d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 612.

51. Benington.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey de Savigneio in Normandy, to which it was given by
Will. de Filgeris. Given by King Richard II. to St. Ann's near Coventry.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 597, 966.

52. Catteley.
Peter de Belingey John Spaule was Founder according to Speed.
built a Monastery here of the Sempringham Order, to the honor of the blessed
Virgin. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 38l. 13s. 8d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 813.

53. Goykewell.
A Priory of Cistercian Nuns founded by Will. de Alta-Ripa... It was rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 16l. 12s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 19l. 18s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 945.

54. Humberston or Umberstane.
A Priory of Benedictines dedicated to St. Mary and St. Peter, founded by Rob.
fill. Drcgonis... It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 32l. 1s.
3d. Dugd. 42l. 11s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

55. Kyme.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Philip de Kime to the honor of the
blessed Virgin. Endowed at the Dissolution with 101l. 4d. per an. Dugd. 138l.
4s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 245.

56. Markeby or Matersey. Confounded by the Monasticon (T. 2. p. 811.) with
Mare^^in Essex.

A Priory of Black Canons built by Rad. fill. Gilberti. It was rated 26. Hen.
VIII. at 1^0l. 13^. ob. per an. Dugd. 163l. 17s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

57. Stanford. Sp.
A Monastery of Benedictine Monks dedicated to St. Nicholas, valued at 65l.
19s. 9d. per an.

58. Neustede juxta Stanford.
A Priory of Gilbertines dedicated to St. Leo^ard. It Is yearly revenues were
worth 37l. 6s. Dugd. 42l. 1s. 3d. Speed.

59. Torington.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and founded by
William de Arundel. Speed.

60. Burwell.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Mary Silvae Major is in France.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 579.

* Cartas ad hunc Priorat. spectantes penes Montagu Comitem Lindsey apud
Grimesthorp in Com. Linc. A. D. 1646.

61. Hagham
An Alien-Priory to St. Severus in Normandy A Cluniack Priory. Reyner.
. Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 603.

62. Holland-Brugge.
A Gilbertine Priory founded by Godwinus ^ rich Citizen of Lincoln, to the
honor of our blessed Savior.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 815.

63. Temple-Bruer.
A Preceptory of the Knights Templers, valued at 184l. 6s. 8d.

64. Willoughton.
A Preceptory of the Templers, valued at 174l. 11s. 1d. ob.

65. Briggerd. Sp.
A Priory valued at 101l. 11s. ob. Speed.

66. Iffingham.
A Abbey of White Canons dedicated to the blessed Virgin MS. Bodl.


67. Grimesby.
Rob. Grosthead Speed.
Bishop of Lincoln, about A. D. 1250. founded a Monastery here for Nuns of the
Order of St. Benedict. It Is Tut^lar Saint was St. Leonard; and it was able to
dispend 9l. 14s. 7d. Dugd. 12l. 3s. 7d. per an. Speed. at the Suppression.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 898.

68. Alvingham.
A Gilbertine Monastery built by Ant. Bek Bishop of Durham, to the honor of
St. Mary about A. D. 1310. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 128l. 14s. 2d. per
an. Dugd. 141l. 15s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 802.

Librum Domesticum Coenobii de Alvingham MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Laud. F. 119. in
quo inter alia invenitur Enumeratio omnium terrarum, reddituum, etc. quae ad
dictum Coenobium quoquo modo pertinebant, cum instrumentis Benefactorum, etc.

69. Eppworth.
A Carthusian Abbey founded by Tho. Earl of Notingham, and commended to the
Patronage of St. Mary, St. John the Evangelist, and St. Edward the Confessor,
20. Rich. II. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 237l. 15s. 2d.
ob. q. Dugd. 290l. 14s. 7d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 969.

70. Tatteshall.
A College founded by Ralph Cromwell Knight, 17. Hen. VI. to the honor of the
holy Trinity. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 348l. 5s. 11d. per an.

Vide Mon. Augl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 194.

* Statuta Fundationis penes Montagu Comitem Lindsey apud Grimesthorp in Com.
Linc.

71. R^veston. Sp.
A College of Secular Canons dedicated to St. Austin.

See Belvoir Priory in Leicestershire, which is placed by the Monasticon in
this County.

LONDON.
1. S. Paul's.
THis ancient Cathedral was founded by Ethelbert King of Kent, A. D. 604. at
which time Mellitus was consecrated the first Bishop of London by St. Austin
the Monk.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 298.

The history of St. Paul's Cathedral in London, from it is foundation until
these times, by Sir Will. Dugdale. London. 1658. fol.

2. Westminster.
A Benedictine Abbey founded by Sebert King of the East-Savons, about A. D. 610.
and dedicated by Mellitus the Bishop to St. Peter. It was reedisied by King
Edward A. D. 1066. and endowed at the Dissolution with 3471^. 2d. per an. Dugd.
3977l. 6s. 4d. Speed. King Henry VIII. made it a Bishops See; but it continued
so only nine years, and then it became a Collegiate Church for a Dean and
Secular Canons, who have continued ever since, except for three years in Queen
Mary's reign, during which time here was an Abbat and Benedictine Monks.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 55. T. 2. p. 847.

Reynerii Apost. Bened. Tr. 1. p. 65. T. 2. p. 158.

An historical account of the original, increase and present state of St.
Peter's, or the Abbey Church of Westminster, by Henry Keep. London. 1683. 8vo.

Historiam Ric. Sporley de Fundatione Abb. Westmonast. in Bibl. Cotton. Claud.
A. 8.

Registr. Westmon. Abb. in Bibl. Cotton. Faust. A. 3.

MS. de dedicatione Eccles. Westmon. in Bibl. Bodl. NE. B. 1. 6.

* Rentale, Cartas, etc. hujus Ecclesiae in manibus Henr. Worsley Hosp.
Lincoln. Arm.

* Cartularium Abbatiae Westmon. penes Henr. Spelman.

* Registrum penes... Okely de... in Com. Salop. 1649.

* Exemplar Rotulorum Curiae diversorum Maneriorum Abbatiae Westmon. sc. de
anno primo and secundo Ricardi III. In Officio Armorum.

* R^ntale hujus Ecclesiae MS. in Bibl. Coll. Vniv. Oxon. I. 10. Imperf.

* Jo. Fleet MS. de Fundatione and dedicatione Abbatiae Westmon. In Bibl.
Westmon. Eccles.

3. College of St. Martin near Aldgate.
A College of a Dean and Secular Canons founded by one Ingelricus and Edward
his brother, A. D. 1056. and confirmed by King William the Conqueror, A. D.
1068.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 26.

* Collect. MSS. Rogeri Dodsworth in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 24.

4. Clerkenwell.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Jordan de Briset A. D. 1100. to the honor of
the Assumption of our Lady. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 262l. 19s. per an.
Dugd. 28l. 16s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 428.

Registrum in Bibl. Cotton. Faust. B. 2.

* Collect. MSS. Ricardi James in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 7.

5. S. John of Jerusalem.
A Priory of Knights Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem, founded by Iordanus
Briset A. D. 1100. Upon the Suppression of the Templers (which Order began A.
D. 1119. and was seated here in the New Temple A. D. 1185.) the best part of
their lands were given A. D. 1324. to the Hospitalers, whose yearly revenues at
the Dissolution were worth 2385l. 12s. 8d. Speed. 3385l. 19s. 8d. Stow.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 505.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

6. Christ-Church near Aldgate.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Rich. Beaumey Bishop of London A. D. 1107.
Stow says that Queen Maud was the Foundress. Survey of London. p. 145.
to the honor of the blessed Trinity. This being the first Monastery that was
dissolved by King Hen. VIII. it was given by him to Sir Thomas Audley then Lord
Chancellor, A. D. 1533.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 80.

7. S. Bartholomew's in Smithfield.
A. D. 1123. Raherus built a Priory of Black Canons here. It was rated 26. Hen.
VIII. at 653l. 15s. per an. Dugd. 757l. 8s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 166.

8. S. Helens near Bishopsgate-street.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by William Fitz-William about A. D. 1160. Not
founded by William Basing Dean of St. Paul's, 2. Edw. II. as in Speed.
It was endowed with 314l. 2s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 376l. 6s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 894.

9. S. Mary de Bethlem without Bishopsgate.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Simon Fitz-Mary A. D. 1247. It was valued
26. Hen. VIII. at 478l. 6s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 557l. 14s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p 382.

10. Nunnery without Aldgate.
Edmund Earl of Lancaster (21. Edw. I.) built a Monastery for Nuns of the Order
of St. Clare, or Minoresses, to the honor of the blessed Virgin and St.
Francis. It Is annual revenues at the Suppression was worth 318l. 8s. 5d. Dugd.
342l. 5s. 10d. ob. Speed. 418l. 8s. 5d. Stow.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 541.

11. ^lsingspittle by Cripplegate.
In old time it was a Nunnery, but William Elsing got this house of the King,
and placed therein a Warden and four Secular Canons, A. D. 1331. whom he
changed A. D. 1340. into Regulars of the Order of St. Austin. Adjoining to it
was also a Hospital of his Foundation. They were endowed at the Dissolution
with 193l. 15s. 5d. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 462.

12. Corpus Christi College in Candleweek-street.
Founded by John Pultney Lord Mayor of London 20. Edw. III. It was rated at
79l. 17s. 11d. per an.

13. Westminster.
King Edward III. finished the College here begun by King Stephen, and therein
placed a Dean, twelve Secular Canons, and thirteen Vicars, four Clerks, six
Choristers, to the honor of St. Stephen. (22. Edw. III.) It was endowed at the
Suppression with 1085l. 10s. 5d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 61.

14. S. Mary of Grace near the Tower.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by King Edw. III. (25. Edw. III.) It was valued 26.
Hen. VIII. at 546l. 10d. per an. Dugd. 602l. 11s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 943.

15. Charter House.
A Carthusian Abbey built by Sir Walter Manny A. D. 1372. to the honor of the
Salutation of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution
amounted to 642l. 4d. ob. Dugd. 757l. 8s. 4d. Speed. In room of this Thomas
Sutton Esquire ( temp. R. Iac. I.) founded and largely endowed a most magnificent
Hospital, consisting of a Master, a Chaplain, and several other Officers, also
eighty decayed Gentlemen, Soldiers and Merchants, besides a Schoolmaster and
Usher to instruct forty four Scholars.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 961.

* Domus Carthusiana, or an account of the founder and foundation of the
Charterhouse London by Sam. Hern. Land. 1677. 8vo.

16. S. Michael in Crooked-Lane.
A College founded by Will. Walworth for a Master and nine Priests. 4. Rich. II.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 104.

17. Barking.
A College founded by King Richard the third in the Chapel of our Lady, within
the Church of All-hallows Barking. Stow p. 131.

18. Whitingdon-College.
The Executors of Richard Whitingdon sometime Lord Mayor of London, endowed a
College in the Church of Pater Noster A. D. 1424. and dedicated it to St.
Michael. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 20l. 1s. 2d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 177, 189.

MIDDLESEX.
1. Stratford-Bow.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Leonard, and founded by Leland.
Collect. T. 1. p. 50.
William Bishop of London, (temp. R. Will. Conq.) It Is yearly revenues were
worth 108l. 1s. 11d. ob. Dugd. 121l. 16s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 443.

2. Kylburn.
A Priory of Nuns of the Order of St. Benedict, founded by Herebert Abbat of
Westminster about A. D. 1139 to which Abbey it was subordinate. St. John Baptist
was the Tutelar Saint of this Priory. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 74l. 7s.
11d. per an. Dugd. 121l. 16s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 361.

3. Haliwel.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Robert Fitz-Gelran Canon of St. Paul's London,
(temp. Ric. I.) to the honor of St. John Baptist. It was valued at 293l. per
an. Stow.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 531.

4. Syon.
King Henry V. founded an Abbey here for sixty Nuns of the Order of St. Bridget,
thirteen Priests, four Deacons, eight Lay Brethren, and commended it to the
Patronage of St. Savior and St. Bridget. It was endowed at the Dissolution
with 1731l. 8s. 4d. ob. q. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 360.

* Constitutiones Mon. de Syon, Anglice. in Bibl. Arundel 1647. nunc in Bibl.
Coll. Gresham.

* Cartas penes Illustriss. Carolum Ducem Somerset.

* The Indulgence of the Monastery of Syon. MS. in Bibl. Musaei Ashmol. Oxon.
750. X.

5. Uxbridge.
A Monastery dedicated to St. Mary, and founded by Hugh Rows. Speed.

6. Hermondesworth.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Catharine at Roan.

7. Hounslow.
A Priory of Maturines, or of the Order of the Holy Trinity for the Redemption
of Captives. Valued at 74l. 8s. ob. per an. Dugd. 80l. 15s. ob. Sp.

Mr. Speed tell's us of a Priory at Stanes, but in all probability he mistakes
it for Stone in Staffordshire.

MONMOUTH-SHIRE.
1. Goldcliff.
RObert de Chandos (temp. Will. Conq.) gave the Church of St. Mary Magdalene
here to the Monks of Bec in Normandy, to which Abbey it became a Cell of Black
Monks. After the Suppression of Alien-Priories, the lands were given to Eaton
College Leland Itin. Vol. 5. f. 6.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 590. T. 2. p. 904.

2. Abergavenny.
An Alien-Priory of Black Monks to the Abbey of St. Vincent in Maine, to which
it was given by Hamelin Balun, (temp. Will. Ruf.) It was not dissolved till the
general Suppression, at which time it was able to dispend 129l. 5s. 8d. per an.
Dugd. 59l. 4s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 556.

3. Lantony.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Hugh Lacy A. D. 1108. to the honor of St.
John Baptist. It was endowed with 99l. 19s. ob. per an. Dugd. 71l. 3s. 2d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 60.

4. Monmouth A Priory of Black Monks, Cell to Gloucester. Leland Itin. Vol. 5.
f. 10.
.
Withenoc de Monemouth (temp. Hen. I.) gave the Church of St. Mary and St.
Florence here, to the Abbey of St. Florence near Salmur, to which it became an
Alien-Priory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 600.

5. Tintern.
A. D. 1131. Walter de Clare founded a Cistercian Abbey here, and dedicated it
to St. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 192l. 1s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 256l. 11s.
6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 721.

* Diversa ad Mon. de Tintern. spectantia inter MSS. (n. 164.) quos dedit Coll.
Gresham. Dux Norfolciae.

6. Grace-Dieu.
A Cistercian Priory built by John de Monemue, A. D. 1233. to the honor of the
blessed Virgin. It was rated at 19l. 4s. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 927.

7. Chepstow.
A Priory of Black Monks, Cell to Bermundsey Leland.
. Endowed with 32l. per an.

8. Malpas.
A Cell of two Black Monks to Montacute Priory in Somersetshire Leland. Coll.
Vol. 1. p. 77.
, valued at 14l. 9s. 11d. per an.

9. Usk, or Cairusk.
A Priory of Benedictine Nuns Ibid. p. 94.
. Endowed 26. Hen. VIII. at 55l. 4s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 69l. 9s. 8d. Speed.

10. Striguil.
An Alien-Priory.

11. Llantarnam.
An Abbey of the Cistercian Order I bid.
.

NORFOLK.
1. West-Dereham.
HEre was an ancient Benedictine Nunnery founded by St. Withburga about A. D.
660. But this being destroyed in the Danish wars, Hubert afterward Archbishop
of Canterbury about A. D. 1180. built here an Abbey for Praemonstratensian
Canons, to the honor of St. Mary. This was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 228l. ob.
q. per an. Dugd. 252l. 12s. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 176. T. 2. p. 624, 853.

2. North-Elmham.
The Diocese of the East Angles being divided into two parts about A. D. 673.
one of the Bishops made this Town his Episcopal Seat for Norfolk, which after a
succession of ten Bishops, and the Martyrdom of Humbert the last of them by the
Danes, A. D. 870. was without a Pastor till about A. D. 950. at which time
Adulphus was Consecrated Bishop of Elmham, and the Sea of Dunwich reunited to
it. Here it continued, till it was translated to Thetford A. D. 1075.

Vide Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 403.

3. Hulme Not in Suffolk where it is placed in the Monasticon.
.
King Canute A. D. 1031. founded here a Monastery for Black Monks, and
dedicated it to St. Benedict. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 677l. 9s. 8d.
Speed. and after the Dissolution was exchanged for other lands with the Bishop
of Norwich, who for this reason is yet styled Abbat of Hulme.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 282. Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 137.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Galba. E. 1.

4. Thetford.
Herfastus Bishop of the East Angles A. D. 1075. removed his Seat from Elmham
to this place, where it continued nineteen years, and then 'twas translated to
Norwich.

Vide Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 406.

5. UUalsingham.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Galf. de Favarches, (temp. Will. Conq.)
and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution
were worth 391l. 11s. 7d. q. Dugd. 446l. 14s. 4d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. ^. p. 20.

Registr. penes Sam. Roper de Hosp. Linc. Arm.

6. UUest-Acre.
A Priory of Cluniac Monks Black Canons. Speed.
subordinate to Jews in Sussex dedicated to St. Mary and All Saints, founded
by Ralph de Todenei, (temp. Will. ^onq.) It Is annual revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 260l. 13s. 7d. q. Dugd. 308l. 19s. 11d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 619.

7. Castel-Acre.
A. D. 1090. Will. Warren Earl of Surrey, built an Abbey for Cluniac Monks here,
to the honor of St. Mary, St. Peter, and St. Paul. It was subordinate to Jews
in Sussex, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 306l. 11s. 4d. ob. q. Dugd. 324l. 17s.
5d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 624.

Registr. in Bibl. Deuvesiana. A. D. 1644.

* Reg. penes D. Th. Widdrington.

8. Norwich.
A. D. 1094. Herebert Losing Bishop of Thetford translated his Episcopal Seat
hither, and founded his Cathedral Church here to the honor of the holy
Trinity, in which he placed Benedictine Monks about A. D. 1100. who continued
till the Dissolution, at which time King Henry VIII. put in their room a Dean
and six Prebendaries.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 407, 1003. T. 3. P. 1. p. 5.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. in Anglia Tr. 2. p. 146. Anglia Sacr. T. p. 397.

* Cartas, Registra, etc. penes Episcopum, Decanum and Capitulum.

9. Linn.
A Cell of Benedictines to the Abbey of Norwich, founded by Herbert Bishop of
Norwich about A. D. 1100.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

10. Yarmouth.
A Cell of Black Monks to Norwich, founded by the same Bishop Herbert.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

11. Thetford.
A. D. 1103. Roger Bigod built a Priory here for Cluniac Monks, to the honor
of St. Mary and St. Andrew. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 312l. 13s.
4d. ob. per an. Dugd. 418l. 6s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 664.

* Reg. penes Will. le Neve Clar. R. Arm.

12. Horseham or Horsford Placed in Sussex, Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1036. Mr. Speed
confounds it with Horsley in Surrey.
.
A Priory of Black Monks Black Canons. MS. Bodl.
dedicated to St. Faith, founded by Rob. Fitz-Walter 6. Henr. I. who annexed it
as a Cell to the Abbey of Conches in France. It was made Prioratus Indigena, 16.
Rich. II. and its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 162l. 16s. 11d.
ob. Dugd. 123l. 2s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 414.

13. UUymondham or ^Uindham.
Will. de Albini Not founded A. D. 1139. as the Chronicle of the Monk of Hulm
says, because the Founders Charter was confirmed by King Henry I. who died
four years before.
(temp. Hen. I.) founded here a Priory of Black Monks, subordinate to St.
Albans, it was dedicated to St. Mary, and rated at 211l. 16s. 6d. per an. Dugd.
72l. 5s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 337.

Registr. penes Will. le Neve Reg. Arm. Clarent. 1640.

* Registrum in Bibl. Cotton.

14. Binham.
A Priory of Black Monks subordinate to St. Albans, built by Petr. de Valoniis,
(temp. Hen. I.) and dedicated to St. Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 178, 343.

* Reg. penes D. Th. Widdrington.

15. Tofte^.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Preaux in France, to which it was given by Rob.
Earl of Mellent and Leicester, (temp. Hen. I.) After the Suppression of these
Priories, King Henry VI. annexed the revenues of this Cell to the College of
Eaton.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 598. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

16. Bromholm or Ba^etun.
A Priory of Cluniac Monks built by William Glanvill This William Glanvill was
Founder of this Priory, not Bartholemew his son, as in Dugdale's Baronage. T.
1. p. 423.
A. D. 1113. (temp. Hen. I.) to the honor of St. Andrew It was dedicated to
St. Sepulcher. MS. Bodl. Sp. Reyn.
It was subordinate to the Abbey of Castel-acre, and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
100l. 5s. 3d. q. per an. Dugd. 144l. 19s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 632. T. 2. p. 909.

17. Hempton or Falkinhindon, v. Falkenham.
Roger de S. Martino (temp. Hen. I.) built here a Priory of Black Canons to the
honor of St. Mary and St. Stephen. It was rated at 32l. 14s. 8d. per an. Dugd.
39l. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

18. Pentney.
Rob. de Vauz (temp. R. Steph.) built a Priory of Black Canons here, to the
honor of the Holy Trinity, St. Mary, and St. Mary Magdalene. It was valued 26.
Hen. VIII. at 170l. 4s. 9d. per an. Dugd. 215l. 18s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 19.

19. Thetford.
A Priory of Canons Regular of the Order of the holy Sepulcher, founded by
William Earl of Warren, (temp. R. Steph.) It was endowed at the Suppression
with 39l. 6s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 49l. 18s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 574.

20. Buckenham.
Will. Earl of Chichester, (temp. R. Steph.) built a Priory of Black Canons
here, and commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. James. It was rated
26. Hen. VIII. at 108l. 10s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 131l. 11s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 274.

21. Carow, Cardiou. Speed.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by King Stephen, and dedicated to the blessed
Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 64l. 16s. 6d. per
an. Dugd. 84l. 12s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 426.

22. Carbroke.
A Commandery of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, given them by Maud
Countess of Clare temp. Hen. II. It was worth 65l. 2s. 9d. per an. at the
Dissolution.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 546.

23. UUaburn.
Sir Ralph Meyngarin Knight, (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Priory of Benedictines
here, which was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 24l. 19s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 28l. 7s.
2d. Speed.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 490.

24. Cokesford in Rudeham Coxford is the name of the Manor, where the Priory
stands, but it is in Rudeham paroch. Leland. Collect. Vol. 1. p. 58.
, Budham. Sp.
Will. Cheny (temp. Hen. II.) founded Founded by Sir John Cheney A. D. 1243.
Weever's Funeral. Mon.
here a Priory of Regular Canons of St. Austin's Order, and commended it to the
Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were worth 121l. 18s.
10d. ob. Dugd. 153l. 7s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 234.

25. Reinham.
A Cell of Cluniac Monks to the Abbey of Castel-Acre founded by William de
Lisewis about A. D. 1180. St. John the Evangelist was the Tutelar Saint of this
Priory.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 1. p. 636.

26. Shouldeham.
Galfr. Fitz-Piers Earl of Essex (temp. Rich. I.) founded a Gilbertine Nunnery
here, and dedicated it to the Virgin Mary and the Holy Cross. It was endowed at
the Suppression with 138l. 18s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 171l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 820.

27. Langley.
An Abbey of Praemonstratensian Canons Not Nuns as in Speed, nor of the Cluniae
Order as in Reyner.
, built by Rob. fill. Rogeri (temp. R. Ioh.) to the honor of the blessed
Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 104l. 16s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 128l.
19s. 9d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 659.

28. Dickling.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to S. Austin and All Saints, founded by
Leland. Collect. Vol. 1. P. 58.
Theobald de Valentia, (temp. Reg. Ioh.) It was endowed at the Suppression with
100l. 18s. 7d. ob. q. per an. Dugd. 137l. 1d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 319.

29. Wirmegay.
A Priory founded by William de Warren (temp. Reg. Johan.) Dugd. Baronage T. 1.
p. 83. Not Reginald de Warren as in MS. Ashmol.
.

30. Biston or Beeston.
A Benedictine Priory founded by the Lady Cressy, valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 43l.
2s. 4d. ob. per an. Dugd. 50l. 6s. 4d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

31. Blackborough.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary and St. Catherine, founded by
Roger Scalies and Muriel his wife Leland. Coll. Vol. 1. p. 56.
, endowed at the Suppression with 42l. 6s. 7d. ob. per an. Dugd. 76l. 3s. 9d.
ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 478. T. 2. p. 879.

Registr. in Biblioth. Spelman. 1640.

32. Crabhouse.
A Nunnery of St. Austins Order Ibid.
, valued at 24l. 19s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 31l. 16s. 7d. Speed.

33. Thetford.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Gregory, founded by... Abbat of St.
Edmundsbury Ibid.
. Endowed with 40l. 11s. 2d. ob. per an. Dugd. 50l. 9s. 8d. Speed.

34. Weybridge or Wexbridge.
A Priory dedicated to St. Margaret, valued at 7l. 13s. 4d.

35. Wirham.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Wynwale MS Bodl. Black Canons. Speed.
.

36. Little Ingham.
A Priory of the Trinitarian Order A Cell of Black Monks to St. Albans, and
dedicated to St. Mary. Speed. We^ver.
, founded by Will. Stafferton, endowed at the Suppression with 61l. 9s. 7d. ob.
q. per an. Dugd. 74l. 2s. 7d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 833.

37. Flytcham.
A Nunnery, Cell to Walsingham. The annual income of this Priory at the
Dissolution, was 55l. 5s. 6d. ob. q. Dugd. 62l. 10s. 6d. ob. Speed.

38. Marmound.
A Gilbertine Nunnery, valued 26. Hen. VIII at 10l. 7s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 13l.
6s. 1d. ob. Speed.

39. Lesingham.
An Alien-Priory founded by Sir Thomas de Lesmgham MS. Ashmol.
, given by King Henry VI. to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

40. Wenghale.
A Nunnery subordinate to the Monastery of Reinham, founded by Roger Prior of
Reinham, A. D....

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 637.

41. Fildalling.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Savignei in France, annexed by King Rich. II.
to the Carthusians of St. Anne's Priory near Coventry.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 966.

42. Heveringland.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Laurence de Montegaudio in France.

43. Malsingham.
A Cell of Canons to Westacre Leland Collect. Vol. 1. p. 57.
.

44. S. Olaves.
A Benedictine Priory founded by Roger fill. Osberti.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

45. Aldeby.
A Cell of Benedictines to the Abbey of Norwich, to which it was given by Agnes
de Bello-fago, and dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

46. UUendlyng.
An Abbey of the Praemonstratensian Order, built by Will. de Wendling, to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were worth 55l. 18s. 4d. ob.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 613.

47. Sporley.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Florence near Salmur, given by Hen. VI. to
Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

48. UUells Falsely placed by the Monasticon in Essex.
.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Stephen at Caen in Normandy, to which it
was given by Will. de Estois or Will. de Scocris.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 574. T. 2. p. 956.

49. UUrongly.
A Cell to Pentney Leland Collect. Vol. 1. p. 57.
.

50. Mendham.
A Cluniac Priory subordinate to Castle-acre, founded by Will. de
Huntingfield... dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 631.

51. Burnham.
A Priory of Austin Canons called Prioratus S.

Mariae de Pratis inter Creyk and Burnham, founded by Alicia de Nerford A. D.
1221. to the honor of St. Bartholomew.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 327.

* Registrum penes Henr. Dereham de West-Dereham Armig. A. D. 1632.

52. Slevesholm.
A Cell of Cluniac Monks to Castel-Acre, to which it was given by William Earl
of Warren about A. D. 1222. It was dedicated to St. George.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 638.

53. Marham-Barbara.
A Nunnery of the Cistercian Order built by Isabella de Albini Countess of
Arundel, A. D. 1252. It Is yearly revenues were worth 33l. 13s. 5d. ob. q. Dugd.
42l. 4s. 7d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 929.

* Reg. penes Joh. Hare de Stowhill in Com. Norf. mil. A. D. 1632.

54. Castre juxta Yarmouth.
A Collegiate Church built by Rob. de Castre MS. Ashnol. Speed. Weever.
, to the honor of St. John Baptist.

55. Tomeston or Tomson.
A College of Secular Canons founded by Tho. de Shardelow Knight, and John his
brother, 22. Edw. III. Leland. Speed. Weever.
Valued at 52l. 15s. 7d. Dugd.

56. Raveningham.
A College built by John de Norwych Knight, 24. Edw. III. to the honor of St.
Mary and St. Andrew, for a Master and eight Priests.

57. Rushworth.
A College of Secular Canons founded by the Lord Edmund de Gonevil Founded by
Sir Rob. Wingfield Knight, Speed.
about A. D. 1360. dedicated to St. John the Evangelist. It was rated 26. Hen.
VIII. at 85l. 15s. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 110.

58. Attilburgh.
Sir Rob. Mortimer founded a College for a Warden and four Secular Canons in
the Church of the holy Cross here, 7. Hen. IV. It was endowed with 21l. 16s.
3d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 142.

59. Heringby.
A College valued at 23l. 6s. 5d.

60. Norwich.
There was a College in the Church of St. Martin in Campis, founded by one John
Brown Leland Collect. Vol. 1. p. 59.
.

Sibton placed in this County by the Monasticon, (T. 3. P. 1. p. 22.) is in
Suffolk.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
1. Castor.
AN old Monastery founded by Kinneburga daughter to King Penda, but destroyed
by the Danes about A. D. 1010. Camd.

2. Peterburgh olim Medeshamsted.
This famous Abbey was begun by Peada King of the Mercians A. D. 655. and
finished by his Brother and Successor King Wolfere, who commended it to the
Patronage of St. Peter. It was of the Benedictine Order, and valued 26. Hen.
VIII. at 1721l. 14s. ob. q. per an. Dugd. 1972l. 7s. ob. q. Speed. At the
Dissolution of Abbeys King Henry VIII. turned this into a Cathedral, and placed
here a Bishop, a Dean, and six Prebendaries, etc.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 63.

The history of the Church of Peterburgh by Simon Gunton, published with large
Additions by Dr. Patrick. Land. 1686. fol.

* Registrum Will. Abbatis de Burgo S. Petri vocatum, The White Book, penes
Rob. Wingfield militem 1636.

* Collectiones MS. Rog. Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 86.

* Registri Terrarum Mon. Burgi S. Petri Partem 1am. in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. C.
1. 2. Partem 2dam. in ead. Bibl. Cleop. C. 2. 1.

* Cronicon Petroburgense a fundatione Monasterii ibidem ad A. Chapter 1368.
continens seriem Abbatum Petroburgensium and Priorum Spaldingensis Ecclesiae
per Johannem Abbatem Burgi S. Petri. In Bibl. Cotton. Claudius A. 5. 1.

* Coenobii Petroburg. Historiam vetustissimam. In Bibl. Cotton. Otho A. 16. 3.

3. Peykirk olim Pegelandia.
An ancient Monastery founded in memory of Pega Sister to St. Guthlac; but
destroyed by the Danes, and the Monks afterward removed to Croiland, A. D.
1048. Iugulphi Hist. Croiland. Edit. Oxon. p. 63.


4. Wedon.
Leland Leland. Itin. V. 1. f. 11.
tells us, that St. Werburg was a Nun at Wedon, where was a Monastery in Bede's
time, afterward destroyed by the Danes. After the Conquest here were two
Alien-Priories, one called Wedon-Pinkney belonging to the Abbey of St. Lucian
near Beauvoys in France, by the gift of Giles de Pinkeni; the lands belonging
to this Priory were granted by King Henry VI. to All Souls College in Oxford
Hist and Antiq. Oxon. T. 2. p. 174.
. The other was Cell to the Abbey of Bec in Normandy, to which Abbey Roger de
Thebovil gave part of this Manor, which was bestowed after the Dissolution of
these Alien-Priories by King Henry VI. on Eaton College Leland. d supra
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 584. T. 2. 954.

* Cartas ad hos Prioratus spectantes in Thesaurariis Collegiorum Omn. Anim.
Oxon. and Eton.

5. Dorthampton.
A Priory of Cluniac Monks built by Simon de Seinlitz Earl of Northampton A. D.
1084. to the honor of St. Andrew. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 263l. 7s.
1d. q. per an. Dugd. 344l. 13s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 679. Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 2. p. 129.

Registr. in Bibl. Hattoniana.

Registr. penes Jo. Theyer de Coupershilt juxta Glocestr.

* Cartularium penes Joh. Lamb militem. 1641. * Collectiones MSS. Rog.
Dodsworthi Eboracensis in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 100.

6. Chacomb.
Hugh Chacomb (temp. Will. Conq.) founded here a Priory of Canons Augustin's,
and dedicated it to St. Peter and St. Paul. It Is yearly revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 83l. 18s. 9d. ob. Dugd. 93l. 6s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 279.

* Rentale terrarum ad Mon. de Chacomb spectantium in Offcio Armorum London.

7. Davintre.
A Priory of Cluniac Monks built by Hugh de Leicester about A. D. 1090. St.
Augustine was the Tutelar Saint of this Monastery. It was rated at 236l. 7s.
6d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 672.

Registr. penes Joh. Rushworth ex Hosp. Lincoln.

8. Fodringhey.
Here was in ancient time a Nunnery, the Nuns were translated to De la pre near
Northampton Leland. Itin. Vol. 1. f. 11.
. In place of which Edward Duke of York built a College here to the honor of
St. Mary and All Saints A. D. 1415. At the Suppression it was seized of lands
to the yearly value of 419l. 11s. 10d. ob. for the maintenance of a Master,
twelve Canons, eight Clerks, and thirteen Choristers.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 158.

9. Northampton.
The Abbey of St. Mary de Pratis for Cluniac Nuns, founded (temp. Reg. Steph.)
by Simon de Seinlitz II. Earl of Northampton. It was endowed at the Suppression
with 119l. 9s. 7d. q. Dugd. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1011.

10. Northampton.
An Abbey of Black Canons built by Will. Peverell to the honor of St. James,
(temp. R. Steph.) It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 175l. 8s. 2d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 213l. 17s. 2d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 49.

Registr. S. Jacobi extra Northampton in Bibl. Cotton. Tiber. E. 5.

11. Pipewell ol. De Divisis.
A. D. 1143. Not founded ( temp. Hen. II.) as in Speed.
Will. de Boteville founded here an Abbey for Cistercian Monks. It Is yearly
revenues were worth 286l. 11s. 8d. ob. q. Dugd. 347. 8. ob. Speed. It was
dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 815.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Jul. A. 1.

* Coll. MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 136.

12. Sulby or UUelleford.
A Premonstratensian Abbey Not an Abbey of Black Monks as in Speed.
founded by Will. de Widevile and Rob. Paviley Knights, and dedicated to St.
Mary. It was valued at 258l. 8s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 305l. 8s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 627.

13. Finnisheved.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Rich. de Engayn, (temp. R. Ioh.) and
dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 56l. 10s. 11d.
ob. per an. Dugd. 62l. 16s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 296.

* Reg. pen. Rob. Kirkham de Finnisheved Arm.

14. UUyrthorp or UUigsthorp.
A Benedictine Nunnery Black Monks. Speed.
united to St. Michaels near Stamford, 28. Edw. III.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 489.

* Munimenta penes Johannem Comitem Exon.

15. Catesby.
Robert the son of Philip de Essebie built a Benedictine Falsely said to be of
the Sempringham Order, by Mr. Speed.
Nunnery here, to the honor of St. Mary and St. Edmund It was dedicated to St.
Thomas the Martyr. MS Bodl.
It was endowed at the Dissolution with 132l. 1s. 11d. q. per an. Dugd. 145l.
6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. ^. 2. p. 896.

16. Ashby.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary, endowed with 119l. 4d. per an.
Dugd. 127l. 19s. Speed.

* Reg. pen.... Orleber Arm. de Puddington in Com. Bedf.

17. Saint-Davy.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to the Holy Trinity and the blessed Virgin.
Speed.

18. Gare Qu. whether it was not the same with Goring in Oxfordshire?
.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Speed.

19. Rothwell.
A Nunnery dedicated to St. John Baptist, valued at 5l. 19s. 8d. per an. Dugd.
10l. 10s. 4d. Speed.

20. Sewardesly or Sewesly.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary, endowed with 12l. 6s. 7d. q. per
an. Dugd. 18l. 11s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 496.

21. Euerdon Erroneously placed in Norfolk by the Monasticon (T. 1. p. 1035.)
.
An Alien-Priory given by Henry VI. to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1035. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

22. Cotherstoke.
A College for a Provost, twelve Secular Canons, and two Clerks, founded by
Ioh. Giffard 12. Edw. III.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 96.

23. Irtelingburgh.
A Collegiate Church dedicated to St. Peter, consisting of six Canons and four
Clerks, founded by the Abbat and Convent of Peterburgh and John Pyel, (temp.
Edw. III.) endowed with 64l. 12s. 10d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 108.

24. Higham-Ferrers.
Henry Chichele Archbishop of Canterbury, founded a College here ( temp. Hen.
V.) for eight Secular Canons, four Clerks, and six Choristers, and commended it
to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin, St. Thomas of Canterbury, and St.
Edmund the Confessor. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 156l. 2s. 7d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 175.

25. Towcester.
A College, valued at the Dissolution at 19l. 6s. 8d. per an.

26. Brackley.
A College founded by... Lord Zouch. Camden.

Vide Reg. Hosp. ibid. in Coll. B. Mar. Magd. Oxon.

NORTHUMBERLAND.
1. Lindisfarn or Holy Island.
IN this Island was the Seat of the Bishops of these Northern parts for almost
250. years, viz. from the time of Bishop Aidan, who was first placed here by
King Oswald A. D. 635. till the flight of Bishop. Eardulf for fear of the Danes
A. D. 875. Here was afterward a Cell of Black Monks subordinate to the Abbey of
Durham, which was endowed at the Dissolution with 48l. 18s. 11d. per an. Dugd.
60l. 5s. Speed

Vide Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 691.

2. Henham.
Here was a Bishop's See founded by St. Wilfrid A. D. 674. which continued
until A. D. 821. and then was united to Lindisfarn. Thomas Archbishop of York
A. D. 1113. placed here a Convent of Canons Regular of the Order of St. Austin.
It was dedicated to St. Andrew, and endowed at the Dissolution with 122l. 11s.
per an. Dugd. 138l. 1s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 90. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 694.

Ricardi Prioris Hagustaldensis tractatum de statu and Episcopis Hagust.
Ecclesiae inter X. Script. Hist. Angl. London. 1652. fol.

* Reg. de Hexham penes Joh. Fenwick mil.

3. Tynmonth.
A Priory of Benedictine Monks Not a Nunnery as in Speed.
built by Rob. de Moubray Earl of Northumberland, (temp. Will. Conq.) to the
honor of St. Mary and St. Oswin. It was subordinate to the Abbey of St. Alban
in Hertfordshire, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 397l. 10s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd.
511l. 4s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 333.

4. Brekenburn or Brinkburn.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Will. Bertram, (temp. Hen. I.) and
commended to the Patronage of St. Peter. It was rated at 68l. 19s. 1d. per an.
Dugd. 77l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 203. 8

Regist. penes Dom. Will. Howard de Naworth A. D. 1638.

5. Newminster near Morpeth Erroneously placed in Yorkshire by the Monasticon.
.
A. D. 1138. Ralph de Merley built here an Abbey for Cistercian Monks. It Is
yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 100l. 8s. 1d. Dugd. 140l. 10s.
4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 800. T. 2. p. 917.

* Regist. penes Dom. Will Howard de Naworth.

6. Alnewick.
An Abbey for Praemonstratensian Canons founded by Eustace Fitz-Iohn A. D. 1147.
It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 189l. 15s.
per an. Dugd. 194l. 7s. Speed. Mr. Speed is under a mistake, when he tells us
that this revenue belonged to the Carmelite Friars; but we may presume he knew
nothing of the Praemanstratenses, because he has made no mention of their Abbey.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 591.

* Reg. penes Dom. W. Howard de Morpeth.

* Reg. penes Joh. Brandling de ead. mil.

* Collectiones MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 49.

7. Blanca-Landa or Alba-Landa.
Walter de Bolebec (temp. Hen. II.) built a Praemonstratensian Abbey here to the
honor of St. Mary. It was endowed with 40l. 9s. per an. Dugd. 44l. 9s. 1d. ob.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 611.

8. Lambley.
A Priory of Benedictine Nuns founded by King John or Adam de Tindale. It Is
Tutelar Saint was S. Patrick.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 506.

9. Ovingham.
A Cell of three Canons to Hexham, sounded by... Vnfranvile Leland. Itin. Vol.
5. p. 92.
.

10. Fa^^, by Mr. Speed corruptly called Frameland, Ferne-Eland and Flaneland.
A Cell of Benedictines to Durham Abbey, valued at 12l. 17s. 8d. per an. Dugd.
Speed.

11. Newcastle.
A Nunnery dedicated to St. Bartholomew, it was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 36l.
10d. per an. Dugd. 37l. 4s. 2d. Speed.

12. Halyston or Holiscomb.
A Benedictine Nunnery, valued at 11l. 5s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 15l. 10s. 8d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 476.

13. Warmington.
A Cell to St. Marie's Abbey at York Reyner. Apost. Bened.
.

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
1. Southwell.
A Collegiate Church first founded by Paulinus Archbishop of York about A. D.
630. and augmented by King Edgar. It was dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Upon the
Dissolution of Colleges (2. Edw. VI.) the lands belonging to this Church were
alienated, but restored again in part by Queen Elizabeth.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 10.

The Antiquities of Nottingham-shire illustrated by Rob. Thoroton M. D. Land.
1677. fol. p. 310.

* Registra, Cartas Originales, etc. penes Capitulum.

2. Blyth.
A Priory of the Benedictine Order, built by Roger de Builly A. D. 1088. to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It was subordinate to the Abbey of St. Catherine
at Roan, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 113l. 8s. ob. per an. Dugd. 126l. 8s. 2d.
ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 553. T. 3. P. 1. p. 19.

The Antiquities of Nottingham-shire p. 427.

Registr. de Blida pen. Gervas. Clifton Bar. 1660.

* Registrum penes... Sanderson de Serleby.

3. Wirksop or Radeford.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Gul. de Lovetoft, (3. Hen. I.) and by him
commended to the Patronage of St. Cuthbert. It was rated at 239l. 15s. 5d. per
an. Dugd. 302l. 6s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 50, 937.

Dr. Thoroton's Notingham-shire p. 453.

* Reg. penes Joh. Seldom.

* Registrum penes Geo. Lascells de Kniveton in Com. Nottingh.

* Cartas penes Illustriss. Henr. Ducem Norfolc.

4. Lenton.
Will. Peverel (temp. Hen. I.) founded here a Priory for Cluniac Monks, and
dedicated it to the Holy Trinity. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 329l. 15s. 10d. ob. Dugd. 417l. 19s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 645. T. 3. P. 1. p. 30.

Dr. Thoroton's Nottingham-shire p. 218.

* Reg. penes Sam. Roper de Heanore in Com. Derb. Arm. A. D. 1677.

5. Thurgarton.
About A. D. 1130. Ralph D' Ayncourt built a Priory of Black Canons here to the
honor of St. Peter, endowed at the Suppression with 259l. 9s. 4d. ob. q. per
an. Dugd. 359l. 15s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 92.

Dr. Thoroton's Nottingham-shire p. 302.

Reg. penes Com. de Chesterfield.

* Registrum penes Cecilium Cooper Genesis 1677.

6. Rufford, Rumeford. Lel.
A. D. 1148. Gilbert Earl of Lincoln founded here an Abbey of the Cistercian
Order, and dedicated it to St. Mary. It was valued at 176l. 11s. 6d. per an.
Dugd. 254l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 848.

Thoroton's Nottingham-shire p. 433.

* Reg. penes... Strelley mil. A. D. 1633.

* Registrum penes Sam. Roper de Kirkby Monach in Com. Warw.

* Cartas penes Honoratiss. Georgium March. Hallifax.

7. Welbeck.
A Praemonstratensian A Priory of Black Canons. Speed.
Priory founded by Tho. Cukenay (temp. R. Steph.) it is Tutelar Saint was St.
James. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 249l. 6s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 298l. 4s. 8d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 597.

Thoroton's Nottingham-shire p. 450.

Registr. penes Comitem de Kingston A. D. 1630.

Registrum pen. Rich. Whalley de Screton in Com. Not. 1613.

* Cartas etc. penes Ducem Novocastr.

* Collectanea MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 135.

8. Shelford.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Ralph Haunselyn (temp. R. Steph.) to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues at the Suppression were
worth 116l. Dugd. 151l. 14s. 1d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 65.

Thoroton's Nottingham-shire p. 147.

9. Brodham.
A Praemonstatensian Abbey dedicated to S. Mary, founded by Leland. Collect.
Vol. 1. p. 89. It Is probable that Leland is in a mistake here, for Agnes was
wife of Peter Golsa, and his daughters name was Sarah, who was perhaps the
Foundress of this Monastery. See Thoroton and the Monasticon.
Agnes daughter of Peter Golsa, (temp. R. Steph.) rated at 16l. 5s. 2d. per an.
Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 646. Thoroton p. 195.

10. Felley.
A Priory of Black Canons Not Black Monks as in Speed.
subordinate to Wirksop, to which it was given by Ralph de Annesly A. D. 1156.
dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed with 40l. 19s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 61l. 4s.
8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 56. Thoroton p. 253.

11. Newstead.
A Priory of Black Canons built by King Hen. II. to the honor of St. Mary. Its
yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 167l. 16s. 11d. ob. Dugd. 219l.
18s. 8d. ob. Speed.

Vid. Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 317. Thoroton p. 260.

Cartularium penes Gelielmum Dom. Byron.

* Registrum in Scaccario pen. Rememorat. Regis.

12. Mattersey or Maresey Erroneously placed in Lincolnshire by the Monasticon.
.
A Priory of Gilbertines dedicated to St. Helen, founded before the year 1192.
valued at 55l. 2s. 5d. Dugd. 61l. 17s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 811. Thoroton p. 480.

13. Walingwels.
Ralph de Cheurolcurt (temp. R. Ioh.) founded a Benedictine Nunnery here, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was endowed with 58l. 9s. 10d. per an.
Dugd. 87l. 11s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 502. Thoroton. p. 463.

14. Beauvale or Gresely.
Nicholas de Cantilupo (16. Edw. III.) founded here a Carthusian Priory to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 196l. 6s. per an.
Dugd. 227l. 2s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 962. Thoroton p. 240.

15. Sibthorp.
Thomas de Sibthorp Parson of Bekingham in Lincolnshire, founded ( temp. Edw.
III.) in the Church of St. Peter here, a College consisting of a Warden, eight
Secular Priests, and three Clerks.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 80.

Dr. Thorotons history of Nottingham-shire p. 170.

* Registrum penes virum eruditum R. Thoroton.

16. Tuxford.
A College of Secular Canons founded here by John Longvillers, 31. Edw. III.

Vide Mon. Ang. T. 3. P. 2. p. 90. Thoroton. p. 382.

17. Clifton.
A College dedicated to the holy Trinity, built by Sir Robert and his son Sir
Gervase Clifton (temp. Edw. II.) valued at 20l. 2s. 6d. per an.

Dr. Thoroton's history of Notingham-shire p. 55.

Not in Yorkshire where it is placed in the Monasticon.
OXFORDSHIRE.
1. Dorchester.
AT the first Conversion of the Saxons to the Christian Faith here was an
Episcopal See, which was founded by St. Birin A. D. 635. who had under his
jurisdiction the two large Kingdoms of the West Saxons and Mercians. And tho^
in after times it was mightily abridg'd in its extent, the Bishoprics of
Winchester, Salisbury, Exeter, Bath and Wells, Litchfield, Worcester and
Hereford, being taken out of it, yet the Diocese still remained the largest in
England, the Bishops of which had their Seat here till Remigius translated it
to Lincoln about A. D. 1075. The Priory of Black Canons was afterward built by
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln about A. D. 1140. to the honor of St. Peter, St.
Paul, and St. Birin MS. Bodl.
. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 219l. 12s. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 197.

* Cartas quamplurimas ad hunc Prioratum spectantes in Registro Dominorum de
Borstal penes D. Joh. Aubrey de ead. Baronettum.

* Munimenta pen. V. Rev. Ric. Davis de Sanford.

2. St. Frideswide's now Christ Church in Oxford.
About A. D. 730. Didanus a petty King in these parts founded a Nunnery here,
in honor of St. Mary and All Saints, and made his daughter Frideswide Abbess
thereof; who being buri^d here and afterward Canonized, this Monastery in
process of time was called by her name. But the Nuns being dispersed in the
Danish wars, Secular Priests inhabited this place till A. D. 1111. at which
time Roger Bishop of Salisbury placed a Convent of Regular Canons of the Order
of St. Austin in the Church of St. Frideswide under the care of Prior Guymund.
This Priory being surrendered into the King's hands A. D. 1524. the next year
Cardinal Wolsey began the foundation of a Noble College for a Dean, eighteen
Canons, etc. But A. D. 1529. the King seized on all the Cardinals revenues, and
among other on the lands appointed for the endowment of this College. A. D.
1532. King Henry VIII. reestablished it for a Dean and twelve Canons; but this
was also dissolved A. D. 1545. In the next year the Bishop's Seat being removed
from Oseney, this Church became a Cathedral, and the King refounded the
Chapter. This Royal and ample Foundation consists of a Dean, eight Canons, one
hundred Students, besides Chapla^s, Choristers, etc.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 173, 983.

Historiam and Antiquitates Acad. Oxon. per Ant. Wood. Lib. II. p. 246. Oxon.
1674.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc. by White Kennett B. D.

Registr. in Bibliotheca Coll. Corp. Christi. Oxon.

* Historiam Fundationis Prioratus S. Frideswid^ Oxon. per Will. Wyrley. MS.
penes Henr. Worsley de Hosp. Linc. Arm.

* Registra, Cartas Originales, etc. in Thesaurario Aedis Christi Oxon.

3. ^ynsham.
A Benedictine Abbey built by Aethelmare or Ailmer Earl of Devonshire A. D.
1005. to the honor of St. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 441. 12s. 2d.
ob. per an. Dugd. 441l. 16s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 258.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

Registr. penes Decan. and Capit Eccl. Christi Oxon.

* Johannis de Wudetun Librum Statutorum Monasterii de Eynsham MS. In bibl.
Bodl. NE. F. 3. 7.

4. Oxford.
A. D. 1075. Cronicon Thomae ^ikes Canonici de Oseney. Edit. Oxon. 1687.
Robert D' Oily founded the Collegiate Church of St. George within the Castle
here, for a Dean and Secular Canons; but about A. D. 1129 Histor and Antiq.
Univ. Oxon. Lib. I. p. 48.
. they were translated to Oseney, where they became Regulars of the Order of
St. Austin.

5. ^rgges.
An Alien-Priory of Black Monks to the Abbey of Fiscamp in Normandy, founded by
Manasser Arsic A. D. 1103. It was given by Henry VI. to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 573. T. 3. P. 2. p. 199.

6. Osney.
A. D. 1129. Rob. D' Oily built a Priory of Canons Augustines here to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
654l. 10s. 2d. Dugd. 755l. 18s. 6d. Speed. Upon the erection of the new
Bishoprics by King Hen. VIII. the Seat of the Bishop of Oxfordshire was placed
here, but it was not long after, viz. 1546. translated to Christ-Church Oxon.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 136.

Mr. Kennett's Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester. etc.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Reg. in Scaccario penes Remem. Regis D.

* Registra, Rentalia and alia munimenta ad bam Abbatiam spectantia in
Thesaurario Aedis Christi, Oxon.

* Historiam fundationis Abbatiae de Osney per Will. Wyrley MS. in Bibliotheca
Henr. Worsley de Hosp. Lincoln. Arm.

7. Godstow.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by one Editha or Ida a rich widow, A. D. 1138.
It was dedicated to St. Mary and St. John Baptist, and rated at 274. 5s. 10d.
ob. per an. Dugd. 319l. 18s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 525. T. 2. p. 884.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

* Historiam de Godstow inter MSS. Hon. Comitis de Clarendon. N. 17.

* Reg. de Godstow in Scaccario pen. Remem. Regis.

* Munim. penes D. J. Walter de Saresden Baron.

8. Tame Not in Buchu (...), in which County this Abbey is said to be situated
by the Editors of the Monasticon.
.
Sir Rob. Gait Knight, A. D. 1138. founded a Cistercian Abbey upon Otmoor within
the parish of Oddington, which was translated hither by Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln. It was commended it to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin, and
endowed with 256l. 13s. 7d. ob. per an. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 802.

Mr. Kennett's Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc.

9. Bruern.
A Cistercian Abbey founded A. D. 1147. by Nicholas Basset Leland. Coll. Vol. 1.
p. ^3.
, it was dedicated to St. Mary. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 134l. 10s. 10d. Dugd. 124l. 10s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 835.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

* Munimenta in These. Coll. Aenei Nasi Oxon.

10. Cold-Norton.
Will. Fitz-Alan (temp. Hen. II.) built here a Priory of Black Canons to the
honor of St. John the Evangelist and St. Giles. This Priory was escheated to
the Crown, ( temp. Hen. VII.) from which it came to the Dean and Chapter of St.
Stephen at Westminster, of whom Bishop Smith bought it, and gave it 5. Hen.
VIII. to Brasen-nose College in Oxford.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 275. T. 3. P. 1. p. 55.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

* Munimenta penes Principalem and Socios Coll* Aenei Nasi Oxon.

11. Stod^ley.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary, and founded by Bernard de S.
Waleri^o Founded by Peter Corbyzen and Will de (...).
, ( temp. Hen II.) It was endowed at the Suppression with 82l. 4s. 4d. per an.
Dugd. 102l. 6s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 486.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

Registr. ^lim penes Tho. Allen ex Aula Glocestr.

12. Burcester.
Gilbert Basset A. D. 1182. built a Priory of Black Canons to the honor of St.
Mary and St. Edburg. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 147l. 2s. 1d. per an.
Dugd. 167l. 2s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 283.

Parochial Antiquities, first attempted in the History of Ambrosden, Burcester,
and other adjacent villages in the Counties of Oxford and Bucks, deduced from
the time of the Britains to near the Age of the Reformation, by White Kennett
B. D. Vicar of Ambrosden. Hic liber accuratissime Historiam hujus Prioratus a
tempore fundationis ad eversionem usque tractat, quam ex Cartis Autographis
penes D. D. Guil. Glynne de Ambrosden in Com. Oxon. Baronettum, and
quamplurimis aliis Codicibus tum MSS. tum impressis summa fide and industria
contexuit Reverendus Author.

13. Wroxton.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of St. Austin, founded by Mich. Belet (temp.
R. Ioh.) and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues were worth
78l. 13s. 4d. Dugd. 78l. 14s. 3d. Sp.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 326.

* Cartas penes Hon. Franc. Dom. Guildford.

14. Rewley or De Regali loco.
A. D. 1281. Edm. Earl of Cornwall changed the Secular Priests, here placed by
his Father, into an Abbat and fifteen Monks of the Cistercian Order. It Is
Tutelar Saint was the blessed Virgin Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 174l.
3s. ob. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 934.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

15. Burford.
A Priory valued at 13l. 6s. 6d. per an. Dugd. Sp.

16. Clattercote.
A Gilbertine Priory dedicated to St. Leonard. Endowed at the Dissolution with
34l. 19s. 11d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

17. Goring.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to the blessed Virgin, valued at 60l. 6s. 5d.
per an. Dugd. Sp.

Vide. Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, etc.

* Munimenta quaedam ad hoc Caenobium spectantia in Cartulario de Borstall
penes D. J. Aubrey Baron.

18. Saucomb ^u. Whether this is not the same with Chacomb in (...)
.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary. Speed.

19. Minster Lovel.
An Alien-Priory Cell to the Abbey of St. Mary de Ibrcio in Normandy, founded by
some of the family of Lov^l.

V^le Cartas penes Henr. Farmer de Tusmore in C^m. Oxon. Armig.

20. Oxford.
A. D. 1283. John Gisfard Baron of Brimsfield founded a College here for the
Benedictines of St. Peter's at Gloucester, and other Monasteries of that Order.
It was suppressed and the lands alienated by King Henry VIII. part of it yet
remains and is called Glocester-Hall.

Vide Histor and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 338, 380. Reyn. Apost. Bened.
in Angl. Tr. 3. p. 53.

21. Oxford.
A College for eight Benedictine Monks of Durham, built by the Prior and
Convent of Durham, A. D. 1290. to the honor of St. Cuthbert: but more amply
endowed by Thom^ Hatsield Lord Bishop of Durham about A. D. 1370. This being
dissolved by King Henry VIII. in the place where it stood was founded by Sir
Thomas Pope Knight, a College for a President, twelve Fellows, and ^^ght
Scholars, (2, 3. Phil. and Mar.) now called Trinity College.

Vide Histor. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 293, 337. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p.
748, 770, 772.

22. Littlemore near Sandford A Charter belonging to this Priory is referred by
the Monasticon ^T. 1. p. 482.) to Sandl^ford in (...).
.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to S. Nicholas. Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 482.
T. 3. P. 1. p. 13.

23. Milton.
A Priory of Monks I^land. Itin. Vol. 2. ^.
.

24. Sandford.
The Manor of Sandford being given to the Knights Templers by Sir Thomas de
Sandford Knt. A. D.... it became a Preceptory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 544.

Mr. Kennet's Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc.

* Registrum MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Wood. 10.

25. Oxford.
A College for the Black Monks of Canterbury, founded by Simon Islip
Archbishop of Canterbury A. D. 1363 Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 328.
. This was suppressed by Henry VIII. and is now part of Christ-Church.

26. Oxford.
A College for Black Monks Leland. Cellec^. Vol 5. f. 1^.
in the parish of St. Aldate, called London College from Richard Clifford
Bishop of London, who was a great benefactor to it A. D. 1421 (...). and Antiq.
Oxon. Lib. ^. p. 338.
.

27. Oxford.
A. D. 1435. Thomas Holden Esquire and El^zabeth his wife sounded a College
near the Northga^c, for Novices of the Order of St. Austin. It was dedicated to
the blessed Virgin Mary. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 33^.


28. D^ford.
The College of St. Bernard for Monks of the Cistercian Order, was founded by
Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury A. D. 1437. On the site of this
dissolved College Sir Thomas Whit^ Knight built and endowed a College to the
honor of St. John Baptist A. D. 1555.

Vide Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 302, 338.

29. Banbury.
A College dedicated to St. Mary, and endowed with 48l. 6s, Speed.

RUTLAND-SHIRE.
1. Brook.
A Priory of Canons Regular of the Order of St. Austin, subordinate to the
Priory of Kenelworth, founded by Hugh Ferrers (temp. Ric. I.) and dedicated to
the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 40l. per an. Dugd. 43l.
13s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 130.

The history of Rutland-shire by J. Wright. Land. 1684. fol. p. 26.

2. Edichweston.
An Alien-Priory, Cell to the Abbey of S. George of Banquervile, to which it was
given by Will. de Tankervile temp. Hen. II.

Vide M^n. Angl. T. 2. p. 952.

Mr. Wright's Rutland-shire p. 41.

SHROP-SHIRF.
1. Lilleshull.
A Delfleda Queen of Mercia is said to build a Church here in honor of St.
Al^mund, which was afterward endowed with lands for the maintenance of ten
Prebends by King Edgar. The Priory for Canons of the Order of St. Austin was
founded about A. D. 1140. by Philip de Belm^is, and dedicated to the blessed
Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 229l. 3s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 327l. ^0s.
Speed.

Vid^ Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 144.

(...) Ric. Leveson de Trentham in Com. Staff.

2. Wenlock.
An Abbey of the Cluniac Order founded by Roger Earl of Montgomery A. D. 1081.
It Is Tutelar Saint was St. Milburga, who being Niece to Wolphere King of
Mercia, had built a Nunnery here in the Saxon times, which was now destroyed.
It was endowed with 401l. 7l. q. per an. Dugd. 434l. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 631.

3. Shr^wsbury.
A. D. 1083. the same Roger Earl of Mon^g^mery built a Benedictine Abbey here to
the honor of St. P^ter and St. Paul. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 132l. 4s.
10l. per an. Dugd. 615l. 4s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 375.

Registr. pen. Ric. Leveson de Trentham. 1638.

Registr. penes Ric. Lee. 1638.

4. Haghmon.
Will. Fitz-Alan A. D. 1100. founded a Priory of Black Canons here, and
dedicated it to St. John the Evangelist. It Is yearly revenues were worth at the
Dissolution 259l. 13s. 7d. q. per an. Dugd. 294l. 12s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 933.

Registr. penes Walt. Barker de ead. Arm. 1653.

5. Wombridge.
A Priory of Black Canons erected by William Fitz-Alan temp. Hen. I. and by him
commended to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Leonard. It was valued at 65l.
7s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 72l. 15s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 252.

6. Bildewas.
A. D. 1135. Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield built an Abbey for
Cistercian Monks here, to the honor of St. Mary and St. Chad. It was endowed
at the Suppression with 110l. 19s. 3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 129l. 6s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 779. T. 2. p. 914.

Historian Fundationis in Bibl. Cotton. Nero. C. 3.

7. Bromfield.
A Benedictine Priory subordinate to the Abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester, for A.
D. 1155. the Secular Canons in the Church of St. Mary here, were turned into
Black Monks.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. I. p. 464.

8. Abberbury.
A Cell to the Abbey of Grandmont in France, to which it was given by Fulk
Fitz-Warin (temp. Hen. II.) After the Suppression of Alien-Priories Hen.
Chichele Archbishop of Canterbury bestowed it on All Souls College in Oxford
Hist and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 175.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 605.

* Munimenta in Thesaurario Coll. Omn. An^m. Oxon.

9. Halesowenb. Placed also in Worcester shire by Mr. Sp. where it is valued at
282l. 13s. 4d. per. an.
.
An Abbey of Premonstratensian Canons built by Peter de Rupibus Bishop of
Winchester, (temp. Reg. Ioh.) to the honor of the blessed Virgin. Its yearly
revenues were worth 280l. 13s. 2d. ob. Dugd. 337l. 15s. 6d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 655.

* Cartas Originales hujus Monasterii in Castr^ Dudly reservatas.

* Registr. pen. Henr. Littleton Baronettum.

10. Chirbur^ or S^ede.
A Priory of Black Monks, valued at 87l. 7s. 4d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 500.

11. Batlingcope.
A Priory of Black Canons.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 336.

12. Oswestre.
Leland (...) Itin. V^l. 5. f. 26.
tells us, that the Church of St. Oswald here was sometime a Monastery called
the Whiteminster, and the cloister was standing within the memory of some then
living, in which were monuments of Monks.

13. Brer^wood or Brewood.
A Priory of White Nuns Ibid. Vol. 7. f. 33.
, valued at 31l. 1s. 4d. per an. Speed.

14. Battlefield.
King Henry IV. (anno regni XImo.) erected a College of Secular Canons here,
(this being the place in which he overcame Henry Percy and other Rebels) to the
honor of St. Mary Magdalene. Its yearly revenues were worth 26. Hen. VIII.
54l. 1s. 10d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 185.

15. Tongue.
A. D. 1131. Isabel the wife of Fulk Penbridge Knight Founded by... (...) o^
Haddon. (...).
, founded a Collegiate Church here, and dedicated it to St. Bartholomew. It was
endowed at the Dissolution with 22l. 8s. 1d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 143.

16. Newport.
A Collegiate Church founded by Tho. Draper, (20. Hen. VI.) and dedicated to
St. Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 201.

17. Shrewsbury.
The College of St. Mary, worth at the Dissolution 13l. 1s. 8d. per an.

18. Shrewsbury.
The College of S. Chad, valued at 14l. 14s. 4d.

Mr. Speed places Stone and Wigmore in this County, the former of which is in
Staffordshire, and the latter in Hereford-shire.

SOMERSETSHIRE.
1. Glastonbury.
THis place is famous in our old Historians for the ancientest Church in Great
Britain, being, as they say, built by Joseph of Arimathea, A. Chapter 31. It was
also the first Monastery in England, founded by St. Patrick about A. D. 425.
and afterward liberally endowed by the munificence of King Ina, and other Saxon
Kings. St. Dunstan introduced Benedictine Monks here A. D.... It was dedicated
to the blessed Virgin Mary, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 3311l. 7s. 4d. ob. per
an. Dugd. but according to Mr. Speed at 3508l. 13s. 4d. ob. q.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1. T. 2. p. 837.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 1. p. 42.

H. Spelman. Conciliorum Tom. 1. p. 4.

Will. Malmburiensem de Antiquitate Glastoniensis Monasterii. Inter XV. Script.
Hist. Angl. edit. Oxon. 1689.

MS. de Antiquitate and Augmentatione vetustae Ecclesae S. Mariae Glaston. in
B^bl. Bodl. Super D. 1. Art. 14.

Collectiones quasdam MSS. de Glastonia in ead. Bibl. Digb. 186.

Fragmenta Historica Glaston. Monasterii in ead. Bibl. Laud. D. 145.

Secretum Abbatis, sive Cartularium antiquum Abbatiae Glastoniensis penes
Abbatem ejusdem Monasterii conservari solitum, in ead. Bibl. Wood. 1.

Registrum a fundatione hujus Abbatiae usque ad tempora R. Edvard. I. penes
Timotheum Clarges A. M. Aedis Christ Oxon. alumnum.

Annals MSS. in quibus praecipue tractatur de Antiquitate Glastoniensis
Monasterii in Bibl. Cotton. C. 10. 5.

Cronicon Glastonburiense a Wilhelmo I. ad A. Chapter 1388. in ead. Bibl. Cleop. D.
4. 1.

MS. de Antiquitate Glastoniensis Ecclesiae, autore Johanne Monacho ejusdem
loci deflorante Will. Malmburiensem and continuationem Adami de Domerham. in
ead. Bibl. Tiber. A. 5.

Eandem Historiam Johannis ad A. D. 1400. productam in pergameno pulchre
exaratam; cujus ad finem adjiciuntur plurimae Cartae and Index. In Bibl. Musaei
Ashmol. Oxon. N. 760. fol.

Registrum penes Comitissam Devon.

Reg. penes Brian. Pope de Butley in Com. Some. Armigerum.

Reg. penes... Dier de Sharpham-Park in Com. Some.

Reg. in Bibl. Coll. Gresham. London.

2. Congresbury.
It is reported by some Authors of no great credit, that here was a Bishops See
founded A. D. 167. and that it continued here till 'twas removed to Wells by
King Ina.

Vide Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 553.

3. Bath.
A. D. 676. King Osric built a Nunnery here; King Offa placed Secular Canons,
who being expelled by the command of King Edgar, Benedictine Monks were put in
their places. John Bishop of Wells first assumed the title of Bishop Bath,
(temp. Hen. I.) This Abbey was dedicated to St. Peter, and valued 26. Hen. VIII.
at 617l. 2s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 695l. 6s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 184. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 560. Reyner. Apost. Bened.
T. 2. p. 131.

4. Wells.
A. D. 704. King Ina founded a Collegiate Church here to the honor of the
Apostle St. Andrew, and, as some Historians say, removed the Episcopal Seat
hither from Congresbury; but others with great probability affirm, that
Athelmus was the first Bishop of this Diocese, here placed by King Edward and
Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury A. D. 909.

Vide Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 554.

* Cartas etc. penes Decanum and Capitulum.

5. Banwell.
Leland Itin. Vol. 8. p. 4.
tells us, that there was a notable Monastery at Banwell in the time of Alfryde
King of the West Saxons.

6. Athelncy.
A. D. 868. King Alfred founded a Benedictine Abbey here to honor of St. Peter
and St. Aethelwine Speed and MS. Bodl.
. It was rated at 209l. 3d. q. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon* Angl. T. 1. p. 202. Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 2. p. 132.

* Reg. pones Wadh. Windham Justice. ad Placit. 1662.

7. Michelney Erroneously placed in Dorsetshire by the Monasticon.
.
A Benedictine Abbey founded by King Aethelstan A. D. 839. and dedicated to St.
Peter MS. Bodl. and Speed.
. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 447l. 4s. 11d. ob. Dugd.
498l. 16s. 3d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. P. 197.

8. Bruton.
A. D. 1005. Algar Earl of Cornwall built here a Monastery for Monks of the
Benedictine Order: but William Mohun Earl of Somerset (temp. R. Steph.) placed
Black Canons here. It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and rated at the
Dissolution at 439l. 6s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 480l. 17s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 205.

* Munimenta penes Dominum Fitz-Harding.

9. Dunster.
William Not John Mohun as in Speed.
Mohun (temp. Will. Conq.) built a Benedictine Priory here to the honor of St.
George, and annexed it as a Cell to the Abbey of St. Peter at Bath This is by a
mistake put into the Catalogue of Alien-Priories, at the end of the first Tome
of the Monasticon.
. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 37l. 4s. 8d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 477.

10. Montacute Falsely said to be in Herefordshire by Reyner.
.
William Earl of Morton ( temp. Hen. I.) founded here a Priory for Cluniac
Monks, and dedicated it to St. Peter and St. Paul. It was endowed with 456.
14s. 7d. q. per an. Dugd. 524l. 11s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. angl. T. 1. p. 17, 668. T. 2. p. 909.

* Transcripta multarum Cartarum ad Prior. de Montacute pertinentium (quae in
Mon. Angl. non inveniuntur) penes Virum Reverendum Andream Paschal Rectorem de
Chedzoy prope Bridgewater in Com. Summers. 1692.

11. Taunton.
A Priory of Black Canons Black Monks Ms. Bodl. Black Nuns Speed.
erected by William Giffard Bishop of Winton, (temp. Hen. I.) to the honor of
St. Peter and St. Paul. It was valued 26. Hen VIII. at 286l. 8s. 10d. per an.
Dugd. 438l. 9s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 83.

12. Bristoll.
A Priory of Black Monks dedicated to S. James founded by Rob. Fitz-Hamon Earl
of Gloucester, ( temp. Hen. I.) who annexed it as a Cell Teuxbury Abbey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 155, 513.

13. Canington.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Robert Curcy Founded by Will. de Romara
according to Mr. Speed.
, ( temp. Hen. I.) to the honor of the blessed Virgin MS. Bodl. and Speed
. Valued at 39l. 15s. 8d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

* Cartas penes Hon. Dom. Clifford.

14. Bristoll.
A. D. 1148. Leland.
Rob. Fitz-Harding Lord of Berkley, built a priory of Back Canons here to the
honor of St. Augustine. It Is yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
670l. 13s. 11d. Dugd. 767l. 15s. 3d. Speed. King Henry VIII. made it a
Cathedral Church, and founded therein a Chapter of a Dean and... Secular Canons.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 233.

* Registrum apud Castrum de Berkly in Com. Gloc.

* Munimenta penes Decanum and Capitulum.

15. Keynsham Not in Glocestershire where it is said to be by the Editors of the
Monasticon.
.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by William Earl of Gloucester, (temp. Hen.
II.) and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 419l.
14s. 3l. per an. Dugd. 450l. 3s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 298.

16. Witham Erroneously reckoned to be in Lincolnshire by Reyner (Tr. 1. p.
161.)

The first house the Carthusian Monks had in England built by King Henry II Not
King Henry III. as in Speed.
. to the honor of St. John the Baptist. It was endowed with 215l. 15s. per an.
Dugd. 227l. 1s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Angl. Angl. T. 1. p. 959.

17. Stoke-Curcy.
Hugh de Nevill (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Priory of Black Monks here, and made
it an AlienPriory to the Abbey of Lonley in France. It was dedicated to St.
Andrew. King Henry VI. gave it to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 577. T. 3. P. 2. p. 199.

18. Haselburg.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by William Fitz-Walter about A. D. 1160.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 113.

19. Buckland Dugdale confounds this with the Cistercian Abbey in Devonshire.
M^n. Ang. T. p. 1^44. and so does spee^.
.
The only Preceptory of Sisters of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in
England, placed here A. D. 1180. by King Henry II. in the room of the Black
Canons here founded a few years before by William de Erleigh. Dedicated to St.
Mary, and endowed at the Suppression with 223l. 7s. 4d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 550.

20. Clive.
Will. de Romare 9. Ric. I. built a Benedictin^ A Cistercian Abbey. Leland and
Speed.
Abbey here to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
155l. 9s. 5d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 530.

* Reg. penes Wadh. Windham Justice. ad Placita. 1662.

21. Worspring.
A Priory of Canons of St. Austin's Order, erected by William de Curtenai about
A. D. 1210. in memory of St. Thomas the Martyr. It Is yearly revenuus at the
Dissolution were worth 87l. 2s. 11d. ob. Dugd. 110l. 18s. 4d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 271. T. 3. P. 2. p. 47.

22. Henton Not in Wiltshire, in which County it is placed in the Monast.
.
A. D. 1227. Ela Countess of Saram founded a Monastery for Carthusian Monks
here, and dedicated it to St. Mary and St. John. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
248l. 19s. 2d. per an Dugd. 262l. 12s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 960.

23. Berliz, Barlynch, Speed.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Nicholas, endowed with 98l. 14s. 8d.
ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 249.

24. Bearwe, Sp. Minchin-barow, Dugd. v. Barrow-Gurney.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary and St. Edwin, valued at 23l. 14s.
3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 29l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

25. Linton.
An Alien Priory to the Abbey of St. Iacutus in Britanny.

26. Staverdale.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Sir Will. Zouch to the honor of St. James
MS. Ashmol.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 306.

27. Temple-Combe.
A Preceptory of the Knights Templers, endowed with 107l. 16s. 11d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 551.

28. North-Cadbury.
Elizabeth widow to Sir Will. Botreaux Knight, founded a College here 4. Hen.
V. for a Rector, six Secular Canons, and four Clerks.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 173.

29. Moundroy.
A College rated at 11l. 18s. 8d. Dugd. Sp.

30. Stoke under Hamden.
A Collegiate Church for a Provost and several Priests, dedicated to St.
Andrew, and founded by one... Gornay. Sp.

In Mr. Speed's Catalogue under Somersetshire may be found Dunkeswell, which
should be in Devonshire, Westbury in Glocestershire, and Fareley, which is in
Wiltshire.

STAFFORDSHIRE.
1. Litchfield.
KIng Oswy A. D. 656. built a Cathedral Church, and placed here a Bishop for
the Kingdom of Mercia. King Offa about A. D. 786. made it an Archbishops See,
which honor it enjoyed for ten years, and then was again subjected to
Canterbury. It was translated A. D. 1075. to Chester, and from thence to
Coventry A. D. 1102. but the Bishops being not long after settled here again,
Bishop Clinton about A. D. 1140. built a new Cathedral Church, and restored and
augmented the Chapter.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 216. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 423.

* Registra, Cartas, etc. penes Dec. and Capitulum. * * Cronicon Litchfeldensis
Ecclesiae MS. in Bibl. Musaei Ashmoleani Oxon. N. 770.

* Acta Capitularia, Transcripta Cartarum, etc. ad Eccles. Litchfeldensem
spectantia. Ibid. N. 794, 827.

2. Stone Placed by Mr. Speed in Shropshire and also in Middlesex.
.
Wolphere King of Mercia founded a College of Secular Canons here about A. D.
675. in memory of his Son Wolfade, whom he here martyred. After the Conquest
Robert Lord Stafford (temp. Hen. I.) erected a Priory of Black Canons here,
which was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 119l. 14s. 11d. per an. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 119.

Registr. in Bibl. Hatton. 1640.

3. Tamworth.
Here was an ancient Benedictine Nunnery founded by Editha daughter to king
Edgar. But after the Conquest the Nuns were translated to Pollesworth by R.
Marmion, one of which family placed here Secualr Canons. Camd.

4. Wolverhampton.
Here was a College of Secular Canons built by a Religious Matron called
Wulfrunna, about A. D. 996. to the honor of St. Mary and St. Peter. It was
afterward annexed to the Dean and Chapter of Windsor Camden.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 988.

Dr. Plot's History of Staffordshire. Chap. X.. 39, 40. Oxon. 1686. fol.

5. Burton upon Trent.
A. D. 1004. Wulfric Spot founded this Abbey for Monks of the Order of St,
Benedict, and dedicated it to St. Mary and St. Modwen. It was valued 26 Hen.
VIII. at 267l. 14s. 3d. per an Dugd. 356l. 16s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon, Angl. T. 1. p. 265. T. 2. p. 869.

Annals Burtonenses a Fundation^ ad A. D. 1262. Edit. Oxon. A. D. 1684. fol.

Registr. penes Will. Dom. Paget de Beaudsert 1650. MS.

6. Lappele.
An Alien-Priory of Black Monks to the Abbey of St. Remigius at Rhemes, to which
it was given by Earl Algar (temp. Edw. Conf.) King Henry V. gave it to Tongue
College in Shropshire.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1022. T. 3. P. 2. p. 145.

7. Iutbury.
A Cluniac Priory dedicated to the blessed Virgin, founded by Henry Ferrers A.
D. 1081 MS. Ashmol.
. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 244l. 16s. 8d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 345. T. 2. p. 873.

Registr. penes Henr. Agard de Foston mil.

Registrum penes Will. Com. Devon.

*Collectanea quaedam ex Registro de Tutbury. MSS. Ashmol. 804.

8. Canwell Falsely said to be in Leicestershire in Mr. Speed's Caralogue.
.
Geva wife to Galfrid Ridell (temp. Hen. I.) built a Monastery for Benedictine
Monks here, to the honor of St. Mary, St. Giles, and All Saints. Valued at
25l. 10s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 439.

9. Blythbury.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by Hugh Malveism (temp. Hen. I.) St. Giles was
the Tutelar Saint of this Priory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 468.

10. Penkridge.
The Church here being endowed and made Collegiate by one Hugo Huose, (temp. R.
Steph.) the advowson of it was given by King John to the Archbishopric of
Dublin.

Vide Plot's Hist. of Staffordsh. Chapter X.. 81, 82.

* Apographa Cartarum penes V. Doctiss. Joh. Mill S. T. Pr. Principal. Aulae.
S. Edm. Oxon.

11. Trentham.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Ramulph Earl of Chester, (temp. R. Steph.)
It was endowed at the Suppression with 106l. 3s. 10d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 260.

* Munim. pen. Will. Leveson Gower de ead. Arm.

12. Roucester.
Richard Bacun about A. D. 1140. built a Priory of Black Canons here to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued at 100l. 2s. 10d. per an. Dugd.
111l. 13s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 267.

13. Fairweld Not in Derbyshire as in Speed.
.
A Nunnery of Benedictines founded by Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield
A. D. 1140. It was dedicated to St. Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 441.

14. Radmore.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Ralph Earl of

Chester, (temp. R. Steph.) hence removed to Stonely (in Com. Warw.) by Hen.
II. A. D. 1154.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 820.

15. Sandwell Mr. Speed reckons this Priory to be in Buckinghamshire.
.
Will. de Offney (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Monastery for Cluniac Monks here,
valued at 38l. 8s. 4d. per an. Speed.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 475.

16. Dudley.
A Priory of Cluniac Monks subordinate to Wenlock, it was built by Gervase
Painell (temp. Hen. II.) to the honor of St. James.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 614.

17. Stafford.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Ric. Peche Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield
A. D. 1162. to the memory of St. Thomas of Canterbury. Its yearly revenues were
worth 141l. 13s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 316.

* Reg. penes... Fowler de ead.

18. Croxton.
A. D. 1176. Bertram de Verdon founded a Cistercian Abbey at Coats, which was
three years after removed hither, and dedicated to St. Mary. It Is yearly
revenues at the Dissolution were worth 90l. 5s. 11d. Dugd. 103l. 6s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 912. T. 3. P. 1. p. 40. Chronica in Bibl. Cotton.

* Reg. penes Will. Pierpoint de Tongue Castle.

19. Raunton.
A Priory of Black Canons subordinate to Haghmon (in Com. Salop.) built by Rob.
fill. Noeli, about A. D. 1190. to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was rated
26. Hen. VIII. at 90l. 2s. 10d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 143. 940. T. 3. P. 1. p. 53.

Cartular. in Bibl. Cotton.

20. Calwich.
A Cell of Black Canons to Kenelworth, of the gift of Nicholas Fitz-Nigel.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 119.

21. Delacres Erron^ously placed in Cheshire by the Monasticon.
.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Ranulph Earl of Chester, A. D. 1214. who
translated the Monks from Pulton in Cheshire hither, and dedicated it to St.
Mary and St. Benedict. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 227l. 5s. per an.
Dugd. 243l. 3s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 890. T. 2. p. 919.

* Reg. penes... Rudyard de ead.

22. Hulton.
Henry de Audley A. D. 1223. erected a Cistertian Abbey here, to the honor of
the blessed Virgin. It was valued at 76l. 14s. 10d. per an. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 942.

23. Brewood.
A Benedictine Nunnery, valued at 17l. 10s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 11l. 1s. 6d.
Speed.

24. Catune Qu. Whether this is not mistaken for Nun-Coton in Lincolushire.
.
A Benedictine Nunnery. Speed.

25. Briuerne There is no place of this name in Staffordshire, so probably it
was no other than Bruern in Oxfordshire.
.
Mr. Speed tells us, that here was two Priories one of Black Monks dedicated to
St. Mary, the other for White Nuns dedicated to St. Leonard.

26. Tetnall.
A Collegiate Church.

27. Stafford.
A College of a Dean and Canons dedicated to St. Mory.

Mr. Speed places Chetwood in this County which is in Buckinghamshire, and
Merivall which is in Warwickshire.

SUFFOLK.
1. Burgh-Castle or Cnobbersburgh.
AN ancient Monastery founded by one Fursaeus a Scot in the reign of Sigebert
King of the East Angles, A. D. 636. Camd.

2. Stoke-Clare.
There was a College for seven Secular Canons founded by one Eluric (temp. Edw.
Conf.) at Clare. A. D. 1090. Gilbert de Clare gave it to the Monks at Bec in
Normandy, so it became a Cell to that Abbey. A. D. 1123. Richard son to the said
Gilbert, removed the Monks out of the Castle to a neighboring place called
Stoke. King Rich. II. made it Prioratus indigena, and (temp. Hen. V.) the Black
Monks were again changed for Secular Canons by Edmund Mortimer Earl of March.
It was dedicated to St. John Baptist, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 324l. 4s.
1d. ob. q. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 535, 1004. T. 3. P. 2. p. 164.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Registrum penes Dominum Stanhope.

* Registrum penes Egidium Bernardiston de Clare. A. D. 1638.

3. Fdmundsbury.
A. D. 1020. King Canute built a Benedictine Abbey here to the honor of St.
Edmund the King, who was here martyred by the Danes. Its yearly revenues at the
Dissolution were worth 1659l. 13s. 11d. ob. Dugd. 2336l. 16s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 284. Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 2. p. 141.

Registr. in Officio Ducatus Lancastrensis.

Registr. 3. penes Rogerum Bacon. Eq. Aur.

* Collectanea MS. Aug. Baker Mon. Ord. S. Bened. in Bibl. Coll. Jesu Oxon.
Vol. I.

* Reg. duo penes Sim. D'Ewes mil. uno Kemp, altero Werketon nominato.

* Registrum penes Th. Edes LLD. 1641.

* Cronicon Jocelini de Brakeland, res domesticas Coenobii S. Edmundi Burgensis
accurate narrans ab A. D. 1170. ad A. Chapter 1215. In Bibl. Cotton. Vitellius. D.
15. 2.

4. Eye.
A Priory of Benedictines founded by Robert Malet (temp. Will. Conq.) and
commended to the Patronage of St. Peter. It was a Cell to Bernay in Normandy,
but Rich. II. made it Prioratus indigena, and so it continued till the
Suppression, at which time it was rated at 161l. 2s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 184l.
9s. 7d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 356.

Reg. penes Th. Dey de Eya Genesis 1650.

5. Blakenham.
Walt. Giffard (temp. Will. Rufi) gave this Manor to the Abbey of Bec in
Normandy, and so it became a Cell to that Abbey. After the Dissolution of
Alien-Priories, King Hen. VI. gave it to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 573. T. 2. p. 954. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

6. Creting.
Rob. Earl of Morton about A. D. 1090. gave this Lordship to Grestein in
Normandy, to which it was an Alien-Priory. King Hen. VI. gave it to Eaton
College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 982. T. 3. P. 2. p. 198.

7. Ixworth.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Gilbert Blund, (temp. Will. Ruf^) to the
honor of S. Mary. It was endowed with 168l. 19s. 7d. ob. q. Dugd. 180l. 9s.
5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 184.

8. Brisete.
About A. D. 1100. Ralph Fitz-Brian erected (...) Priory here for Canons of the
Order of St. Austin. Its Tutelar Saint was St. Leonard.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 86.

9. Bliburgh.
An Abbey of Premonstratensian Black Canons. Speed.
Canons built ^o the honor of the blessed Virgin, by... Ab^at of Chich (temp.
Hen. I.) Valued at 48l. 8s. 10d. (...) an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 593.

10. Fdwardestow.
A Cell of Black Monks to Abingdon, thereunto given by Hubert Munchensi Not
founded by Peter Bishop of Winchester, as in Speed Catalogue.
, about A. D. 1115.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 468.

11. Redlingfield.
A. D. 1120. Manasses Earl of Gisnes built a Benedictine Nunnery here to the
honor of St. Andrew. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 67l. 1d. ob. Dugd. 81l.
2s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 417.

12. Romburgh Erroneously placed in Cambridgeshire, (Mon. Aug T. 1. 404.) in
Essex, (Ibid. p. 1037)
.
A Beneaictine Priory dedicated to St. Michael, Cell to the Abbey of St. Mary at
York, to which it was given by Alan Earl of Richmond about A. D. 1140.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 404.

13. Sibton Not in Norfolk as (...) the Monasticon.
.
A. D. 1150. Will. de Cayneto founded a Cistercian Abbey here, and commended it
to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. In 26. Hen. VIII. it was found able to
dispend 2^0l. 15s. 7l. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 866. T. 3. P. 2. p. 32.

Registr. in Bibl. Arundel nunc in Bibl. Coll. Gresham.

* Registr. penes Tho. Scrivener.

14. Snapes Falsely said to be in Essex by the Editors of the Monas^i^^.(T 2. p.
894.)
.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. John at Colchester, founded by Will. Martell A. D.
1155. and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. King Hen. VII. gave it to the Canons
of Butley. It was rated at 99l. 1s. 11d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 894. T. 3. P. 1. p. 74.

15. Butley.
A. D. 1171. Ralph Glanvill founded a Priory of Black Canons and dedicated it
to St. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 318l. 17s. 2d. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 245. T. 3. P. I. p. 110.

16. Leiston.
An Abbey of Premonstratensian Black Canons. MS. Ashmol.
Canons built by Ralph de Glanvill A. D. 1183. to the honor of the Virgin
Mary. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 181l. 17s. 1d. q.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 606. T. 3. P. 1. p. 74.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

17. Ipswich.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to the Holy Trinity, founded by Norman fill.
Enott, (temp. Hen. II.) Endowed with 86l. 6s. 9d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 295.

18. Bungey.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to the holy Cross, and founded by Roger de
Glanvill and the Lady Gundreda his wife, (temp. Hen. II.) Endowed 26. Hen.
VIII. with 62l. 2s. 1d. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 513.

19. Campess.
Theobald de Valoins 5. Ioh. built a Benedictine Nunnery here, and dedicated it
to the blessed Virgin. It was endowed with 182l. 9s. 5d. per an. Speed. In the
Chapel of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin within the Church of this
Priory, Maud Sister to Henry Earl of Lancaster founded (21. Edw. III.) a
Collegiate Chantry of a Warden and four Priests, it was not long after removed
to Brusiard.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 490.

20. Ipswich.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Peter, and founded by Thomas Lacy
and Alice his wife. It was valued at 88l. 6s. 10d. per an. Sp. In 20. Hen.
VIII. Cardinal Wolsey obtained leave of the King to found, in the place where
this Priory stood, a College for a Dean, twelve Canons, eight Clerks, eight
Choristers, and a Grammar School, which he designed for a Nursery to his
College at Oxford Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. Lib. II. p. 248.
.

21. Dodnash.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary, and founded by one Wymarus MS.
Ashmol.
. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 42l. 18s. 8d. ob. Speed.

22. Flixton.
A Nunnery of the Order of St. Austin, erected by Margery de Creike. A. D....
Valued at 23l. 4s. 1d. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

23. Herinflete.
A Priory of Canons Regular built by Roger Fitz-Osbert A. D... to the honor of
St. Olave. Endowed at the Dissolution with 49l. 11s. 7d. per an. Dugd. Speed.

24. Trem.
A Benedictine Priory founded by Sir John Bovile.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

25. Kersey.
A Benedictine Priory dedicated to St. Mary and St. Anthony.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 532.

26. Wangford.
A Cluniac Priory founded by Doudo Asini A. D.... and subordinate to Thetford.
Its yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 48l. 8s. 10d. Dugd. 30l. 9s.
5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

27. Woodbridge.
A Priory of Black Canons built by... Rufford One Hugh Rows was Founder
according to MS. Ashmol.
, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. Valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 50l. 3s. 5d.
ob. per an.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

28. Letheringham.
A Priory founded by Sir John Boinet, A. D.... Valued at 26l. 18s. 5d. per an.

29. Liteburch. Sp.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to S. Mary.

30. Rafford Qu. Whether it is not a mistake for Rufford in Nottinghamshire,
which was founded by Gilbert Earl of Lincoln?
. Sp.
A Monastery dedicated to our Lady, founded by one Robert Bishop or Earl of
Lincoln. Sp.

31. Walton.
A Benedictine Priory dedicated to St. Felix.

32. Burshyard.
A College for a Warden and four Priests, founded by Maud de Lancaster Countess
of Vlton A. D. 1354. This Priory was not long after changed into a Nunnery of
the Order of St. Clare. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 56l. 2s. 1d. per an.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 98.

33. Mettingham.
The Collegiate Church of St. Mary founded by Sir John de Norwich, (temp. Edw.
III.) Leland. Collect. Vol. I. p. 59.
Its yearly revenues were worth 202l. 7s. 5d. ob. per an.

34. Suthbury.
A Cell of Benedictine Monks to Westminster Abbey, to which it was given by
Richard Roke, 35. Edw. III. It was dedicated to S. Bartholomew. Here was also a
College founded by Simon of Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, to the honor of
St. Gregory. It consisted of a Master, five Priests, etc. and was rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 122l. 18s. 3d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 367.

35. Denston.
A College endowed with 22l. 8s. 9d. per an. Sp.

SURRY.
1. Chertsey.
A. D. 666. Frithwaldus a petty King of Surry founded a Monastery here to the
honor of St. Peter. It was of the Benedictine Order, and valued 26. Hen. VIII.
at 659l. 15s. 8d. ob. q. Dugd. 744l. 13s. 6d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 875. Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 1. p. 64.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. A. 13.

* Reg. in Scacc. penes Remem. Regis.

2. Bermondsey.
An Abbey of Clumac Monks built by Alwin Child a Citizen of London, A. D. 1082.
to the honor of St. Savior. It Is yearly revenues were worth 474l. 14s. 4d.
ob. q. per an. Dugd. 584l. 2s. 5d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 639. Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 2. p. 134.

Cronica de Bermondsey in Bibl. Deuvesiana.

Registr. penes Joh. Seldom.

* Registrum in Bibl. Cotton.

3. Southwark.
The Abbey of St. Mary Overeie for Black Canons founded by William Giffard
Bishop of Winchester, A. D. 1106 Angl Sacr. T. 1. p. 276. It was founded by Sir
William Pont de le Arch and Sir William Dauncy Knights. Stow.
. It was valued at 624l. 6s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 656l. 10s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 84. 940.

4. Merton.
A. D. 1121. King Henry I. founded an Abbey here for Canons of St. Austin's
Order, and dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
957l. 19s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 1039l. 5s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 135.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. C. 7.

* Historiam fundationis in Officio Armorum.

5. Waverley.
William Giffard Bishop of Winchester built an Abbey here for Cistercian Monks
A. D. 1128. to the honor of St. Mary. It was the first house that Order had in
England, and was endowed at the Dissolution with 174l. 8s. 3d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 703. T. 2. p. 912.

Annals de Waverley in Bibl. Cotton. Vesp. A. 16. editas per V. Cl. Thomam
Gale. Oxon. 1687. fol.

6. Newark near Guild'ord.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Ruald de Calva A. D.... and commended to the
Patronage of St. Mary and St. Thomas of Canterbury. It was endowed with 258l.
11s. 11d. per an. Dug. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 247.

7. Tanrigge.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of St. Austin, founded by Odo de Dammartin,
and dedicated to St. James, valued at 78l. 6s. 10d. ob.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 403.

8. Reygate.
Will. Warren Earl of Surry erected a Priory of Black Canons here to the honor
of St. Mary and St. Cross, (temp. Reg. Ioh.) It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
68. 16s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 78l. 16s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 346.

9. Horsdey.
A Priory of Black Nuns.

10. Shene.
A Carthusian Abbey built by King Hen. V. A. D. 1413. to the honor of the Holy
Jesus. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression were worth 777l. 12s. ob. Dugd.
962. 11s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 973.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Jul. C. 2.

11. Lingfield.
A Collegiate Church founded by Reginald Lord Cobham, (temp. Hen. VI.) and
dedicated to St. Peter (...) 2. p. 69.
. Valued at 75. per an.

Mr. Speed places Horsham in this County; but that Priory is in Norfolk.

SUSSEX.
1. Selsey.
HEre was an old Monastery founded by St. Wilfrid A. D. 673. to the honor of
the blessed Virgin and St. Peter, and endowed by King Ceadwalla A. D. 711.
Eadbert Abbat of this House being Consecrated the first Bishop of the
South Saxons, the Episcopal Seat remained here till (temp. Will. Conq.)
Stigandus translated it to Chichester.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 153. T. 3. P. 1. p. 115.

2. South-Malling.
A Collegiate Church first founded by King Ceadwalla, and restored by one of
the Archbishops of Cauterbury Leland. Collect. Vol. 1. p. 82.
. Valued at 45l. 12s. 5d. ob. per an.

3. Bosenham,
An ancient Monastery built here by one Dicul a Scot Ca^den ex Eccl* Hist.
Bedae.
. Will. Warwast Bishop of Exon founded a Collegiate Church here, for a Dean and
four Prebendaries, (temp. Hen. I.) Mon. A^^^ T. 2. p. 6.
.

4. Battle.
A. D. 1067. William the Conqueror built a Benedictine Abbey here to the honor
of S. Martin.

It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 880l. 14s. 7d. ob. Dugd. 987l. 11d. ob. q.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 310. Reyner. Ap. Bened. T. 2. p. 136.

Hist. Abbatiae de Bello in Bibl, Cotton. Dom. A. 2.

Reg. in curia Augmentationis.

Annals Monasterii de Bello ad A. D. 1206. In Bibl. Cotton. Nero. D. 2. 3.

* Cartas etc. penes Hon. Franc. Vicecom. Montag.

5. Chichester.
By virtue of a Constitution made at the Synod of London A. D. 1075. Bishop
Stigandus removed his Seat from the village of Selsey to this place, being the
chief Town of his Diocese, where was before a Monastery dedicated to St. Peter,
as also a Nunnery Camden.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 115.

* Cartas Originales, Registra, etc. penes Episcopum, Decanum and Capitulum
hujus Ecclesiae Cathedralis.

6. Sele, Acceseale, Sp.
A. D. 1075. Will. Braose gave the Church of St. Peter at Sele to the Abbey of
St. Florence at Salmur, so it became a Cell to that Monastery.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 580. T. 2. p. 973.

* Registr. in Thesaur. Coll. B. Mar^ae Magd. Oxon.

7. Jews.
An Abbey of Cluniac Monks founded A. D. 1078. by Will. Warren Earl of Surry,
and dedicated to St. Pancrace. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 920l. 4s. 6d. Dugd. 1091l. 9s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 615.

Registr. penes Joh. Seldom. Arm. 1649.

* Reg. penes Edw. Comitem Dorset. 1629.

* Cartularium penes Edw. Bysh Arm.

* Collectiones MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 55. f. 117.

8. Stayning.
An Alien-Priory to Fiscamp, to which Abbey it was given by King Will. the
Conqueror. St. Cudman was the Tutelar Saint of this Cell. It was afterward a
College for a Dean and Secular Canons MS. Bodl.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 971.

9. Wilmington.
Rob. Earl of Moreton (temp. Will. Rufi) bestowed this Manor on the Abbey of
Grestein in France, to which it became an Alien-Priory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 982.

10. Boxgrabe.
A Cell to Essay in Normandy, given by Rob. de Haya (temp. Hen. I.) made
Prioratus indigena, 13. Edw. III. It was dedicated to St. Mary and St. Blase,
and valued at 145l. 10s. 2d. ob. per an. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 592. T. 2. p. 969.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

11. Robertsbridge.
A. D. 1176. Rob. S. Martin built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of the
blessed Virgin. It was endowed at the Suppression with 248l. 10s. 6d. per an.
Dugd. 232l. 9s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 916. T. 2. p. 920.

* Reg. penes Rob. Com. Leicestriae. 1670.

12. Pynham or De Calceto juxta Arundell.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Will. Earl of Arundell, (temp. Hen. II.)
and dedicated to St. Bartholomew.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 143.

13. Dareford.
Hen. Hoese (temp. Ioh.) built a Priory of Premonstratensian Canons here to the
honor of St. John Baptist. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 98l. 4s. 5l. per
an. Dugd 108l. 13s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 78.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

14. Michelham.
A Priory of Black Canons founded here by Gilb. de Aquila 13. Hen. III. and by
him commended to the Patronage of the holy Trinity. Its yearly revenues were
worth 160l. 12s. 6d. Dugd. 191l. 19s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 334.

15. Arundel.
An Alien-Priory of Black Monks to the Abbey of Sees in France. It was turned
into a College 3. Rich. II. and by Richard Earl of Arundel endowed with lands
for the maintenance of a Master and twelve Secular Canons. It was dedicated to
St. Nicholas, and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 168l. 7d. ob. per an. Dugd. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 101.

16. Eastburn.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by Sir John de Bone A. D.... Endowed at the
Dissolution with 29l. 16s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 47l. 3s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

17. Hastings.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Sir Walter Bricet Kn^. A. D.... to the
honor of the Holy Trinity. But their lands being destroyed by an inundation,
John Pelham translated them to Warbilton, 14. Hen. IV. It was valued at 51l.
9s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 57l. 19s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 84.

18. Ruspur Dugd. Rupperar Sp.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Rated 26. Hen. VIII. at
39l. 13s. 7d. per an. Speed.

19. Shulbred.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Sir Ralph Ardent Knight. Endowed with 72l.
15s. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd. 79l. 15s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 362.

20. Tortington.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to S. Mary Magdalene, and founded by the
Lady Hadwisa Corbet Leland Collect. Vol. 1. p. 82.
. Valued at 75l. 12s. 3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 101l. 4s. 1d. Speed.

21. Hardham or ^eringham.
A Priory of Canons of St. Austin's Order, built by Sir Will. Dawtree Knight,
in honor of the Holy Cross MS. Ashmol.
.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 181.

22. Hoo.
An Alien-Priory.

23. Leominster, Levenestre or Leveminstre.
An Alien-Priory to Almanesches, given by King Henry VI. to Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 606. T. 3. P. 2. p. 200.

24. Remsted. Sp.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Sp.

25. Lullmenster Qu. Whether it is not the same with Leominster?
.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Sp. MS. Bodl.

The Monasticon places the Priories of Otteham and Beigham in this County,
which are Kent, and Horsford, which is in Norfolk.

WARWICKSHIRE.
1. Polle^worth.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by King Egbert, and dedicated to St. Edith; It
was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 87l. 16s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 23l. 8s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 197.

The Antiquities of Warwickshire illustrated, by Sir Will. Dugdale. Land. 1656.
fol. p. 797.

* Cartas Originales penes Fr. Nethersole de ead. Arm. and Sam. Roper de
Monks-kirkby Arm.

2. Coventry.
Leofric Earl of Mercia about A. D. 1050. built an Abbey here for Black Monks to
the honor of the blessed Virgin. Rob. de Limesie Bishop of Chester removed his
Seat hither, (temp. Hen. I.) one of whose Successors expelled the Monks, and
placed Secular Canons in their room A. D. 1191. But seven years after the Monks
were restored.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 302. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 463. Reyner. Apost. Bened.
T. 2. p. 139.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 100.

Registr. in Scaccario.

3. Monks-Kirkby.
An Alien-Priory to St. Nicholas at Angiers, founded by Galfred de Wirce (12.
Will. Conq.) Granted 20. Rich. II. to the Monastery of Eppworth in Lincolnshire.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 562.

Dugdale's Warwickshire p. 50.

4. Warwick.
A Priory of Canons Regular of the Holy Sepulcher, founded by Henry Earl of
Warwick, (temp. Hen. I.) It was endowed at the dissolution with 41l. 10s. 2d.
per an. Dugd. 49l. 13s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 573.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 362.

5. Kenelworth.
A Priory of Black Canons built by Gaufrid de Clinton A. D. 1112. to the honor
of the Virgin Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 538l. 19s. Dugd. 251l. 5s.
9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 114.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 155.

Registr. penes Sam. Clerk de Salford Bar. 1640.

6. Pynely.
Rob. de Pilardinton (temp. Hen. I.) founded a Benedictine Nunnery here, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It Is yearly revenues were worth 23l. 5s.
11d. Dugd. 27l. 14s. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 442.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 500.

* Cartas Orig. penes Edw. Cookesey de ead.

7. Bretford.
A Benedictine Nunnery Cell to Kenelworth, founded by Galfrid de Clinton,
(temp. Hen. I.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 464.

Dugdale's Warwickshire illustrated. p. 30.

8. Warwick.
The Collegiate Church of St. Mary endowed by Roger Earl of Warwick, A. D.
1133. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 247l. 13s. ob. per an Dugd. Sp. 333l. 2s.
3d. according to a MS. in the hands of Sir Simon Archer.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 27.

Dugdale's Warwickshire p. 343.

Registr. in Scaccario penes Remem. Regis.

* Cartas quamplurimas Originales, etc. penes Magistrum Sim. Fysh de Warwick,
hujus Eccl. Sacristam.

9. Warmington.
An Alien-Priory to Preaux in Normandy, to which it was given by Henry Newburgh
Earl of Warwick, (temp. Hen. I.)

Vide Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 416.

10. Olbury.
A Cell to the Nunnery of Polesworth, to which it was given by Walter de
Hastings, (temp. Hen. I.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 198.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 778.

11. Wotton-wamen.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Conches in Normandy, to which it was given by
Ralph de Stafford, (temp. Hen. I.) After the Dissolution of these Priories it
was annexed by King Richard II. to St. Ann's near Coventry.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 558, 604.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 604.

12. Alneceaster or Alcetur, ol. S. Maria de Insula.
A. D. 1140. Ralph Boteler built a Benedictine Priory to the honor of St. Mary
and St. John Baptist. It was endowed with 85l. 7s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 101l.
14s. Speed. This Priory is also placed by Mr. Speed in Worcestershire, and
there valued at 75l. ^s. per an.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 470.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 574.

Cartam fundationis and dotationis Abb. S. Mariae de Insula in Dioec. Wigorn.
MS. in Bibl. Bodl. NE. C. 5. 12.

13. Merivall.
A. D. 1148. Rob. Earl of Ferrers built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of
St. Mary. It was endowed with 254l. 1s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 303l. 10s. Speed. Mr.
Speed has also a Pri^^y of this name in Staffordshire, there rated at 199l.
14s. 10d.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 830.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 782.

* Reg. olim penes Ric. Chamberlain Registrar. Curiae Wardarum.

14. Comb Erroneously placed by Mr. Speed in Leicestershire.
, ol. Smite.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Richard de Camvile A. D. 1150. and dedicated to
St. Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 311l. 25s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 343l. 5d.
Speed. 302l. 15s. 3d. Arch.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 882.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 145.

Parochial Antiquities of Ambrosden, Burcester, etc. by White Kennett. B. D.

Registra in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. A. 1. D. 18.

15. Studley.
Peter de Stodley (temp. Reg. Steph.) built a Priory of Black Canons here. It Is
yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to 117l. 1s. 1d. ob. Dugd. 125l.
4s. 8d. Arch. 181l. 3s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 89.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 55.

16. Wroxall.
A Nunnery of Benedictines founded here by Sir Hugh de Hatton, (temp. Reg.
Steph.) Its Tutelar Patron was St. Leonard. It was valued at 72l. 15s. 6d. per
an. Dugd. 78l. 10s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 433.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 489.

17. Aucot.
A Cell of Benedictines to Malvern the Great in Worcestershire, founded by
Will. Burdet A. D. 1159. Rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 34l. 8s. per an. Speed. 28l.
6s. 2d. Dugd.

Vide Monast. Angl. T. 1. p. 470.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 815.

18. Erdbury Or Erneby. Speed.
.
Ralph de Sudley (temp. Hen. II.) built a Priory of Black Canons here, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression were
worth 94l. 6s. 1d. Dugd. 122l. 8s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 265.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 773.

19. Henwood.
A Nunnery of the Benedictine Order founded by Ketelburn de Langdon, (temp.
Hen. II.) and commended to the Patronage of St. Margaret. It was valued at 21l.
2s. ob. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 479.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 695.

20. Nun Eaton.
Rob. Earl of Leicester (temp. Hen. II.) built a Nunnery^ here for Benedictines
of Fontevrault Order, to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was endowed at
the Dissolution with 253l. 14s. 5d. ob. per an. Dugd. 290l. 15s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 518. T. 2. p. 868.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 766.

* Rotul. pen. Dec. and Cap. Eccl. Cath. Litchfeld.

21. Stonely.
A ^^stercian Abbey translated from Radmore (in Com. Staff.) by King Henry II.
and dedicated to St. Mary. It was rated at 151l. 3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 578l.
2s. 5d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 820.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 169.

Registr. de Stonely penes Tho. Leigh de Stonely Mil. 1640.

22. Wolfricheston v. Wolston.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Peter sub Dinam, but 18. Rich. II. granted by the
Abbat and Convent of that place to the Carthusians near Coventry.

Vide Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 24.

23. Thelesford.
Will. Lucy of Cherlecote (temp. Hen. III.) built here to the honor of St.
John Baptist and St. Radegund, a Priory for Maturines or Canons of the Order of
the Holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives. Their annual income at the
Suppression amounted to 23l. 10s. Speed. Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 831.

Dugdale's Warwickshire illustrated. p. 393.

* Registrum imperfectum^ penes Magistrum Fish de Warwick.

24. Stratford.
A Collegiate Church founded 5. Edw. III. by John Stratford then Bishop of
Winchester. Valued at 123l. 11s. 9d. per an.

Vide Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 521.

25. Maxstock.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by William Clinton Earl of Huntingdon A. D.
1337. and commended by him to the Patronage of the holy. Trinity, St. Michael,
and All Saints. Its yearly revenues were worth 87l. 12s. 3d. ob. Dugd. 129l.
11s. 8d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 351.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 730.

26. Astley.
A Collegiate Church dedicated to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, founded
by Sir Thomas de Astley Knight, 17. Edw. III. Valued at 39l. 10s. 6d. per an.
Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 92.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 69.

27. Coventre.
A. D. 1381. Will. Lord Zouch built a Carthusian Abbey here to the honor of St.
Ann. It was endowed with 131l. 6s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 251l. 5s. 9d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 963.

Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 131.

28. Knoll.
A College founded by Walter Cook and Elizabeth Lady Clinton, 4. Hen. V.
Endowed with 18l. 5s. 6d. per an.

Vide Dugdale's Warwickshire. p. 702.

* Registrum Coll. de Knoll penes Sim. Archer Equ. Aur.

WESTMORELAND.
1. Shapp or Hepp.
THis Abbey of Premonstratensian Canons was first built by Thomas fill. Gospatric
A. D.... to the honor of St. Mary Magdalene at Preston in the Barony of
Kendall; but afterward removed hither by the Founder. Its yearly revenues at
the Dissolution amounted to 154l. 17s. 7d. ob. Dugd. 166l. 10s. 6d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 594.

* Regist. olim penes Dom. Will. Howard de Naworth.

WILTSHIRE.
1. Malmesbury.
A Benedictine Abbey founded by Eleutherius Bishop of Winchester A. D. 675. It
was dedicated to St. Aldhelme, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 803l. 17s. 7d. per
an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 49. Reyner. Apostolat. Bened. Tr. 1. p. 21.

Will. Malmsburiensem Lib. 5. de Pontificibus. Inter XV. Scrip. Oxon. 1689.
fol. and Angl. Sacr. T. 2.

Registr. in Scaccario.

* Duo Cartularia penes Magistrum Will. Bay liff de Munkton juxta Chippenham in
Com. Wilts.

* Cartularium in Bibl. Bodl. in Musaeo, Wood. 5.

2. Wilton.
Here was a Benedictine Nunnery first founded by St. Alburg Sister to King
Egbert, rebuilt by King Alfred, and augmented by King Edgar, to the honor of
St. Mary and St. Edith. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to
601l. 1s. 1d. q. Dugd. 652l. 11s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 191. T. 2. p. 851.

* Registra, Cartas, etc. penes Honoratissimum Th^^ain Comit^m Pembrochiae.

3. (...) and 4. Ram^bury.
Upon the divis^^n of the Diocese of Shirburn, (...) Archbishop of Canterbury
A. D. 909. consecrated Ethelstan, Bishop of Wiltshire, who had his Episcopal
Seat, sometimes at Ramsbury and sometimes at Wilton. About A. D. 1060. this
Bishopric was again united to Shirburn, which was not long after translated to
Salisbury by Bishop Herman.

5. Ambresbury.
A. D. 980. Queen Elfrida erected a Monastery here for Nuns of the Benedictine
Order, and commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary and St. Melorius. It was
A. D. 1177. subjected to Fontevrault in Normandy, but afterward made Denison,
and rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 495l. 15s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 558l. 10s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 191. T. 2. p. 868.

Reyner. Apost. Bened T. 2. p. 126.

6. Salisbury.
Here Bishop Herman A. D. 1075. laid the foundation of a Cathedral Church in
the Castle of Old-Salisbury, which was finished and endowed by his Successor
Bishop Osmund. Here the Episcopal Seat continued till Bishop Poor in the
beginning of the reign of King Henry III. began to build that stately Fabric
in New-Salisbury, which yet continues, as a lasting monument of the Piety and
magnificence of its Founder.

Vide Godwin de Praesulibus Angliae.

Mon. Angl. T. 2. P. 1. p. 375.

* Cartas, Registra, etc. penes Episcopum, Decanum and Capitulum.

7. Farley Falsely placed in Somersetshire by Mr. Speed.
.
A Cluniac Priory subordinate to Jews (in Com. Suss.) founded by Humphrey de
Bohun A. D. 1125. It was dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene, and endowed at the
Suppression with 153l. 14s. 2d. ob. per an. Dugd. 217l. 4d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 620.

8. Charleton.
An Alien-Priory to St. Ebrulf at Vtica in Normandy, to which Abbey it was given
by Adelin de Iuri, (temp. Hen. I.) It was given by King Edw. IV. to Windsor.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 968. T. 2. P. 2. p. 75.

9. Bradenstoke.
Walter Earl of Sarisbury (temp. R. Steph.) built a Priory of Black Canons Not
Black Monks as in Speed.
here to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
212l. 19s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 270l. 10s. 8d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 206.

* Registr. de Bradenstoke in Bibl. Cotton. V^tellius. A. II.

* Collectiones MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 108.

* Rentale Prioratus de Bradenstoke penes Virum amicissimum and rei Heraldicae
peritissimum Magistrum Will. Aubrey de Kington S. Michaelis.

10. Mayden-Bradley.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Manasser Biset Sewer to King Stephen, and
dedicated to St. Mary. Its yearly revenues were worth 180l. 10s. 4d. Dugd.
197l. 18s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 408.

11. Stanley.
A. D. 1151. Maud the Empress built a Cistercian Abbey here, to the honor of
St. Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 177l. 8d. per an. Dugd. 222l. 19s. 4d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 876.

12. Okeburn.
A Cell to Be^ in Normandy to which Abbey it was given by Maud de Walingford,
(temp. R. Steph). King Edw. IV. annexed it to Windsor College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 582. T. 2. p. 954. T. 3. p. 71.

13. Tvy-Church or Ederose.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by King Henry II. It was dedicated to the
blessed Virgin, and endowed at the Dissolution with 122l. 8s. 6d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 133l. 7s. ob Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 273.

14. Cosham.
King Henry II. gave the Church of this place, and some lands here to the Abbey
of Marmonstier in Tourein, to which it became a Cell.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 991.

15. Chippenham.
A. D. 1184. Will. de Maundevil Earl of Essex gave the Manor of Chippenham to
the Knights Hospitalers of St. John, and so it was made a Preceptory.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 544.

* Cartas ad hanc Praecept. spectantes in Musaeo Ashmol. Oxon. MS. Dugd. No. 74.

16. Au^bury Not (...) as it is always called in the Monasticon.
.
Will. de Tanquervil (temp. Hen. II.) gave this Manor to S. Gregory de
Tanquervil in Normandy, and so it became an Alien-Priory to that Abbey. It was
annexed (temp. Hen. IV.) to the Collegiate Church of Fodringhey, in Com.
Northamp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 952. T. 3. P. 2. p. 159.

17. Ansty.
Walter de Turbervill (12. Ioh.) gave this Manor to the Hospitalers, and so it
became a Preceptory, valued at 81l. 8s. 5d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 547.

18. Lacock.
A. D. 1233. Ela Countess of Sarum built a Nunnery here of St. Austin's Order
to the honor of the blessed Virgin and St. Bernard. It was valued at 168l. 9s.
2d. per an. Dugd. 203l. 12s. 3d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 241.

Chronic. de Lacok. a Christo ad A. D. 1320. in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. A. 8.

* Cartul. penes Dom. Johan. Talbot de Lacock.

19. Salisbury.
The Collegiate Church of St. Edmund consisting of a Provost and twelve Secular
Canons, was founded by Walter de la Wyle Bishop of Salisbury about A. D. 1270
Leland. Itin. Vol. 3. f.
.

20. Pulton.
A Gilbertine Priory founded by Sir Thomas Seymour, 21. Edw. I.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 826.

21. Marleburg.
A Priory of Black White Canons. Leland.
Canons dedicated to St. Margaret, and founded by Edmund Earl of Cornwall,
(temp. Edw. I. Speed.
) Rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 30l. 9s. 6d. per an. Dugd 38l. 19s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 272.

22. Uphaven.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Wandragisilius in Roan. King Edw. VI. gave it to
Windsor College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 73.

23. Brioptune There is no place of this name in Wiltshire.
. Qu.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene. Speed.

24. Clatford.
An Alien-Priory to St. Victor de Caleto in Normandy. King Henry VI. gave it to
Eaton College.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 199.

25. Longleat.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Radegund, founded by Sir John Vernon
Knight Leland. Collect Vol. 1. p. 80. Vol. 5. p. 19.
.

26. Eston.
A Priory dedicated to the holy Trinity. Valued at 42l. 12s. per an. Dugd. 55l.
14s. 4d. Speed.

27. Keinton.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary. Endowed with 25l. 9s. 1d. ob. per
an. Dugd. 38l. 3s. 10d. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 534. T. 2. p. 887.

* Cartul. penes Magist. Rogers de Chippenham.

28. Eddington.
A Priory of Bonhommes built by Will. Eddington Bishop of Winchester A. D.
1352. to the honor of St. James, St. Catherine, and All Saints. Its yearly
revenues at the Suppression amounted to 442l. 9s. 7d. ob. q. Dugd. 521l. 12s.
ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 357.

The Editors of the Monasticon place in this County Steinington, which should
be in Berkshire, and Brommor, which should be in Hampshire; and Mr. Speed
reckons Middlston and Henton to be in this Shire, the former of which is in
Dorsetshire, and the latter in the County of Samerset.

WORCESTERSHIRE.
1. Worcester.
HEre were Secular Canons from the time the Bishops See was here placed by King
Ethelred, viz. A. D. 680. till A. D. 991. when Bishop Oswald turned them out,
and put in Benedictine Monks, who continued till the Dissolution, and then
Canons were restored. It was dedicated to St. Mary and St. Wulstan, and valued
26. Hen. VIII. at 1229l. 12s. 8d. ob. per an. Dugd. 1386. 12s. 10d. ob. q.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 120. Ang. Sacr. T. 1. p. 469.

Cronica Wigornensia in Bibl. Cotton. Calig. A. 10. edita per Cl. Whartonum in
Angl. Sacr. T. 1. Land. 1691. fol.

* Registra, Cartas etc. penes Decan. and Capitulum Wigorn.

* Librum de terris and redditibus Mon. S. Mariae Wigorn. In Bibl. Cotton.
Tiber. 13.

2. Pershore.
About A. D. 680. Oswald nephew to King Ethelred founded a College for Secular
Canons here, but King Edgar and Bishop Oswald introduced Benedictine Monks A.
D. 984 Annals Wigorn, in Tomo primo Angliae Sacrae.
. It was dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and the Apostles St. Peter and St.
Paul, and rated at 643l. 4s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 666l. 13s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 203.

Registr. in Curia Augmentationis.

3. Evesham.
A Benedictine Abbey built A. D. 700. by S. Egwin Bishop of Worcester to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
1183l. 12s. 9d. Dugd. 1268l. 9s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 144. T. 2. p. 851.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. Tr. 1. p. 38. Tr. 2. p. 143.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

Reg. pen. Ric. Fleetwood de Penwortham in Com. Lanc. Arm.

Analecta de Actis Abbatum in Bibl. Cotton. Vesp. B. 15.

* Reg. olim in Bibl. Edw. Coke Cap. Just. ad Plac.

4. Fladbury ol. Fledanbirig.
An ancient Monastery founded by Bishop Egwin A. D. 702.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 125.

5. Stowre.
A Monastery founded by Aethilbaldt King of Mercia A. D. 736.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 121.

6. Bredon.
Eanulfus Grandfather to King Offa about A. D. 750. built the Monastery here to
the honor of St. Peter.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 122.

7. Clive.
Here was in King Offa's time a Monastery dedicated to St. Michael, which was
afterward annexed to Worcester.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 124.

8. Wudiandun,
A Nunnery founded by Aethelred King of Mercia, and made a Cell to Worcester A.
D. 774.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 122.

9. Kemsey.
A Cell to Worcester Abbey, thereunto given by King Coenwulf A. D. 799.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 127.

10. Heanbirig.
A Monastery subordinate to Worcester Abbey, and founded by Wiglaf King of the
Mercians A. D. 833.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 123.

11. Westbury.
A Cell of Black Monks to Worcester Abbey, founded by Bishop Oswald A. D. 983.
Annals Wigorn. in Tomo primo Angliae Sacrae.
After Bishop Oswald's death this Monastery was destroyed by the Danes, but
reedified by Wulstan Bishop of Worcester, (temp. W. Conq.) and annexed as a
Cell to Worcester Abbyc. Vita W^stani per Hemmingum. Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 541.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 125.

12. Malvern major.
A Benedictine Abbey founded by one Aldwin a Hermit A. D. 1085. and endowed by
King William the Conqueror, and King Henry I. It was dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, and was able to dispend at the Dissolution 308l. 1s. 5d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 375l. 6s. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 365. T. 2. p. 876.

13. Bordesley Fa^sly placed by Speed in Buckinghamshire.
.
A. D. 1138. Maud the Emperess built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of
the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression amounted to 388. 9.
10l. ob. per an. Dugd. 392l. 8^. 6. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 803.

* Cartas Orig. penes Clem. Throgmorton de Hasely in Com. Warw. Will. Sheldon
de B^oley Com. Wigorn. Christ. Hatton Bar. Henr. St. George Arm. and in Officio
Armor^m.

14. Malvern minor.
A Benedictine Priory founded by one Ioceline A. D. 1171. and endowed by Will.
Blois Bishop of Worcester. It was dedicated to St. Giles, and valued at 98l.
10s. 9d. per an. Dugd. 102l. 10s. 9d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 545.

15. Westwood.
A Cell of Nuns to Fontevrault in France, to which Abbey it was given by Osbert
Fitzhugh and Eustachia de Say, (temp. Hen. II.) Endowed with 78l. 8s. per an.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 574. T. 2. p. 868.

16. Whiston.
A Nunnery founded by the Abbat and Convent of Worcester A. D. 1255 Annal.
Wigorn.
It was endowed at the Dissolution with 53l. 3s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 56l. 3s. 7d.
Speed.

17. Cokehill.
A Priory of White Black Nuns. Ms. Bodl.
Nuns founded by Isabella Countess of Warwick about A. D. 1260 Dugdale's
Baronage T. 1. p. 227.
. Valued at 35l. 9s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 34l. 15s. 11d. Speed.

18. Astley.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Taurinus at Ebroix.

The Monasteries of Alnecester and Wotton-Wawen which are in Warwickshire, are
placed in Mr. Speed's Catalogue under this County; where also are there said to
be Halesowen and Penwortham, the former of which is in Shropshire, and the
latter in Lancashire.

YORKSHIRE.
1. York.
PAulinus was consecrated the first (...) ^^ing made an Archiepiscopal Seat by
King (...) to be fabulous.
Archbishop of York A. D. 625. who having converted Edwyn King of the
Northumbers to the Christian says, built a small Church here to the honor of
St. Peter. This being destroyed by the Danes, Thomas the first Norman
Archbishop A. D. 1067. laid the foundation of the stately Cathedral now
standing.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 128.

Thomae Stubbs Acta Ponti^icum Eboracensium. Inter X. Script. Hist. Angl. Land.
1652. ^ol.

2. Lestinghan.
An ancient Monastery founded by St. Cedd A. D. 648.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 62.

3. UUhitby ol. Strenshall.
A Monastery founded by S. Hilda about A. D. 650. destroyed by the Danes, but
re^dified for Benedictine Monks by Will. de Percy, to the honor of St. Peter
and St. Hilda, A. D. 1067. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
437l. 2s. 9^. Dugd. 505l. 9s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 71, 988.

Registr. p^nes Hug. Cholmondley mil. 1640.

4. Rippon.
St. Wilfrid about A. D. 660. Leland It in. Vol. 1.
built a Monastery here, which in succeeding ages became a College for a Dean
and Secular Canons. It was dedicated to St. Peter, and valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
35l. 3s. 8d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 172. T. 3. P. 2. p. 87.

Registra, Cartas etc. penes Decan* and Capit. Rippon.

* The history of the Collegiate Church of Rippon, by Sir Tho. Herbert MS.
penes V. Doctiss. Thomam Gale Scholae S. Pauli Land. Archididascalum.

5. Beverley.
A Monastery dedicated to St. John the Evangelist, founded by John de Beverley
about A. D. 720. It was destroyed by the Danes 146. years after, but reedified
by King Aethelstan in memory of S. John de Beverley, and Canons Secular placed
here. At the Suppression it was endowed with 109l. 8s. 8d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 171. T. 3. P. 2. p. 1.

* Registrum penes Franc. Thorp Baronem Scaccarii tempore Vsurpationis
Cromwellianae.

* Statuta and Cartularium hujus Collegii. In Biblioth. Coll. Univ. Oxon. F. 1.

6. York.
Here were Culdees in the Church of St. Peter A. D. 936. at which time King
Aethelstan endowed it with lands; but after the Conquest it became a Priory of
Black Canons and an Hospital: the Church being rebuilt by King Stephen, it was
by him dedicated to St. Leonard. The foundation consisted of a Master, thirteen
Brethren, four Secular Priests, eight Sisters, thirty Choristers, two
Schoolmasters, two hundred and six Beadmen, and six Servitors Speed.
. The revenues (26. Hen. VIII.) amounted to 362l. 11s. 1d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 367.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

7. Selby.
A Benedictine Abbey founded by King William the Conqueror, and commended to the
Patronage of St. Mary and St. German. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 729l. 12s.
10d. per an. Dugd. 819l. 2s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 371.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. T. 2. p. 155.

Registr. penes Th. Walmesly de Dunkehalgh in Com. Lanc. Arm. 1620.

Apographum bujus Registri est inter MSS. Viri rei Antiquariae peritissimi
Nath. Johnston M. D. de Pontfract, qui agri Eboracensis Antiquitates jam sub
manibus habet, unde pleniorem Abbatiarum, Prioratuum and aliorum locorum
Religiosorum Historiam expectet Orbis eruditus.

Cartular. in Archivis Ducatus Lancastr.

* Tenementa Mon. de Selby in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. D. 34.

* Collectiones MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 118.

8. York.
A. D. 1088. Alan Earl of Richmund built a stately Abbey here for Black Monks to
the honor of St. Olave, but it was afterward dedicated to the blessed Virgin
by the command of King William Rufus. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression
amounted to 1550l. 7s. q. Dugd. 2085l. 1s. 5d. ob. q. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 383. T. 3. P. 1. p. 9.

Reyner. Apost. Bened. in Anglia Tr. 2. p. 145.

Registr. in Biblioth. Deuvesiana. 1646.

Steph. Witebiensem de fundatione Mon. S. Mariae Ebor. and Historia ejusdem
Mon. una cum figuris Abbatum Sciagraphice depictis etc. In Bibl. Bodl. NE. A.
3. 20.

* Reg. penes Decan. and Capit. Eborac.

* Collectanea MS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 7. 9.

9. York.
A Priory dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and subordinate to Marmonstier in
France. It was founded by Ralph Painell A. D. 1089. for Benedictine Monks, and
valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 169l. 9s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 196l. 17s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 563.

10. Hakeness.
A Cell to Whitby, to which it was given by William de Percy, (temp. Will.
Rufi.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 414.

11. Richmond.
A Cell to the Abbey of St. Mary at York, to which it was given by Wymar Sewer
to the Earl of Richmond about A. D. 1100. St. Martin was the Patron of this
Priory, which was endowed with 43l. 16s. 8d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 388, 401.

* Reg. in Bibl. Cotton.

12. Bridlington.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Walter de Gant, (temp. Hen. I.) and
dedicated to S. Mary and S. Nicholas MS. Bodl.
. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 547l. 6s. 11d. ob. per an. Dugd. 682l. 13s.
9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 161.

Registr. pen. Will. Ingleby de Rippon Equ. Aur.

* Cartularium penes Ric. Maleverer Bar.

* Collect. MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 159.

* Registrum penes Joh. Bellengham de Levens in Com. Westminster.

13. Birstall.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Martin de Albamarle in Normandy, to which
it was given by Stephen Earl of Albamarle, A. D. 1115.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 587.

14. Gisborn.
A. D. 1119. Rob. de Brus built a Priory of Black Canons here to the honor of
the blessed Virgin. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 628l. 3s.
4d. Dugd. 712l. 6s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 147. T. 3. P. 1. p. 46.

Annotationes Cartarum de Gisborn in Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. D. 2.

* Rogeri Dodsworthi Collect. MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 7.

15. Kirkham.
A Priory of Canons of the Order of S. Austin, founded by Walter Espec A. D.
1122. and commended to the Patronage of the Holy Trinity. It was valued at
269l. 5s. 9d. per an. Dugd. 300l. 15s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 105.

* Cartul. MS. in Bibl. Bodl. in Musaeo. Fairfax. 7.

* Collectiones MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi Vol. 95.

16. Nostell.
Rob. de Lacy finished the Priory of Black Canons here, founded to the honor
of St. Oswald the King, by his Father Ilbert de Lacy, (temp. Hen. I.) It was
endowed at the Suppression with 492l. 18s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 606l. 9s. 3d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 34.

* Reg. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Cartularium penes Carolum Fairfax de Menston in Com. Ebor. 1632.

* Coll. MSS. Rog. Dodsw. in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 138.

17. Emmesey.
A. D. 1120. Will. de Meschines founded a Priory of Black Canons here to the
honor of St. Cuthbert, which was translated to Bolton A. D. 1151.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 100.

18. Scoke-kirk.
A Cell to Nostell Abbey dedicated to All Saints, and founded by Gaufrid
Fitz-Pain (temp. Hen. I.) Valued at 8l. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 43.

19. York.
A Benedictine Nunnery founded by Thurstan the Archbishop about A. D. 1130 and
dedicated to St. Clement. It was able to dispend annually 55l. 11s. IId. Speed.
Dugd.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 510.

20. Nun-Monketon.
Will. de Arches (temp. Hen. I.) built a Nunnery for Benedictines here to the
honor of St. Mary. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 75l. 12s.
4d. ob. Dugd. 85l. 14s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 476.

21. Fountains.
A. D. 1132. Thurstan Archbishop of York founded a Cistercian Abbey here, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 998l. 6^.
8d. ob. per an. Dugd. 1173l. 7d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 733.

MS. de Origin hujus Abbatiae in Bibl. Arundel. nunc in Bibl. Gresham.

Registr. MS. penes Will. Ingleby de Ripley Mil. 1630.

Regist. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. Tib. C. 2.

* Cartular. penes D. Joh. Trevor.

* Registr. penes Carolum Fairfax de Menston.

* Registrum pen. Decan. and Capit. Ebor.

* Registrum omnium terrarum, feodorum, etc. ad hoc Monast. spectantium, quod
rescribi fecit Marmaducus Abbas, A. D. 1509. penes Honoratiss. Comitem Denbigh.
apud Newnham-Padox in Com. Warw.

22. Rivaulx.
A Cistercian Abbey founded A. D. 1132. by Walter de Espec, and commended to the
Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It was endowed with 278l. 10s. 2d. per an.
Dugd. 351l. 14s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 727.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Jul. D. 1. 2.

* Registrum penes Will. Lite de Wilburgham in Com. Cant.

23. Warter.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Galfred Trusbut A. D. 1132. St. James was
its Tutelar Patron. Its annual income amounted to 143l. 7s. 8d. per an. Dugd.
221l. 3s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 172.

Registr. penes Tho. Widdrington Equ. Aur.

* Cartul. MS. in Bibl. Bodl. in Musaeo Fairfax. 9.

24. Newburgh.
A. D. 1135. Roger de Mowbray founded a Priory of Black Canons here, and
dedicated it to St. Mary. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
367l. 8s. 3d. Dugd. 457l. 13s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 190.

* Collectiones MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 94.

* Munimenta penes Honoratiss. Thomam Comitem Falconberg.

25. Hode.
A Cell of Black Canons to Newburgh, whereunto it was given by Adam Fossard,
and dedicated to St. Mary.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 194.

26. Bella-Launda, v. Bilaund Ioh. Hagustald* who calls this Abbey Bechlanda.
.
A Cistercian Abbey built by Roger de Mowbray A. D. 1138. to the honor of the
blessed Virgin Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 238l. 9s. 4d. per an. Dugd.
295l. 5s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 775, 1027.

Registr. penes Joh. Rushworth Arm.

Registr. penes Brianum Fairfax.

* Collectiones MSS. Rog. Dodsw. Vol. 91. 94.

27. Watton.
A Gilbertine Abbey dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and erected by Eustace fill.
Iohannis, (temp. R. Steph.) It was rated at 360l. 16s. 10d. ob. per an. Dugd.
453l. 7^. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 798.

* Reg. in Arce London.

28. Malton.
The same Eustace Fitz-Iohn (temp. Reg. Steph.) built a Gilbertine Priory here
to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was endowed 197l. 19s. 2d. per an.
Dugd. 257l. 1s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 816.

* Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

29. Fors.
Akarius Fitz-Bardolf A. D. 1145. founded here an Abbey of Cistercian Monks, who
were afterward translated to Iervall.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 869.

30. Roch.
A Cistercian A Priory of the Cluniac Order, situated in Wiltshire* Re^ner.
Abbey founded by Rich. de Builli and Rich. Fitz-Turgis A. D. 1147. and
dedicated to St. Mary. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 224l. 2s. 5d. per an.
Dugd. 71l. 19s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 839.

* Collectiones MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 9.

31. Salley.
A. D. 1147. Will. Percy built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of the
blessed Virgin. It was able to dispend at the Suppression 147l. 3s. 10d. per
an. Dugd. 221l. 15s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 842.

Registr. in Bibl. Deuvesiana.

* Cartularium penes Franc. Darcy.

32. Nun-Appleton.
A Cistercian Nunnery founded by Adeliz de S. Quintin, (temp. R. Steph.) and
commended to the Patronage of St. John the Apostle. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII.
at 73l. 9s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 83l. 5s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 907.

33. Middlesburgh.
Rob* de Brus (temp. R. Steph.) gave this Manor to the Monks of Whitby, and so
it became a Cell of Benedictines to that Abbey. St. Hilda was likewise the
Patroness of it.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 413.

34. Kirkstall.
A. D. 1147. Henry Lacei built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of the
blessed Virgin. It was endowed with 329l. 2s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 512l. 13s. 4d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 746, 854.

Chronica de Kirkstall a Bruto ad finem Henr. V. In Bibl. Cotton. Dom. A. 12.

* MS. de Fundatione Prior. de Kirkstall in Bibl. Bodl. Laud. G. 9.

* Reg. in Officio Ducatus Lanc.

* Collect. MS. Rog. Dodsworthi Vol. 8. 39.

35. Arden.
The Priory of St. Andrew for Benedictine Nuns erected by Peter Hotun, (about
A. D. 1150.) It was endowed with 12l. 6d. per an. Dugd. 13l. 7s. 4d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 500.

36. Keling.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Agnes de Archis to the honor of St. Mary and
St. Helen. (temp. R. Steph.) Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth
35l. 15s. 5d. Dugd. 50l. 17s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 474.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton. Oath. C. 8.

37. Melsa or Meaux.
A. D. 1150. William le Gross Earl of Albemarle founded a Cistercian Abbey here,
and dedicated it to the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 299l.
6s. 4d. q. per an. Dugd. 445l. 10s. 5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. I. p. 792, 747.

Registr. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Collect. MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 110.

* Registra penes Christ. Hildiard de.... in Holderness.

* Cartular. penes Will. Aldford de ead. Mil.

* Registr. penes Decan. and Capit. Eborac.

38. Bolton.
A Priory of Black Canons valued at 212l. 3s. 4d. per an. translated hither A.
D. 1151. by Alice de Romalli from Emmesey.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 100.

* Reg. penes Will. Ingleby de Ripley mil.

* Collectiones MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi. In Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 8. 146.

39. Richmond juxta.
A Premonstratensian Priory founded by Roald the Constable A. D. 1152. and
dedicated to St. Agatha. Its annual income 26. Hen. VIII. amounted to 111l.
17s. 11d. Dugd. 188l. 16s. 2d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 649.

40. Ierball.
A. D. 1156. the Cistercians at Fors were translated hither by Conan Duke of
Britain. It was dedicated to St. Mary, and rated at the Suppression at 234l.
18s. 5d. per an. Dugd. 455l. 10s. 5d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 869.

* Cartas penes Honoratiss. Thomam Com. Ailesburiensem.

41. Woodkirk.
A Cell of Black Canons to Nostel, founded by William Earl of Warren, (temp.
Hen. II.) It was dedicated to St. Mary, and its yearly revenues were worth at
the Suppression 17l. 4d. Dugd. 47l. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 41.

42. Wilberfoss.
Alan de Catton (temp. Hen. II.) founded a Benedictine Nunnery here, and
commended it to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It was able to dispend at
the Dissolution 21l. 16s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 28l. 8s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 524. T. 3. P. 1. p. 12.

43. Yedingham or Littlemareis.
A Benedictine Nunnery built by Rog. de Clear, (temp. Hen. II.) to the honor
of St. Mary. It was valued at 21l. 16s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 26l. 6s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 496.

44. York.
A Collegiate Church dedicated to the holy Sepulcher, and built by Roger
Archbishop of York about A. D. 1170. for a Warden, four Priests, four Deacons,
and four Subdeacons. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 138l. 19s. 2d. ob. per an.
Dugd. Speed.

Vide Thomae Stubbs Acta Pontificum Eborac. inter X. Script. Hist. Angl. Land.
1652. col. 1723.

45. North-Allerton.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of Marmonstier in France, to which it was given by
Rich. Malleverer, (temp. Hen. II.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 599.

46. Hoton.
A Cistercian Nunnery founded by Ralph de Nevill, (temp. Hen. II.)

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 840.

47. Mount S. John.
A Preceptory of Knights Templers, to whom this Manor was given by Robert Lord
Ross, (temp. Hen. II.) Endowed with 102l. 13s. 2d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 551.

48. Drax.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Will. Paynell, (temp. Hen. II.) and
commended to the Patronage of St. Nicholas. Its yearly revenues were worth
104l. 14s. 9d. Dugd. 121l. 18^, 3d. ob. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 96.

Cartul. pen. Marmad. Constable de Everingham.

* Collectiones MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 8.

49. Keldon or Keldeholm.
A Cistercian Nunnery dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and founded by Rob. de
Stutevil, (temp. Hen. II.) It was valued at 29l. 6s. 1d. per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. I. p. 914.

50. Rosedale.
A Benedictine A Cistercian Nunnery. MS. Bodl.
Nunnery built by the said Rob. de Stutevil, to the honor of St. Mary and St.
Laurence. It was endowed at the Dissolution with 37l. 12s. 5d. per an. Dugd.
41l. 13s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 507.

51. Senningthwait.
About A. D. 1160. Bertam Haget founded a Cistercian Nunnery here, and
dedicated it to St. Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 60l. 9s. 2d. per an.
Dugd. 62l. 6s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 827.

52. Pontfract.
A Cluniac Monastery founded by Rob. de Laci 5. Hen. II. Its tutelar Patron was
St. John the Evangelist. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 337l. 14s. 8d. per an.
Dugd. 472l. 16s. 1d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 648.

Cartular. penes Tho. Widdrington A. D. 1652.

* Registrum in manibus Joh. Wentworth de Wolley in Com. Ebor. Armig. cujus
Apographum est penes V. Cl. Nath. Johnston M. D. de Pontfract.

53. Hampoll.
A Cistercian Nunnery dedicated to the blessed Virgin, built by Avicia de Tanai
about A. D. 1170. Its annual income amounted to 63l. 5s. 8d. Dugd. 85l. 6s.
11d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 830.

54. Ribleston.
This Manor was given to the Knights Templers by Robert Lord Ross, (temp. Hen.
II.) so it became a Preceptory, having rents (26. Hen. VIII.) to the value of
207l. 9s. 7d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 551, 557.

55. Marton.
Bertam de Bulmer (temp. Hen. II.) built a Priory of Black Canons here to the
honor of the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 151l. 5s. 4d. per
an. Dugd. 183l. 2s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 98.

56. Monks-Bretton.
Adam Fitz-Swain about A. D. 1186. founded a Monastery of the Cluniac Order
here, subordinate to the Priory of St. John at Pontfract, and dedicated it to
St. Mary Magdalene. Its yearly revenues at the Suppression amounted to 239l.
3s. 6d. Dugd. 323l. 8s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 660.

Cartularium in Bibl. Cotton. Claudius. A. 8.

Registr. penes Franc. Wortley Mil.

* Registr. penes Joh. Wentworth de Wolley Arm.

* Registr. penes Will. Armyn Mil.

* Collect. MSS. Rog. Dodsworthi. In Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 155. 159.

57. Molesby.
A Priory of Nuns of St. Austin's Order subordinate to Marton, founded by King
Henry II. and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
26l. 2s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 32l. 6s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 98.

* Collect. MSS. Rogeri Dodsworthi. In Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Vol. 10.

58. Swainby.
A Priory of Premonstratensian Canons founded A. D. 1190. by Helewisia de
Glanvill, but translated to

59. Coverham.
By Ranulf de Glanvill the famous Lawyer, 14. Ioh. It was dedicated to St.
Mary, and endowed with 160l. 18s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 207l. 14s. 8. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 648.

60. York.
A Gilbertine Priory founded by Hugh Murdac about A. D. 1200. St. Andrew was
its Tutelar Patron. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 47l. 14s. 3d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 57l. 5s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 808.

61. Ellerton.
A Priory of the Sempringham Order built by W. Fitz-Peter, (temp. R. Ioh.) to
the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was able to dispend at the Suppression
62l. 8s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 78l. 10d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 821. T. 3. P. 1. p. 108.

62. Grosmunt.
A Priory subordinate to the Abbey of Grandmont in France, founded by Ioanna the
wife of Rob. de Turnham, (temp. R. Ioh.) It was rated at 12l. 1s. 8d. per an.
Dugd. 14. 2s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 597. T. 3. P. 1. p. 15.

63. Thirkehead.
Rog. fill. Rogeri (temp. R. Ioh.) founded a Benedictine Nunnery here and
dedicated it to S. Mary. It was endowed with 20l. 18s. 10d. per an. Dugd. 23l.
12s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 529.

64. Wyckham.
A Cistercian Abbey erected by Paganus de Wickham (temp. R. Ioh.) and commended
to the Patronage of St. Michael. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 25l. 17s. 6d.
per an. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 916.

65. Helagh-Park.
A. D. 1218. Bertram Haget built a Priory of Black Canons here to the honor of
St. John the Evangelist. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to
72l. 10s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 86l. 5s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 286.

Cartular. MS. in Bibl. Cotton.

* Registr. penes Dominum Wharton.

66. Knaresburgh.
A Priory of the Order of the holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives,
founded by Rich. Earl of Cornwall, A. D. 1218. Saint Robert was the Tutelar
Saint of this Monastery. It was valued at 35l. 10s. 11d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 833.

67. Newland.
A Preceptory founded by Roger of Poictou, 9. Edw. 1. Valued at 129l. 14s. 11d.
ob. per an.

Vide Rog. Dodsworthi Collectiones MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. Vol. 10.

68. Hedley.
A Cell to the Monastery of the holy Trinity at York.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 595.

69. Gilling.
A Nunnery. Speed.

70. Maryke.
A Benedictine Nunnery dedicated to St. Andrew, MS. Bodl.
and founded by... Ask Leland. Itin. Vol. 5. f. 96.
. Valued at 48l. 18s. 3d. per an. Dugd. 64l. 16s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 484.

71. Beverley.
On the East side of the Town was a House of the Trinity belonging to the
Knight Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem. Ibid. Vol. 1. f.
Valued at 167l. 10s. per an. Speed.

72. Arthington.
A Cluniac Nunnery, rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 11l. 8s. 4d. ob. per an. Dugd. 19l.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 691.

73. Basedale,
A Cistercian Nunnery dedicated to St. Mary. Endowed with 20l. 1s. 4d. per an.
Dugd. 21l. 19s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 840.

74. Esseholt.
A Priory of Cistercians subordinate to Sinning-thwait. Valued at 13l. 5s. 4d.
Dugd 19l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 828.

75. Ferreby.
A Priory rated at 60l. 1s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 95l. 11s. 7d. ob. Speed.

76. Handale or Grundale.
A Benedictine Nunnery. Endowed at the Suppression with 13l. 1s. 7d. per an.
Dugd. 20l. 7s. 8d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 427.

77. Kirkley.
A Benedictine Munnery built by Reynerus Flandrensis, to the honor of the
blessed Virgin, A. D.... Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 19l.
8s. 1d. Dugd. 20l. 7s. 8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 487.

78. Ecclesfield.
An Alien-Priory to St. Wandragisilius's Abbey in Normandy.

79. Scarburgh.
An Alien-Priory.

80. Nun-Burnham, Dugd. Nunvertholm Sp.
A Benedictine Nunnery. Valued at 8l. 1s. 11d. per an. Dugd. 10l. 3s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 498.

81. Swinhey.
A Cistercian A Benedictine Nunnery. MS. Bodl.
Nunnery founded by Erinburch de Burtona to the honor of the blessed Virgin.
Endowed with 82l. 3s. 9d. ob. per an. Dugd. 134l. 6s. 9d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 834. 1026.

82. Scarthe.
A Cell of Black Canons to Gisburn, to which it was given by Stephen de
Mainillo.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 153.

83. Cotingham.
Thomas Lord Wake Not Thomas Holland Earl of Kent as in Speed.
(15. Edw. II.) built a Priory of Black Canons here, translated 19. Ed. II. to

84. Haltemprice.
Which was dedicated in honor of the Nativity of Christ, the Annunciation of
the blessed Virgin, and the Exaltation of the holy Cross. It was endowed at the
Suppression with 100l. 3d. ob. per an. Dugd. 178l. 10d. ob. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 347.

85. Hull.
A. D. 1378. Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, founded a Cartusian Priory
here, and commended it to the Patronage of St. Mary, St. Michael, and S. Thomas
of Canterbury. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 174l. 18s. 3d. per an. Dugd.
231l. 17s. 3d. Sp.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 966. T. 2. p. 930.

86. Pontfract.
Sir Rob. Knolles Knight, (8. Rich. II.) founded a College here and dedicated
it to the holy Trinity. Its annual income at the Dissolution was worth 182l.
14s. 7d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 106.

* Cartas, Remembrantias and munimenta pertinentia ad hoc Coll. and Domum
eleemosinariam ejusdem inter MSS. Barlov. in Bibl. Bodl.

87. Bolton.
A College endowed by Sir Rich. le Scrope Knt. 20. Rich. II. Its yearly
revenues at the Suppression were worth 102l. 9s. 3d. Speed. This revenue is
falsely said by Speed to belong to a House of Friars Carmelites here.


Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 137.

88. Wenslow
A College dedicated to the holy Trinity, and founded by the said Sir Rich. le
Scrope. 22. Ric. II.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 137.

89. Hull.
A College of Prebendaries, founded as Leland Leland. It in. Vol. 1. f.
thinks, by Walter Shirlaw Bishop of Durham, about A. D. 1400.

90. Hemyngburgh.
A College founded by the Prior and Convent of Durham, (5. Hen. VI.) to the
honor of the blessed Virgin, for a Provost, three Canons, six Vicars, and six
Clerks. Valued at 36l. 7d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 97.

91. Mountgrace.
Thomas de Holland Duke of Surrey founded here a Monastery for Carthusians, and
dedicated it to the blessed Virgin and St. Nicholas, 19. Hen. VI. it was valued
at 323l. 2s. 10d. ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 968.

92. Middleham.
A College dedicated to St. Mary and St. Alkilda, founded by Rich. Duke of
Gloucester, 17. Ed. IV.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 204.

93. Roderham.
Thomas Rotherham Archbishop of York, (22. Edw. IV.) built a Collegiate Church
here to honor of Christ Jesus. It consisted to a Provost, five Priests, six
Choristers, a Musick-master, a Schoolmaster, and a Writing-master, Leland. It
in. Vol. 5. f. 78.
and was endowed 26. Hen. VIII. with 58l. 5s. 9d. ob. q. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 204.

94. Aulcaster.
A College dedicated to St. Mary and St. John Baptist, founded by Rob. Earl of
Leicester, Speed.
,... and was able to dispend at the Suppression 27l. 13s. 4d. per an. Speed.

95. Sutton.
A College endowed with 13l. 8s. 8d. per an.

96. Hoveden.
A College of ten Prebendaries. Liber MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Cromwell 129.


97. Pontfract.
In the Castle here was a College dedicated to St. Clement, consisting of a
Dean and three Prebendaries Leland. It in. Vol. 1. f.
.

The Monasticon places Sibthorp in this County, which is in Notinghamshire;
and Mr. Speed reckons Wederhall and Sempringham to be in this County, whereas
the former is in Cumberland, and the latter in Lincolnshire.

WALES.
ANGLESEY.
1. Holy-Head or Caer-Guby.
S. Chebius who flourished about A. D. 380. founded a little Monastery here.
But this being destroyed, here was afterward a College of Prebendaries, Leland.
Collect. Vol. 4. p. 54.
whose yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to 24l. per an. Dugd.

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE.
1. Brecknock.
A Priory of Benedictines subordinate to Battle Abbey: it was built by Bernard
de Newmarch (temp. Hen. I.) to the honor of St. John the Evangelist, and
endowed at the Suppression with 112l. 14s. 2d. per an. Dugd. 134l. 11s. 4d.
Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 319.

2. Brecknock.
A College of 14. Prebendaries, translated hither by King Hen. VIII. from
Aberguilly in Caermarden- shire.

CAERMARDEN-SHIRE.
1. Kydwelly.
A Priory of Benedictines founded by Roger Bishop of Sarum about A. D. 1130. It
was subordinate to Shirborn in Dorsetshire, and rated at 29l. 10s. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 424.

2. Alba-landa, Whiteland, or Blancland.
John de Toryton (temp. R. Johan.) built a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor
of St. Mary. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were worth 135l. 3s. 6d.
Dugd 153l. 17s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 884. T. 2. p. 918.

3. Lancadanc.
A Collegiate Church consisting of a Precentor and one and twenty Canons,
founded by Thomas Bishop of St. David's A. D. 1283.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 2. p. 36.

4. Aberguilly.
A Collegiate Church founded by Thomas Bek Bishop of St. David's, in which he
placed two and twenty Prebendaries Leland.
. Valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 42l.

5. Tallach.
A Benedictine It was a Premonstratensian Monastery according to Leland.
Abbey dedicated to the blessed Virgin and St. John the Baptist. It was valued
at 136l. 9s. 7d. per an. Dugd. 153l. 1s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 465.

6. St. Clare.
An Alien-Priory, consisting of a Prior and three Cluniac Monks, Cell to St.
Martin de Campis in Paris, and afterward given to All Souls College in Oxford.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1026.

7. Caermarden.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. John the Evangelist. Endowed at the
Suppression with 164l. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 282.

8. Teguin or Taue.
An Abbey of White Monks. Lel.

Mr. Speed places Llanleir in this County which should be in Cardiganshire.

CAERNARVON-SHIRE.
1. Aber-Conway.
A. D. 1185. Llewellin fill. Gervasii Prince of North Wales, built a Cistercian
Abbey here to the honor of the blessed Virgin and All Saints. It was rated 26.
Hen. VIII. at 162l. 15s. per an. Dugd. 179l. 10s. 10d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 918.

2. Clunokvaur.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by one Guithin, Uncle to a Prince of North Wales, A.
D.... Its Tutelar Saint was St. Benow.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 892. T. 2. p. 919.

3. Bethkelert.
A Priory of Black Canons founded by Llewellin the last Prince of Wales about
A. D. 1260. and commanded to the Patronage of the blessed Virgin. It was
endowed with 70l. 3s. 8d. per an. Dugd. 69l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 100.

4. Bardsey.
An Abbey dedicated to St. Mary. Its yearly revenues at the Dissolution were
worth 46l. 1s. 4d. ob. Dugd. 58l. 6s. 2d. Speed.

5. Penmon or Glannach.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary. It was valued at 40l. 17s. 9d.
ob. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 338.

6. Siriolis. Sp.
A Priory rated at 47l. 14s. 3d. per an. Speed.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE.
1. Stratflour.
A. D. 1164. Resus Prince of South Wales built a Cistercian Abbey here. Its
yearly revenues at the Dissolution amounted to 118l. 7s. 3d. Dugd. 122l. 6s.
8d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 893.

2. Cardigan.
A Priory of Black Monks, subordinate to the Abbey of Chertsey in Surrey.
Leland. It in. Vol. 5. f. 16.
Valued at 13l. 4s. 9d. per an.

3. Llanleir or Llan-Clere. Mr. Speed is under a mistake about this Priory,
taking it to be the ^ame with St. Clare, he has placed it in Caermardenshire.

A Cistercian Nunnery, Cell to Stratflour. Leland ut supra.
Valued at 57l. 5s. 4d. Dugd. Speed.

4. Llandewi-brevy.
A College of a Dean and twelve Prebendaries, founded by Thomas Bek Bishop of
St. David's. Leland. It in. Vol. 5. f. 16.


5. Llanrustyt.
A Nunnery. Lel.

6. Llansanfride.
Leland Ibid.
thinks this to be the Nunnery that Giralaus calls Llanfride.

DENBIGH-SHIRE.
1. De Ualle Crucis.
A Cistercian Abbey founded by Madok ap Griffith about A. D. 1170. and dedicated
to the blessed Virgin. It was endowed with 188l. 8s. per an. Dugd. 214l. 3s.
5d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 945.

2. Ruthin,
A Cell of Bonhommes. Lel.

3. Wrexham.
A Collegiate Church. Lel.

FLINT-SHIRE.
1. St. Asaph.
KEntigern a Scot, about A. D. 560. founded a Monastery between the Rivers
Elwyd and Elwy, which shortly after became an Episcopal Seat, called in Latin
Episcopatus Elguensis, Eluensis or Llan-Elwensis, and since Asaphensis, from
St. Asaph successor to Kentigern in this See.

Vide Fr. Godwinum de Praesulibus Angliae. Land. 1616. 4^. p. 652.

* Registra, Cartas, etc. penes Episcopum and Capit.

2. Basingwerk.
A. D. 1131. Ranulph Earl of Chester founded an Abbey of White Canons here, and
dedicated it to St. Mary. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII. at 150l. 7s. 3d. per an.
Dugd. 157l. 15s. 2d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 720.

3. Hawston.
A Preceptory, valued at 160l. 14s. 10d. per an.

GLAMORGAN-SHIRE.
1. Landaff.
HEre has been a Cathedral Church ever since the time of St. Dubritius, who was
made Bishop here about A. D. 520.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 3. P. 1. p. 188.

Historiam de Fundatione and Dotatione Ecclesiae Landaviensis, editam a Cl.
Whartono in Angliae Sacrae Tom. 2. Land. 1691. Fol.

* Registra, etc. penes Episcopum and Capitulum.

2. Margan.
A. D. 1147. Robert Not William Earl of Gloucester as in Speed.
Earl of Gloucester built a Benedictine A Cistercian Priory. MS. Bodl.
Priory here to the honor of the blessed Virgin. It was rated 26. Hen. VIII.
at 181l. 7s. 4d. per an. Dugd. 188l. 14s. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 477.

Annals de Margan editas per V. Rev. Thomam Gale. Oxon. 1687. Fol.

3. Wenny.
A Cell to Gloucester Abbey, thereunto given by Maurice de London, Founded by
Sir John de Loundres Knt. Lord of Ogmore Castle. Leland.
A. D. 1141. It was dedicated to St. Michael.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 114.

4. Neth. The fairest Abbey in Wales, says Leland.

A Cistercian Abbey founded by Richard de Grainvill about A. D. 1150. and
dedicated to the Holy Trinity. It was endowed with 132l. 7s. 7d. ob. per an.
Dugd. 150l. 4s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 719.

Registr. penes Edw. Stradling Mil.

5. Swansey.
A Preceptory of the Templers. Valued at 20l. per an.

6. Llangenith.
An Alien-Priory to the Abbey of St. Taurinus at Eureux. After the Dissolution
it was annexed by Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury to All Souls College
in Oxon.

* Vide Cartas ad hunc Prioratum spectantes in Thesaurario Coll. Omn. Anim.
Oxon.

MERIONETH-SHIRE.
1. Kimmer This Abbey is confounded by the Monasticon with Combehire in
Rad^or-shire.
.
A Cistercian Abbey dedicated to St. Mary and founded by Llewellin fill. Gervasii
about A. D. 1190. So Mr. Speed, but the foundation was only (...) by this
Lewellin, who was Prince of North Wales
Its yearly revenues were worth 51l. 13s. 4d. Dugd. 58l. 15s. 4d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 825.

MONTGOMERY-SHIRE.
1. Strat-Margell.
A. D. 1170. Madoc Not Owen ap Griffith as in Speed.
ap Griffith founded a Cistercian Abbey here. It was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at
64l. 14s. 2d. per an Dugd. 73l. 7s. 3d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 895.

2. Llanlugan.
A Nunnery rated at 22l. 14s. 8d. per an.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE.
1. St. David's ol. Menevia.
HEre was the Seat of an Archbishop, who was Primate of Wales, from the time
of St. David, who translated it hither from Caerleon, about A. D. 540. till S.
Sampson about A. D. 930. carried the Pall with him to Dole in Britanny.
Notwithstanding the Bishops of this See had Archiepiscopal power till the time
of King Henry I. in whose reign Bernard Bishop of St. David's made profession
of his subjection to the Archbishop of Canterbury as his Metropolitan.

Vide Godwin. de Praesulibus Angliae. p. 599.

Angliae Sacrae T. 2. in quo extant Annals Ecclesiae Menevensis, and Giraldus
Cambrensis de jure and statu Menevensis Ecclesiae.

* Registra, Cartas and alia munimenta penes Episcopum and Capitulum.

2. S. Dogmael.
A Benedictine Priory subordinate to S. Martin at Tours, to which it was given
by Robert Fitz-Martin A. D. 1126. It was endowed at the Suppression with 87l.
8s. 6d. per an. Dugd. 68l. 1s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 444.

3. Pilla.
An Alien-Priory dedicated to St. Mary and St. Budoc, and Cell to the Abbey of
St. Martin at Tours, to which it was given by Adam de Rupe.

Its yearly revenues 26. Hen. VIII. amounted to 52l. 2s. 5d.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 1019.

4. Daverford.
A Priory of Black Canons dedicated to St. Mary and St. Thomas the Martyr. It
was valued 26. Hen. VIII. at 133l. 11s. 1d. per an. Dugd. 135l. 6s. 1d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 292.

5. Slebach.
A Preceptory valued at 184l. 10s. 11d. ob. per an.

6. St. David's.
A College of a Master and seven Priests, founded by John Duke of Lancaster A.
D. 1365. Its yearly revenues were worth 106l. 3s. 6d. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 2. p. 112.

7. Mounton in the Suburbs of Pembroke.
A Priory of Black Monks Cell to St. Albans, founded by Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, (temp. Hen. VI.) Leland.


8. Caldey.
In this Isle was a Cell of the Order of St. Dogmael. Ibid.


RADNOR-SHIRE.
1. Combehire Falsely said to be in Pembrokeshire by the Monasticon.

A Cistercian Priory founded by Cadwathel and ap Madoc A. D. 1143. It was rated
26. Hen. VIII. at 24l. 19s. 4d. per an.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 825.

The Isle of MAN.
1. Russin.
A. D. 1134. Olave King of Man founded a Cistercian Abbey here to the honor of
the blessed Virgin. It was subordinate to Fourness in Lancashire. A. D. 1192.
the Monks removed to

2. Douglass.
Where they continued four years, and then returned to Russin.

Vide Mon. Angl. T. 1. p. 710.

The Names of the Monasteries that were dissolved by a Bull of Pope Clement
VII. A. D. 1524. and granted by King Henry VIII. to Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop
of York, toward the erecting of two Collges, one at Ipswich, and the other at
Oxford.
St. Frideswides in Oxford. Blackmore in Essex. Stanesgate in Essex. Thobye in
Essex. Typtree in Essex. Wykes in Essex. Dodnash in Suffolk. Snapes in Suffolk.
Beigham in Kent. De Calceto near Arundel in Sussex. Canwell in Staffordshire.
Sandwell in Staffordshire. Daventre in Northamptonshire. Littlemore in
Oxfordshire. Leisnes in Kent. Tunbridge in Kent. Poghley in Berkshire.
Ravenston in Buckinghamshire. Tyckford in Buckinghamshire. Bradwell in
Buckinghamshire. Horkesleigh in Essex.
Beside these, were dissolved by a Bull of the same Pope A. D. 1528. 20. Hen.
VIII.
St. Peter's at Ipswich in Suffolk. De la Pre in Hertfordshire. Wallingford in
Barkshire. Bromhill in Norfolk. Flixton in Suffolk. Rombergh in Suffolk.
To which may be added
Fairweld in Staffordshire. Ginge in Essex. The Hospital of St. Wolstan at
Worcester. The Hospital of St. James at Alverton in Yorkshire.
Before the Dissolution the following Abbats and Priors sat in the Upper House
of Parliament, as Barons of this Kingdom.
The Abbats of
Glastenbury. St. Austin's in Canterbury. Westminster. St. Albans. St.
Edmundsbury. Peterburgh. St. John's at Colchester. Evesham. Winchelcomb.
Croiland. Battle. Reading. Abingdon. Waltham. Shrewsbury. Cirencester. St.
Peter's in Gloucester. Bardney. Hulme S. Bennets. Thorney. Ramsey. Hyde.
Malmsbury. St. Mary's at York. Selby. The Prior of Coventry. The Prior of St.
John of Jerusalem, who was styled primus Angliae Baro.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of all the Monasteries and other places mentioned in
the Notitia Monastica.

A
ABberbury 190. Abbotesbury 53. Aberconway 276. Abergavenny 143. Aberguilly
cclxxiii. 274. Abingdon 1. ii, lxi, ccxi, cclxxxviii. Acceseale 222. Acornebury
86. Ailesbury 117, 260. Alba-landa ( Northum.) 170. (Wales) 274. S. Albans iii,
x, xi, xiv, lxiii. 88. lxxxix, xc, xci, cxi, cl, clxix, cclxxxiv. cclxxxviii.
Albemarle 121, 124, 252, 259. Alcetur 230. Aldeby 156. Aldgate 137, 138.
North-Allerton 261. Almanesches 226. Alnecester 230. ccxlvii. Alnewick 169.
Alverton 287. Alvingham 133. Ambresbury 237. Ambrosden 14, 16, 18, 68, 73, 178,
179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 231. Andever 73. Andewell 78, 81. Anebury 240.
Angiers 14, 23, 32, 33, 44, 118, 227. Anglesey ( Cambr.) 2^. ANGLESEY ( Wales)
273. Ankerwik vi, 16. Ansty 240. S. Anthony 32. Appledurcomb 81. Nun-Appleton
257. Aquilae Balivatus 123. Arden 258. Arimathea 193. Armethwait 34. Arthington
267. Arundel 224, cclxxxvi, S. Asaph 279. Ashby 165. Ashford 106. Ashridge 18.
Asserugge 18. Astley ( Warw.) 234. (Worc.) 247. Athelney 195. Atteston-Ginge
67. Attilburgh 159. Aucot 231. Avebury 240. Aukland 58. Aulcaster 271. Axholm
127. Axmouth 45.
B
Badeisley 81. Badlesmere 105. Baketun 150. Banbury 186. Banquervile 187.
Banwell 195. Barden 91. Bardney lxx. 117. cclxxxviii. Bardsey 276. Barking (
Essex) 60. (Land.) 140. BARKSHIRE 1. xix. Barlyneh 200. Barnewell 22.
Barnstaple 44. Barrone 87. Barrow ( Derb.) xxxix, 40, Barrow- Gu^ney (Summers.)
200. Bartone 87. Basedale 267. Basingwerk 279. Bath 194 cxcvi. Battle xliv.
221. cclxxiii, cclxxxviii. Battlefield 191. Bearwe 200. Beauchief 38. Beaudsert
203. Beaulieu ( Beds.) 10. ( Hants.) v. 79. ( Norm.) cxi. Beauvale 176.
Beauvoys 161. Becc 4. 48, 93, 120, 143, 161, 209, 210, 239. Bechlanda 256.
Bedford 10. xii. BEDFORDSHIRE 9. xiii. S. Bees 35. Beeston 154. Beigham 102.
ccxxvi, cclxxxvi. Bekeford 73. Bekingham 176. Bella Launda 256. de Bello Capite
38. de Bello loco see Beaulieu. de Bello portu 129. Belvoir 111. Benington 130.
Beoley 246. Berkinhead 29. Berkley 70. cxcviii. Berleston 50. Berlings 125.
Berliz 200. Bermondsey xl. cxliv. 218. Bernard-castle 59. Bernay 210.
Bethkelert 276. Beverley civ. 249, 267. Bierden 66. Bigleswade 12. Biland 256.
Bildewas 189. Bileigh 65. Bilsington 104. Bindon 54. Binham 150. Birstall 252.
Bisham 6. Bishopsgate 138. Bissemede 9. Biston 154. Bitham 124. Bittlesden 15.
Blackborough 154. Blackmore 66. cclxxxvi. Blakenham 210. Blakewase 101.
Blancalanda ( North.) 170. (Wales) 274. (Norm.) 128. Bliburgh 211. Blithe 172
Blithbur^ 204. Bodmin 30. Bolton 259, 270. Bolyngton 125. Bonury 30. Bordesley
xix. 246. Borstall 14, 177, 183. de Bosco ( Buck) 11. (Heart.) 88. Bosenham 221.
Bourn 22. Boxgrave 223. Boxley 100. Boxwell 71. Brackley 167. Bradenstoke 238.
Bradley ( Leic.) 114. Maiden Bradley ( Wilt.) 239. Bradsole 101. Bradwell 15.
cclxxxv. Brampton-Brian 85. Brecknock 273. BRECKNOCKSH. 273. Bredgare 106.
Bredon ( Leic) 112 (Worc.) 244. Bredsall 30. Brekenburn 169. Brend 39.
Brerewood 191. Bretford 228. Monks-Bretton 262. Brewood ( Shrop.) 191. (Staff.)
208. Bridgewater 197. Bridlington 252. Bridport 55. Briggerd 133. Brightley 45.
Brimsfield 73. Brinkburn 169. Brioptun 241. Brisete 211. Brisol 39. Bristol
lxxiv, 197, 198. Britanny 23. Brivern 208. Brodham 123. Bromfield ( Gloc.) 73.
(Shrop.) 190. Bromhall 7. Bromholm 150 cclxxxvii. Brommere 79. ccxlii. Brook
187. Bruern 181. ccviii. Brunne 119. Bruton lxi. 196. Buckenham 151. Buckfastre
45. Buckingham 14, 15. BUCKINGHAMSH, (...). clxxxi, clxxxii. Buckland ( Devon.)
48. (Some.) 199. Budham 152. Bunbury 29. Bungey 213. Burcester vi, xi, 182.
Bursord 183. Burgh-castle 209. S Burien 31. Burnham ( Buck.) 17. (Nors.) 158.
Burscough 108. Burshyard ccxiv. 216. Burton ( Wight.) 82. (Hertf.) 91. (Staff.)
203. Burwell 132. Bustleham 6. Butley cxciv, 213.
C
N. Cadbury 201. Caen 53, 61, 157. Caer-Guby 273. Caerleon 283. Caermarden 275.
CAERMARDENSH. 274. CAERNARVONSH. 276. Cairusk 145. de Calceto 224, cclxxxvi.
Caldey 284. Caldre 35. Caldwell 1^. Cale 116. de Caleto 242. Calk 37, cxvi^
Calwich 207. Cambridge 22, 24, ci. CAMBRIDGESHIRE 20, xc, xciii, ccxii.
Cameringham 128. Camestrum 55. Campess 214. Canington 197. Cannonleigh 46.
Canterbury xix, 95, 96, xcvii, xcviii, 99, 100, ci, cvi, cxlvi, clxvi, cxc,
ccii, ccxxi, cclxxxviii. Canwell cxvi, 204, cclxxxvi. Carbroke 152. Cardigan
277. CARDIGANSH. cclxxv, 277. Cardiou 152. Caresbrook 78. Careswell 49. S.
Caricius 33. Carliol 34. Carow 152. Cartmele 108. Castel-acre 148, cliii,
clvii, clviii. Castre ( Norf.) 158. (Northampt.) 160. Catesby 165. Catteley
130. Catune 208. Cern 52. Cerasie 78. Chacomb 162, clxxxiv. Charleton 238.
Charley 114. Chatteriz 21. Chedzoy 197. Chepstow 144. Cherburgh 128. Chertsey
218. CHESHIRE 26, xxxviii, cix, ccvii. Chester 26, 27, 29, xxxv, xxxvii, cxx,
ccii, ccv, ccvii. Chester ( Durh.) 56. Chesterfield 40. Chesthunt 90. Chetwood
17, ccviii. Chich 62, ccxi. Chichester 222. Chicksand 10. Chille 91. Chilletree
91. Chippenham ccxxxvi, 240. Chirbury 190. Christ-Ch. ( Hants.) l. 77. (Land.)
137. (Oxf.) 177. Cirencester 71, cclxxxviii. Clare 209. S. Clare 275, cclxxvii.
Clatford 242. Clattercote 183. Clerkenwell 136. Clifford 85. Clifton 176. Clive
( Devon.) 42. (Some.) 199. (Worc.) 245. Clovely 50. Clunokvaur 276. Cnobberburgh
209. Coats 206. Cobham 105. Cogges 179. Coggeshall 64. Cokehill 247. Cokersand
107. Cokesford 152. Colchester 62, ccxiii, cclxxxviii. Cold-Norton 181.
Colne-Earles 61. Comb cxvi, 171. Combehire cclxxxii, 285. Conches 84, 149, 229.
Congresbury 194. Conysheved 108. Cormeiles 71. CORNWALL xviii, 30, lii, lxxiii,
clxxxiii. Cornworthy 50. Cosham 220. Cotherstoke 166. Covenham 118. Coventry
cxxviii, ccii, 227, ccxxix, ccxxxiii, 234, cclxxxviii. Coverham 264.
Coupershill 162. Coupland 35. Cowike 48. Crabhouse 154. Cranburn 52. Crantock
33. Crediton xxxiv, xli, 42. Crendon 15. Cressing-Temple 64. Cresswell 87.
Creting 211. Creyk 158. Cripplegate 138. S. Cross 82. Croxton cx, 113. Croyland
117, cxix, cclxxxviii. Cuich 48. CUMBERLAND 34. Cumbermere 26. Cumbwell 102.
Cunacester 56.
D
Dacre 34. Dala 38. Dalby 113. Darleigh 38. Dartmouth 49. S. David's 283, 284.
Davintre 162, cclxxxvi. Daunton 103. S. Davy 165. Delacres xxvii, 207.
DENBIGHSHIRE 278. S. Dennis 70. Denny 23. Denston 217. Deping 120. Derby 37,
39, 40. DERBYSHIRE 37. W. Dereham 146. Derehirst 70. Derlington 59. Dernhale
28. Dertford lxxxiii, 105. de Divisis 164. Dodnash 214, cclxxxvi. S. Dogmaels
283, cclxxxiv. Dole 283. Donington 8. Dorchester ( Oxs.) 177. Door 86.
DORSETSH. 51, cxcvi. Dover 98, 101, cii. Douglass 285. Drax 261. Dublin 205.
Dudley 206. Dunkehalgh 250. Dunkeswell 46, cci. Dunmow 62. Dunstable 10.
Dunster 196. Dunwich cxlvi. Durford lxxxiii, 224. DURHAM ( Bishopric) 56,
lxxx, clxxxiv. Durham 56, lviii, clxviii, clxx, cclxx.
E
Eastburn 225. Eaton ( Bedf.^ 12. ( Buck.) 19, clvii, clxi, cxcix, ccx, ccxi,
ccxlii. S. Ebrulf 7, 90. Ecclesfield 268. Eddington 242. Ederose 239.
Edichweston 187. S. Edmunds 21. S. Edmundsbury cliv, 209. Edwardstow 211. Egle
123. Egleston 58. Einsham 179. Einulfesbury 92. Elflete 98. Elgin 85. Ellerton
265. Ellingham 81. N. Elmham 146. Elsham 126. Elstow ii, 9. Eltesley 22. Ely
20, xxiii. Emmesey 253, cclix. Eppworth 133, ccxxviii. Erdbury 232. Essay 223.
Esseholt 267. ESSEX 60, cxl, ccxiii. Eston 242. Everdon 166. Everingham 262.
Evesham 244, cix. Eure^x 281. Ewias 84. Exeter xxx, xxxi, xxxii, 41, xliii, 44^
45, 47, clxxvii, ccxxi. Eye 209.
F
Fairweld 205, cclxxxvii, Falkenham 151 Falkinhindon 151. Farendon 5. Farley
238. Farn 170. Faverwell 40. Felley 175. Ferne-eland 170. Ferreby 267.
Feversham 100. Fildalling 156. Finchale 58. Finnisheved 164. Fiscamp 223.
Fladbury 244. Flamstede 87^ Flaneland 170. Flanesford 87. Fledanbirig 244.
Flexely 72. Flixton 215, cclxxxvii Fodringhey lxxi, 163, ccxl. Folkston 97.
Fontevrault 232, 237. Fontney 73. Ford 45. Fordham 24. Fors 257. Fosse 97.
Foston 204. Fountains 254. Frameland 170. Frampton 53. Freston 119. Frisetun
119. Frithelstoke 47. de Fulgeriis 49. Furnes 107, cclxxxv.
G
Gant 99. Gare 165. Garradon 113. S. Germans 30. Gerondon 113. Gilling 266.
Ginge-Attestone 67, cclxxxvii. Gisborn 252. GLAMORGANSH. 280. Glannach 277.
Glassoney 32. Glastonbury 193. cclxxxviii. Gloucester 70, lxxii, lxxxv, lxxxvi,
cxliv, clxxxiv, cxc, cclxxx, cclxxxviii. GLOCESTERSHIRE 68, cxcviii. Godstow
180. Goldcliff lxxiv, 143. Goring clxv, 183. Goykwell 130. Grace Dieu ( Leic.)
115. (Monm.) 144. Grandmont 190. Graystoke 36. Greenfield 125. Gresley ( Derb.)
38. (Not.) 167. Grestein 211, 223. Grimesby 119. Grimesthorp 124, 125, 126.
Grosmunt 265. Grundale 268. Gyrwi 56. Gymeges 82.
H
Haddon 191. Hagh 128. Hagham 132. Haghmon 189, ccvii. Hagneby 126. Hailing 82.
Hakeness 251. Hales 73. Halesowen 190, ccxlvii. Haliston 171. Haliwel 141.
Hallifax 174. Haltemprice 269. Hamele 81. Hamme 5. Hampoll 263. HAMPSH. l, 75,
ccxlii. Handale 268. Hardham 226. Hartlepool 56. Harwood 12. Haselburgh 199.
Hasely 246. Hasilden 72. Hastings 225. Hatfield-Peverell 63, xci.
Hatfield-Regis 65. Haverford 284. Haverholm 121. Hawston 279. Heanbirig 245.
Heanore 39, 173. Hedley 266. Heinings 126. Helagh-Park 266. S. Helen 82.
Helenstow ( Berk.) 2. (Bedf.) 9. Helston 32. Hemingburgh 270. Hempton 151.
Henes 128. Heningham 65. Henton 200, ccxlii. Henwood 232. Hcortu 56. Hepp 235.
Herbaldown 99. Hereford xlvii, lxxii, 84, 85, 87, clxxvii. HEREFORDSHIRE 84,
xc, cxcii, cxcvii. Herinflete 215. Heringby 159. Heringham 226. Hermondesworth
142. Hertford 88. HERTFORDSHIRE xxv, lxvi, 88, cxi. Hertland xxxiii, 43.
Hesteland 33. Hither 113. Heveringes 126. Heveringland 156. Hichin 91. Hickling
153. Hide 76, cclxxxviii. Higham-Ferrers lxvi, 166. Hinkley 113. Hirst 120.
Hitchinbroke xxii, 93. Hode 256. Holiscomb 171. Holland 110. Holland-brugg 132.
Holme ( Dors.) 55. Holme-Cultr^m ( Cumb.) 36 Holyhead 273. Holy-Island 168. Hoo
226. Horkesleigh 64, cclxxxvi. Horneby 110. Horsford 149, ccxxvi. Horsham 149,
ccxx. Horsley ( Ess.) 61. ( Suss.) cxlix, 220. Horton ( Dors.) 52. (Kent) 102.
Hoton 261. Hoveden 271. Hounslow 142. Hull 269, 270. Hulme 146, cclxxxviii.
Hulton 207. Humberston 131. Huntingdon xxxvi, 93, 94. HUNTINGDONSHIRE xxii, 92.
Hurley 2.
I
S. Jacutus 201. Jarrow 56. de Ibreio 184. Ickleton 24. Jervall 260. Iffingham
133. Ikelington 24. Ilbre 29. Ingham 155. Ipswich 213, 214, cclxxxvi,
cclxxxvii. Irford 128. Irtelingburgh 166. S. Ives 93. Ivingho 15. Ivy-Church
239. Ixford 128. Ixworth 211.
K
Keldeholm 262. Keldon 262. Keling 258. Kemsey 244. Kendal 108, 235. Kenelworth
clxxxvii, ccvii, 228. KENT 94. Kersey 215. Keynsham 198. Kilburn 141. Kilpeke
86, Kime 131. Kimmer 282. Kingswood 72. Kington 242. Kirkby- Beller 116,
Monks-Kirkby 227. Kirkham 253. Kirkley 268. Kirk-Oswald 36. Kirkstall 258.
Kirksted 122. Knaresburgh 266. Knoll 234. Kydwelly 274.
L
Lacock 178. Lambley 170. Lancadanc 274. LANCASHIRE xxviii, xxxv, 107.
Lancaster 107. Lanceston 31. Lanercost 36. Langcester 58. Langdon 103. Langley
( Leic.) 114. (Norf.) 153. Latton 67. Lavenden 18, ci. Launda 112. Lechlade 74.
Leeds 100. Leicester xiii, live, 111, 116. LEICESTERSHIRE 111. cxxxiv. Leiston
213. Lemster 84. Lenton 173. Leominster ( Heref.) 84. (Suss.) 226. Leot 84.
Lesingham 155. Lesnes 103, cclxxxvi. Lestingham 248. Letheringham 216. Lettely.
81. Leveminster 84. Levenestre 84. Levens 252. Jews lxv, lxvi, lxxxvi, cii,
cxlviii, 222. ccxxxviii. Lewesham 99. Leyborn 128. Lighes 66. Lilleshull 188.
Limbroke 87. Liming 97. Lincoln xvii, cix, 118, 124, cxxxii, clxxvii.
LINCOLNSHIRE xvii, cxi, 117, cxcviii. Lindisfarn lvii, 168. Lingfield 220. Linn
148. Linton 201. Lira 54, 78, 113. Litchfield cx, clxxvii, 202. Liteburgh 216.
Lithom lix, 109. Littlemareis 260. Littlemore 185, cclxxxvi. Llandaff 280.
Llan-Clere 277. Llandewi-brevy 278. Llangenith 281. Llanleir cclxxv, 277.
Llanlugan 282. Llanrustyt 278. Llanfanfride 278. Llantarnam 145. Llantony (
Gloc.) 73. (Monm.) 143. Lodres 53. Lolley 97. LONDON xl, lxii, xci, 135.
Longavile 14. Longleat 242. Lonley 199. Louth-Park 121. Lowther 35. Luffield
13. Lullmenster 226.
M
Macclesfield 29. Magnotsfield 74. Maiden-Bradley 239. Maidstone 106. Main 118.
Maldon 65. Malling ( Kent) 98. (Suss.) 221. Malmsbury xlii, xlix, 236.
cclxxxviii. Malpas 145. Malsingham 156. Malton 256. MAN (Isle) 285. Manchester
110. Marbury 28. Maresey 175. S. Mary Overeie 218. S. Mary de Pre ( Hertf.) 90,
cclxxxvii. (Derb.) 39, (Leic.) 111. (North.) 163. S. Mary de Val 33. Markeby
131 Markham-Barbara 158. Marleburgh 241. Marmonstier 13, 239, 251, 261.
Marmound 155. Marsche 50. Marton 263. Maryke 267. Mattersey lvi, 131, 175.
Maxstock 233. Meaux 259. Medeshamstede 160. Medmenham 16. Melsa 259. Mendham (
Buck.) vi, 16. (Linc.) 157. Mercia 26, 37, 69, 117, 202, 227. Mercy 66, xci.
Merivall ccviii, 230. Merkyate 11. MERIONETHSH. 282. Merlow vi, 18. Merton 219.
Mettingham 216. S. Michael 49. S. Michaels Mount 31. S. Michael de Magno Monte
31. S. Mich. in periculo Maris 31, 46. Michelham 224. Michelney 196.
Middlesburgh 258. Middleham 271. MIDDLESEX xxxi, l, 141. Middleton 51. Milton
185. Minchin-Barrow 200. Minchin-Hampton 74. Minster-Lovel 184. Minting 120.
Mirdial 91. Mirmaud 24. Missenden 14. Modberley 28. Modbury 48. Moddry 10.
Modney 94. Molery 48. Molesby 264. Monkenlane 84. Monks-Bretton 263.
Monks-Kirkby 227. Monmouth 144. MONMOUTHSH. 143. Montacute xlix, lv, 197.
Montgomery 188. MONTGOMERYSHIRE 282. Mont S. John 261. Morgan 280, Morpeth 169.
Morton 31, 107. Motisfont 80. Mottinden 104. Moundroy 201. Mountborow 45, 49,
81. Mountgrace live, lxxviii, 270. Mounton 284. Mundene 89. Munkton 236. Munstre
33. Murresley viii, 19. Musewell 14.
N
Nantwich 26. Naworth 35, 36, 60, 169. S. Neots 92. Nesseham 59. Neth 281.
Newark 219. Newbigging 91. Newbo 130. Newburgh 255. Newcastle 171. Newenham (
Bedf.) 9. (Devon.) 47. Newent 71. Newhouse xxxix, 123. Newington ( Buck.) 14.
(Kent) 102. Newland 266. Newminster 169. Newnersby 122. Newnham-Padox 255.
Newport ( Buck.) 13. (Shrop.) 192. Newsom 123. Newstede ( Linc.) 127, 131.
(Not.) 175. Niwetton 71. Nocton 122. Noion 7. NORFOLK xiv, xxii, 146, clxvi.
Norhill 12. Northampton 162, 163. NORTHAMPTONSH. xiii, 160. North-Cadbury 2^1.
NORTHUMBERL. xx. 168. North-Yevel 12. Northyle 12. Norton ( Chesh.) 27,
xxxviii. Cold-Norton ( Oxf.) 181. Norwich 148, 159. Nostel cxii, 253, cclx.
NOTTINGHAMSH. 172. de Novo-Mercato 7. Nousley 115. Nun-Appleton 257.
Nun-Burnham 268. Nun-Cottun 125, ccviii. Nun-Eaton 232. Nun-Monketon 254.
Nun-Ormesby 122. Nunverholm 268. Nutley 15, xvii.
O
Oddington 181. Ospring 105. Ogmore 280. Okeburn 239. S. Olaves 156. Olbury
229. Olveston 114. Ormesby 122. Osney clxxix, 178. Osulveston 114. Oswestre
191. Otmoor 181. Otteham 102. Otterington 46. Otterey 43. Overton 58. Ovingham
170. Oxeney 124. Oxford xiii, xxiv, xxxii, 177, 179, 184, 185, 186. cclxxxvi.
OXFORDSH. xix, 177.
P
Painswike 86. Paratrendune 15. Parco-Crendon 15. Parco-Luda 121. Parco-Stanley
38. Paris 44, 275. Paston 21. Patricksburn 103. Paunsfield 61. W. Peckham 106.
Pembroke xxiii, cviii, 284. PEMB^OKESHIRE 283. Penkridge 205. Penmon 277.
Penryn 32. Pentney 151. Penwortham 109, ccxlvii. Pershore 243. Peterburgh 160,
cclxxxviii. Petrocstow 30. Peykirk 161. Piddington 14. Pilton 42. Pipewell lxx,
164. Plecy 67. Plimpton xxxii, 43. Poghley 5, cclxxxvi. Pollesworth xl, cciii,
227. Pollewerk 40. Pollshoo 47. Pontefract ccl, 262, cclxiii, 269, 272. Preaus
55. Prittlewell 65. Puddington 165. Pulla 283. Pulton ( Chesh.) 27. (Wilt.)
241. Pyling 107. Pyneley 220. Pynham 224. Pyonia 86.
Q
Quarrer 79. Queinington 73.
R
Radeford 172. Radmore 205. RADNORSHIRE 285. Rafford 216. Ramsbury 236. Ramsey
xxi, 92, cclxxxviii^ Ratlingcope 191. Ravendale 129. Raveningham 159. Ravenston
17, xcvi, cclxxxvii. Raveston 134. Raunton 207. Reading 3, lxxxiv, cclxxxviii.
Reculver 97. Redbridge 75. Redlingfield 212. Reinham 153. Remsted 226.
Repingdon 37. Revesby 123. Rewley 183. Rhemes 204. Ribleston 263. Richmond
xxiii, lviii, ccl, 251, 259. Rippon 249. Risburg 19. Rivaulx 255. Roan 43, 142.
Robertsbridge 224. Roch 257. Rochester 95. Rodeley 113. Roderham 271. Roiston
xxv, 90. Romberg xxv, 212, cclxxxvii. Rosedale 262. Rothwell 165. Roucester
205. Rowney 89. Rudham 152. Rufford 173, ccxvi. Rumford 173. Rumney 104. Rumsey
76. Rupperar 225. Rushworth 159. Ruspur 225. Russin 285. RUTLANDSHIRE 187.
Ruthin 278.
S
de Sagi^ 107. Salisbury clxxvii, clxxviii, 236. ccxxxviii, ccxl, 241. Salley
257. Salmur 77, 144, 157, 222. Saltry 94. Samford 59. Sandelford 4. Sandford
185. Sandwell 206, cclxxxvi. Santof 128. Sapcote 116. Saucomb 184. Savignei
156. S. Saviors 81. Scarburgh 269. Scarthe 269. Scobbedon 85. Sees 224. Selby
250, cclxxxviii. Sele 222. Seleburn 80. Seling 101. Selsey 221. Sempringham
xxiv, lviii, 111. Senningthwait 262, cclxvii Seton 37. Sewardesly 165. Sewesly
165. Shaftesbury 51. Shapp 235. Sharpham-Park 194. Shelford 174. Shene vii,
lxxxii, 220. Shengay 23. Shepey 98. Shirburn ( Dors.) lii, 53. cclxxiv. (
Hants.) 78. Shottesbrook 7. Shouldham 153. Shrewsbury xxiii, 188, 192,
cclxxxviii. SHROPSHIRE 188. Shulbred 225. Sibthorp 176, cclxxii. Sibton clix,
212. Sidmouth 49. Silly 32. Sion xxxi, cvii, 141. Siriolis 277. Sixle 129.
Slapton 49. Slebach 284. Sleep 93. Slevesholm 158. Smite 230. Snapes lxvii,
212, cclxxxvi. Snede 190. Snelshall 16. Soffam-Bulbeck 25. SOMERSETSH. xlvi,
193. Sopewell 89. Sopewike 67. Southampton 78. Southwark 218. Southwell 172.
Southwyke 79. Spalding 118. Spelepenne 49. Spinney 25. Sporley 157. Stafford
206, 208. STAFFORDSHIRE xvii, xix, xxvii, xl, 202. Staindrop 59. Stainfeld 127.
Staining 223. Stampford 59. Stane 115. Stanes 142. Stanesgate 66, cclxxxvi.
Stanford 127, 131, clxiv. Stanlaw 27, cix. Stanley ( Derb.) 38. (Gloc.) 72.
(Wilt.) 239. Stave 115. Staverdale 201. Steinington 4, ccxlii. Stiventon 4.
Stixwold 123. Stodley 182. Stoke-Clare 209. Stoke-Curcy 199. Stoke under
Hambden 201 Stoke-kirk 254. Stone cxlii, cxcii, 202. Stonely ( Hunt.) 94.
(Warw.) 232. Stow xxv, 118. Stowr ( Dors.) 55. (Worc.) 244. Stratfield-Say
viii, 82. Stratflour 277. Stratford-Langthorn 63. Stratford-Bow 141. Stratford
( Warw.) 233. Stratmargell 282. Strenshall 248. Striguil 145. Studley 231.
SUFFOLK xxv, 209. Sulby 164. SURRY 218, cclxx. SUSSEX 221. Suthbury 217. Sutton
271. Swainby 264. Swansey 281. Swavesey 23. Swineshed 119. Swingfield 105.
Swinhey 268.
T
Tackly 63. Talcarn 33. Tallach 274. Tame 181. Tamworth 293. Taken 275. Tanrigge
220. Tarent 54. Tatteshall 134. Tevistoke xxxii, 42. Taunton 197. Teguin 275.
Temple-Bruer 132. Temple-Comb 201. Tetnalf 208. Teuxbury lii, 69, cxcvii.
Thanet 97. Thele 91. Thelesford 233. Theokesbury 69. Thetford lxiv, 149, 151,
154. Thirkehead 265. Thoby 67, cclxxxvi. Thorneton 121. Thorney 21, cclxxxviii.
Thornham 108. Thornholm 120. Thremhale 61. Thurgarton 173. Tichfield 80.
Tickford 13, cclxxxvi. Tilty 65. Tinmouth 169. Tintern Tipttee 67, cclxxxvi. de
Tiron^o 81. Titley 87. Tiwardreth 32. Toftes 150. Tomeston 158. Tomson 158.
Tongue 191, cciv. Tongue Castle 207. Torington 132. Torkesey 129. Torr 46.
Torlington 226. Totteness 44. Toucester 167. Tours 283. Trentham clxxxviii,
205. True 215. Treweleigh 104. de Troarno 61. Tunbridge 100, cclxxxvi. Tunstall
49. Tupholm 127. Tusmore 184. Tutbury 204. Tuxford 176. Twinham 77. Tyrone 81,
82.
V
Vale-Royal 28. S. Valery 63. de Valle Crucis 278. de Valle Dei 124. Vaudey
124. Ulcomb 104. Ulvescroft 115. Umberstane 131. Uphaven 241. Urford 128. Usk
145. Vtica 90.
W
Waburn 152. Walden 63. WALES 273. Walingwels 176. Wallingford 5. cclxxxvii.
Walsingham 147. Waltham 60, cclxxxviii. Walton 216. Wangford 215. Wardon 11.
Ware 90. Warham 54. Warmington ( North.) 171. (Warw.) 229. Warter 255. Warwick
228, 229. WARWICKSHIRE xl. 227. Waterbeach 23. Watton 256. Wedon 160. Welbeck
174. Welhove 119. Welleford 164. Wells ( Linc) 129. (Nor^.) 157. (Some.) 195.
Wendling 157. Wenge 14. Wenghall 158. Wenlock 188. Wenny 280. Wenslow 270.
Werewordon 113. Wermouth 56. Westacre 147. Westbury ( Gloc.) 74. (Worc.) 245.
Westminster xiii, 135, clxxxi, ccxvii, cclxxxviii, WESTMORLAND lix, 235.
Westwood ( Kent) 103. (Worc.) 246. Wetherall 35, cclxxii. Weybridge 155.
Wexbridge 155. Whalley xxviii, 109. Wherwell 77. Whiston 247. Whitby 248.
Whiteland 274. Wickham ( Buck.) 19. (York) 265. Wigmore 85, cxcii. Wigsthorp
164. Wikes 63, lxvii, cclxxxvi. Wilberfoss 260. Willesford 120. Willoughton
132. Wilmington 223. Wilton 236. WILTSHIRE li, live, 236. Wimondham 149.
Wimondley 90. Winburn 51. Winchelcomb 69, cclxxxviii. Winchester xv, xx, xxi*
75, 76, lxxx, 83, clxxvii. Windham 149. Windsor v, 6. Wingham 104. Winteney 78.
Wirham 155. Wirksop 171. Wirmegay 154. Wirthorp 164. Witham ( Berks.) 2. (Some.)
198. Wittlesey 20. Woburn 11, xvi. Wolfricheston 233. Wolley 263. Wolston 233.
Wolverhampton 203. Wombridge 189. Woodbridge 215. Woodkirk 260. Worcester
clxxvii, 243, ccxlv, cclxxxvii. WORCESTERSH. xix, ccxxx, 243. Wormesly 86.
Worspring 200. Wotton-wawen 229. Wrexham 278. Wroxall 231. Wroxton 183. Wudeham
65. Wudiandun 245. Wye 106.
Y
Yarmouth 149, 158. Yedingham 260. Yevelay 39. York xxxv, 250, 251, 254, 261,
264, cclxxxviii. YORKSHIRE xxxv, 248.
An Index of the Sirnames of all Founders of Monasteries and other persons,
that occurr in this Book.
A
DE Abi Ralph 125. Adelfleda Queen 188. S. Adelwold 52. Adulphus Bishop 46. Ae
v. E. Aednoth 93. Aethelbert King 95, 96. Aethelmare v. Ailmare. Aethelred King
245. Aethelstan King 30, 31, 41, 42, 51, 196, 249. S. AEthelwine 195. Agard
henry 204. S. Agatha 259. Aidan Bishop 168. Ailesbury Earl Rob. 117. Ailmar
Earl 42, 52, 179. Ailwin Earl 92. S. Alban 88. S. Albans Abbat Galfr. 11.
Garinus 90. Paul 3. Albemarle Earl Steph. 252 Will. 121, 124. de Albini Cecilia
10. Isabella 158. Nigell 120. Ralph 128. Robert 10. William 149. S. Alburg 60,
236. S. Alcmund 188. Aldford Will. 259. S. Aldhelm 236. Aldwin Bishop 246.
Alfred King 1, 51, 76, 195. Alfrith Queen 3. Algar Earl 30, 196, 204. Allen
Tho. 182. All Saints 37, 93, 106, 114, 163, 177, 204, 234, 242, 254, 276.
Alswitha Queen 75. de Alta-Ripa Will. 130. de Amundevil Walt. 126. S. Andrew
22, 32, 33, 48, 58, 61, 81, 95, 114, 120, 150, 168, 195, 199, 201* 212, 258,
264, 267. S. Ann 53, 234. de Annesly Ralph 175. Anselm Archbish. 93, 10^. de
Aquila Gilb. 224. Archer Sir Simon 229. de Arches Agnes 258. William 254.
Ardent Sir Ralph 225. de Areci Rob. 128. Argentine Rich. 90. Armyn Will. 264.
Arsic Manasser 179. de Arundel Will. 132. Arundel Countess Isabella 158. Earl
Rich. 225. William 224. S. Asaph 279. Ashmole Elias 7. Ashton Sir Ralph 109.
Asini Dondo 215. Astley Sir Tho* 234. Athelmus Bishop 195. de Aubervill Will.
103. Aubrey Sir John 14, 177, 183 William 238. de Audley Henry 207. Sir Tho.
137. S. Audoen 66. S. Audry 20. S. Austin 95, 96, 135, 162, 198.
B
S. Bachus 23, 32, 33, 44. Bacon Sir Roger 210. Bacun Rich. 205. Badlesmere
Barth. 105. Baker Augustine 96. Balun Hamelin 143. S. Barbara 78. Barker Walt.
189. S. Bartholomew 52, 137, 158, 171, 191, 224. Barrow Isaac 25. Basket Sim.
12. Bassa 97. Basset Gilbert 182. Nich. 181. Sir Ralph 116. Richard 112.
Basingburn Mary 25. Bath Bishop John 195. Baynard Juga 62. Beauchamp Hugh 9.
Pain 9, 10. Rich. 5. Rob. 47. Roise 9, 10. Beck Antony 56, 58, 59, 133. Tho.
274, 278. Becket Tho. 38. v. S. Thomas of Canterbury. S. Bega 35. Belet Mich.
183. de Belingey Peter 130. Bellengham John 252. Beller Roger 116. de
Bello-fago Agnes 156. de Belmeis Phil. 188. Ric. 62, 137. S. Benedict 48, 52,
92. S. Benow 276. Berkly Lord Robert 198. Roger 72. Will. 72. S. Bernard 240.
Bernardiston Egid, 209. Berry... 2. Bertram Will. 169. de Beverley S. John 249.
Bidun John 18. Bigod Roger 149. S. Birin 177. Biset Manass. 239. Blanchmains
Rob. 114, 115. S. Blase 223. Bloet Rob. 119. Blois Will. 246. Blund Gilb. 211.
Boinet Sir John 216. Bolebec Hugh 11, 16. Walter 170. Bolton Rob. 208. de Bone
Sir John 225. S. Boniface 29. de Bosco Ernald* 15. Bossu Rob. 54, 111, 113.
Boteler Ralph 230. Botevile Will. 164. Botreaux Sir Will. 201. S. Botulph 21,
62. Bourchier Rob. 67 de Bradgare Rob. 106. Brakeland Jocel. 210. Brandling
John 170. S. Branwalader 51. Braose Will. 222. Braybrook Sir Gerard 12. Brewere
or Briwere Will. 41, 46, 47, 80. Bricet Sir Walt. 225. S. Bridget 142. Brien
Guy 49. de Brioniis Adeliza 45. Rich. 45. Briset Jordan 136, 137. Britanny Duke
Conan 23, 58, 260. Earl Alan 23. Brito Hugh 122. Bromfield Nich. 62. Brown John
150. Bruce Tho. Lord 85. Brudnell Tho. Lord 111. de Brus Rob. 252, 258.
Buckingham Duke... 111. 113. Duke George 15. Earl Walter 15. de Builli Richard
257. Roger 172. Bulbeck... 25. de Bulmer Bertram 263. Bundy Rob. 114. Burdet
Will. 221. Burton Will. 111. de Burtona Erinburch 268 Bussel Warin 109. Byron
Will. Lord 175.
C
Cadwathel 285. de Calva Ruald 219. Calvely Hugh 29. Camerarius Rob. 23.
Campion Will. 102. de Camvile Rich. 230. Cannings Will. 74. Canterbury
Archbishops Anselm 93, 100. Henry Chichele 166, 186, 281. Hubert 146. J. Kemp
106. ^o. Peckham 105. Lanfranc 99. Sim. Sudbury 290, 217. William 98* Will.
Courtney 106. de Cantilupo Nich. 176. Canute King 22, 30, 146, 209. de Capra
Sir Michael 67. Cardinan Rob. 32. de Carilefo Will. 57. Carleol Earl Charles
60. Carry Will. 50. de Castre Rob. 158. de Catton Alan 260. de Cayneto Will.
212. Ceadwalla King 221. Cecilia Countess... 74. S. Cedd 248. Chaceport Peter
17. S. Chad 189, 192. Chaddeworth Ralph 5. Chamberlain Rich. 230. de Chandos
Rob. 143. Charity Will. 112. S. Chebius 273. Cheny Sir John 152. Will. 152.
Cherry Will. 8. Chester Bishop Rob. 227. Earl Hugh 26 Ralph 205. Ranulf 27, 35,
37, 120, 205, 207, 279. Chesterfield Earl... 173. Cheurolcurt Ralph. 176.
Chichele Hen. 166, 186, 190, 281. Chichester Earl Will. 151. Child Alwin 218.
Cholmondley Sir Hugh 248. Cilla 2. Cissa 1, 2. de Clare Gilbert 11, 209. Walter
144. Maud Countess 152. S. Clare 123, 136, 216, 275, 277. Clarence Duke 74.
Clarges Tim. 194. Clavel Walr. 46. Clement Pope 13, 286. S. Clement 254, 272.
de Clerc Rog. 260. Clerk Franc. 104. Sam. 228. Clifford Rich. 185. Lord... 198.
Clifton Sir Gerv. 172, 176. Sir Rob. 176. Tho. 109. Clinton Bishop of
Litchfield 202. Galfr. 228. William 234. Cobham John Lord 105. Cobham Regin.
Lord 220. Coenwulf King 245. Coke Sir Edw. 244. Coker John 11. Colrith Roger
78. Constable Marmad. 262. Cookesey Edw. 228. Cooper Cecil. 173. Corbet Hadwisa
226. Cornwall Earl Ailmer 42, 52. Algar 196. Edm. 5. 18, 141, 183. Ric. 73,
266. Corpus Christi 12. Coventre John 124. Tho. Lord 124. Coventry Bishops Ric
206. Roger 189, 205. Courtney Will. 106. de Creike Marg. 215. Cressy... 154. de
Crevequer Sir Rob. 166. Cromwell Sir Ralph 134. Cross Holy 2, 25, 60, 66, 77,
87, 214, 220, 226. Cukenay Tho. 174. Culpepper ^o. 106. Cumberland Earl Ranulph
35. Curcy Rob. 197. de Curtenai Will. 200. S. Cuthbert 34, 57, 109, 172, 184,
273. S. Cuthburga 151.
D
de Dammartin Odo 220. Darcy Franc. S. David 86. S. David's Bishop Thom. 244,
278. Bern. 283. Davies... 4. Davis John 57. Ric. 177. Dauncy Sir Will. 219.
Dawtree Sir Will 226. Denbigh Earl Basil. 255. de Dene Ralph 102. S. Dennis 70,
79. Derby Dean Hugh 38. Dereham Henry 158. Devon Bishop 42. Countess Maud 47.
Amicia 48. Earls Ailmer 279. Baldw. 43, 77, 79. Ordgar 42, 52. Rich. 25, 80,
100. Thomas 48. William 204. Dewes Sir Simon 25, 52, 218, 251. Dey Thomas 210.
Di^ul 221. Didanus King 177. Dier... 194. Diggs Sir Dudley 101. Dodsworth Roger
60, 108, 125, 170, 174, 223, 238, 250, 251, 252. 253, 255. 256, 257, 258, 259,
266. S. Dogmael 283, 284. Doily Rob. 179, 180. de Domerham Adam 194. Domneva
97, 98. Dorchester Bishop Remig. 118. Dorset Earl Edw. 223. Draper Tho. 192. S.
Dubritius 280. Dugdale Sir Will. 7, 227. Duin Sir Rob. 39. Duncomb Will. 10
Dun^lmen^is Sim. 57. S. Dunstan 193. Durham Bishops Aldw. 57. Anth. 56, 58,
133. Hugh 58. Tho. hatfield 184* William 57. de Dynam Galfr. 44.
E
Eadbald King 97. Eadbert Abbat 221. Eadred King 97. Eadulphus Bishop 42. S.
Eanswith 97. Eanulfus King 244. Eardulfus Bishop 56, 168. S. Ebrulf 90. S.
Edburg 76, 97, 182. Eddington Will. 242. Edes Tho. 210. Edgar King 1, 3, 20,
26, 41, 75, 77, 172, 188, 203, 236, 243. Editha 180, 203. S. Edith 227. 236. S.
Edmund Archbish. 241. S. Edmund King 98, 126, 165, 167, 209. Ednod Archbishop
21. Edred King 1. S. Edward King and Mart. 31, 42, 76, 81. S. Edward Conf. 7,
31, 43, 99, 134, 135, 195. K. Edward I. 28. K. Edward III. 6, 105, 139. K. Edw.
Black Prince 7. K. Edward IV. 73, 78, 84, 238, 239, 241. S. Edwin 200. K. Edwyn
248. Egbert King 227, 236. Egfrid King 20. 56. S. Egwin 244. Ela Countess 200,
240. Eleutherius Bishop 236. Elfric Archbishop 95. Elfrida Queen 77, 237. Elgin
Earl Thom. 85. Eliensis Tho. 20. Elizabeth Queen 172. S. Elizabeth 82. Elsing
Will. 138. Eluric 209. de Engayn Rich. 164. Erkenwald 60. Erleigh Will. 199.
Escot Richard 31. de Espec Walter 11, 252, 253. de Essebie Phil. 165. Robert
165. Essex Earls Galfr. 63, 153. William 94, 240. Estois William 157. S.
Ethelbert King 84, 135. S. Ethelburg 60. S. Etheldreda Queen 20. Ethelfleda 70.
Ethelred Earl 70, 117. Ethelred King 41, 68, 95, 243, 245. Ethelstan Bishop
237. S. Ethelwold Bishop 20, 21, 54, 75, 76. Ethilbaldt King 117. Eudo 62. de
Evermue Reyner 126. de Ewias Harold Lord 84. Robert 86. Exeter Bishops Barthol
30. Brewer 41, 47. Jo. Grandison 43. Leosf. 30, 31. Walt. 32 Will. Warlewast
30, 31, 43. Exeter Earls... 117. John 164. Exton... 48. Eynulfus 62.
F
Fairfax Brian 255. Charl. 253, 255. S. Faith 14, 149. Falconberg ^^rl The 256.
Farmer Henry 184. de Favarches Galf^ 147. S. Felix 216. Fenton Baron 2. Fenwick
Sir John 168. Ferrers Henry 204. Hugh 187. Earl Rob. 86, 112, 230. de Filgeriis
Will. 130. Fill. See Fitz. Fill. Aluredi Juhell 44. Fill. Baldwini Will. 48. Fill.
Drogonis Rob. 131. Fill. Enott Norm. 213. Fill. Gervasii Llewellin 276, 282. Fill.
Gilberti Rad. 131. Fill. Godebaldi Rob. 64. Fill. Gospatric Tho. 235. Fill. Noeli
Rob. 207. Finch Heneage 96. Fish James 229, 233. Fisher Bish. Rochester 101.
Fitz See Fill. Fitz-Alan Rob. 73. Will. 181, 189. Fitz-Bardolf Akarius 257.
Fitz-Brian Ralph 211. Fitz-Gelran Rob. 141. Fitz Gilbert Richard 92. Roisia 92.
Fitz-Haimon Rob. 52, 69, 197. Fitz-Harding Lord. 196. Robert 198. Fitz-Henry
Alan 129. Robert 108. Fitzhugh Osb. 246. Fitz-Jeffery Maur. 65. Fitz-John
Eustace 169, 256. Fitz-Martin Rob. 283. Fitz-Mary Sim. 138. Fitz-Nigell
Nicholas 207. William 27, 38. Fitz-Osbern Will. 78. Fitz-Osbert Rog. 150, 215.
Fitz-Pain Galfr. 254. Fitz-Peter Will. 265. Fitz-Piers Galfr. 153. Fitz-Ranulf
Rob. 38. Fitz-Richard-Fitz-Ponce Sim. 86. Fitz-Roger Richard 109. 265. Rob.
153. Fitz-Swain Adam 268. Rob. 65. Fitz-Turgis Rich. 257. Fitz-Walter Robert
149. William 199. Fitz-Warin Fulk 190. Fitz-William Simon 125. William 138.
Flammard Ranulph 80. Flandrensis Reyner 268. Fleet Jo. 136. Fleetwood John 109.
Richard 244. S. Florence 77, 144, 157, 222. Fogg Sir John 106. de Forte Sampson
12. Fossard Adam 256. Fowler... 206. Fray John 89. S. Frideswide 177, 178, 186.
Frith John 5. Frithwaldus King 218. Froucester Walt. 68. Fuller Tho. 60.
Fursaeus 209.
G
Gait Sir Robert 181. Gale Tho. 249, 280. Gaunt Gilbert 124. Gislebert 121.
Walt. 117, 252. Geary... 9. S. George 7, 158, 179, 187. 196. S. George Sir
Henry 246. Richard 22. S. German 30* 250. Germanus Abbat 70. Gernon... 66.
Giffard John 166, 184. Walt. 14, 15, 210. Will. 76, 197, 218, 219. S. Giles 22,
37, 89, 181, 204, 246. Giraldus Cambrensis 283. Gisnes Earl Manass. 212. Githa
43. Glanvill Bartholom. 150. Halewisa 264. Ralph 213. Ranulph 264. Rog. 214.
William 150. Glapthorn... 20. Gloucester Abbats Germanus 70. Pet. 68. Walt. 68.
Dukes Humphrey 284. Richard 59, 271. Earls Gilb. II. Rob. 197, 280. William
198, 280. Glynne Sir William 182. Godiva Countess 118. S. Godric 58. Godwin
Earl 43. Godwinus of Lincol^ 132. Golsa Agnes 175. Peter 122, 175. Gonevill
Lord Edw. 159. Gornay... 201. de Gousla Peter 122. de Grainvill Rich. 281.
Graystoke Ralph 36. S. Gregory 47, 48 99, 106, 154, 217. de Grendon Serlo 38.
de Gresley... 120. Galf. 113. Robert 119. ap Griffith Madoc 278, 282 Owen 282.
S Grimbald 76. Grimbold Robert 114. de Grimesby Eudo 125. le Gross William 259.
Grosthead Rob. 17, 133. Guildford Franc. Ld. 183. Guithin 276. Gundreda 214.
Gundulph Bishop 96, 99. Gunton Simon 160. S. Guthlac 87, 117, 161. Guymond
Prior 178. Gwyn... 88.
H
Haget Bertr. 262, 266. Haggard... 22. Hales Matthew. 111. Hallifax Marq. Geor.
174. Halton Timoth. 69. Hamon Henry 101. Hare Sir John 158. Harley Sir Edward
85, 86. Harold Earl 60. de Hastings Walter 229. Hatfield Tho. 184. Hatton
Christopher 246. Hugh 231. Haunselyn Ralph 174. Hauvill Ralph 24, 129. Hawkwood
Sir John 66. de Haya Ralph 124. Rich. 128. Robert 223. Heane 102. Hegge Robert
57. S. Helen 2, 9, 37, 175, 258. Hemmingus 245. Heneage Sir George 129. K.
Henry I. 4, 6, 10, 34, 36, 71, 76, 78, 84, 119, 219, 246. K. Henry II. 60, 127,
128, 175, 198, 199, 206, 232, 239, 264. K. Henry III. 17, 24, 198. K. Henry IV.
71, 191. K. Henry V. 7, 66, 78, 82, 141, 204, 220. K. Henry VI. 19, 48, 73, 81,
82, 129, 150, 155, 161, 166, 199, 210, 211, 226, 242. K. Henry VII. 213. K.
Henry VIII. 6, 20, 26, 34, 73, 124, 135, 148, 160, 178, 180, 184, 198, 273,
286. Herbert Sir Tho. 249. Hereford Countess Ma^d 47. Earls Milo 71. Roger 73.
Herfastus Bishop 147. Herman Bishop 237. Hertford Earl Rich. 100. Hewes Robert
92. Hieu 56. S. Hilda 248, 258. Hildiard Christoph. 259. Hoese Henry 224. Hugh
205. Holden Tho. 186. Holland Sir Robert 110. Thomas 260, 270. Hollis Gervas
121. Hooker John 41. Hotun Peter 258. Howard Lord William 35, 36, 96, 169, 170,
235. Humbert Bishop 146. Huntingdon Earls Henry 36. Will. 224. Countess Judith
9. Huntingfield Will. 157. Huose Hugh 205.
I
S. Jacutus 201. James Richard 137. S. James 3, 23, 28, 40, 45, 61, 64, 71, 85,
88* 94, 120, 151, 163, 174, 201, 206, 220, 242, 255, 287. Ida 180. Ina King 51,
193, 194, 195. Ingelby William 252, 254, 259. Ingelricus 236. Joceline 246. S.
John Baptist 4, 12, 32, 47, 54, 58, 62, 65, 87, 89, 141, 143, 158, 166, 180,
186, 198, 209, 224, 230, 233, 271. S. John of Beverley 249. S. John the
Evangelist 31, 62, 114. 153, 159, 181, 189, 249, 257, 262, 266, 273, 275. John
King 5, 46, 80, 170, 20^. Johnston Nath. 250, 263. Joseph of Arimathea 193. de
Ipre Will. 100. Islip Simon 185. S. Julian 62, 78. S Ivo 93. de Juri Adelin
238.
K
S. Karilefus 118. S. Katherine 47, 50, 87, 124, 142, 154, 242. Kederminster
Rich. 70. Keep Henry 135. Kemp John 106. Kendal Will. Lord 108. S. Kenelm 69.
Kennett White 16, 86, 73, 178, 181, 182, 231. Kent Earls William 100. Thomas
269. Kentigern 279. Kenwulf King 6^. de Kilpeke Henry 86. de Kime Phil. 131.
Kinewalcus King 75. Kingston Earl... 174. Kinneburga 160. Kirkham Robert 164.
Knolles Sir Rob. 269.
L
Lacy Agnes 73. Alice 214. Henry 109, 258, Hugh 85, 143. Ilbert 253. Joh. 27.
Margaret 87. Rob. 262. Rog. 253. Tho. 214. Lamb Sir John 162. Lancaster John
284 Maud 216. Will. 107, 108. Lancaster Duke Henr. 116. Earls Edmund 138. Henry
214. Lanfranc Archbishop 93. de Langdon Ketelburn 232. Langton Stephen 104.
Lassels George 173. S. Laurence 60, 66, 102, 123, 261. Lee Richard 189. de
Leicester Hugh 162. Leicester Earl Rob. 13, 54, 111, 113, 114, 115, 150, 224,
232, 271. Leigh Thomas 233. de Lekeburn Robert 128. Leofric Bishop 30, 31, Earl
118, 227. S Leonard 16, 23, 36, 72, 86, 108, 129, 131, 133, 141, 183, 189, 211,
231, 250. de Lesingham Tho. 155. Leveston Rich. 188, 189. Leveson-Gower Will.
205. de Leva Gilbert 58. de Limefie Ralph 88. Robert 227. Lincoln Bishops
Alexand. 121. Remigius 177. Robert 17, 124, 133. Earls Francis 121. Gilb. 173.
216. Henry 109. Lindsey Earl Montagu 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 132. de Lisewis
Will. 153. Litchfield Bps. Rich. 206. Roger 189, 205. Walter 110. Lite William
255. Littleton Henry 190. Llewellin Pr. Wall. 276. de London Maur. 280. London
Bishops Erkenw. 60. Mellitus 125. Rich. 62, 137, 185. William 91, 141. Long
Gilb. 47. John 47. Longvillers John 176. Losing Hereb. 148. Lovel... 184, 208.
Lovetoft William 172. de Loundres Sir John 280. Low Sir John 52. Lowther Sir
John 35. Lucas John Lord 62. S. Lucian 161. Lucius King 20, 75, 248. Lucy
Richard 103. William 233. Lupus Hugh 26. Lutterell Sir Andr. 114. de Luvetot
Eustace 93.
M
ap Madoc 285. de Magna Villa see Mandevill. Mainillo Steph. 269. de Malbanc
Hugh 26. Malcolm King 24. Malebiss Beatrix 25. Malet Robert 210. Malleverer
Ric. 252, 261. Malmburiensis Will. 193, 236. Malveisin Hugh 204. Mandevill
Jeffrey 3, 63. Will. 94, 240. Manefelmus 18. Manny Sir Walt. 139. Mantell Rob.
65. Marbury Tho. 28. March Earl Edm. 209. Mareschall Will. 106. S. Margaret 5,
15, 19, 59, 105, 155, 232, 241. Marmion R. 203. Martell Ralph 16. Will. 213. S.
Martial 123, 127. S. Martin 44, 61, 73, 98, 106, 107, 159, 221, 252, 283, S.
Martin Rob. 224 Rog. 151 Martivall Roger 116. S. Mary Magdalen 7, 8, 10. 16,
36, 42, 44, 55, 66, 78, 100, 102, 103, 105, 122, 143, 151, 166, 191, 225, 226,
235, 238, 241, 263. Mascherell Walt. 63. Masters Will. 71. Maud the Empress 14,
239, 246. Maunsell John 104. de Mecaenis see Meschines. Mellent Earl Rob. 150.
Mellitus Bishop 135. S. Melorius 237. de Merc Eustace 90. Merley Ralph 169. de
Merlymond Oliver 85. Merwald King 84. Meschines Ranulph 35, 107. Will. 253.
Metham... 125. Meyngarin Sir Ralph 152. Meynill Will. 39. S. Michael 31, 33,
46, 49, 51, 79, 85, 99, 101, 140, 164, 212, 234, 245, 269, 280. S. Milburga
188. S. Mildred 97. Milefrid King 84* Mill John 205. Milo Earl Heref. 71.
Minshull Galfr. 127. Mis^enden Sir Will. 14. de Modberley Patric 28. S. Modwen
203. Mohun John 196. Reginald 47. Will. 196. de Monimue John 144. Montacute
Will. 6. Montagu Franc. Visc. 222. de Monte-Canisio Dionysia 23. Montfichet
Gilbert 16, 61. Will. 63. Montgomery Earl Roger 23, 188. Mortimer Edmund 209.
Hugh 85. Ralph 15. Sir Robert 159. Morton John 20. Sir William 70. Morton Earls
Robert 31, 211, 223. Stephen 107. Will 197. Moubray Rob. 169. Rog. 128, 255,
256. Mounsteven Edm. 21. Muncels Alan 125. Munchensi Hubert 212. de Munewell
Nigell 97. Murdac Hugh 264.
N
S. Nectan 43. S. Neot 92, 93. Nethersole Fr. 227. le Neve Will. 45, 149, 150.
Nevill Alan 127. Gilb. 127. Hugh 199. Ralph 59, 261. Newburgh Henry 229. Robert
54. Newcastle Duke of 174. de Neweham Fulk 103. Newenton Tho. 66. Newman Rog.
44. Newmarch Bernard 273. S. Nichasius 28. S. Nicholas 5, 14, 28, 32, 44, 47,
65, 85, 100, 108, 118, 131, 185, 200, 225, 227, 252, 261, 271. S. Ninian 59.
Norfolk D... Duke 144. Duke Henry 173. North Dudley 125. Northampton Earl Sim.
94, 162, 163. Northumberland Earl Robert 169. Bishops Aidan 168. Eardulfus 168.
de Norwich Sir Joh. 159, 217. Ralph 17. Norwich Bp. Herlett 148. Notingham
Earls Robert 112. Thomas 133.
O
Oddo Duke 69. Offa King 69, 88, 195, 202, 244, 245. de Offney Will. 206. Ogle
Sir Richard 118. Okely... 13, 136. Olave King 251, 285. S. Olave 251. Oldfield
John 118. Oliver John 66. Orcus 53. Ordgar Earl 42, 52. Orford Robert 20.
Orleber... 165. de Ormesby Gilb. 122. de Orreby Agnes 126. S. Osith 62. Osric
King 194. Prince 68. Oswald Bishop 69, 243. Oswald King 70, 112, 122, 168.
Oswald Prince 243. Oswi King 202. S. Oswin 169. de Oxenford John 67. Oxford
Earl Alberic 24. Bishop Walter 32.
P
Paget Lord Will. 203. Painel ^ulk 13. Gervas 206. Ralph 251. Will* 261. S.
Pancrace 233. S. Pandionia 22. Pantulf Burgia 114. William 114. Parcarius
William 114. Paschal Andr. 197. Patrick Simon 160. S. Patric 49, 170, 193.
Paveley Sir Robert 164. S. Paul 10, 44, 56, 86, 117, 139, 148, 162, 177, 188,
197, 243. de S. Paul Mary 23. Paulinus Archbishop 172, 248. Peada King 160.
Pech Richard 206. Peckham John 105. S. Pega 161. Pelham Joh. 225. Sir William
123. Pembroke Countess Mary 23. Earl William 108. Penbridge Fulk 191. Isabella
1^1. Penda King 160. Perch Earl Galfr. 4. Countesses Lucia 123, 134. Maud 4. de
Percy Henry 127, 191. Will. 248, 251, 257. S. Peter 10, 12, 13, 30, 41, 44, 48,
49, 52, 53, 54, 56, 64, 68, 69, 72, 76, 77, 85, 86, 96, 99, 116, 117, 131, 135,
160, 162, 166, 169, 173, 177, 184* 188, 190, 195, 196, 197, 210, 214, 218, 221,
222, 243, 248, 249. Peterburgh Abbats John 161. Will. 127, 160. S. Petroc 30.
S. Petrorsi 30. Peverell Pain 12. Will. 63, 163, 173. Peyton Sir Edw. 22.
Picot... 22. Alberic 23. Pierpoint Will. 101, 207. de Pilardinton Rob. 228.
Pincerna Rob. 27. de Pinkeni Giles 161. Plegmund Archbishop 42, 195, 236. Plot
Robert 203. Poictiers Rog. Earl 107. de Poictou Rog. 266. William 73. de la
Pole Mich. 269. Pomerei Ethelw. 45. Will. 146. Pont de la Arch Sir William 219.
Pontissar John 82. Pool Sir Henry 71. Poor Richard 54. Pope Brian 194. Sir Tho.
184. de Port Henry 78. de Pratellis John 103. Pultney John 139. Pusar Hugh 58.
Pyel John 166.
Q
Quincy Rob. 115. de S. Quintin Adeliza 257.
R
S. Radegund 24, 101, 102, 233, 242. Raherus 137. de Raines Sibilla 23. de
Redvers Baldwin 43, 45, 77, 179, 180. Rich. 45, 53. Remigius Bishop 118, 177.
S. Remigius 204. Resus Prince 277. K. Rich. II. 54, 78, 113, 128, 130, 156,
209, 210, 229, 233. K. Rich. III. 140. Richmond Earls Alan 23, 212, 2^0. Conan
58, 89. Ridell Galfr. 204. Maud 112. de Ripariis or de Riveriis see de Redvers.
Roald 259. S. Robert 266. Rochester Bishop Gundulf 99. Fisher 101. Rogers...
242. Roke Rich. 217. Rokesby... 122. Rokesly Rob. 104. de Romalli Alice 259. de
Romara Will. 123, 197, 199. Rook... 102. Roper Sam. 39, 174, 227. Ross Rob.
Lord 261, 263. Rotheram Tho. 271. Rows Hugh 142, 216. Ruan... 48. Rudburn Tho.
75. Rudiard... 207. Rufford... 216. S. Rumon 42. de Rupibus Peter 80, 190.
Rushworth John 163, 256.
S
de Salicosa mora Galfr. 38. de Sampford Jordan 66. S. Sampson 51, 283.
Sanderson... 172. de Sandford Sir Tho. 185. Sarum Bishops Herman 237. Osm. 237.
Rich. 54, 237. Roger 52, 53, 178, 274. Walter 241. Countess Ela 200, 240. Earls
Walter 238. Will. 6, 31. Savage Tho. 29. S. Savior 46, 51, 81, 101, 142, 210.
de Saukvile Ela 202. de Sautrey John 92. de Say Eustace 247. Scalies Muriel
154. Rog. 154. de Scocris Will. 157. Scrivener Tho. 212. de Scrope Sir Rich.
270 Scudamore Lord... 86. Sebert King 135. de Seintlitz Sim. 162, 163. Seldom
John 173, 218, 223. S. Sepulcher 100, 150, 151. S. Sergius 23, 32, 33, 44. S.
Severus ^^2. S. Sexburg Queen 98. Seymour Sir Tho. 241. de Shardelow John 158.
Sir Tho. 158. Sheldon Will. 246. Shirley Rob. 112. Shrewsbury Earl Roger 23,
61. de Sibthorp Tho. 176. Sigebert King 209. Skirlaw Walt. 270. Smith Bishop
Lincoln 181. John 72. Snew Haylwardus 52. Somerset Earl Will. 196. Duke Charles
142. Somner Will. 95, 104. Southouse Tho. 101. Spaule John 130. Spelman Henry
136. Spencer Margaret 81. Nicholas 81. Lord... 69. Lord Galfr. 18. Sporley
Rich. 136. Spot Wulfr. 203. Stafferton Will. 155. Stafford Ralph 229. Lord
Robert 202. Stanhope Lord... 209. Stephen King 64, 100, 101, 120, 123, 139,
152, 239, 249. S. Stephen 31, 53, 61, 73, 139, 151, 157, 181. Stigandus Bishop
221, 222. de Stodley Peter 231. Strangways Sir John 52. Stratford John 94, 233.
Strelley Sir... 174. de Stutevil Rob. 262. Sudbury Simon 217. de Sudley Ralph
232. Suffolk Duke Mich. 269. Suffolk Earl 64. Surrey Duke Thom. 270. Earl Will.
148. Sutton Thom. 139. S. Swithin 75.
T
Talbot Sir John 241. Richard 86, 87. de Tanai Avicia 263. de Tankervile Will.
187, 240. S. Taurinus 247, 281. de Thebovile Rog. 161. Thetford Bishop Herb.
148. Theyer John 162. S. Thomas of Canterb. 32. 90, 103, 110, 126, 166, 167,
200, 206, 219, 269 284. Thorold Will. 101, 118. Thoroton Rob. 172, 176. Thorp
Franc. 249. Threlkeld Rob. 36. Throgmorton Clem. 246. Thurstan Archbishop 254.
de Tindale Adam 170. Todd Hugh 34, 35. Todenei Ralph 147. Tola 53. Toney Ralph
84. Rog. 88. de Totney Rob. 111. Trevor Anth. 9. Sir John 254. Holy Trinity 3,
9, 37, 46, 67, 76, 77, 79, 80, 104, 106, 115, 134, 137, 142, 148, 151, 166,
173, 176, 213, 224, 225, 234, 253, 266, 269, 270, 281. Trusbut Galfr. 255. de
Turbervill Walt. 240. de Turnham Rob. 102, 265. Twine Brian 2.
V
de Valentia Peter 150. Theobald 153, 214. S. Valery 63. de Vallibus Rob. 36,
151. de Valoins see de Valentia de Verdun Bertram 206. Roisia 115. de Vere
Alberic 24, 61, 65. Lucia 60. Rob. 102. Vernon... 191. Sir John 242. S. Victor
242. S. Vincent 143. Ulton Countess 216. Unfranvile... 170. de Vauz see de
Vallibus.
W
Wake Thomas Lord 269. Baldw. 119, 120, Hugh 120. de S. Walerico Bern. 182. de
Walingford Maud 239. Walmesly Tho. 250. Walter Sir John 180. Theobald 107.
Walworth Will. 140. S. Wandragisilius 241. de la Ware Charles Lord 77. Tho.
Lord 110. Warlewast William 30, 31, 43, 221. Warren Regin. 154. Will. 148, 151,
154, 158, 220, 223, 260. Warwick Countess Isabella 247. Earls Henry 228, 229.
Roger 229. Wells Bishop John 195. de Wendling Will. 157. Wentworth Joh. 263,
264. S. Werburga 26, 161. Westmorland Earls... 21. Ralph 59. Whalley Rich. 174.
Wharton Henry Wharton Lord... 266. Whethamstede John 88. White Sir Tho. 186.
Whitingdon Rich. 140. de Wickham Will. 83. Wictred King 98. de Widevile Sir
Will. 164. Widdrington Sir Thom. 148, 150. Wiglaf King 245. Wikes Tho. 179. S.
Wilfrid 28, 168, 221, 249. K. William Conq. 22, 53, 61, 70, 77, 93, 130, 221,
223, 246, 250. K. William Rufus 34, 44. Willoughby Lord 117. de Wilton Alan 58.
Wiltshire Bishop Ethelstan 237. Winchester Bishops Eleutherius 236. Ethelwold
20, 21, 75, 76. Henry 15. John 82, 233. Peter 80, 190, 212. William 76, 83,
197, 218, 219. Earl Robert 115. Windham Wadham 196, 200. Wingfield Sir Robert
159, 160. S. Winwale 155. de Wirce Galfr. 227. Witebiensis Steph. 251. S.
Withburga 146. S. Wolfade 202. Wolsey Cardinal 17, 178, 214, 286. Wood Ant. 49,
178. de Woodstock Tho. 67. Woodward Rob. 4. Worcester Bishops Aldred 68. Egwin
244. Oswald 69, 243, 245. Will. 246. Wulstan 245. Worsley Henr. 4, 136, 178,
180. Wortly Franc. 264. Wray... 2. Wright John 187. de Wudetun John 179.
Wulphere King 26, 160, 188, 202. S. Wulstan 243, 245, 287. Wyckham Paganus 265.
de la Wyle Walt. 241. Wymarus 214, 251. Wyrley Will. 178, 180.
Y
York Archbishops Paulinus 172, 248. Rog. 261. Tho. 168, 271. Thurstan 254.
Duke Edward 163.
Z
Zouch Lord... 167. Lord Will. 234. Sir Will 201.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. l. 1. of is wanting. p. 16. l. 3. and p. 68. l. 20. p. 73. l. 21. for
M. A. read B. D. p. 35. l. 21. for Lowther read Whitehaven. p. 56. l. 20.
Lindisfarn. p. 69. l. 29. strike out again. p. 71. l. 9. leave out it. p. 74.
l. 13. William Cannings is upon the authority of Speed mentioned as Founder of
VVestbury College, whereas he is only Dean; who was the Founder I cannot learn,
but John Carpenter Bishop of V^orcester was a great Benefactor to it about A.
D. 1450. See Godwin de Pr^sulibus Angliai. p. 519. p. 85. l. 16. read Dominum.
p. 137. l. 21. leave out it. p. 145. l. 6. for at read with. p. 176. l. 27. for
Edw. II. read Edw. IV. p. 178. l. ult. and p. 180. l. 19. Historia a
Fundationis Abbatiarum de Oseney and S. Fridiswid. Oxon. que dicitur esse penes
Henr. Worsley de Hosp. Lincoln. Arm. est peculium Viri summ^ industria and
Oxoniensium Antiquitatum restauratoris Antonii Wood A. M. quem penes sunt
plurim^ Cartae Originales spectantes ad Abbatias and Frioratus de Oseney and
Tame in Com. Oxon. Tickford, Nutley, Caldwell, and Ravenston in Com. Ruck. S.
Nichol. de Tiptree, Blackmore and Stanesgate in Com. Essex. Tunbridge, Lesnes,
and Begham ix Com. Cant. Daventre in Com. Northamp. Canwell in Com. Staff.
Walingford in Com. Berk. de Calceto juxt^ Arundell in Com. Suss. p. 191. l. 21.
for 1131. read 1411. p. ^29. l. 3. for Sim. read Iac. p. 270. l. 15. for
Shirla^ read Skirlaw.


