TO THE NOBILITY OF ENGLAND.
My LORDS,
EXample has ever been reckoned amongst the Chiefest motives of Persuasion: and
of all Examples, those certainly are most prevalent to particular Persons,
which can be drawm from their own Families. It Is a debt which you owe to your
Ancestors, to inherit their Virtues, and brave Actions, as wall as their Lands,
and Titles, and therefore it concerns you to know them: and perhaps, a more
Signal Instance can hardly be found in all History, of their Loyalty to their
king and Country, than this Ancient Record which is here presented to your
LORDSHIPS: which shows you with what courageous unanimity, your Forefathers
did disown, and resist the Authority of Rome usurped over this Crown. You have
this resolute answer ratified by the Seals of the whole Lay Nobility, and the
Contents will tell you, that what they Sealed with their Hands, they would
likewse Seal with their Blood; totis Viribus defendere. Now this was done at a
time, when the Popes power was almost at the heighest in this Kingdom; not
long after the pretended resignation of the Crown by King John: and in a cause,
when only one branch of the Royal Prerogative was violated, by the Popes
interposition in the Settlement of the Title of Scotland; and if the
infringment of this one Right, was so highly resented by these Nobles, what
would their undaunted Resolutions have been, if the whole Supreme Prerogative
had been at stake? Your LORDSHIPS are referred to the Letter it self to guess.

Exemplar Literarum quas Comites and Barons Angliae miserunt Papae super
negotio Scotorum, Anno Regni Regis, EDWARDI Primi, 29.
SAnctissimo in Christo Patri Domino Bonifacio divina Providentia Sanctae
Romanae and universalis Ecclesiae summo Pontifici sui devost Filii Johannes
Comes 1 Warren: Thomas Comes 2 Lancastriae: Radulphus de Montehermerii Comes 3
Glocestriae and Hertfordiae Humfridus de Bohun Comes 4 Hereford and Essex,
Constabularius Angliae: Rogerus Bigot Comes 5 Nouffolk and Matiscallus Angliae:
Guido Comes 6 Waruuici: Richardus Comes 7 Arundel: Adamorus de 8 Valencia
Dominus de Montemaco: Henricus de Lancastria dominus de 9 Monemuch: Johannes de
Hasting Dominus de 10 Bergavenny: Henricus de 11 Percy Dominus de Topolif:
Edmundus de 12 Mortuomari Dominus de Wig more: Robre tus fihus 13 Walteri
Dominus de Woodham: Willielmus Dominus de 14 Molyns: Johannes de 15 Sancto
Johanne Dominus de Hanacre: Hugo de 16 Ver Dominus de Swanescampes: Willielmus
de 17 Brewose, Dominus de Gowet: Robertus de 18 Monte also Dominus de Hawardyn:
Robertus de 19 Tateshule Dominus de Buckenham: Reginaldus de 20 Gray Dominus de
Ruthin: Henricus de 21 Gray Dominus de Codenore: Hugo 22 Bardolf Dominus de
Wirmegey. Robertus de 23 Toney Dominus de Castro Matildis: Willielmus de 24
Roos Dominus de Hamelake: Robertus de 25 Clifford Castellanus de Apilby: Petrus
de 26 Malolacu Dominus de Mulgreve: Hillippus Dominus de 27 Kyme: Rubertus
filius Rogeri Dominus de 28 Clavering: Johannes de 29 Mohun Dominus de Duaster:
Almaricus de 30 Sancto Amando Dominus de Wydehay: Willielmus de 31 Ferrariis
Dominus de Groby: Alanus la 32 Zuche Dominus de Asheby: Theobaldus de 33
Verdoun Dominus de Webbele: Thomas de 34 Furnyvall Dominus de Shefeld: Thomas
de 35 Multon Dominus de Egremont: Willielmus de 36 Latimer Dominus de Corbi:
Thomas Dominus de 37 Bekele: Fulco filius 38 Warini Dominus de Witinton:
Johannes Dominus de 39 Segrave Edmundus de 40 Eyncourt Dominus de Thurgerton:
Petrus 41 Corbet Dominus de Cause: Willielmus de 42 Cante Lupo Dominus de
Ravesthorp: Johannes de 43 Bellocampo Dominus de Hacche: hogerus de 44
Mortuomari Dominus de Penketlyn: Johannes filius 45 Reginaldi Dominus Blenlevi:
Ranulphus de 46 Nevil Dominus de Raby: Brianus filius 47 Alani Dominus de
Bedale: Willielmus 48 Marescallus Dominus de Hengham: Walterus Dominus de 49
Huntercombe: Willielmus 50 Martin Dominus de Cammes Henricus le 51 Tyeis
Dominus de Chilton: Rogerus 52 la War Dominus de Isefield: Johannes de 53
Ripariis Dominus de Anger: Johannes de 54 Lancastre Dominus de Grisdale:
Robertus 55 filius Pagani Dominus de Lammer: Henricus 56 Tregotz Dominus de
Garringes: Radulphus 57 Pypard Dominus de Limford. Walterus Dominus de 58
Faucumberg: Rogerus 59 le Estrange Dominus de Ellesmere. Johannes le 60
Estrange Dominus de Knokyn. Thomas de 61 Chaurtes Dominus de Norton: Walterus
de 62 Bello campo Dominusde Alecestre: Richardus 63 Taleboi Dominus de
Eckleswell: Johannes 64 Buttecourt Dominus de Mendesham: Johannes 65 Engayn
Dominusde Colum: Hugo 66 Poynz Dominus de Cori. Malet: Adam Dominus de 67 Well:
Simon Dominus de 68 Monte Acuto: Johannes Dominus de 69 Sullee: Johannes de 70
Moeles Dominus de Canterburi Edmundus Baro 71 Stafford:Johannes 72 Lovel
Dominus de Sackyng: Edmundus de 73 Hasting Dominus de Enchuneholmok: Radulphus
filius 74 Willielmi Dominus de Granthorp: Robertus de 75 Scalariis Dominus de
Neuseles: Willielmus 76 Tcuchet Dominus de Levenhales: Johannes 77 Abadam
Dominus de Beverslon: Johannes de 78 Haveringes Dominus de Grafton: Robertus la
79 Ward Dominus de Alba-aula: Nicholaus de 80 Segrave Dominus de Stowe:
Walterus de 81 Teye Dominus de Stangveve: Johannes 82 de Insula Dominus de
Wodeton. Eustachius Dominus de 83 Hacche: Gilbertus 84 Pecche Dominus de Corby:
Wiilielmus 85 Paynell Dominus de Tracinton. Bogo de 86 Knovill Dominus de Albo
Monasterio: Fulco le 87 Estrange Dommus de Corsham: Henricus de 88 Pinkeney
Dominus de Wedon: Johannes de 89 Hudleston Dominus de Daneys: Rogerus de 90
Huntingfeld Dominus de Bradenham: Hugo filius 91 Henrici Dominus de
Raveneswath: Johannes le 92 Breton Dominus de Sporle: Nicholaus de 93 Carrau
Dominus de Mulesford: Thomas Dnminus de la 94 Roche: Walterus de 95 Muncy
Dominus de Thornton: Johannes filius 96 Marmaduci Dominus de Hordene: Johannes
Dominus de 97 Kingeston: Robertus 98 Hastang Dominus de la Desiree: Radulphus
Dominus de 99 Grandon:Willielmus Dominus de 100 Leybotn: Johannes de 101
Grastock Dominus de Morpath: Matheus filius 102 Johannis Dominus de
Stockenhame: Nicholaus de 103 Meynill Dominus de Wherleton: and Johannes 104
Paynell Dominus de Otteleye:
Devota pedum oscula beatorum,
Sancta Romana Matter Ecclesia per cujus ministerium fides Catholica gubernatur
in suit is astibus, cum ea, sicut sirmiter credimus and tenemus, maturitate
procedit, quod nulli praejudicare, sed singulorum jura non minus in aliis, quam
in ipsa tanqum matter alma conservari vclit illesa. Satie convocato nuper per
sercnisnmn Dominum nostum Edwardum Deigratia Regem Angliae Illustrem
Parliamento apud Lincoln generait, Idem Dominus noster qnasdam literas
Apostolicas, qu as super cert is negoliis, conditionem and statum Regni Scotiae
tangentibus, exparte vestra recepcrat, inmedio exhiberi, and seriose nobis
fecit exponi. Quilus audit is, and diligentius intellectis, tam nostris
sensibus admiranda, quam hactenus inandita in eisdem audivimus contin^ri.
Scimus enim, Pater sanctissime, and notorium est in partibus Angliae, and
nonnullis aliis non ignotum, quod a prima institutione Regni Angliae, Reges
ejusdem regni, tam temporibus Britonum quant Anglorum, supertus and directum
dominium regni Scotiae habuerunt, and in possessione, vel quasi, Superioritat
is and directi Dominii ipsius regni Scotiae succesivis temporibus extiterunt,
nec nllis temporibns, ipsum regnmn in temporales pertinnit, velpertmet quavis
jure ad Ecclesiam snam praedictam, quinimto idem Regnum Scottae progemtoribus
praedictii Domini nosln Regtbus Angliae pertinuit, atque sibi feodale extitit
ab antiqno. Nec etiam, Reges Scotorum and regnuut aliis qnam Rtgihm Angliae
subfuerunt vel subjici consuerunt. Neqne Reges Angliae super juribus suis in
regno praedio, aut ALIIS SUIS TEMPORALIBUS, coran aliquo Judice Ecclesiastico,
vel Seculri, ex libera praeminentia slau suae regiae diyniatis, and
consuetudinis cnnctis temporibus irresragabiliter observatae resfponderunt, aut
respondere debebant. Unde habilo tractatu, and dcliberatione diligent, snper
contentis vestris literis memoratis, communis, concors and unanimis omnium
nostrorum and singulorum consens us fuit, est, ac erit, inconcusse, Deo
propitio, in futurum, quod praesatus Dominus noster Rex super juribus regm
Scotiae, AUT ALIIS SUIS TEMPOR ALIBUS, nullatenus judicialiter respondeat coram
vobis, nec judicium subeat quoquomodo, aut jura sua praedicta in dubinm
qnaestionis dedncat, nec ad praesentiam vestram Procuratores aut Nuncios ad boc
muttat. Praecipuc cum praemissa cederent manifesle in exhaeredationem jnris
Coronae Regni Angliae and dignitatis, ac subver sionem status ejusdem regni
notoriam, nec non in praejudicium libertatum, consuetudinum, and legum
paternarum, ad quarum observationem and defensionm, ex debito praestiti
Juramenti ostringimur, and quae manu tenebimus toto posse totisque viribus cum
Dei auxilio defendemus. Nec etiam permittimus, aut aliquatenus permittemus,
sicut nec possumus, nec debemus, praemissa tam insolita, indehita,
praejudicialia, and alias inaudita, praelibatum Dominum nostrum Regem, etiamsi
vellet, facere, seu quomodolibet attemptare. Quocirca sanctitati vestrae
reverenter and humiliter supplicamus, quatenus eundem Dominum nostrum Regem,
qui inter alios Principes orbis terrae catholicum se exhibet, and Ecclesiae
Romanae devotum, jura sua, libertates, consuetudines, and leges, praedicta,
absque diminutione and inquietudine pacifice possidere, and ea illibata
persistere benignius permittatis.

In cujus rei Testimonium, Sigilla nostra tam pro nobis, quam pro tota
communnitate praedicti Regni Angliae praesentibus sunt appensa, Datum apud
Lyncoln 12 die Februarii, Anno Domini Millesimo Tricentesimo.
The Copy of a Letter sent by the Earls and Barons of England to the Pope,
Concerning the Affair of Scotland, in the 29. year of the Reign of King EDWARD
the First.
TO the most Holy Father in Christ Bonifice, by divine Providence of the Holy
Roman and Catholic Church Pope, his Dutyful Sons John Earl of 1 Warren;
Thomas Earl of 2 Lancaster; Ralph de Montehermerii Earl of 3 Gloucester, and
Hertford; Humphrey 4 Bohun Earl of Hereford, and Essex, Constable of England;
Roger 5 Bigot Earl of Norfolk, and Marshal of England; Guy Earl of 6 Warwick;
Richard Earl of 7 Arundel; 8 Adomar of Valencia Lord de Montemaco; 9 Henry of
Lancaster, Lord of Monemuth; John 10 Hastings Lord of ABergavenny; Henry 11
Percy Lord of Topclif; Fdmund 12 Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore; 13 Robert Son of
Walter Lord of Woodham; William Lord 14 Molyns; John 15 St. John Lord of
Hanacre; Hugh de 16 Ver Lord of Swanescampes; William 17 Brewose Lord of Gower;
Robert 18 Montalt Lord of Hawardyn; Robert 19 Tateshale Lord of Buckingham;
Reginald 20 Gray Lord of Ruthin; Henry 21 Gray Lord of Codenore; Hugh 22
Bardolf Lord of Wirmegey; Robert 23 Toney Lord of Wallingford; William 24 Rous
Lord of Hamelake; 25 Robert Clifford Keeper of Apleby Castle; Peter 26 Illake
Lord of Mulgrave; 27 Phillip Lord of Kyme; 28 Robert Son of Roger Lord of
Clavering; John 29 Mohun Lord of Dunsier; 30 Almeric of St. Amand Lord of
Widehay; William 31 Ferrars Lord of Groby; Alan la 32 Zouche Lord of Asheby;
Theobald 33 Verdoun Lord of Webbele; Thomas 34 Furnyvall Lord of Shefeld;
Thomas 35 Multon Lord of Egremont; William 36 Latime Lord of Corbi, Thomas Lord
37 Berkele; 38 Fulco Son of Warin Lord of Witington; John Lord 39 Segrave;
Edmund 40 Eyncourt Lord of Thurgerton; Peter 41 Corbet Lord of Cause; William 42
Cantlup Lord of Ravesthorp; John 43 Beauchamp Lord of Hacche; Roger 44 Mortimer
Lord of Penkethlin; 45 John Son of Reginald Lord of Blenlevi; Ranulph 46 Nevil
Lord of Raby; 47 Brian Son of Alan Lord of Bedale; William 48 Marshal Lord of
Hengham; Walter 49 Lord of Huntercombe; William 50 Martin Lord of Cammes; Henry
51 le Tyeis Lord of Chilton; 52 Roger le Ware Lord of Isefield; John 53 Rivers
Lord of Anger; 54 John Lancastre Lord of Grisedale; 55 Robert Son of Pain Lord
of Lammer; Henry 56 Tr^gotz Lord of Garringes; Ralph 57 Typard Lord of Limford;
Walter Lord 58 Faucumberg; 59 Roger L'Estrange Lord of Ellesmere; 60 John
L'Estrange Lord of Knokyn; 61 Thomas Chaurtes Lord of Norton; 62 Walter
Beauchamp Lord of Alecester; 63 Richard Talebot Lord of Eckleswell; John 64
Buttecourt Lord of Mendesham; 65 John Engayn Lord of Colum; 66 Hugh Poynz Lord
of Corimalet; 67 Adam Lord Wells; 68 Simon Lord Montacute; 69 John Lord Sullee;
70 John Mocles Lord of Canterbury; Edmund Baron 71 Stafford; John 72 Lovell
Lord of Sackyng; Edmund 73 Hasting Lord of Enchuneholmocke; 74 Ralph Son of
William Lord of Grainthorp; 75 Robert Scales Lord of Neuseles; 76 William
Touchet Lord of Levenhales; John 77 Abadam Lord of Beverston; John 78
Havaringes Lord of Grafton; Robert 79 Ward Lord of Whitehall; Nicholas 80
Segrave Lord of Stowe; 81 Walter Teye Lord of Stangreve; John 82 L'Isle Lord of
Wodeton; 83 Eustace Lord Hacche; Gilbert 84 Pecche Lord of Corby; William 85
Paynell Lord of Tracinton; 86 Bogo Knovill Lord of Whitminster; Ful^o 87
L'Estrange Lord of Corfham; 88 Henry Pinkeney Lord of Wedon; John 89 Hudleston
Lord of Daneys; Roger 90 Huntingfeld Lord of Bradonhame; 91 Hugh Son of Henry
Lord of Raveneswath; 92 John le Breton Lord of Sporle; Nicholas 93 Carrau Lord
of Mulesford; 94 Thomas; Lord de la Roche; Walter 95 Muncey Lord of Thornton;
96 John Son of Marmaduc Lord of Hordene; 97 John Lord Kingston; 98 Robert
Hasting Lord de la Desiree; 99 Ralph Lord Grandon; William 100 Lord Leyborn;
John 101 Grastock Lord of Morpath; 102 Matthew Son of John Lord of Stockenhame;
Nicholas 103 Meynill Lord of Wherleton; and John 104 Paynell Lord of Otteleye
Devoutly Kiss your Holiness;'s Feet.
The Holy Mother Church of Rome; by whose Ministry the Catholic Faith is
directed, does proceed as we firmly believe, and hold, with that Maturity of
Counsel in her determination, that she not prejudice any, but like a Tender
Mother is willing to preserve the Rights of every particular person inviolable,
as well in other places, as within her own precincts. Wherefore a full
Parliament being Called, by our Sovereign Lord Edward by the Grace of God the
Renowned King of England, at his City of Lincoln, He our said Sovereign did
cause to be Publicly produced, and faithfully Interpreted to us, certain
Apostolical Letters received from You concerning some affairs relating to the
Condition, and state of the Kingdom of Scotland. Which having heard, and well
understood, we found that contained such things, as seemed very strange to us,
and such as were never heard of before. For we know that from the very most
Holy Father, and it is well known throughout this Realm of England, and not
unknown to other places, that from the very beginning of the Realm of England,
the Sovereign and Direct Dominion of the Kingdom Scotland, has been enjoyed by
the Kings of England, both in the times of the Britains, and also of the
English. And that they have been in the possession, (or as Good) of the
Supremacy, and direct Dominion of the said Kingdom of Scotland, in all
succeeding Ages; Neither has the said Kingdom at any time in Temporals
belonged, or does belong by any manner of Right unto your Church of Rome
aforesaid, but in truth the said Kingdom of Scotland, has belonged unto the
Ancestors of our aforesaid Sovereign Lord, Kings of England, and of old time
has been Feudatory to them alone. Neither have the King and Kingdom of
Scotland been subject, or usually under any one else but the Kings of England;
Neither have the Kings of England given in any Answer, or ought to give in any
Answer, in reference to their Rights in that Kingdom, OR ANY OTHER THEIR
TEMPORALATIES, before any Judge Ecclesastical or Secular, by reason of the
Boundless Preeminence of their State and Royal Dignity, and Custom
Irrefragably observed throughout all Ages. Wherefore, after a serious Debate,
and Consideration of the Contents of your aforesaid Letters. The Common, Joint,
and Unanimous consent of all, and every of us was, is, and by the help of God
shall be Resolutely for ever, That our aforesaid Sovereign Lord the King, Ought
in no wise to give in any Answer in Judgment before you, touching His Rights in
the Kingdom of Scotland, OR ANY OTHER HIS TEMPORALITIES, nor by any mean to
submit to your Jurisdiction, or so much as to yield that his said Rights be
brought into Question, or to send any Proctor, or Messenger to appear before
you in this Business. Especially since the doing of the Premises would
manifestly tend to the disinheriting of the Rights of the Crown of the Kingdom
of England, and of the Royal Prerogative, and to the notorious subversion ot
the State of this Realm, and likewise to the Prejudice of the Liberties,
Customs and Laws of our Progenitors, All which we are bound by Oath duly to
Observe, and Defend, and which we will Maintain with the utmost of our Power,
and by the help of God with all our Might and Main Defend. Moreover, we do not
Permit, or in the least will Permit, (for it is not in our power, neither ought
we) that our said Lord the King should do, or in the least wise attempt to do
any of the premises, so strange, so unlawful Prejudicial, and otherwise unheard
of, though He would himself. Wherefore we with Reverence humbly beseech your
Holiness, that you would Graciously permit the said Sovereign Lord our King,
who is as good a Catholic, and as much devoted to the Church of Rome, as any
Prince of Christiandom, Peaceably to Enjoy, His Rights, Liberties, Customs,
and Laws aforesaid, without my Trouble, or Diminution, and so to remain
untoucht for the future.

In Witness whereof we have set our Seals to these presents, as well for our
selves, as for the whole Commonalty of the Kingdom of England aforesaid. Dated
at Lincoln the 12 day of February in the year of our Lord One Thousand Three
Hundred.
numbered array of seals

A brief account of (...) popes Pretenses of a Civl Right to the Crown of
England, and the Answer thereunto.
THat the Pope of Rome has for sum Ages last past pretended to a Sovereign
Right over Christan Kings and Princes, cannot be unknown to any, who are
acquainted with the writings of their most approved Authors, the Decrees of
their Councils, or the Instanccs of such usurped authority recorded in
Histories for these Five Hundred years. The judgment of their Licenced Authors,
their Councils, and their Laws in this Case, is excellently published by the
Learned Pen of the Right Reverend Bishop of Lincoln; and that the same Doctrine
has been by them generally received, I can bring no greater proofs, than their
common practice recorded in History. How many Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign
Princes have been de Facto deposed by them, how many great Massacres and
private Murders have been Encouraged and Defended, how many Tortures, and
unheard of Cruelties, how many Treasons, and Damnable Conspiracies to the
subversion of whole Kingdoms, have been contrived, and some executed by
Jesuits, and other Emissaries of Rome, would require a large Volumn to relate;
I shall refer the Reader to a few Authors, for his abundant satisfaction herein
Thuanus, (a) Lib. 1. cap. 9. de Repub.
Bodinus, and the Exact Collection of (b) Popish Treasons and Vsurpa^.
Mr. Fowlis. Nor was there any place felt the weight of the Popes Iron Rod more
grievous then the Kingdom of England; hence was he wont to exact vast sums of
money, which were as readily paid: and of what esteem it was with him. ^y
gather from the Character he gives, when he calls it (...) Innocent 4. Anno
1214.^
Puteus inexhaustus. And from (...)from their yoke and burden ^n neither we nor
our Fathers were able to beat, what Damning Censures and Violent
Excommunications have been sent out against us, what Secre^ and Horrible Plots
have been contrived to destroy our Kings and Kingdoms, I hope will never be
forgot: and all this not so much to reestablish here the Religion, as the
Authority which the Pope has lost: and the right of that Title which he claims
to this Kingdom, he thinks equal to that pretended from Constantin's Donation.
And to this purpose his Sub-Collector (c) Hist. Angl. lib. 4.
Polidore Virgil tells us, that Ina was the first King who made this Kingdom of
England Tributary to the Pope: but he forgets himself page 740. where he says
Peter pence was given Pietatis and Religionis Causa, for Gods sake, and
therefore not by way of Homage and Subjection. This Gift was continued by Offa.
Atulphus. Canutus, and Edward the Confessor, who calls it the Iamb. Appendix
Edw. de Rome Seat. 10.
Kings Alms. William the Conqueror allows this gift, but renounceth all
Obedience to the Pope, as appears by Lanfranks Epist. Apud Eadiner p. 113
Pope Pascal 2. in a Letter to Hen. d. calls this Donation Beati Petri
Eleemosyna, and Res^. ab A^l. Bellarning page.83.
Bishop Andrews tells us, that it was an Alms given to a Hospital at Rome,
where they usul to entertain Pilgrims out of England.

The Second pretended Title is from King John's Resignation of the Crown to
Pandulphus the Popes Legate, and receiving it again under Fealty, and Homage,
and at the yearly Tribute of a Thousand Marks. Which Title upon several
accounts will appear invalid. First as to matter of Fact; In Supplicat. of
Souls Page 296.
Sir Thomas Moor, who could not want all advantages of informing himself in
affairs of this nature, denies it, his words are these; Some Writers say, that
King John made England and Ireland Tributary to the Pope, by the grant of a
thousand Marks; we dare surely say again, that this is untrue, and that all
Rome neither can show such a grant, nor ever could, and if they could, it were
right naught worth: For never could any King of England give away the Realm to
the Pope, or make the land Tributary if he would, nor no such money is there
paid, nor never was. These are the words of that great Statesman, who was no
enemy to the Popes Authority. But granting there was something done to this
purpose, in the prese(...) Peers, and without the Consent of Any, as Mat. Paris
a Monk of Saint Albans, who lived at that time, acquaints us; I shall take my
Second Argument to invallidate this Title, from the words of Sir Thomas Moor
before cited: for if they could at Rome show any such grant, yet it were right
naught worth: for never any King of England could give away the Realm to the
Pope, nor make the Land Tributary if he would. And herein agree the Learned
Grotius, Bodinus, and other Lawyers: and the Barons of this Realm were obliged
by their Oaths, Lambert Apx. p. 170. lib. 50. de obsequiv erga Regem lege 59 p.
171.
Terras and honores Regis omni fidelitate ubique servare cum co, and contra
inimicos and alicnigenas desendere, To preserve together with the King the
Territories and Honor of the King, and to defend them against their Enemies and
Forraigners. And herewith agrees the Command which the Conqueror laid upon all
the Commons; Firmiter pracipimus ut omnes liberi homines totius Regni praedicti
sint sratres jurati ad Monarchiam nostram proviribus suis and sacultatibus,
contra inimicos pro posse suo desendendum, and viriliter servandum. i. e. We
strictly Charge and Command, that all Freeholders in all parts of our Kingdom
shall be sworn Brethren, Sworn to defend our Monarchy with their Persons and
Estates, to the utmost of their ability, and manfully to preserve it: by which
it appears that the Commons were as well as the Lords bound to defend their
Country against Usurpations and Invasions; and we doubt not but the same
English courage is to be found amongst their posterity, which we find Coll.
Posthum. page 348. which be quoteth e lib. Sancti Albani fol. 207.
Recorded about the 44. year of Henry the third. For when Pope Alexander the
Fourth demanded a revocation of Adomar Bishop of Winchester, because he was a
Churchman; as was urged, and not subject to lay Censures, who had been
Banished by the joint consent of the King, Lords and Commons, for his
intolerable Insolence, the Commons gave this resolute answer to the Popes
demand, Peter de Monford being Prolocutor; Si Dominus Rex and Regni Majores noc
vellent, (meaning Adomar's revocation fom Banishment,) COMMUNITAS tamen ipsius
ingressum in Angliam jam null^ sustinorat. Though the King, and Peers of the
Realm should declare for his return, yet the Commons would by no means endure
it. Lastly no man can confer a greater Right upon another, than what is in
himself; and that King John was an Usurper, is evident from all His;tories of
that Age for Arthur of Britain, his Elder Brothars Son, was Thirteen years or
Age, when John invaded the Throne, but tearing that he might not be long quiet
in his Possession, whilst the Right Heir was alive, he Murdered his Nephew, and
imprisoned his Neice Elianor, who survived him; and his does utterly make void
his Right to dispose of what he had not right to keep. And of what small
account was this pretended Title, not only the Resolutions of the Commons before
mentioned, but also this Letter Subseribed by all the Peers of England will
abundantly manifest.

THe Reader may please to take notice, that the Exemplar whence this was taken
is in Corpus Christi Colladge Library in Oxon, and Recorded by Mat.
Westminster, and Walsingham, and mentioned by Parsons in his answer to the Lord
Chief Justice Coks Reports, but without any Reply, Page 266. cap. 11. and
whereas in that the ames round the Ar^ies are in an ancient English letter, the
Graver being being unacquainted with the Characterm, for his own ease, and more
convenient Reading has put them in the Modern.

Febr. 8. 1678.
Imprimatur,

JOHN NICHOLAS Vice-Can. OXON.

OXFORD. Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD for RICHARD DAVIS, 1619. And are to be Sold
by MOSES PIT, at the Angel; HENRY MORTLOCK, at the Phaenix, in St. Paul's
Church Yard: and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall.


