TO THE Bishops and Clergy OF England and Wales, The State of the Cruel
Persecution, Imprisonment (many to Death) and Spoil of Goods inflicted upon the
People called QUAKERS.
Only for their Religious Meetings, and Obeying, Serving, and Worshipping
Almighty God that Made them.
IN the Year 1680, a Brief Account of the sad Sufferings of the said People
(from the Year 1660) was presented to King Charles the Second, and his
Parliament, in Print, as follows.

First, That in that Time, according to Accounts then come to hand, there had
died of the People called Quakers aforesaid, in Prison, and Prisoners, for the
Exercise of their Faith and Conscience in Matters of Religion and Worship
toward Almighty God: some of whom had been beaten and bruised, being knocked
down at their Peaceable Meetings, and died of their Wounds, to the Number of
243. Secondly, That then remained in Prison in the several Goals in England and
Wales for the Testimony of a good Conscience, (many of whom were Prosecuted by
Writs of Excommunicato Cap. diverse of them having been closely Confined, upon
that Account, for several Years then past) in Number, 276. Thirdly, The Number
of those that had suffered Imprisonment for Meeting, and refusing, for
Conscience Sake, to Swear, some of them having had the Sentence of a PRAEMUNIRE
passed upon them, and diverse had their Goods and Chattels Distrained and taken
away, -- Viz. 9437. Fourthly, The Number of the said People Excommunicated and
Imprisoned for not Conforming to the Public Worship (which were but a few in
comparison to the many that have been so Prosecuted) Viz. 624. Fifthly,
Sentenced for Banishment, for Meeting together to Worship God: Viz. 198. And
this Instant Year 1685, there was presented to King James the Second, the
Account of present Prisoners for the Testimony of a good Conscience, and their
Religious Meetings, in Obeying and Worshipping of God, to the Number of 1460.
With Account of Prisoners that died for their Faith and Worship, since the
Account in 1680. 78. The Number of all the said Sufferers, come to hand,
amounting to 12316.

Note, That some of the present Prisoners are still continued upon the above
said Account in 1680.

And since, we have had Account of several more that are sent to Prison, and
some more have died Prisoners.

Besides many that have suffered Imprisonment since the Year 1680, and a great
Number distrained upon, and their Goods spoiled, and made havoc of by
Informers (and some Priests have been Informers) for their Religious Peaceable
Meetings, and not coming to the Parish-Worship; to the Ruin of many both in
their Husbandry and Trade; some nor having had a Bed left to lie upon, nor a
stool to sit on, nor a Cow to give Milk for their poor Children, nor Corn for
Bread, or Seed, or Drink, nor Tools to work withal, etc. The Value of which
Goods so taken and made havoc of, as well as the number of Sufferers upon the
said Accounts, and by Imprisonments, is considerable (not here inserted.)

NOW let the Bishops and Clergy in England and Wales, consider the sad and
cruel Sufferings by Imprisonment, (many to Death) and Spoil of Goods, as
abovesaid, inflicted upon the People called Quakers for their Religious
Meetings, and only for Obeying, Serving, and Worshipping Almighty God that made
them. And were not your Forefathers once Dissenters from the National Worship?
And was it Just in them that Persecuted your Forefathers for nor Conforming to
the Sacrament of the Altar, and other things? And do not you now follow their
Example that Persecuted your Forefathers, in your Imprisoning and Persecuting
Protestants for their tender Conscience Sake toward God, etc. And though there
are many Sects and diversities of Orders among the Roman Catholics, and
several Sorts and Sects were among the Jews (as you read in the Scriptures) yet
Both were, and are kept from Persecuting one another among themselves. And
therefore why should you that profess your selves Protestants, Persecute
Protestants, or any, seeing that you have no such Command from Christ and his
Apostles, but, To love one another, and to love Enemies? And, Christ by the
Grace of God, has tasted Death for every Man: So he has bought Mankind by his
Death: And God would have all Men to be Saved: Therefore why should any Destroy
them in their Lives or Estates by Imprisonment, because they cannot be of their
Way? For Christ commands, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together till the
Harvest: which is the End of the World. And would the Bishops and Clergy be
served so themselves, to be Cast into Prison till Death, and their Goods
spoiled, for Worshipping and Serving God that Made them? Would they say, it was
according to the Nobility of true Christianity, and the Royal Law of God, To do
unto others as they would have them do unto them? Or, were that, To love their
Neighbor as themselves? And is it not a sad thing, to see Protestants Destroy
and Ruin Protestants, both by Imprisonment and in Estate! And therefore
consider the Justness of the Lord, if he should suffer You to come under the
same Punishment, how You then would stand to your own Principles, which you
have forced others unto? and how You would bear the same Punishment you have
inflicted upon others, for not following them? Therefore consider whilst God
has given you a Day, and a Visitation, to do good while you have Power; for if
your Power should be taken away from you, then 'twill be too late for you to do
good: For, God will render to every one according to his Deeds.

And does not Tillotson, (one of your own Doctors) say in his Sermon on Luke
9.55, 56. Preached the 5th. of November, 1678. (page 6, 7.) Viz. That there
were those in the Primitive Times would have called for Fire to come down from
Heaven to Destroy some that would not receive Christ; but Christ Rebuked them,
telling them, They knew not what Spirit they were of: that is (says D.
Tillotson) Ye own your selves to be my Disciples, but do you consider what
Spirit now Acts and Governs you? Not that surely which my Doctrine designs to
mould and fashion you into, which is not a Furious, Persecuting and Destructive
Spirit; but Mild, Gentle and Saving, Tender of the Lives and Interests of Men,
even of those who are our greatest Enemies. And further (page 7.) he says, And
now no Difference of Religion, no pretense of Zeal for God and Christ can
Warrant and Justify this Passionate and Fierce, this Vindictive and
Exterminating Spirit; for the Son of Man came not to Destroy Men's Lives, but to
Save them. (Thus far Doctor T.)

Now let the Bishops and Clergy consider how many hundred Men's Lives have been
destroyed by Imprisonment through them? And how many hundreds have been made
Widows and Fatherless thereby? And how many hundreds have been Ruined in their
Persons and Estates since the Year 1660, through their's and the Clergy-Mens
means, for Obeying, Serving, and Worshipping God that made them?

And whereas it has been often alleged to us, that the Apostle Paul says, Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Power, etc. And that Peter says, Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors sent by him for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and the Praise o them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. And as Paul says,
Knowing that the Law is not made for the Righteous Man, but for the Lawless,
Disobedient, Ungodly, Sinners, Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of Fathers
and of Mothers, and for Manslayers, for Whoremongers, and for them that defile
themselves with Mankind, for Liars and perjured Persons, etc. Now these were
the Evildoers which are to be punished, 1 Timothy 1. And as the Apostles say, Let
every Soul be subject to the higher Power, and to every Ordinance of Man for
the Lord's sake, who are for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise
of them that do well. The Apostle does not say, That every Soul should be
subject to the higher Power, and to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake,
for Punishment of People for Serving and Worshipping of God in Matters of
Faith, Religion and Worship: For Christ and the Apostles never gave forth any
such Command or Ordinance; and therefore the Christians in the Apostles Days,
their Souls were to be subject to the Higher Power, and to submit to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, who are for the Punishment of Evildoers
(and the Apostle Paul tells you whom the Law was made against, and what
Evildoers they were, that were, and are to be Punished, as before mentioned)
and for a Praise to them that do well. For the Law was not made against the
Righteous, but to punish such Sinners and Evildoers as the Apostle speaks of,
but not to punish Christians for their Faith and Religion, and for Worshipping,
Obeying and Serving Almighty God that made them. For did not Peter, and Paul,
and other Apostles and Christians suffer for Matters of Religion, and their
Obeying, Serving, and Worshipping of God, who could not obey the Doctrines,
Ordinances, or Commandments of the Jews, nor Diana's, nor of the Romans? For if
he and the rest of the Christians and Apostles had, then they had not suffered.

And the Apostle says ( Colossians 2.20, 21, 22.) If ye be dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the World, why as though living in the World, are you
subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not? Which all are to
perish with the using after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men. So here you
may see, there were Doctrines, Ordinances, and Commandments of Men, concerning
Religion and Worship, that were not to be Touched with, nor Tasted, nor
Handled: And yet the Apostle says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
Man for the Lord's sake, which are for the punishment of Evildoers. So these
Ordinances of Men for the punishment of such Evildoers. (as before mentioned)
every soul was to submit to that higher Power, for these were for the praise of
them that do well: Yet they were not to submit to the Ordinances, Commandments,
or Doctrines of Men in matters of Faith, Religion and Worship, nor to touch,
taste nor handle them; and therefore the Christians suffered by the Jews and by
the Heathen-Romans, and Diana's Worshippers; as you may see in the Ten
Persecutions, and in the Scriptures. Therefore we desire you to make a
Distinction betwixt the Ordinances of the Higher Power, their Laws and
Ordinances, for the punishment of Evildoers, as before mentioned; and likewise
such Ordinances, Commandments and Doctrines of Men, that the Christians were
not to be subject unto in matters of Faith, Religion and Worship, and were not
to touch, taste nor handle them, and therefore they suffered.

And pray, What spirit was and is this, that has made Christians to suffer for
Religion, and Serving and Worshipping of God since the Apostles days? Not
Christ's nor his Apostles; for Christ tells them plainly, that would have had
Fire to come down from Heaven upon them that would not receive him, Ye know not
what spirit you are of. And therefore, all in Christendom, that have Persecuted
people for matters of Faith and Religion, and serving and worshipping God that
made them, have they known what spirit they were and are of themselves? And
therefore have such the spirit of Christ, that know not what spirit they are of
themselves? For the Apostle says, They that have not the spirit of Christ, are
none of his: And the same Apostle says, He that is born of the Flesh, will
persecute him that is born of the Spirit: But we never read, that he that is
born of the spirit, did persecute any about Religion, Faith and Worship, in the
New Testament.

And so we desire you to come to the spirit of Christ, that you may make a
Distinction, as the Apostle did, between those Doctrines, Commandments and
Ordinances of Men, that are not to be Touched, Tasted, nor Handled; and the
Laws and Ordinances of Men which the Christians are to submit themselves unto
for the Lord's sake, for the Punishment of Sinners and Evildoers, as the
Apostle Paul speaks of before; for he made a Distinction. And cease from
Imprisoning and Persecuting both Protestants and others that profess
Christianity, and give over spoiling their Goods for Religion, Faith, and
Worship, and their Serving and Worshipping of God. And let the Bishops and
Priests set open all the Prison-Doors for the Prisoners to go free, that
through their means have been cast into Prison, and their Goods Restored them
again, that through any of their means have been taken from them, for the
relief of their poor Families: and if not, see how you can prove your
Doctrines, Commandments, and Ordinances of Persecution from Christ and his
Apostles Doctrine; without which you must acknowledge your Doctrines,
Commandments, and Ordinances to be of the Ordinances of Men, that have not
known what spirit they were of, which are not to be Touched, Tasted, nor
Handled, as the Apostle says. And if you would have us Conform to such
Doctrines, Ordinances, and Commandments of Men, that do not know what spirit
they are of themselves, and which (the Apostle says) are not to be Touched,
Tasted, nor Handled, that Act contrary to the Royal Law of God, and Do unto
others, as they would not have others do unto them: Would you be served so your
selves?

So we pray, Consider, and do unto others as you would have others do unto you;
and love your Neighbor as your selves: and let nothing be in your Pulpits, but
the sound of the Joyful, Glorious Gospel of Life, Peace, and Salvation to every
Creature under Heaven; and freely if ye have received it, freely give it: For
neither Christ nor the Apostles did preach up a Doctrine, Ordinance, or
Commandment to Imprison to Death, Persecute, and spoil Goods of them that did
not Conform to Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine; no, not so much as against
Blasphemers, Schismatics, Heretics and Seducers: Were not they to Overcome
Evil with Good? and were not their Weapons to be Spiritual, and not Carnal? and
are not Goals and Carnal Weapons (to Force People to Ordinances, Doctrines, and
Commandments of Men) contrary to the spiritual Weapons and Armor that the
Apostles warred withal in the Primitive Times?

Therefore we pray you again to Consider, what ground you have out of the New
Testament from Christ and his Apostles, who profess your selves Christians, to
spoil Goods, cast into Prison (yea many to Death) and to war with Carnal
Weapons and Armor against such tender Consciences in matters of difference in
Religion and Faith, and that do obey, Serve and Worship in Spirit and Truth,
Almighty God that made them? Would not You have Liberty for your Tender
Consciences? And if so, why should you be against Others, that they should not
have the same Liberty of their Tender Consciences, that Dissent from you, as
you would have your selves? And if not, do you fulfill the Royal Law of God, To
do unto others, as you would have them do unto you? And does not the Lord say,
I will have MERCY and not Sacrifice? So you may see, that it is Mercy that the
Lord looks for, who is Merciful, etc. And does not the Lord require of Man, To
do Justice, to love MERCY, and to walk humbly with God? Mich. 5.8.

London, the 30 th. of the 1 st. Month, called March, 1685. Signed in Behalf of
our Suffering Friends, Thomas Robertson, Richard Bland, John Bowater, William
Ingram.


FINIS.

