To the Ld. Mayor and other Justices and Aldermen of the CITY of LONDON. The
Case of the Prisoners, commonly called QUAKERS in the said City, Humbly
Presented: We the said Prisoners, who have nothing but Love and Good will,
Sincere and Due Respects toward you all, both as Men and Civil Magistrates, do
Heartily (...) your Health and Prosperity in Justice and Truth.
THE Matters which we would humbly present to yo(...)rious and tender I
considerations, are chiefly concerning the Charge ^st our peaceable Religious
Assemblics, in late Indictments rendered (...), and c, but in some later Routs
and Unlawful Assemblies, witb Force and Armss (...) and then Fining and
Imprisonment till payment; together with a Ju^t against some to find Sureties
for the Good Behavior. This cou(...)ing been taken, we really conceive the
measure we have thereby is not only hard, b(...)either unmerited on our parts:
We hope you will give the Loosers and Sufferers leave to (...) without offense.

We pray you seriously consider, whether the Charge of Routs, and ^n be
rationally laid upon our said peaceable Assemblies, or they justly punishable
as (...) and we thereupon to be thus closely confined and fined, as Persons
Routous etc. (...) legal definition Routs as given by allowed Authorities. As
an Unlawful Assem^ in Common Law, is, of the Company of three or more Persons,
disorderly coming together, with Intention Forceably to commit an unlawful Act;
as to beat a (...), or to enter upon his Possession, cut or destroy his Corn or
Grass, or such like. So a Roust is when such Assembly Moves, going or riding
forward, to commit by force such unlawful Act, to the injury of the Person or
Possesion of another. And then a Riot is when they do execute the same, using
threatening words, furious gestures, and other Force and Arms, to the ^errour
of the people, wherein there is some apparent disturbance of the public Peace,
either by signification of Speech, show of Armor, turbulent Gestore, or actual
and express Violence, etc. In which definition, both W. Lambard in his
Eirenarcha, the Lord Cook in his Institutes 3d.pt. and Mich. Dalton in his
Justice of Peace, under those titles of Riots, Routs, Breach of the Pe^ce, and
Unlawful Assemblies, etc. with many other Authorities do agree.

^V. Lam^rd, Eirin. 1. 2.p. 175, 176. 177. and Cook Inst. 3 pt. chapter I. f.9. and
chapter 79. f 176. Dal. tit. Riots, Routs. etc.

Pray observe in case of a Rout; Suppose a Company of Rude Persons met to
contrive some Mischief or Injury against the Persons, Goods or Possessons of
their Neighbors, and moving forward with Clubs or any offensive Weapons, to
^mit the Riot designed and those should be apprehended in their Motion, before
the act be committed, and then Indicted for a Rout and Unlawful Assembly, etc.
the Question is, Whether the Indictment framed against these, be not in the
same manner and form, or mostly of the same kind, with these Indictments
against us, for our Religious Meetings to Pray to God etc. what Book-Case or
President in Common Law or Equily can Parallel these, or warrant the la^

Now we can Appeal, 1st, To Almighty God, who knows our Hearts and secret
Intentions, that our Religious Assemblies are with no such Injurious
Intentions; And to the Consciences of our indifferent Neighbors and
Spectators, that our Meetings have never given them occasion to think, that
ever we intended and such Injury or Force, either by Motion, Action or Weapon,
nor can any such thing be attested against us. And we doubt not but all
unprejudiced Jurors, our Neighbors do understand that our Meetings are upon no
such in urious account, but on a Religious account, for (...) toward Almighty
God. And therefore how can it be just or reasonable any Ju(...)old be unposed
upon, to find us Guilty, either of Routs, Riots, or Unlawful Assembles as
before described, to bring Guilt, Danger or Damnation upon their own Souls: Who
as they are not to be Menaced into a Verdict, so not to be Fined nor Imprisoned
for finding according to their Consciences, though it may seem not consistent
with the Evidence or Direction of the Court, according to the Lord Vaugban's
Reports in Bushel's Case, in the (...) Year of K. Charles 2. fol. 143, and 153.
For (says he) the Jury may know the Witnesses to be Stigmatized and Infamous,
which may be unknown to the Parties, and consequenly to the Court. And further
says fol. 143. (in the same case) If the Judge from the Evidence shall by his
own Judgment, first resolve upon any trial what the Facts is, and so knowing
the Fact, shall then resolve what the Law is, and order the Jury Penalty to
find accordingly; What either necessary or convenient use can be fancied of
Jury, or to continue Trials by them at all? Thus far the Learned Judge Vanghan
argues the case in behalf of the Jury, having not found Penn and Mead guilty of
a Trespass, Unlawful Assembly, Rout and Tumult, etc. whereof they stood
Indicted, not withstanding they were taken and indicted on occasion of such a
Religious Meeting, as these for which we now suffer^ yet the Jury in Conscience
could not find them Guilty of a Rout or Riot etc. Who being therefore Fined
Forty Marks a Men, and Committed to Prison, the said Judge Vaughan vindicated
the Jury, and opposed such proceeding against them; to which the rest of the
Judges at Westminster, who were present at the Argument, agreed.

Besides, that is a Remarkable Passage of K. Charles 1st in his (...) where he
says in his Prayer (viz) Make them at length seriously to Consider, that
nothing Violent or Injurious can be Religious. which may be considered and
app^ved several ways. 1st. our Assemblyes being generally believed and known
to he religious and peaceable on our parts, are therefore no Routs, Riots, or
unlawful Assemblyes, where in either violence or injury is Intended or acted.
2ly. If nothing Violent or injurious can be Religious; Then with what
conscience can any Judge our Religious quiet Meeting, Rout^ or Riots. 3ly. How
can the violence and injury then done to us, both against our said M^gs against
our Persons by close Confinment, and against our Estates by Spoil, be Rel^ous
or Christian? Nay are not such Severities rather Reproach to Christianity.

Lastly whereas some of us, besides our Fines and imp(...)s, are sentenced to
find Saretyes for the good behavior, or else to be continued in (...) We
entreat you to consider, in what cases Surety for the good behavior, is to be
granted, according to Common Law and Jastice.

Pray Observe, It is chiefly to be granted against Common Barretours, common
Quarrellers, Rioters, such as ly in wait to Rob, or shall be suspected for that
cause, or shall assault or attempt to robb, or are generally feared or
suspected to be robbers by the highway and against such as are like to commit
Murder, homicide and other grievances etc. and against such as shall practice
to Poison another, and against such as be of evil name and same, as for
resorting to houses suspected to maintain Adultery or incontinency, and against
the maintainers of houses commonly suspected for Bawdery, and against common
whoremongers and common whores, and against night-walkers, suspected to be
pilferers etc. And against Eves-droppers, and such Night walkers that cast men's
Gates and Carts into Ponds etc. suspected persons who live idly, common
haunters of Alehouses and Taverns, common Drunkards etc. such as go in the
Message of Thieves etc. As you may see at large in M. Daltons Justice of Peace,
under the Title, urety for the good behavior, grounded on other Authorities.

Now pray Consider these things between God and your own Consciences, seeing
neither We nor our Assemblyes are under any of these criminal circumstances,
what parity can there be between these crimes, misbehaviours or enormities, and
our Peaceable Meeting in Spirit and Truth, to pray worship and praise Almighty
God that made us, according to our tender Consciences? which both the Holy
Scriptures, and consequently the Liturgy of the Church of England require and
Warrant without exception of Persons or places? And what Book-case or president
in Common Law and Justice can be produced either to prove such Meettings Routs,
or to Fine, Imprison, or require Suretyes for the good Behavior, for praying
to God, or peaceably Worshipping him in our Religious Assemblies, according to
our Faith and Persuasions, without any intention or Overt Act of Violence or
Injury either to the Government, or to any person or property of another
whatsoever. The Righteous Judge of all knows our Innocence in these matters.

The premises Considered, We do in Christian humility entreat you, not to
detain us under close Consinment to the impairing our health, endangering our
Lives, and Ruining our Distressed Families. And we further Request you, not to
Sentence any more of us to find Suretyes for the Good behavior (for our
quietly Meeting to Worship God), and to discharge those of us, who are under
the same Sentence. God preserve and direct you.

From Newgate, and Woodstreet Compter, this 5th of the 10th Month, 1684. Your
Suffering Friends and Wellwishers.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis precedent Application was delivered to the Lord Mayor the 5. of the 10.
mo. 1684. and also a Letter to the Recorder of the same import, the 6th ditto.
To which may be added, that the Indictments against our Assemblies for being
Routous, Unlawful, with Force and Arms, etc. we conceiving to be in the same
Terms as Indictments are framed against Persons assembled and moving forward in
a Routous manner, with Intention to commit some Riot or Unlawful Act with
Force, to the injury or hurt of the Neighbors, their Persons or Possessions:
Whenas our Assemblies are clear both from any such Injurious Intention, Motion
or Action, as well as Armed Force, for we appear with no Weapons nor Force; and
therefore do still question, how these can rationally hold parallel in Fact, or
be equally punished in point of Justice, Common Law or Equity.

And further, our Assembling being with Intention to Worship Almighty God in
Spirit and Truth waiting on him and therein to pray to and praise him. This the
Holy Scriptures Warrants and Requires, and consequently the Liturgy of the
Church of England, by requiring the reading and practice of Holy Scripture; and
expressly, Whereas on St. Matthias Day, Act. 1. is cited, where its said, In
those days Peter stoot up, etc. The number of the Names that were together,
were about 120, and they continued with one accordin Prayer and Supplication,
v. 14, And also on Good Friday, Epist. Hebr. 10. 24, 25. is cited in the
Liturgy, viz. Let Us consider one another, to provoke one another unto Love and
good Works, not for saking the Assemblies of our selves together, as the manner
of some is, but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because
you see the day approaching. And John 4. (Liturgy, 2d Lesson to be read at
Morning Prayer, in March 17. and July 16. viz. observe,) v. 21. Jesus says
unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this
Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalens, Worship the Father, v. 2 3. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seekith such to worship him. v. 24. God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship in Spirit and in Truth. 1
Cor. 14. appointed for the 2d Lesson at Evening Prayer in May 31. and Sept. 29.
in which are these Instances. V. 14, But if all Prophesy, and there come in one
that believes not, or one Unlearned, he is Convinced of all, he is Judged of
all. v. 25. And thus are the Secrets of Li^ Heart made manifest, and so falling
down on his Face, he will Worship God, and report that God is n you of a Truth,
V. 26. How is it then Brethren, when you come together, every one of yon has a
Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an
Interpretation; let all things he done to Edifying. v. 29. Let the Prophers
speak, two or three, and let the other Judge. v. 30. If any thing be revealed
to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. v. 31. For ye may all
Prophesy one by one, that all may Learn, and all may be Comforted. V. 32. And
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. v 33. For God is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, at in all the Churches of the Saints;
thus for the Liturgy.

And this was good Order in the True Christian Church, etc. with many more
Instances that might be produced to justify our Practice, and what we Profess
or Pretend, both as to the Matter and Manner of Religious Exercise and Worship.


