TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

THE Due Account, and Humble Petition OF THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL, Lately
COMMISSIONED for the REVIEW and ALTERATION OF THE LITURGY.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1661.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty,
WHen the distempered Nation, wearied with its own Contentions and Divisions,
did groan for Unity and Peace, (the wonderful Providence of the most Righteous
God appearing for the removal of Impediments) their eyes were upon your
Majesty, as the person born to be (under God) the Center of their Concord; and
taught by Affliction to break the bonds of the Afflicted, and by experience of
the sad effects of men's uncharitableness, and passions, to restrain all from
violence and extremity, and keep up moderation and mediocrity, the Oil of
Charity and Peace: And when your subjects desires were accomplished in your
Majesty's peaceable possession of the Throne, it was the joy and encouragement
of the Sober and Religious, that you began the exercise of your Government,
with a Proclamation full of Christian Zeal against Debauchery and Profaneness,
declaring also your dislike of [those who under pretense of Affection to your
Majesty, and your Service, assume to themselves the liberty of reviling,
threatening, and reproaching others, to prevent the Reconciliation and Union of
hearts and affections, which can only (with Gods blessing) make us rejoice in
each other] Our comforts also were carried on by Your Majesty's early, and
ready entertainment of Motions for accommodation in those points of Discipline
and Worship, in which we disagreed, and Your professed Resolutions to draw us
together by mutual approaches, and publishing Your healing Declaration, which
was received with thanks of Your House of Commons, and the applause of the
people, and the special joy of those that longed for Concord and Tranquillity
in the Church. In which Your Majesty declared so much satisfaction in the
foundations of Agreement already laid, for that You [should think Your self
very unfortunate, and suspect that You are defective in the Administration of
Government, if any superstructures should slack those foundations, and contract
or lessen the blessed gift of Charity, which is a vital part of Christian
Religion.

And as in the said gracious Declaration Your Majesty resolved to [appoint an
equal number of Learned Divines of both Persuasions, to review the Liturgy, and
make such Alterations as shall be thought most necessary, and some Additional
Forms of Scripture phrase, as near as may be, suited unto the nature of several
parts of Worship, and that it be left to the Ministers choice to use one, or
other, at his discretion: So in accomplishment thereof, Your Majesty among
others, directed Your Commission to be for the review of [the several
Directions, Rules, and Forms of Prayer, and things in the said Book of
Common Prayer contained] And (if occasion be) to make such seasonable and
necessary Alterations, Corrections, and Amendments thereof, as by and between
us shall be agreed upon to be needful, or expedient for the giving a
satisfaction to tender consciences, and restoring and continuance of Peace and
Unity in the Church under Your Protection and Government; and what we agree
upon as needful or expedient to be done for the Altering, Diminishing, or
Enlarging the said Book of Common Prayer, forthwith to certify and present it
in Writing to Your Majesty.

In Obedience to this Your Majesty's Commission, we did with the Right
Reverend Bishops, who required of us that before any personal debate, we should
bring in writing all our Exceptions against the book of Common Prayer, and all
the Additional Forms which we desired; Both which we performed, and received
from them an Answer to the first, and returned them our full Reply; The last
week of our time being designed to personal conference, was, at the will of the
Right Reverend Bishops, spent in a particular dispute with three of each part,
about the sinfulness of one of the Injunctions, from which we desired to be
free, and in some other Conference on the By. And though the account which we
are forced to give to your Majesty of the issue of our Consultations, is, that
no Agreements are subscribed by us to be offered to your Majesty according to
your expectation; and though it be none of our intent to cast the least unmeet
reflection upon the Right Reverend Bishops, and Learned Brethren, who think not
meet to yield to any considerable Alterations, to the ends expressed in your
Majesty's Commission; yet we must say, that it is some quiet to our minds, that
we have not been guilty of your Majesty's, and your Subjects disappointments,
and that we account not your Majesty's Gracious Commission, and our labor
lost, having peace of conscience in the discharge of our duty to God and you,
that we have been the seekers and followers of Peace, and have earnestly
Pleaded, and humbly petitioned for it. And we humbly beseech your Majesty, to
believe that we own no Principles of Faction or Disobedience, nor patronize the
Errors or obstinacy of any.

It Is granted us by all, that nothing should be commanded us by man, which is
contrary to the word of God: that if it be, and we know it, we are bound not
to perform it, God being the absolute Universal Sovereign; That we must use
all just means to discern the will of God, and whether the commands of men be
contrary to it; that if the command be sinful, and any through the neglect of
sufficient search, shall judge it lawful; his culpable error excuses not his
doing it, from being sin; and therefore as a reasonable creature must needs
have a judgment of discerning, that he may rationally obey it; so is he with
the greatest care and diligence to exercise it in the greatest things, even in
the obeying of God, and saving of his Soul; and that were a strong probability
of great sin and danger lies before us, we must not rashly run on without
search, and that to go on against Conscience, even where it is mistaken, is sin
and danger to him that erreth. And on the other side, we are remembered, that in
things no way against the Laws of God, the Commands of our Governors must be
obeyed; but if they command what God forbids, we must patiently submit to
suffering, and every soul must be subject unto the higher Powers, for
conscience sake, and not resist: The public Judgment, civil, or
ecclesiastical, belongs only to public persons, and not to any private man;
that no man must be causelessly, and pragmatically inquisitive into the Reasons
of his Superiors commands; nor by pride and self-conceitedness, exalt his own
understanding above it is worth and office, but all to be modestly, and humbly
self-suspitious; that none must erroniously pretend to Gods Law, against the
just command of his Superiors, nor pretend the doing of his duty to be sin;
that he who suspecteth his Superiors commands to be against Gods Laws, must
use all means for full Information, before he settle in a course of disobeying
them; and that he who indeed discovers any thing commanded to be sin, though
he must not do it, must manage his opinion with very great tenderness and care
of the public Peace, and the honors of his Governors: These are our
Principles: If we are otherwise represented to your Majesty, we are
misrepresented; If we are accused of contradicting them, we humbly crave that
we may not be condemned, till we be heard.

It is the desire of our Souls to contribute our parts and interests to the
utmost, for the promoting of holiness, charity, unity, and obedience to Rulers
in all lawful things: But if we should sin against God, because we are
commanded, who shall answer for us, or save us from his Justice? And we humbly
crave, that it may be no just Gravamen of our dissent, that thereby we suppose
Superiors may err, seeing it is but supposing them to be men not yet in
Heaven; and this may be reputed to every one that differs in Opinion from
another. And we beseech Your Majesty to believe, that as we seek no greater
matters in the World than daily Bread, with liberty to Preach the Gospel, and
Worship God according to his Word, and the practice of the Primitive Churches;
so we hope it is not through P^^i^lanimity, and overmuch tenderness of
suffering, that we have pleaded so much for the avoiding of suffering, to our
selves or others. May none of our sufferings hinder the prosperity of the
Church, and the good of Souls, and we have enough. And we suppose those that
think the persons inconsiderable in Number and Quality for whom we plead, will
not themselves believe that we have done this for popular applause: this were
not so much to seek the reward of Hypocrites, as to play the game of Fools;
seeing the applause of inconsiderable men can be but inconsiderable, and we
know our selves that we are like thus to offend those that are not
inconsiderable; the Lord that searches hearts, does know that it is not so
much the avoiding of suffering to our selves, or any particular person, that is
the end of our endeavors, though this were no Ambitious end) as the peace and
welfare of the Church and Kingdom, under Your Majesty's Government. We know,
that supposing them who are for the Ceremonies, to be as Pious and Charitable
as the rest, it cannot so much offend them that another may forbear them, as it
must offend another to be forced to use them; and we know that conscientious
men will not consent to the practicing of things in their judgment unlawful,
when those may yield that count the matter indifferent. And for the management
of this Treaty, it being agreed at our first meeting, that nothing be reported
as the words or sense of either part, but what is delivered by them in writing;
We humbly crave, that Your Majesty receive no more as ours, and that what is
charged on any particular person, he may be answerable for himself; and though
the Reverend Bishops have not had time to consider our Additions to the
Liturgy, and of our Reply, that yet it may be considered before a Determination
be made. And though we seem to have labored in vain, we shall yet lay this
work of Reconciliation and Peace at Your Majesty's feet, beseeching you to
prosper such a blessed Resolution, till it attain success: We must needs
believe, that when Your Majesty took our Consent to a Liturgy to be a
foundation that would infer our Concord, You meant not that we should have no
Concord, but by consenting to this Liturgy, without any considerable
Alterations.

And when You comforted us with Your Resolutions to draw us together, by
yiedling on both sides in what we could, You meant not that we should be the
boat to lay the banks that should not stir; and when Your Majesty commanded us
by Letters Pattents to meet about such Alterations as are needful or expedient
for giving satisfaction to tender Consciences, and the restoring and continuing
of Peace and Unity, we rest assured, that it was not Your sense that those
tender Consciences were to be forced to practice all which they judged
unlawful, and not so much as a Ceremony abated them, or that our Treaty was
only to convert either party to the Opinion of another, and that all our hopes
of Concord and Liberty consisted only in disputing the Bishops into
Nonconformity, or coming in every Ceremony to their minds.

Finally (for Your Majesty, under God, is the protection whereto Your people
fly, and as the same necessity still remains which drew forth Your Gracious
Declaration) we most Humbly and Earnestly beseech Your Majesty, that the
benefit of the said Declaration may be continued to Your people, and in
particular, that none be punished or troubled for not using the Common Prayer,
till it be effectually reformed, and the Addition made, as there expressed. We
crave Your Majesty's Pardon for the tediousness of this Address, and shall
wait in hope, that so great a Calamity of Your people as will follow the loss
of so many able faithful Ministers, as the rigorous Imposition would cast out,
shall never be recorded in the History of Your Reign, but that these
impediments of Concord being forborne, Your Kingdom may flourish in Piety and
Peace, that this may be the signal honor of Your happy Reign, and Your joy in
the day of Your account, which is the prayer of

Your Majesty's Faithful and Obedient Subjects.


