TO THE King's Most Excellent Majesty; Together with the Honorable Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament: The Husbandman's Advocate.
Most Excellent CAESAR, AND Most Honorable and Renowned Senators of England,
UNder God, you have saved Your Selves and Your Country; and as many of us as
have learned to distinguish between the True and the Living God, and those
false Deities which grow in our Woods and our Quarries, we return you our due
and eternal Thanks. Under God, you have secured us from Popery and Slavery;
Secure us but once more from Poverty, and your Work is done. Present His
Majesty as Long and as Much as your Wisdom shall think sit, our Purses are
open, and our Hearts are so too: Only permit the Honest Husbandman's Advocate
(like a Public Mercury) to point out the way how to obviate the
Inconveniences of too much Plenty. This Paper humbly presents,

That the Price of Land, and the Product of it, is now so very low, is the
common Grievance and Complaint; the Speculation whereof is very nice, and
strange, whenas Plenty shall be accounted a misfortune, and full Barns an
inconvenience. They that look into the Causes, some lay it upon the Interest of
Money, some upon the paucity of our Inhabitants, occasioned by War and Plague,
and so many Foreign Plantations and Colonies; others upon the extraordinary
Improvement of Husbandry, and breaking up so many Parks and Chaces, and
dreining of Fens; and they that say we spend too much Wine and exotic Liquors,
besides the dry Drunkenness of Tobacco, do think they are not altogether
mistaken; not to mention the too good Opinion of the Manufactures of Strangers,
and too little Kindness for our own. Whether these, or any, or all of these, do
contribute to this Epidemick Evil, is not now the Subject of this present
Paper: but that such a mischief there is gradually crept in upon us, and, like
a sly Hectic Fever, has seized upon the very Vitals, and grown almost past
recovery before discerned.

That the Soil we tread upon, is not shrunk in its Dimensions, but in its
substantial Value and Reputation, is too well known, especially to the
unfortunate Seller, and made use of by the indigent and crafty Tenant, who
either demands deep Abatements, or else threatens to throw up your Lands. The
Country man tells us, and we see it with our Eyes, How he neither spares his
Pains nor Sweat, endures the Cold and Heat of both Seasons; contents himself
with his Country-fare and Russet: The Dews of Heaven fall upon him, and his
Fields do laugh and sing with Plenty; and yet for all this, when he casts up
his Account at the years end, it betides him alike with the Prodigal and the
Slothful; he looks into his hand, and there is nothing; and the cause of all
is, That the Fruits of his Ground and Labors afford no Price, no Profit
proportionable to his Rent and Charges, and to what he might justly expect as a
Reward of his Industry: From whence how long and how sad a Chain of Miseries
must inevitably ensue, we need neither Prophet nor Diviner to inform us.

Many honest Essays indeed, and ingenious Idea's, how to obviate this General
Poverty, have come out of late; but, alas! with so little success, because they
are either too short, or too narrow, or else attended with other
Inconveniences as obnoxious almost as those they pretend to remove: Now then,
to make haste to the Mark we aim at, This New Evil is curable by the Royal Hand.

If it would please the August Government of England to deal with the Fruits of
the Earth, as the King does with Men and Metals; both which, though of mean
Extraction, he advances many times to Honor and Reputation, merely upon the
Account of his Sovereignty: The One he advances to Dignities, and Places of
the greatest Trust; and the Other he enobles with his own Royal Effigies; and
as an Instrument of all Commerce and Traffic, he makes it countervail whatever
the World produces. If the Government would be pleased to advance the Price of
our own Native Corn, the business would be done in a moment, and all things
reduced to the most flourishing Condition that either We or our Forefathers
were wont to glory of. If Wheat might not be sold under Two and thirty
Shillings a Quarter, nor Barley under eighteen, immediately our Lands, Farms,
Farmers, Landlords, Noblemen, and so to the upmost Rounds of all Orders, the
King himself, would be by one Fourth-part at least Richer than now they are.

And to prevent all Objection, let the Nation be cast into Three Ranks of Men;
that is to say, The Noble, the Middle, and the Lowest sort: No man can suppose,
that those of the highest Order can dislike the Design, but rather infinitely
desire and abet it, as being all Landlords; As for the Middle sort, most of
them are Farmers themselves, or such as have a great dependence upon them: so
that when that day comes, they will doubtless keep it as a Jubilee to all
Generations: And for the Lowest, they are such by Age and Infirmity, or some
other unseen Misfortune; and for these, the Laws and Christian Charity has
provided: But for the Lazy and the Spendthrift, their Objections will best be
answered at the House of Correction.

Now, if any morose man shall hastily cry out, That this Design is not
practicable, because without a Precedent, and so with one froward Negative be
their Own and their Countries Enemy so far; let them know they are mistaken, as
not understanding the True Nature and Power of Sovereignty. What will they say,
when they hear or read, That the Roman Senate, to ease the public Necessity,
by a Decree, made the Half-pound of Copper as much worth as the Pound; and a
while after, the Quarter, and at last the Ounce, was valued as high as the
Pound was at the first; and this applauded and consented to by the Tribunes?
What shall we say of the Persian Sophy, who by virtue of his Sovereignty,
annually sets the Price upon his Pearl, being the product, not of a Whale, or
of a Leviathan; but bred and born in the Belly and Cottage of an Oister? Can
the Chinese so mightily magnify his Thee, or the Japonian his Cha, of shrubby
offspring; the latter of which, if Tulpius was not misinformed, has been sold
for a Hundred pounds the pound? Who knows not how great an estimate the French
King puts upon his Salt Pits, and how much his Lillies did once flourish upon
it, even to a fault? Do we not see Stones and Shells made daily the Ornament
and Companion of Princes, not for any intrinsic value of their own; but only
by the Indulgence of our Fancies, Natura Lapides fecit, Opinio Gemmas? Shall
such things as these, made more for Delight than Necessity, and which the World
could spare, Salt only excepted; Shall such little gay things weigh down our
Gold and Silver, and sit so high in our opinions; And shall Bread, which is the
staff of our lives, and the happy product of our Fields, be so generally
undervalued? Shall Bread, which is obtained every year by the indefatigable
Industry and Sweat (it may be) of Millions of our people? Shall Bread, which
indeed this year lies under the Clods, but the next runs through all our Veins,
and is turned into our very selves? Shall Bread, which we daily pray for twice,
and sometimes thrice in an Hour, before we have it, and when enjoyed, shall we
put so mean a price upon it, only because Heaven is pleased to give it us with
both hands? Certainly, besides the impolicy of it, there seems to be
ingratitude and irreligion in the Case. These few things therefore are humbly
propounded to our Wise and Renowned Superiors.

1. Let it be considered what was truly said of old, Res quaelibet tantum valet
quantum vendi potest, tho the use and goodness of many things are known by a
Mark or Signature impressed upon them by Nature; yet nothing is born or
produced with its price engraven upon it, but is left to the determination of
Mankind, to whose delight and necessity they are all subservient. Were all
England set to Sale (which God forbid) what measures would the Purchaser take,
before he would strike the Bargain? Doubtless he would inquire into the
fertility of the Soil, the nature of the Product; but most of all, what profit
he could make of it. Tho the Globe were never so rich, and the growth of it
never so good, yet profit still is the Pole Star he steers by, when he knows
that a good Market is that which blesses all the Territory round about it. If
all the Corn of England be cheap, the Land that bore it will be so too; and
then what shall we think of those Landlords, but as Men contemptible and
crest-fallen, when we know that two lean Premises can never make a fat
Conclusion?

2. Let England be considered as one great Farm, whose main concernment lies in
Tillage, which will manifestly appear; 1st, Because all the Pasture and Marsh
lands, all the Heath, and Wood lands, bear no proportion to the Arable Land of
England. And 2dly, because Husbandry employs more Hands than any Calling
whatsoever, and it may be as many as all the Callings in England put together.
Now it is but reasonable that that which is the greater part of the Country,
and which keeps the greater part of the Nation employed, should be kept up in
its full value and reputation. From hence it will easily appear, how great an
esteem we ought to have of the Husbandmen of England; the rather, when we call
to mind, how that among the Egyptians of old, it was accounted a capital Crime
to kill a Plowing Ox; and the reason is given, because he is Socius Coloni, the
Husbandman's Companion in the Culture of the Earth. According to the testimony
of the Ancients, England was always esteemed a rich Storehouse and Treasury of
Corn: Zozimus calls it, Occidentalis Imperii quasi horreum and Cellam
penuariam, The Granary of the Western-Empire, and whence Eight hundred Ship
loads of Corn were annually transported to Germany, to nourish the
Frontier-Soldiers; and long before that, in the Judgment of Orpheus, it was
esteemed for its fertility of all sorts of Grain, the proper Seat and Mansion
of Ceres her self. And if so many Hundred years ago, this Island was so famous
for its plenty and fruitfulness, What may we now think of it, when the Art of
Husbandry is so much emproved, and so many Woods and places of pleasure and
divertisement removed to give place to the Plow? Now after all this, that so
much Art, and so many Experiments have successfully been made, it will be an
infinite discouragement to the most industrious, and far more numerous part of
the Nation, if some proportionable reward and price might not be allowed in so
great a concernment, in which so much Art, Cost, Labor and Necessity, do all
jointly conspire.

3. Might this Proposal be accepted, and effectually prosecuted, it would
undoubtedly prevent one great Mischief, which if common report be true, is
practiced, especially in the City of London, which is, that Brewers, Bakers,
and others, do combine together, concerning what Price they please; so that
when the honest Countryman has brought up his Corn to the City, the Market
immediately falls upon him, who partly through Necessity, and partly for the
great Charge and Trouble of carrying it back again, he is forced to sell it at
what Price so ever they please to give him; nay, many times, at a lower Rate
than he might have had at home among his Neighbors. Whence it is, That a few
men in Cities and Towns, are daily seen to grow abundantly Rich; and in the
mean time, by such illegal Combinations, multitudes of men in all the Counties
of England, grow most miserably poor. Certainly great pity it is, to see a few
men, that live in soft ease and delicacy, by a few crafty Tricks, to acquire
vast Estates in a few years, whilst Thousands of honest and working men, who
perhaps after 40 or 50 years hard Labor and Care, do many times wish for a
Grave, because they are in danger of a Prison.

4. If it were possible that the Opinion of every individual Man of the Nation,
could be taken, it is very probable, that a hundred would be in favor of this
design, for one that should appear against it; because all that have Land, and
use Land, would be for it; most of the Traders and Shop keepers would be no
less, as having Commerce with both those, as easily foreseeing how their Trade
would quicken upon it; so that of necessity the Dissenters must doubtless be
infinitely far less in Number and Quality, than the former. Now then, Whether
it be better Policy, and more of Justice, to gratify the most and best part of
the Nation, than the fewest and meanest, will easily be determined.

5. The Courage and Fortitude of a Nation, usually bears proportion with the
Wealth of it; the Poor and the Slave are not sensible of the shame of
Cowardice; and our wise Rawleigh tells us, The Body of our Victorious Armies
was made up of the free Yeomen of England, and their Sons: We are a Nation that
have been, and still are happy, even to envy, so long as Plenty and Wealth,
like Castor and Pollux, shall be undivided: We are not like the Nomades of old,
who were contented with Skins and Mares-milk; but a Nation ranged into several
Orders and Scales of men. Honor must be supported by large Fortunes: And our
Annals tell us what great things our Ancestors have done in the World, to whose
Memory we are indebted to do the same, when occasions are offered; and all this
presupposes a proportion of Wealth, which is impossible, unless the Credit of
Land be maintained, which is our common Nurse, as well as Mother, and by which
the King Himself is supplied.

Last of all, Such an Expedient as this, will retrieve the old and famous
Hospitality of England; the Nobles, Gentry, Farmers, and Tradesmen, with the
ingenious Artificers, by a most happy and concatenated Interest, like the great
Intelligences, will keep this our English Orb in a most Natural and Thriving
Motion, when Money, like the healthful Blood in our Veins, shall still
circulate by a just and happy Distribution. The Landlord shall be hospitable,
because his Tenant is solvent; and the Tenant will be so, because his Landlord
is Noble, and Bountiful to his Neighbors; City and Country shall friendilly
conspire by mutual Commerce, and the whole Nation with one joint Acclamation,
shall Cry out, God and the King: God, that gives the Crop, and the King the
Price.

God save the King and Parliament of England.

So Prays, The Husbandman's Advocate.

LICENSED April 5. 1690. J. F.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.


