To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of (...)
SHOWS,
THat We Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, having all along
behaved our Selves with an humble and modest Patience and Submission, amongst
the most Eminent Dangers, and most signal disappointments; Can no longer be
silent without rendering our Selves infamous to posterity, as Persons abandoning
our own Safety, wanting Courage to defend Your Majesty's Life, Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, and Love for our Country.

And whereas by the Known Laws of this Realm (which Your Majesty has obliged
Your Self by Your Coronation Oath to observe) Your Majesty is to use the Advice
of Your great Council, the Parliament; for Redressing Grievances, and providing
extraordinary Remedy against unusual and Eminent Dangers. And whereas, Your
Majesty was Graciously pleased to the Infinite Joy of Your whole Kingdom, on
the 20th. day of April last, to Declare to Your Parliament, That it was your
Resolution to Consult with, and be Advised by Parliaments, in all Your
Majesty's Weighty and Important Affairs.

And whereas there never was any Affair so Weighty, and so Important as the
Preservation of Your Sacred Person and Kingdom, from the present Plots,
Influences, Villainous Designs, and Bloody Conspiracies of the Papists at Home
in Conjunction with their Adherents abroad, to which they are chiefly
Encouraged by [the Hopes of a Popish Successor, and] the Absence of
Parliaments, by whom alone the Principal Conspirators can be brought to Justice.

And whereas we have been awakened to a greater sense of our Danger, and of the
nearness of our Destruction, as well by the Consideration of the Terror and
Amazement of all Your Majesty's Subjects, during Your Majesty's sudden and
violent Sickness, from which to their Infinite joy, and by the great Goodness
of God you are so happily Recovered, as also by observing the Insolence of the
Papists to increase continually, and that they still pursue their Accursed
Designs, by New and more detestable methods of Endeavoring to Corrupt Your
Majesty's Evidence, and suborning Witnesses to accuse many Great and Innocent
Protestants of Pretended Treasons, (thereby the better to Conceal and Execute
their own) whereby no man's Life or Estate can be secure.

We do therefore Most Humbly Beseech Your Majesty, To the end that the
aforesaid Hellish Conspiracies may be thoroughly Examined, and Justice
Effectually done upon the Conspirators, and sufficient and adequate Provisions
may be made for securing Your Majesty's Royal Person, The Protestant Religion,
The Ancient well-Establisht Government of this Kingdom, and all Your Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, That the present Parliament Prorogued to the 26th. of
January next, may Meet and continue to Sit till they have accomplished those
Great Ends, which will render Your Majesty the Most Beloved of Princes, will
make Your Name Glorious to Posterity, and Your Subjects most Happy under Your
Reign.

And Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, will cheerfully with their
Lives and Fortunes, Defend Your Majesty's Person and Government, and as in Duty
bound will pray For and rejoice In Your Long and Prosperous Reign.

