To the HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.
The Humble Petition of Robert Tayloe, Joseph Emerson, John Sawbridge and
Edward Pearce, on the behalf of themselves and other Poor Mariners, to the
Number of Five hundred and upwards, who served the East India Company in their
late Wars against the Great Mogul, and other Heathen Princes: And on the behalf
of the Widows and Orphans of other Mariners to the like Number, that Perished
in the said Wars.

SHOWS,
THAT the said Company, in the Years 1683, 1684, 1685 and 1686. entered your
Petitioners and others, on Board several of their Ships, viz. in the Ships
called The Charles the Second, the Beauford, the Caesar, the Rochester, and
other their Ships, to make direct Voyages to and from the East Indies, at very
low Wages and Sallaries, in a Merchant-like way (there being then no Wars
betwixt this Crown and any other Princes or State in the World, nor did your
Petitioners apprehend any War was like to be between this Crown and any the
said Princes.

That in some short time after your Petitioners Arrival in the Indies, the said
Companies Agents and Governors there, engaged their said Ships in an Actual War
against the said Great Mogul, and other Heathen Princes; and by excessive
Tortures, as Nailing their Hands to the Mainmast, Whipping, and washing their
Wounds in Brine, and other great Torments, the Commanders of the said Ships
compelled your Petitioners, against their Wills, and contrary to the Statute
made 5 Eliz. chap. 5. to serve in the said Companies Wars, against the said
Heathen Princes, upon their Land, in Parts very remote from any Sea, and to
make Depredations without any Just Cause (as your Petitioners could understand)
and Robbing the Subjects of the said Heathen Princes to a very great Value.

That the said Commanders, Agents and Governors, finding the said Ill Usage of
your Petitioners not to take its full Effect according to their Expectation,
the said Governors caused an Order to be made in their Court of Admiralty held
in the said Indies, that your Petitioners should have (over and besides their
low Wages) a Sixth part of all Prizes, to be divided amongst them, and the same
Order to be published on some of the said Ships, and to be affixed to the
Main-masts of the same Ships, to make the same more public, and to encourage
your Petitioners to Fight for them; which your Petitioners accordingly did.
That during the said War, there was taken, by your Petitioners, in Prizes, to
the value of 1500000 l. and upwards, which is proved in the Court of Exchequer,
in a Suit there brought, and now depending, for their Majesty's Tenths of the
said Prizes, of which 260000 l. belongs to your Petitioners for their Sixth
part, due to them not only by Contract, as aforesaid, but Laws of Nations; and
so by the said Company confessed, in their Answer in the said Court in the said
Suit, and accordingly have paid some Mariners their Proportions.

That whilst your Petitioners were in the Indies, your Petitioners were
necessitated to accept from the said Commanders and Agents, Dollers at 9 s. a
piece, the prime Cost in England was not above 4 s. 6 d. and Rack at 12 s. per
Gallon, the prime Cost not above 9 d. per Gallon, and Brandy at 18 s. per
Gallon, by which means all your Petitioners Wages, and more, was expended, and
many Mariners, more than by the said Wars, perished for want of such
Commodities.

That your Petitioners have applied themselves from time to time to the said
Company for the said Share, or what should appear due to them, upon a Just
Dividend thereof to be made, and for their Nonperformance thereof, your
Petitioners, the last Sessions of Parliament, were about to Address themselves
to this Honorable House for Relief therein; whereupon a worthy Member of his
Honorable House, then Governor of the said Company, having notice, promised
your Petitioners Satisfaction if your Petitioners would forbear their said
Address; which Promise your Petitioners relying upon, did accordingly forbear,
but hitherto cannot get any manner of Satisfaction, and in want thereof, are
grown so Necessitous, that many are forced to be relieved by their respective
Parishes wherein they respectively live.

And forasmuch as this Honorable House has ordered the said Company to bring
in their Books, and a State of their Debts and Credits; your said Poor
Petitioners do humbly Hope and Pray, that this Honorable House will take
notice, that your Petitioners may have Credit upon the said Companies Books for
the said Sum so due and owing to your Petitioners, in order that they may have
Satisfaction for the same, for that the said Prizes have been converted to the
Use and Benefit of the said Company; And to afford such further Relief to your
Petitioners, as to this Honorable House shall seem fit.

And your Petitioners (as in Duty bound) shall ever Pray, etc.

