TO THE KING'S MOST Excellent Majesty.
THE Humble Address of diverse of the Gentry, Merchants and others, Your
Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, Inhabiting in Boston, Charlestown
and Places adjacent, within Your Majesty's Territory and Dominion of
New England, in America.
In Must Humble manner Shows.
That many of us in our late Humble Address, prostrated our selves at Your
Royal Feet, and should with all Silence and Humility have waited Your Royal
Will and Pleasure, did not Your Majesty's Interest and our peace and safety at
this day, more urgently enforce us to spread before Your Sacred Majesty, the
deplorable Estate and Condition of this Your Territory and Dominion. The late
Revolution dividing the said Territory into ten Parts or Colonies, viz.
Pemaquid, Province of Main, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Plymouth, Rhoad-Iland,
King's Province, Connections, New York, and East and West Jersyes, thereby much
debilitating each others, and giving great advantages to our Enemies, the
French and Indians; and many hundreds of Your Majesty's Subjects Murdered and
Captivated: Pemaquid, all the Province of Main, save three Towns, and
Scenecdeka in the Colony of New York, the Frontier Town of Canada and Inlet to
New England, being sinco destroyed: Some Depredations made upon New Hampshire
and the Massachusetts, and all other the out-Towns in imminent danger, and Your
Majesty's poor Subjects there in great Distresses and Fears, being exposed to
the Rapine and Cruelty of the Enemy, whenever attack by them.

That an Expediton was made by some of Your Majesty's Subjects in the
Massachusetts Colony against the French at Port Royal, who surrendered
themselves upon Articles; but no care taken to preserve the same for Your
Majesty's service, little Annoyance given to the Enemy by that, or any other
Enterprise hitherto engaged in.

That an Agreement was made by those who pretend to Govern Your Majesty's said
Colonies, to make an Attaque upon the French at Canada. To which End New- York
and Connecticut Colonies were to r^ise and send by Land of the English and five
Nations of the Indians 2000 Men And Your Majesty's Colonies of the Massachusetts
and Plymouth were to Equip a Navy by Sea o^ 32 Sail, and 2200 Soldiers and
Mariners, which (without Your Royal Commission or Order) was accordingly done.
But the Land forces failed of their performance; and the Navy sent to Quebeck
being defeated, the whole Design was frustrated, to the almost Ruin and
Destruction of Your Majesty's Subjects here, being set forth at a vast Expense,
which beside the former heavy Taxes, will leave, even the Massachusetts Colony
(as we Conjecture) in further Arrears of at least 50000 l. Many of Your poor
Subjects also being destroyed by the Enemy, and Dead by Distempers and
Diseases, happening among them in the said Expedition.

That by Reason of the want of Government settled by Your Majesty, the
Divisions and Strifes at New- York, through the Arbitrary Impositions and
Exorbitant proceedings of the pretended Governor there, are Risen to such a
Height, that Your Subjects in that Colony have lately taken up Arms one against
another, and some Blood is already spilt; which will further weaken Your
Majesty's poor Subjects, and greatly encourage the Enemy, whose Return upon us
by Land, and Men of War from France by Sea in the Spring, we have great Reason
to fear: Whom to Resist, through want of Your Majesty's Government as also of
Arms and Ammunition to defend our selves, we shall be utterly incapacitated for.

DREAD SOVEREIGN, We Your poor, Loyal, Distressed Subjects therefore humbly
supplicate Your Royal favor to be Extended toward us, in Commiserating our
Lamentable Estate, and that You will be graciously pleased to take us into Your
immediate Care and Protection, and send us such speedy Relief and Assistance as
in Your Princely Wisdom shall seem most meet, to save us and ours, together
with Your Majesty's Interest in these Parts from Total Ruin:

And your most obedient and Loyal Subjects, as in all Duty bound, will ever
pray for Your Majesty's, long and prosperous Reign, Thom. Graffort. P. Bowden
Dav. Waterhouse. Laur. Hammond. Nath. Dows. Nath. Rand. John Cusler, Jun. Tim.
Gutler. Richard Sprague. Fr. Littelfild. John Hammond. John Nelson. David
Jeffries. Benj. Mountfort Samuel Phillips. Henry Mountfort. Thom. Edwards
Edward Gouge. Fra. Foxcroft. James Lloyd. Tho. Newton. Dan. Allen. Sam. Walker.
Nich. Manning Giles Dyer. Geo. Rasin. Jo. Herb. Coward. Natt. Shannon. Nicho.
Tipp^t. John Soames. Thomas Greaves. Nico. Paige. Edward Shippen. Edward
Palms. (...) ^ultis aliis.


Charlestown New- England, November the 22d. 1690. Worthy SIR,
THE sorrowful Tidings of your Caption by the French, soon came to us. But long
was it ere we received the Reviving News of your Health and Liberty, which we
are desirous to believe is true, tho we cannot yet be so happy as to receive
the Confirmation of under your own hand; but with great Longing do wait for.

We are still wading in the Mire of the Old Rebellion, long looking for
Deliverance, but (as yet) it comes not, and that which adds to our Misery, we
are kept in so great a degree of Ignorance, (for want of certain Intelligence)
o^ our Affairs at White Hall, that we have nothing to bear up our Spirits from
sinking, but the Improvement of our Reason upon the Justice of the Cause we have
appeared for and the Justice of our Prince upon whom(under God) we depend. This
has helped us to outface many a Brunt, and to despise many Reproaches and
Columnies cast upon us by those, whose profession soars High so that Religion,
which had they well Learned the practick part thereof, would better instruct
them. Yet, though we remain ignorant of our Affairs there, you are acquainted
with the progress of Affairs here, which gives us some hopes that His Majesty
will not long withold that so necessary, and (by all good Subjects) so much
desired Settlement of Government over this people, in such methods as may most
Conduce to His service, and the prosperity of His Loyal Subjects in this Land,
the want of which a few Months longer, I fear (if God wonderfully prevent not)
will leave us to almost utter Ruin. For since the Port Royal design (whereby
great Debts were Crontracted, and no service to the King of Country, or
Annoyance to the Enemy considerable, was attained.) A grand expedition to
Quebeck in Canada has been undertaken of 32. Sail of Vessels, and 2200.
Soldiers and Mariners, raised by the Massachusetts and Plymouth Colonies, who
set sail from Nantasket the 9th. day of August, under Sir William Phipps
General in expectation of a Land Army to consist of 2000. Men, to be raised in
Connecticut, New York and the five Nations of the Western Indians, to advance
for Mount-Royal, under Major General Fits-John Winthrop. But the methods
proposed for forming the Land Army sailing, (few of the Indians, of whom the
Army were Principally to consist, appearing) after the Fleet was gone, the
whole strength of the Enemy is supposed to be drawn down to Quebeck (for it is
reported by Captain Silvanus Davis, as I hear (who was a Captive there, and now
redeemed) that they were near 4000, strong so that after almost Nine weeks
passage. Landing their Soldiers (of whom not above 1200. were in health or
capacity to go on shore) and Slinging some shot into the Town, they were forced
to make a dishonorable Retreat, some slain in the Attempt, many wounded,
leaving five Field pieces on shore in the Enemies hands (the Redemption of near
a score of Captives, in exchange for some French they took in their Voyage,
being the greatest good attained by this Expedition.) In there Return, they
were so dispersed and endangered by Tempestuous weather, that no further
Exploits could be performed; Many hundreds sick and dead of the small Pox,
Fevers and Fluxes; one Vessel cast away and about 12 men drowned, the whole
Fleet not yet returned: The charge of this Expedition is very great; some
observing men judge, that this Colony cannot be less in Arrears than 50000 l.
It Is most evident that the hand of God has been against them in this and almost
all other their Undertakings, which I fear is too too little taken Notice of.
And now, what shall we do? The Flower of the Country was drawn off in this
design, very many of whom are dead and sick, all men Discouraged, the Enemy
Encouraged and Enraged, from whom we may reasonably expect Assaults as soon as
the season will permit, besides Ships of War upon our Coast in the Spring: To
Cry, Help on King! is a Crime almost unpardonable, except it be for our old
Charter Government. Besides, what may His Majesty say? Why you cannot have any
need of my help, who have Boasted of your being Able to make me Emperor of
America; You found no need of my Orders or Assistance to Attack the King of
France's Territories; You need no settlement of Government by Charter, or
otherwise from Me, who can take it up of your selves, and proceed to Election
without, yea, contrary to my Orders? etc.

Oh miserable deluded people! We have provoked God, who alone can save us; and
our King, who under God, can only be our Intrumental Savior, I fear may be
provoked to leave us helpless and succourless, if God overruled not wonderfully
to prevent it. But here are many good Christian Loyal Subjects, who are long
looking, waiting and praying that God will so Incline the King's heart toward
us, as not to leave us to Ruin one another, for want of a Settlement of such
methods of Government over us by His Royal Authority, as shall most Conduce to
His service and our good, nor leave us to become a Prey to Antichristian and
Pagan Enemies.

To which end an Address is now drawn to be sent by this Vessel in the Name of
some Gentlemen, Merchants and others, wherein the deplorable Condition of the
Country is spread before Him, and His Compassion and Protection craved; (a Copy
whereof I here inelos'd) and doubt not of your readiness to do your part for
the promoting the same.

The eyes of the people generally begin to be opened, so as, I question not,
but the King's Government will be very acceptable to most, who yet, through
Ignorance of Law, and how our Affairs rule at home, dare not speak out:
Besides, some Government here must be, and a bad one, yea, a Usurped one (say
they) is better then none.

Oh how welcome would a true Information of things be to us, and a word or two
of some Advice, how to Govern our selves under our great Temptations and
Confusions till His Majesty has determined His Royal Pleasure concerning us.

On October the 17th. last Mr. Jos. Lynde and Mr. Sam. Hayman, both of our
Town, Accosted me with a Paper, which they called an Order from their General
Court, the Copy whereof please to take as follows.

February the 18th. 1690. At the General Court of the Massachusetts Colonie in
Charlestown.
It is Ordered by this Court that Capt. Laur. Hammon deliver to the Order of
the County Court for Middle. the Records of that County (that is to say) All
Books and Files by him formerly Received from Mr. Danforth sometime Recorder of
that County: As also all other Books of Record and Files belonging unto the
said County in his Custody.

Copy Ex. Isa. Addington Secre.

At a County Court held at Cambridge, October the 8th. 1690.
Captain Joseph Lynde and Captain Samuel Hayman are Requested and Empowered by
the Court to Receive the County Records as above, from Captain Laur. Hammon. As
Attests

Tho. Danforth Dep. Gover.

After a Perusal of the said Paper, I demanded a Copy of it, which they denied
me, till I had given my Answer, which I delivered them in writing under my
hand, in these following words. viz.

I am Commissioned by the Crown of England to be Clerk of the Peace, General
Quarter Sessions, and Inferior Court of Common Pleas within this County of
Middle. and to take into my Custody and Charge all public Records and Writings
belonging to the Courts of the said County, and them faithfully to keep and
secure: To which I have been likewise sworn. In Obedience therefore to which
Commission, and in Conscience of my Oath, I am bound to Keep and Secure the
said Records and Writings (as much as in me lies) which have been so delivered
unto me and hitherto by me faithfully kept, until Orders from the said Crown
shall otherwise dispose of them, which when produced, I am ready to Obey.

L. H.

Since which I have heard no more from them. Orders from their General Court
for Rates, have been at several times as fol. viz. 7^.10.2. and now (as its
said) 20. I have not heard of any Distraint for Payment but in Boston, and upon
one Person in this Town, though I know diverse refuse to pay. What methods will
now be taken to still the Clamours of those (or their Relations) who were in
the late unhappy Expedition, are yet unknown. It Is certain, most of the Seamen
were Impressed to that service, and so as of the Landmen, and most of them
threatened, if they Listed not Voluntarily they should be pressed; so that partly
through fear of Violence used with them, and partly great Expectations of success
and much plunder, which was trumpeted about in the Country by some busy Agents;
(and some Clergymen in Boston and some other places Crying Victory, Victory
over Antichrist in their Pulpits etc.) the Poor people were enticed and drawn
in to their own and the Countries (almost) utter Ruin. Those who, in the time
of their Preparations, did soberly discourse their fears of the Imprudence (at
least) of this design, and the Rum they had a prospect of thereby, were called
King James's men, Friends to French and Papists, Enemies to the Country etc.
for so doing. And now the event has Evidenced those fears not to have been
groundless, they censure us (most uncharitably) as rejoicing at the General
Calamity; which God knows, many of us mourn for, and Lament the Violent,
Headstrong and Exorbitant Courses of those who have driven on these and many
other designs against Law and Reason. But I forbear;

It Is time to conclude, which I shall do with Reciting one Passage more (which
possibly may come to your knowledge from Virginia) of the strange Actions of
our present Rulers, which is this.

In August last, came a Gentleman from Virginia by Land, with diverse Letters,
especially from the Lieut. Gover. Nicholson there, to sundry Gentlemen in
Boston, who continued in Town (as I Remember) about a fortnight, and being
ready to Return, received of Diverse Persons Answers to the Letter, sent them,
etc. But when ready to depart, his Port-Mantua wherein his Letters were, was
seized by Order, and carried before the Council (his Person was likewise seized
and for some time detained; the Port-Mantua being Locked, and the Owner refusing
to deliver the Key, they broke it open, took out the Letters, and opened them,
Read them; detaining what Letters they pleased, and rest^oring what they
pleased to the Messenger, who the next day was dismis^^^. Several Letters they
did detain, directed to Gover. Nicholson, and have ^de the Contents of men's
private Letters matter of public Discourse; among which was a Letter written
by the same Gentleman by me, ( John Cutler Jun. signing with me) wherein I
briefly recited the Heads of our late Sufferings, the Causes thereof, and the
Consequences; And enclosed a List of the Names of most of the Officers and
Ships gone for Canada. This was much discoursed of to our great Condemnation;
though they never proceeded so much as to send for us. But the great pretense for
opening these Letters was, A plot, Oh! a Horrid plot, viz. That it was Purposed
and Resolved between King William's Gover. of Virginia, and the Malignant
party, the Tory's in Boston, Charlestown, etc. that the said Gover. (now in our
week Estate, when our strength was gone) should come and seize upon the
Government here, and so make us all greater slaves than we are now (which truly
would be no easy matter) if not to deliver us up to the French; And was not
this ground sufficient, and answerable to all the World, think you, to have
broken open and detained at pleasure, even the Letters of the King Himself
under the like pretense? And although that would have been a Crime of a Higher
degree; yet thus to treat the Kings Gover. is a Crime of the same kind, and is
an Indignity ofter'd to the Kings Person (in my weak Opinion) Thus Sir you have
a Scheme of this matter, and a Confused Account of many other things, which
your Wisdom will (I hope) gather sense so far out of, as to understand them by.

I fear I have tired your Patience, and crave your Pardon, with my Humble
service I remain

Worthy Sir, Your Obliged Humble Servant. L. H.
The French at Quebeck have shown great Humanity to their English Captives, (as
the Captives redeemed do acknowledge) several of whom they Ransomed out of the
barbarous hands of the Indians, with their money, that they might be generously
accommodated.

The Inducements to this Canada Expedition (were as we may well con^^^er.) a
belief of an easy Conquest, abundance of Treasure to be gotten, and a Name and
Fame in the world, (especially at White Hall) for our great Valor and high
Achievements, and our zeal against Antichrist (all under a pretense of
Necessity, for our own Preservation; that if we did not carry the War thither,
they would bring it into our own Bowels) All pla^sible and encouraging
Arguments to unthinking minds. But if it be inquired, by what Order, Commission
or Authority this Design was prosecuted? The answer must be, none (...) They
Issued Orders for seizing of Shipping, Provisions, (...) Impressing of men,
granted Commissions to Officers, Superior and I^^eriour, and all in Their
Majesty's Names, without any Order or Commission, from Their Majesty's, either
to Authorize their so doing or to Constitute them a Government in Fact or Name
as they assume to themselves. And the truth is, had they dealt plainly and
aboveboard, according to their Principles, they should have Issued out all
their Warrants, and granted all their Commissions in the Name of the People
upon whom they depend for their Authority (such as it is,) and not have used
(or rather abused) Their Majesty's Names, while (in Fact) they deny Their
Authority: Then might the people have been disabus'd, some of whom, to my
knowledge, have Confidently believed, that nothing has been done, but by the
King's Command. But I hope all these Mists of Confusion and Darkness will soon
be scattered by the clear Sunshine of the King's Authority here speedily to be
settled; The hastening of which, for the preserving the Interest of the Crown
and the Refreshing the Spirits of all Their Majesty's Loyal Subjects in these
parts, is the longing desire, and hearty prayer of;

Worthy Sir, Your Humble Servant, L. H.



Licensed April the 28th. 1691.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills in Black-Fryars 1691.


