To the Right Worshipful Sir RICHARD HEART, Knight, And THOMAS EARL, Esquire.
Now chosen Representatives in Parliament for this City of Bristol.
WE, Citizens and Freeholders of this City, hold our Selves obliged to return
You our hearty Thanks for Your Exemplary Loyalty to the King and the Present
establishment in the Church and State, notwithstanding all the Designs here, or
elsewhere, to vilisie or subvert them, under the specious Pretenses of
Arbitrary Power and Popery; hoping you will act with all expressions of Duty
and Allegiance to the King, of whose good Affections to his People and
Established Religion we have no doubt, though (...) men have endeavored to
suggest other Opinions to his Subjects.

And as You are our Representatives, we lay before you these Severals.

First, That some expedient By-Law be Endeavored, to punish such as shall
insinuate into the People any designs in our King or Government, to set up
Arbitrary Power, or shall Calumniate the prosessed Sons of the Church of
England (His Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects) as Papists, and Men of
Arbitrary Principles.

Secondly, That no Laws be Repealed, whereby the Church or State may be less
secured against their Enemies; But such New Laws may be added to those now in
force, that may Effectually defend them from the Horrid and Hellish Plots of
the Papists: And from a Second Ruin and Desolation, by the underhand
Contrivances, and restless Endeavors, of Ambitious and Fanatical Parties.

Thirdly, That You preserve the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Property of
the Subjects, that the King, and his Successors, may be assured of our Duty and
Allegiance; and we receive from them Mercy and Justice. Then will God bless us,
whilst we serve Him and his Anointed, and Righteousness and Peace shall kiss
each other.

Fourthly, That You endeavor to preserve Us from Illegal Imprisonments and
exactions of Fees by our Fellow Subjects, least we be enslaved under Arbitrary
Power (as in the late Rebellion) contrary to Magna Charta, and other good Laws:
But if any shall offend, let them be punished in such sort as the Laws direct.

Fifthly, That the King be supplied with Money, to secure Us from, the Power of
France at Land and Sea; That what Alliances the King has, or shall make for
the defense of Europe and the Protestant Religion, may be performed, and our
Merchants encouraged to send forth those large Adventures they are inclined
unto, could they be secured by good Fleets in the Four Seas, and remoter Parts;
They being at present apprehensive the French may possess their Estates (at
pleasure) at Sea, as he does those of the Subjects of the Empire on Land; from
whence comes a diminution of Trade in the Kingdom.

In Endeavoring these Particulars, You will truly represent Us.


