SHORT STRICTURES OR ANIMADVERSIONS On so much of Mr Croftons [Fastning St
Peter's Bonds] As concern the REASONS OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD Concerning the
Covenant.

By Tho. Tomkins Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of All Souls Coll. in Oxon.

LONDON: Printed by E. C. for A Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1661.

To the Reverend JOHN MEREDITH Doctor of Divinity, and Warden of All Souls
College in Oxford.
Honored Sir,
BEfore I presume to beg your Patronage, I must bespeak your Pardon. You might
indeed justly wonder, how I should think my self able to judge what were
material in this weighty Controversy; did I not live in an age of so much
Light, that there are two things we are all able to do: viz. to Reform a
Church, and Model a State. There is a Fault (I must confess) in Our (as in All)
Governments, which as some men are resolved never to Pardon, so I have no hope
ever to see mended, viz. That all are not uppermost.

There is an Objection will be made against this Innocent Treatise, that it is
wrote against Conscientious men. I cannot deny but that the concerned Gentlemen
are admirably furnished with Consciences for every occasion. To prevent this
Cavil, my appeal is to You who know what conscience is; having suffered so much
to preserve a good one: A trial, those Gentlemen were never very forward to
undergo, nor (if my Augury fail me not) ever mean to be. That sacred thing (or
what was mistaken for it, or at least called by that Name) has done strange
things in this Nation, which it highly concerns some to enquire whether it will
justify. We read in Scripture of Obeying for conscience; but not one word of
Rebelling for it. And yet men can do it, and at the same time make the written
Word the rule of their Action. It first distinguished between the Kings Person
and His Power, and next between his head and his shoulders. And truly, they who
once divide the Kings Person and Power are concerned that they never unite
again.

Because men do daily disobey Laws upon the score of conscience, and for that
reason take themselves, and are taken by others, for Innocent; I shall beg your
leave to ask this Question, Whether following Conscience is a sufficient Plea
to quit us from sin, even where it is so indeed? (To say nothing of those
Universal Pretenders, Artifice and Melancholy.) The Scripture makes mention of
seared Consciences, reprobate minds, which sure are no great perfections; and
of strong delusions, which though they be new lights are but flashes of
hellfire. And St. Paul reckons himself the greatest of sinners, for what he
did out of the dictates of conscience [ I my self thought verily that I ought
to do many, etc.] These are competent grounds of rendering that Tenent
suspicious.

I ask therefore briefly, Has the conscience any rule besides it self, or no?
If not; How is the written Word of God the rule of Action? If it have; Whether
it be possible for it to swerve from its Rule, or no? If not; then every man is
infallible, there can be no such thing as strong delusions, believing a lie,
etc. If it be possible for conscience to swarve from its Rule; whether its
swarving be its Innocence? For if it be not so, it is no sufficient ground for
men to conclude themselves innocent, when they disobey Authority, because it is
their conscience so to do, because the Word of God (to which Conscience as well
as other Faculties ought to be subject, and sins when it is not) prescribes
obedience to Governors in the most universal terms imaginable. I could not but
say thus much; because, [ This is our conscience] was the old non-conformists
first plea, and the latter (in name only different) Enthusiasts only plea; and
if it be a sufficient one, it must hold in all cases as well as any: because
the reason is equal in all. It may justify those many who killed the King, and
those many more who killed our Savior.

My want of years and judgment I shall not at all excuse, but urge as my
fitness for this employment; It were a disparagement to the University of
Oxford, if such an Antagonist could not be answered by one of the meanest who
can plead relation to so Renowned a Body.

The many weaknesses you will find in these papers are so many evidences that I
came to Oxford in times of Reformation, when Learning was counted little less
then an enemy to Grace, as indeed it was to what they called so.

Our Imperfections (Honored Sir) we blush not to discover to you whose goodness
will not see them but only to remove them: whose business is, not so much to
preside, in a College, as to reform it; to be our Warden, as Example. Like the
Sun who when he rules the world, enlightens it too, when he shines he
cherishes; so that its most spendid Majesty is but Love in all its glory: So
your Commands are so many boons, and injunctions endearments: so that you do
not rule but assist and oblige us; and have now abundantly satisfied the
Obligation the Founder laid upon you of promoting the good of the College to
your uttermost, by vouchsafing to take us into your particular care. So that
how mean soever this Present is, from your self I am assured to learn how, in
time to come, I may make a better: And in the mean time glory that I can
account my self,

Honored Sir, Your most devoted and obliged Servant, THO. TOMKINS.
All Souls Coll. Oxon Sept. 26.
To the Reader.
READER,
I Very well foresee, that many (who are conscious to themselves, that such
things are possible) will laugh and scorn at the Author of this Treatise, as
one who meant to write the sense of the Times, rather then his own. In the
beginning therefore, I bar all who have been themselves guilty of what they
only suppose to be, viz. Our late Complyers, whose consciences have been in
this sense tender, that they might be bended any way. And now, I hope, I have
prevented my most numerous and severe Accusers. But, now I think on it, I will
release them too; let them employ all their art and passion, in telling the
World, how unworthy such Proceedings (while they have been their own) are. For
why should I hinder such men from laughing at themselves? The worst all those
can say of me is, I am like them; and that were bad enough, if it were true.

This Account is civil enough for these men: I should gladly afford them
another, if I had any reason to think so well of them, that their Principles
would not fail them: if it should once happen, that they would consist with
their duty; and that their beloved Rule, Obey the present Power, whatever it be
(Blasphemously called following Providence) had not this one, and that the
only, Exception, Provided it be not the Lawful Power. And sure there is too
much Reason so to guess, when those whose Consciences scrupled nothing under an
Usurper; scruple indifferent things under their King: when Perjury, nay
Covenant Breaking, Sacrilege, and Treason, were easier in those days
swallowed; then a Ceremony in these.

My own faults, in the Performance, are so many, that I would not willingly be
obliged to answer for any more then mine own; viz. The Ill-timing, etc. But how
to assure those men (I before spoke of) of the truth of any thing I shall
assert, about my own intentions in that, or any thing else; I profess I am
utterly Ignorant: since they, out of their own experience of themselves, very
well know, that the most Solemn Oaths and Imprecations, are not sufficient
Evidences of ones sincere meaning.

But there are others, who are capable of, and therefore deserve, a better
account; who as they abhorred Time-serving in themselves, are loath to suspect
it in another: it being very hard for him who does no ill himself, to think,
without great cause, Ill of another. To them I say thus:

Whoever thinks this time unseasonable for a Treatise of this Nature, my
opinion is so perfectly the same with his, that, had it been in mine own
choice, I should not have needed to have told the World so. And this I insisted
upon in several Letters to one of that place and prudence (whose commands it
was scarce manners for me to dispute) more pressingly then many others (perhaps
the most censorious) would.

I urged that the Contest was about the Covenant, which had been already
answered by the Parliament; The only way it deserved to be considered. And to
compose such a Treatise, would be but to produce evidence against one who was
executed the week before. But this Objection does not, I confess, reach the
case so fully as I apprehended it would, before I had exactly read over Mr. Cr.
Book; because Mr. Cr. sometimes in pursuit of his Argument, oftener in running
away from it, does insert Principles no way relating to the Covenant, then as
they may be subservient to the main (though disowned) end of the Composers of
it, viz. Anarchy in Church and State, as several notions about the Kings
Prerogative, Liberty, Propriety, the Original of Government, Sacrilege,
Will Worship, the Power of the Church, Holy Days, Superstition, Scandal, etc.
Which according to his explication (who to say the truth, speaks out all) the
Covenanters were more wary, then professedly to own. Now I suppose, there is no
Reason why Errors, because they are, in a Book, wrote in defense of the
Covenant should be privileged from Confutation: this were to invest the
Covenant in the Grave, with the same Power it exercised in the Throne.

There are two Reasons (Reader) which I have prevented thee from using; which,
had they seemed sufficient to One who is better able to judge then I, or
possibly, thy self can pretend to be, thou had missed of that sport, thou
think thy self to make with them.

Which yet I cannot deny, but that there is some ground of suspicion for; when
I consider the practices of some in, and the opinions (thence drawn) others
have of, the Place I live in: For it may be thought first, That I write now
against the Covenant, upon the same score in these times, upon which I would
have wrote for it in others: Tenants as well as Cloths, changing with the
Fashion. As to this, I only say this: Of those few that do know me, many can
witness me to be innocent in this particular, even when they dare not say
themselves have been so.

But if not this, it may (perhaps) be thought, that this is a sage Contrivance
of a sneaking Scholar, who being resolved to write against some body, chose
one who durst not answer. I must confess this would have troubled me, had this
been my first attempt: It is well known, I appeared as to the civil part (and
to the Covenant, as it referred to that) when the Press was open enough, since
which, all Mr. Cr. Books on that subject, have been writ.

There was one thing more which diswaded me from, and hindered me in, the
finishing this; and that alone would have me have suppressed, now it is done;
which I to that end proposed to that Reverend Person who engaged me in it, viz.
A fear that it might displease the judicious Royalists, as being an occasion to
multiply the number of (what is already too great) Seditious Pamphlets, it
being not probable, that of those numerous Abettors of Mr. Cr. and his cause he
brags of, not one should offer to assert either. But I do assure all those
worthy persons, I received a Negative as to this too, from one, in whose
judgment they would readily acquiesce; and desired me to go on, for that the
Times did require (what sure this Book did not) an Answer to Mr. Cr. This Book,
I must confess, comes out late against the Covenant; I wish some men had more
honesty, or less countenance, that this may be the last; or if not so, That
there may never be need of other weapons, besides Pens against it. If thou will
yet be satisfied (Reader) that I was only passive in the Publishing, I am glad;
if not, I am resolved not to be sorry.

The Introduction.
EIther the Covenant is in its sense as Loyal, and in its obligation as
indispensable as it is at present thought convenient to be asserted; or, it is
not. If not; why is there such a do made about that, which if in any
circumstances of affairs, certainly in these, obliges not? But if it is; How
came it to pass, that it was totally forgot by themselves, when the Rump, or
the Cromwels appeared to be in good earnest against it. Sure I am, the very
Covenanters thrived by contrary Oaths and practices. Sure I am, that whole
party, (very, very few particulars excepted) have been such base complyers
with, nay flatterers of, every thing, but their lawful Prince; take as unworthy
conditions from an unlawful Power, as themselves would fain have imposed upon
the one only lawful one. That they have discovered hitherto no other use of
their conscience, but in scrupling at things indifferent, and that too, when it
brought along with it gain and credit. Be turned out of a Benefice of 30 l. a
year, when to be a silenced Minister was worth a 100. The instances of other
sufferers are not very numerous; nor when trial comes to be made, will, I
suppose, be. Where was their Allegiance to King Charles in Queen Richards
days? Him they courted upon these two accounts, He was an Usurper, and so
obliged to secure them in other men's estates, Qualis Rex, talis Grex. And
secondly, he was an easy fool, and so apt to be ruled by crafty Knaves. Nor
did they trouble Him with their Covenant; because they were sure to enjoy what
they intended by it, viz. other men's Estates: No matter for the Scotch
Government, when without it they can securely keep English Livings. Nor was it
of any great Concern to have this Church reformed according to their
principles, when the best endowed Churches were reformed into their possession.
He who endeavors to persuade me to an Oath, himself in cases of danger or
profit broke, takes me a Fool, and engages me to take him for a Knave.

If the Covenant be a National Obligation, obliging all, even those who took it
not, as well as those who took it, and Posterity into the bargain, (as Mr. Cr.
in the sixth Section throughout) none are more guilty than those who imposed
and asserted it, because none have acted more contrary to it, according to that
loyal sense which is now put on it. The truth is, it is penned so ambiguously,
that (like their Consciences) it might suit all times. They swear in the third
Article [ To preserve the Kings Person and Authority, etc.] By preserving the
Kings person, their practice teaches me to understand preserve, i. e. keep
safe* i. e. in custody, i. e. in Prison: As for his Authority, that was
preserved too; where, as things then stood, they could have been content it
should have been continued: That they would have preserved the Kings Authority,
I shall not deny but in whose hands let themselves speak. They told us pretty
fair at the beginning of the War, See 19 Propositions: All the Kings Privy
Council to be approved by them, take such an Oath as they pleased; so likewise
the Chancellor, Judges, the Steward, etc. all the great public Officers; so
likewise Peers, the whole Militia at their disposal, and the marriage of the
Kings Children, all who had stood for the King, to be at the mercy of the
Parliament. Their other Proposals were much at the rate of these, I therefore
pass them over all, and so I shall their Votes of Non-Addresse, with their
Declaration upon them, because shame has made them buy them all up, so that
upon ordinary enquiry they are not to be had, and themselves revoked them when
they knew not well how to help it, but were fain to make a virtue of Fear and
Spite, and call it Loyalty, at the Isle of Wight-Treaty, where the Kings Party
must be first acknowledged guilty of the blood shed in the War, in the Preface,
and accordingly treated in the Articles; the Militia, Law-making, Officers,
etc. all in them solely for twenty years, all Peers made by the King since the
Great Seal went to him, null; their Great Seal approved, etc. with much more to
be seen in the Articles: And after all this, for fear some Regalia, some shadow
of Authority should have escaped their observation, they only Voted his
Concessions a fit ground for establishing a peace, so that if they could think
of any thing else which looked like Authority, they were resolved to have it,
for the Agreement was only begun, not made.

As to the Kings Person, I do not find they can acquit themselves much better;
I very well know, that in the actual cutting off the Kings Head, and some other
attendant violences, the Army did not suffer the Presbyterian party to have the
whole share of the benefit: but I suppose that will not free them from the
whole share of the guilt; except, when two join in an unlawful design, he who
is outwitted, is presently innocent.

First, I enquire, whose Army it was? who raised them, furnished them with
opportunity (not at present to say, Principles?) Had there been no more, they
could not have been easily acquitted; for a man is responsible for the
consequents of his unwarrantable actions, especially if they are foretold, and
he will not desist: In that case he can scarce say, He did not intend those
consequences, not at all pretend he did not produce them.

In our Law, if a man in his lawful calling, does an act, though without his
intent or knowledge, by which a man is unawares to him killed, the punishment
is severe, though morally he cannot be supposed to help it: As a Mason throwing
stones or timber from the top of a House, a Man going by, by chance is killed;
but if such a Man does such an act out of his Calling, it is Death, and that
deservedly: So the two Houses, had they professed no hostility to the King,
they not being in their employment, the power of the Sword not at all being by
our Laws vested in them, nor can they make out which way they came by, or who
gave them, that Authority; whatever is the consequent of their so doing, they
are guilty of it, be it what it will: And truly it is reasonable, that they who
will usurp employment, should be obliged to see the Ills of it not to be
greater than those which before perhaps they did but fancy.

He who forces me out of the security of the Law, and by violence confines me
to another protection, is obliged to see that that be not less. And this would
have been so, suppose the King to have had the rights barely of a private
person: He who without authority of Law, but solely upon the grounds ( real or
imaginary) of expediency, will commission, enrage, and arm men against me, and
after their having made them my mortal Enemies, make them my Lifeguard, commit
my life to the keeping of those, themselves had often represented me to, as not
fit to live; he before God and Man is answerable for my life, without whom
those others could have had neither power, nor pretense, nor, in all
probability, would have a will to take my life from me.

But (alas) how small a part of the Presbyterian Parliaments guilt is this,
from whom they received not only opportunity, but principles and example? They
not only enabled, but taught the Army by doctrine and practice. Imprisoning the
King, our Law, and common sense too, calls compassing his Death: For in that
case, his life, as to the public, can be nothing but a capacity of taking
away theirs, and they all that while are in a fair probability of being hanged.
After the imprisonment of a King, suppose him like to escape, and head a
numerous party, did he not deserve to be farther proceeded against? and would
not their own security require it? Would they have ever restored the King to
the Exercise of any power, till he had assented to what they should please or
no? If no, I desire to know first what the Army did more then that? Secondly,
what a King he were, who had nothing to do in the Government, but only gro^n
under it? And thirdly, why may not they who have Authority to depose a King,
and have just grounds, viz the security of the public, may not for the
assurance of that security, put him to death. If they would have restored the
King, though he had not tamely said Yes to every Demand, yielded his Crown to
save his Head, let them say so for shame, if they can.

What they did, and owned from the beginning, and it may be too justly
concluded from the no remorse we find in them, would own again, were it not
for fear and shame, will justify the Army from any thing but being their
servants, who understood, and only acted their Commandment. In the first
Reason for a War, [The King was but a Trustee, and had broken his trust, which
tended to the Dissolution of Government.] That was fair to begin with, [ Tended
to, etc.] i. e. The relation of King and Subjects was fairly going, and why, if
but a Trustee, and the Trust broken, it may not be re-seized; I could almost
tell them, I see no cause: Sure it would sufficiently show their intentions in
case of the King, but not at all better their own claim: I would not have the
House of Commons triumph too soon; because, as is very evident, they had
received their whole power and trust; so both, in the Judgment of him who
called them, and those who sent them, they had basely betrayed it.

Again, the King was not King in his personal, but political capacity, i. e.
themselves, against whom therefore to wage War was Treason, according to this,
the cutting off the Kings Head cannot be Treason. I shall not deal farther in
this, but only desire all those of them who would persuade themselves of their
own innocence, that they are at least thus far concerned, that they employed
and empowered those men, who but for them, never would have been able to
accomplish, nor in all likelihood to contrive that black Act; and that after
the King had often by rational and convincing Arguments showed it to be the
necessary result of their principles and proceedings: And truly the Army were
almost obliged, in their own defense to pull down the King and Laws, they had
so much offended, that they could scarce hope for pardon, nor at all be secured
of it, the King being once restored, any farther then they were assured of the
Kings regard to Honor and Conscience, a thing the two Houses had very
unworthily often declared to be none at all.

I cannot but observe how the Parliament thought to order the King, by
employing such men as would do their work thoroughly. They could not in
discretion trust the King, but could an Army, and so betrayed themselves with a
great deal of wariness, as it is very ordinary for men to ruin their own
Interest by preferring it before their Duty: And in that case the question is
this, Who knows what is fittest to be done, God who commanded this, or
themselves who contrived that: And sure it cannot be otherwise expected, but
that God should declare those who take upon them to be wiser then him, to be
very Fools. But in our case, they did not more sacrifice their Religion and
Allegiance to Craft and Interest, then they did sacrifice that Craft and
Interest to Passion and Humor; and truly it frequently happens, that they who
change Government, do neither mend it as to the Peoples advantage, nor enjoy it
as to their own. The chief Instruments of prosperous Rebellion, are usually the
Avengers of it, at once expound and chastise the vice, set up a power which is
indeed Arbitrary both in the rules and exercise of it, when that they had
pulled down one, which was only called so, it fared so with us. The people had
as little need to be fond of their Patriots, as they of their Army: Neither of
us have cause to complain of any but our selves: It was just with God to permit
us our ruin, when we were fond of it, that after we had complained without a
cause, we should have cause to complain.

The Parliament and People both say they were unhappy, let us see whether they
were not as unwise, beside the being dishonest.

We employed Mercenary Soldiers, to secure our Liberties, we expected that a
victorious Army, i.e. Legions of Indigent persons armed with power and want,
should secure propriety; after having pulled down their Prince submit to their
fellow subjects; having ventured Lives and Fortunes, and their Souls too, to
get a Conquest; having got it, intend only to be called Good Boys, and then
very mannerly retire to their old Trades and Beggary: This was not very
probable, that after having beaten their Enemies, their Friends should Vote
them down.

Let the Parliament (as they did) tell them of duty, themselves had employed
against it, they will obey their command by your own Example, act according to
the declared sense of the Houses interpreted by their practice: And in earnest
(were it not that Sin and Vengeance are not laughing matters) it would make one
smile to hear a Rebel earnestly tell others of their Duty to him,
conscientiously state the obligation of an Oath to those himself had employed
in breaking all.

Sir John Hotham told his Majesty, he would obey his Commands signified by both
Houses of Parliament, when the Army afterward thought they had been Rebels
long enough for other men's sakes and advantages, it was time now to be so for
themselves: Had they then said, they would obey the Resolves of the two Houses
delivered by his Majesty, could the most desperate Villain in that Assembly
have retorted any thing but a Blush. Is there any disparity here but what is to
the disadvantage of the two Houses, the King being their Head; nor can they
oblige at all without his consent, when as to Militia Affairs, the King needs
not their Authority at all.

We would willingly forget their former Actions if they would suffer us, but
their desire to begin again appears by resuming (now all other marks of
distinction are worn out) their so long laid aside Original Mark and Bond,
whereby to discern and engage their Party, to know their strength, and how to
use it: The nature of which being abundantly laid open by the Oxf. Reasons;
there needs no more to be said as to the strength of those Reasons, and
innocence of the Covenant, then briefly to consider some passages in both,
which Mr. Crofton was willing to mistake.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 21. read whom the Carthaginians could not beat. p. 10. l. 17. r.
could not do till then. p. 12. l. 19. add, Our Representes in Parliament, as to
the exercise of that Power the Law vests in them, (which every one that knows
the constitution of England, knows to have bounds) do legally bind us: because
we chose them, and gave them authority for that purpose, To consent for us. But
if they usurp any other Power, (as the Milicia, Reforming the Caurch in spite
of the King, etc.) the conclude not us at all. We neither entrusted them, with
any such Power, nor know of any such Power inherent in our selves to trust them
with. This being very clear to any but those that will not see; in this sense I
grant, They by, etc. p. 12. l. 21. r. do consent: and that. p. 13. l. 9. r.
that if he. l 13. add, Good Doctrine for the Rump. p. 20. l. 4. r. and then to
one which -- p. 24 l. 10 r. A Tenent, which the Army raised upon the score of
this Covenant learnt so well. p. 32. l. 2. f. what, r. which. l. 8. f. to, r.
so. p. 42. l. 14 after questioned, add, it as to that. p. 43. l. 6. aft.
nothing, add, of it. p. 45. l. 14. dele that. p. 46. l. 15. f. very be, r. be
very. p. 84. l. 3 Consider them though but as so many single persons, the
Covenant bending. p. 85. l. 1. r. Which being a former bond, no man's Allegiance
was. p. 145. l. 10. r. persuaded the Nobles that Prelates.

SHORT Strictures or Animadversions on so much of Mr. Croftons [Fastning S.
Peter's bonds] as concerns The Reasons of the University of Oxf. concerning the
Covenant.
THE Oxford men say, They could not swear (as not being able to say) That the
Rage, Power, and Presumption of the Enemies of God was (in the sense there
intended) increased, p. 1. Which was no more then this, They durst not mock God
and the World by solemnly pretending to call to mind (as the phrase there is)
what they did not believe to be at all. To which Mr. Cr. p. 26. Their ability
to say so, is of little moment, etc. Is it a small Consideration in an Oath,
that I am not Able to say the thing I swear, to be true; nay, believe and think
my self Able to prove false? Others were able to say it. Though this with the
former, being wrote in another Character, may obtain our Notice, though not
Assent; May I Swear upon another man's Knowledge? Must all the Church of Romes
bad Tenants be reformed into worse practices? Does our not assenting, by
implicit Faith qualify for swearing upon implicit belief?

The Oxf. men say, That this way of Imposing an Oath, intrenches upon the Kings
Prerogative; and surely Mr. Cr. Censures upon the Refusers of it, intrenches
upon Gods. The judicial Incapacity, etc. he there suggests, is (because without
ground) without Charity. The best of it is, it is easier to vote Malignants,
then make Reprobates. The Visitours, who could by a vote turn men out of
Oxford, could not do any more then barely wish them out of heaven. I cannot but
tell the resolved Covenanters (those I mean who glory in, and so are far from
shaking off, this Bond of Iniquity) that there is something in themselves,
which looks more like what is, or may end in Judicial incapacity, then any
thing which can be pretended against the Oxf. men, viz. A resolution never to
be persuaded otherwise. As the By whatever Combination, Persuasion, etc.
Sixth Article enjoynes, i. e. They must never more consider, (or, if they do,
it must be only to show they dare despise) whatever Reason or Religion can say
against those courses they are beforehand resolved of. Which thing, though it
might make me despair to deal with them, does it self encourage me. Sure I
shall easily persuade men, that there is something very suspicious in that
Cause, which will not endure any of its Proselytes should attend to what can be
said against it. Mr. Cr. has yet another Answer to this, If they did know it,
though they were not able to say it, it was for us sufficient. Words which
shall not be answered, till they are explained. Words, as well as Men, may
escape by being in the dark: to be unintelligible is security against being
confuted. I perceive it is good Policy to write some nonsense, that we may be
sure that that at least will remain unanswered.

The two next Paragraphs are proofs of what the University professes not to be
convinced of; the increase of the Rage, Power, Presumption of the enemies of
God, being increased in the sense intended, which were, The troubles the three
Kingdoms were at present in, the Spanish Armado, the Gunpowder Treason, the
College of Propagators, Cuneus his plot discovered to Sir William Boswel, and
by him to Archbishop Laud, laid open in Romes Masterpiece.

First, I observe by this and other Treatises referred to, (particularly, The
Sovereign Power of Parliaments; wrote, as Mr. Cr. says, solidly by Mr. Prynn,
and some will not stick to say, as solidly by him since confuted) it is too
apparent, That Presbyterians, those I mean who plead for the Covenant, want
nothing but Opportunity to play over their old Game. Contending so earnestly
for old Premises, can be nothing but an earnest desire to infer the same
Conclusion. Methinks they should not desire the King to forget what themselves
will not. But all this is far from proving the Rage, Presumption of the enemies
of God to be increased in the int^nded sense, as appears thus:

The Covenant was made against that Party the King headed: who, for those and
such like Reasons, were the [ Open enemies] Which name they deserved either
because they propagated Popery, or because others did it. The latter will not
(though practiced) be asserted; nor the former proved. First, I hope the old
Plots, the Spanish Armado, the Gunpowder Treason, do not evince the King and
his Party, to have been Popish: and for that later one of Cuneus, that it was
discovered to the Archbishop, is no demonstration at Oxon. that he drove it on.
If the Archbishop was a Papist, I would willingly be resolved, whether the
Jesuit Fisher was a Protestant.

The Scotch Service Book, is an argument much used by those, who never saw, or
least considered it. Retaining Forms and Ceremonies used in the Church of
Rome, which were Ancient, Useful, and Innocent, is of great use: as to
demonstrate our conformity with the Primitive Church; and to convince Rome, we
would not leave her, but where she left her self. Which is to prove our
Reformation to be the result of Reason and Conscience, not Spite and Humor.
Nor is this an evidence of, but a bar from, our return to Rome; For they who
will not separate but upon, and no farther then there are, weighty Causes; are
not like to return till those weighty Causes are removed: whereas they who
separate in an Humor, may in a Humor unite again. Nay, they who are but
partly guilty; who will abstain from actions otherwise innocent, because some
they think ill of use them, acknowledge themselves guilty of separating more
then there is cause for: that is, as I understand it, out of Spite, be the name
it bears never so solemn. A deportment, Christians (of all men in the world)
much more Christian Churches, should not use one toward another.

To Object our readiness to return to Rome upon so incompetent a ground, at the
best was Weakness: but to Object it now, when all those, the ruin of whom this
Book endeavors, have been resolute examples of our averseness from Rome,
notwithstanding the sore temptations which (by means of this Covenant) they
have been exercised with, can be nothing but Malice. Unless we will suppose,
that those, who would not part with a good cause, when God seems to forsake it;
should throw it away, now he appears to own it.

They tendered a Cardinals cap to the Archbishop. It is no new trick, to be rid
of a most dangerous adversary, to make him suspected, and so not used, by his
own party. Hannibal quickly understood Fabius, and as quickly foresaw his own
speedy ruin, unless the Romans discarded that General. The Carthaginians could
not beat him: therefore he was so maliciously kind to him, as not to injure
him. The silly vulgar suspected, and the crafty knaves proclaimed him, to be a
Confederate of Hannibals: Nor was that error discovered till there was reason
to repent it. Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes. Had there been less ability and
resolution to oppose Rome in that head, it might in all probability have stood
longer upon its own shoulders.

Mr. Cr. wonders at that expression [ In the intended sense] without which
words the Oxf. men would never have denied the Rage, etc. of the enemies of
God, and Religion to be at that time increased: because they saw and felt it.
And truly on which side they were, Mr. Cr. shall witness, even where he is
professedly handling the Argument, p. 28. Who abetted the murder of the late
King. Which Army did that, needs no dispute. Who commissioned the men that did
that; furnished them with Principles and opportunity; in prosecution of whose
avowed Declarations and Resolves, that Act might be justified: The men of Oxf.
saw then as clearly, as all the World do easily now. If the Kings death was, as
Mr. Cr. urges, a design of the Papists; the King, the Bishops, and the Royal
Party were not sure their only Factors. You see, Sir, one may believe the
presumption of the enemies of God, to have been at that time increased; and
yet, not in that sense. That Papists rejoiced at our Troubles is granted: and
withal, that they have not at all discovered their sorrow (their joy they have)
that this Covenant pulled down that Church, which themselves by strength of
Arguments and Armies, could not do.

Oxf. Second Reason is,

They could not truly say, That they had used or given consent to any
Supplication or Remonstrance to the purpose therein expressed.

The force of this is plainly thus, They durst not swear they had done what
they knew they never did. To which Mr. Cr. p. 29. Had not they Representees in
Parliament? did they give No to such Supplications? or, if they did, were they
not carried by the major Vote? and is not the Negative swallowed therein, that
all persons and bodies Corporate did thereunto consent?

This a strange piece of sense. Whatever the Parliament upon other men's
Supplications Vote, though of such a nature as many men from their very souls
abhor the thought of; it is for that sole reason true, that they supplicated
for it: and they may swear it, though they know they did not. On the other
side, I conceive I may be bound to submit to many Laws, as proceeding from a
competent Authority, which I may truly affirm I neither did, nor was at all
bound to desire. Had the Parliament, when they first voted No-Addresse, in
1647. Voted the Kings death, (which they might have done by the same law of
Reason, nor could their ablest defenders ever answer Goodwin and others upon
that Head) did every man in England therefore supplicate for it? But for Him we
need not be sollicitous, seeing at the very beginning of the War, he was
declared but a Trustee, who had shamefully betrayed his Trust, etc. But if this
Logic be good, there is a worse story behind, even this Blessed Covenant has
lost its ablest defendor, (not to say at one blow it has lost them all,)
seeing the Parliament have voted the Covenant burnt: and Mr. Cr. himself may
swear he has supplicated for it. Sure he will find a way to evade this
special piece of Law so applied. That by the Parliament all Persons and Towns
Corporate did consent; that in things belonging to their cognizance, the
Majority concludes the whole House, and they the Nation; I believe true and
account it reasonable. But Mr. Cr. good friend Mr. Baxter tells us another
story, and endeavors to prove it in the enlargement of his 179. Thesis, of the
Efficient and Conveying causes of Power, p. 185, 186. The Minor part, if it be
the better and wiser, are not concluded; and if they have any advantage as
strength, etc. they may use it. I suppose that he thinks with the Minor, he
will persuade them, who will be not unapt to believe it of themselves, that
they are the wiser and better.

The next thing considerable is, p. 30. an answer to the fourth Reason: which
is, that they apprehended it not to be according to the Commendable practice of
these Kingdoms, or the example of Gods people in other Nations; nay, the
Defenders tells us, The world never saw the like before. To which M. Cr. tells
us, That Israel did in the days of Ioash, Josiah, etc. The only difference is,
in short, one of the greatest reasons, for which this Covenant was expressly and
frequently refused and refuted: Those were with, This expressly against, him in
whom that Obligatory Power lay, the Prince.

In his Reconciling these words with those of Mr. Nigh, Mr. Cr. grants what is
abundantly enough to prove what he denies [ That for Matter, Persons, and other
Circumstances, the like had not been in Any age or Oath we read of in Sacred or
Profane Stories]. Whence I thus argue, If there is so much in this Covenant
distinct from what was ever in any before, and that so considerable, as to make
a distinct Argument to commend this Covenant to the world, more then any other
ever could pretend to; That for Matter and Persons, i. e. The thing sworn, and
persons swearing, besides other circumstances, there had never been the like
before. It is not imaginable this should be warranted by former examples, when
neither in Matter nor Persons, the thing sworn, or persons swearing, besides
other attendant circumstances, the like had ever been before. It seems it was
done after, and warranted by the example of a thing nothing like it.

According to Mr. Cr. method we proceed to The First ARTICLE.
First exception is, They are not satisfied how they can in judgment Swear to
preserve the Religion of another Kingdom.

To which Mr. Cr. p. 39. It Is but Reason they suspend their act till they can
swear in judgment.

If so, the Visitors, the tender-conscienced Visitors, turned the Oxf. Heads
out of their places (and by the way put themselves in) for not doing what in
Mr. Cr. judgment, they ought not to have done. But neither has he given or
offered any thing to satisfy us, How and where Christ bound us to Swear the
Reformation of another Kingdom by fire and sword. Gods people, sure we are,
Jewish and Christian, had Idolators in the Regions round about them: yet we do
not find them Covenanting to pull down the Idols of silver and gold, that they
might put the silver and gold in their own Pockets. If the Scots may Covenant
to reform England and Ireland, why not France and Spain? Does Religion forbid
them violence in its cause against all but their own Prince? or is Rebellion
never sanctified till it is against him, to whom we owe particular Allegiance?

But besides the general unwarrantableness of such courses; the Oxf. men render
several Reasons peculiarly relating to Themselves and that Cause. As first,
That as it did not concern them to have much, so they professed to have very
little understanding of it. Which, though Mr. Cr. is pleased to wonder at;
another man possibly may not at all think it strange, that wisemen should not
trouble themselves with what did not concern them. When he says, They should
know as much as all the Nation besides; I desire to know his opinion of those
Gentlemen who came into their places.

The next thing of moment is, p. 42. in answer to the Fourth Reason; where, the
Oxf. men find in Scotland, several things tending toward Superstition and
Schism; as accounting Bishops Antichristian, and Indifferent Ceremonies
unlawful. Where, first, he catches at those Phrases, tending toward; and, to
our thinking: where he triumphs thus, Methinks, Superstition and Schism
should be so well known at Oxf. that they might be able to conclude what things
tend thereunto. Modesty of Expression, is no more a sign of Ignorance; then
Bold peremptoriness, is an infallible evidence of Knowledge. When St. Paul
says, I Think, I have the Spirit of God; should a witty Sophister retort,
What? the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who magnifies so his Office, but
Think, he should know whether he has the Spirit, or no? Nay, this grave
Corrector, in this very place, uses the same expression he carps at,
Methinks, Superstion, etc.

The Charge is this, They account Bishops Antichristian, and Indifferent
Ceremonies unlawful, and make their Discipline a Mark of the true Church, and
the setting up thereof the erecting the Throne of Jesus Christ. There is but
one way to excuse this from Schism, and that too many Non-conformists have
taken, which is to say, They do not divide from a Church; because, where these
fancies are not received, there are no Churches; not considering, they have by
that means un-Churched all the World, that any History gives an account of. And
that for so many ages, that if this be true, the gates of hell prevailed
against the Church, as soon as themselves can pretend it made the first
attempt. But this Mr. Cr. would willingly salve. They give Assemblies Authority
about Ceremonies, ergo, do not deem Indifferent Ceremonies unlawful. If so,
Ceremonies not commanded in the Word of God may be enjoined.

They make Discipline rightly administered, as is prescribed in the Word of God,
the Note of a true Church, but do not appropriate it unto theirs. Either their
Discipline is prescribed in the Word of God, or not. If not; they did well to
swear and fight down Ours, for not being in the Word of God prescribed, to make
way for another, which it self is not there. If it be there prescribed, and yet
this Title [ Prescribed in the Word of God, which is the Note of a true Church]
be not appropriate to it, but may belong to another; and that which either is
not in the Word of God, which is the former inconvenience; or, which is in the
Word of God as well as theirs: and then there be two several Disciplines
prescribed in the Word of God. A Doctrine, I suppose, our Scotch-Masters would
not once have liked.

They deem indeed English-Popish-Ceremonies unlawful; but deny them to be
Indifferent, p. 43.

Are they unlawful because used in Popish-Churches, or for any other Reason? If
for any other Reason; that should have been expressed, or at least intimated,
so as we might have guessed at it. If for that reason alone, (as seems, being
alone alleged, The appellation, Popish:) I do not apprehend, how another man's
using a thing, can make it unlawful for me to use it. For sin is nothing else
but the transgression of a Law. What then, by the laws of God, and my just
Superiors is not prohibited me; it is not imaginable, how a Heathen, Turk,
Jew, or (which some make worse) a Papist, can by doing it make it unlawful for
me to do. For seeing the Laws of God and Man have left it free; he or I, either
or both, in doing such a thing do but use our indulged Liberty, that which is
left free for us to do. Now, how it comes to pass, That his using his lawful
liberty, should deprive me of mine, I would gladly know. The Question seems to
me this, How it can be criminal in me, to imitate other men (suppose Papists,
whom, I hope, I may reckon Men) in those cases in which they are confessedly
Innocent? for so, in this present Case, Papists confessedly are; seeing they
transgress no law of God or Man. For had it been otherwise; not its being used
by Papists, but the law, against which the action is, should have been urged as
the Reason of the sin of it.

The Jews, who crucified Christ in his person, and persecuted Him in his
members, were certainly as great enemies to Christ, as Papists can in modesty
be supposed to be. Yet, St. Paul (whose trade was not to gain by Factions)
would do actions upon that very score, to be like them; complied with them in
Ceremonies which he knew to be abolished. To the Jew he became a Jew in that
sort. I know it is said, He did it to win over the Jews, and it is not likely
we should win over the Papists. A Discourse dictated not by Reason, but Malice,
which makes it blind, and (the blow missing its Adversary) throws it self. St.
Paul was far from being ignorant how the spirit of obduration, was in a very
great measure gone out upon that People; he yet durst not omit all possible
condescension. Their being stubborn, was no warrant to Him to be morose. To
endeavor was his duty, and he did it. What use they would make of it, he left
to them; what effect it should have, to God.

His last Salvo, is p. 44. The distinction between vere and vera Ecclesia. The
Scots do not un-church all others for want of their Discipline, Because a True
Church is opposed to a Corrupt, as well as falsely constituted.

I demand here, Whether a Church may be a Church of Christ without the
Scotch-Discipline, or no? If No, the Distinction is impertinent; not to say,
crafty: serving to hide their meaning, till there is opportunity of discovering
it. If it may, then there was no need of a Covenant and attending-violences to
force in that, without which we may be a Church of Christ; and so, without it,
The Lord might have dwelt among us, as the phrase of the Covenant is. Or if,
for all that Grant, it is yet necessary to bring that Discipline in, in such a
manner; then it is not enough to be a Church of Christ, unless we be a Church
of Scotland too: and Wars are necessary, not only till a Church is a true one;
but till every one acknowledges it the best imaginable. Atenent, the Army
raised upon the score of this Covenant; and learnt it so well, that they
quickly taught their Scotch-masters the meaning and consequents of it.

The second ground of the Oxf. men's Refusal, is, They are not satisfied, How
they can swear to reform the Doctrine, Discipline, etc. Because it cannot be
changed without manifest scandal to the Papist and Separatist.

1. By yielding the Cause, our godly Bishops have by writings and sufferings
maintained.

2. By justifying the Papists, in calling Ours, A Parliamentary Religion.

3. By acknowledgement, that something to which conformity is required, is not
agreeable to the Word of God, and so justifying Recusancy and Separation.

4. A confession that our punishing of Papists was unjust, because it was for
not joining with Us in a form of worship, which our selves approve not of as
well as they.

To all which, Cr. bravely retorts, much at the rate of City-Logick, p. 45. It Is
well, Scandal is at length become an Argument of some force, had it been
regarded from the Non-conformists, etc. Here is a triumph when there is not
only no victury, but no fight. When the true sense of an Argument is not to be
avoided or endured; some can entertain themselves and some Readers, with
putting on it a sense, they can answer. Scandal in the Reason and in the Reply
are no otherwise akin, then that the English words answerable to them, may upon
an occasion be drawn to make a quarter quibble. Because (...), is translated [
Offence] Therefore every one who is offended in a different sense, i. e. angry,
is forsooth scandalized. A Doctrine, which has brought greater Scandals, then
those it pretended to remove were ever fancied to be. It has been it self a
(...), a stumbling block whereat many have fallen. I shall discover and remove
it.

Offense, which in Scripture (as has by many learned men, beyond all exception
been proved; and will demonstrate it self to any, that will but consult the
places where that word is used) is, any action of Ours by which a Brother may
be led on to sin. And that; either by misunderstanding an Action of Ours (which
was the case of eating meat offered to Idols, which might have been interpreted
as in honor to the Idol; and so one who thought well of us, might be induced
to do it indeed) or else, something directly criminal, which we by word or
example encourage others to. The other notion of the word Offense, which the
Nonconformist urged, and Mr. Cr. revives, That whatever another is pleased to
be angry at, is a sin for me to do; is in it self absurd, and in its
consequence intolerable. For then the rule of my actions should not be the Law
of God, and the commands of my Superior, not repugnant to them, both which the
Scripture expressly obliges me to, if it does to any thing at all, but every
peevish fellows humor and melancholy: and, contrary to our Saviors rule, If
my Brother were angry with me without a cause, not he, but I should be in
danger of the Judgment.

Nor could our consciences be any longer satisfied in any action, than they
were assured there were no mistaken or humorous well-meaning men in the world.
St. Paul tells us, If meat make my Brother offend, I will eat no meat while I
live. If this mistaken sense of Scandal, in this and such like cases were true,
and we obliged upon such penalties as are assigned in Scripture, to men guilty
of that sin: Christianity were a bondage greater then that which. Christ came to
remove, and free us from. Should a sect of well-meaning ignorants arise, who
thought all Flesh and Wine abominable, (and some such there have been) are we
all bound upon pain of hell to forbear? Because they are angry; is it therefore
true that we sinned, because they upon no ground thought so? Do Erroneous
conceits alter the nature of things? Do false opinions by being stiffly held
become true? A Surplise must not be used in Divine Service, nor worn, because a
godly brother is angry! The same Reason will conclude for a black Gown. For
Sectaries were once (and possibly are esteemed aga^^) Godly, and Brethren. This
palpable mistake, I have the longer stood upon, not only because it occasioned
Triumph; but, because I could not easily apprehend it, other than wilful.
Because the Reasons have expressed it so plain, as to prevent all possible
misunderstanding. In these words they have showed wherein the Scandal did
consist, viz. [In justifying the Recusancy of One, and Separation of the Other]
i. e. in helping them to a reason to encourage, and so continue their sin; not
in making them angry, but pleasing them too well. Nor is it likely for him who
is offended in the vulgar sense, to be offended in the Scripture-sense. He who
is angry with me for doing a thing, is not like to do it because I do it; to
imitate me in that for which he does abominate me.

But here I cannot but observe, that Reason in this Section should be
acknowledged, when, by being so, it overthrowes their whole cause. The Reasons
are indeed so pressing, and the words so incapable of a sinister
interpretation; that the Covenant it self must undergo one to avoid their
reach. Where, after the droling Preface of, These serious Casuists, with
reverence may I note it, understand the Words of the Covenant Sophistically, p.
46. He then presents us with this Notion, Religion, as it denotes the Matter,
etc. is different from the Circumstances, Order, and Ceremonies annexed and
appendant, and none but ignorant Idiots will deem the change of them the change
of Religion, p. 46.

This is the first Salvo. The Oxf. Arguments are not concluding, because
nothing of the Religion, but Circumstances, Order, and Ceremonies were to be
changed; which was not that, our Martyrs suffered for. What ignorant Idiots, as
Mr. Cr. calls them, are these Oxford Scholars, who must understand words in
their true, plain, literal meaning? What a silly University this was? Give me
Mr. Cr. there is a man indeed, can find out a meaning of words, they are in no
wise capable of! By the Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, is meant,
in Circumstances, Order, and Ceremonies. If this be the meaning, the words were
very ill chosen to express it. But withal, Mr. Cr. has not at all mended the
matter, by enforming us plainly, That they will use such violent proceedings,
when only Circumstances, Order, and Ceremonies are the Debate.

But the vanity of the former Plea being (possibly to himself) apparent; The
next salvo is, p. 46, 47, 48, 49. We must make a distinction between what is
Established, and what is Exercised in Engl. etc.

Because all the Declaiming is about the latter, What is cal^ed the Religion
exercised? I shall not flourish; that is, use many words, not to express what I
would say, but to hide my having nothing to say; but ask directly, because I
would be answered to, where I suspect juggling. They have Sworn to reform the
Doctrine, Worship, etc. in England, according to several (not at present to say
inconsistent) Rules; the Word of God, the Church of Scotland, the best Reformed
Church. I ask then. Do they mean to alter the established Doctrine; or No? If
yes; the distintion is vain and crafty: A slight instead of an answer. If no;
does reforming according to those rules, that is, (as I understand it) bringing
in the Doctrine of Scotland, etc. signify, Doing some new act to continue the
established Doctrine in England; or to let it alone as it is? If either of
these, let that word have the same meaning in all parallel places, and this
Controversy is at an end: But, how we shall be brought to the same Confession
of Faith, Directory, etc. which is also sworn, without altering the established
Doctrine, Worship, Government, which are different, is not very clear.

As to the Doctrines themselves here called, The Religion exercised, Though it
is no Demonstration at Oxon, that they are false, because the Scotch Army made
them a Pretense to get Money with: yet, being they are, as Mr. Cr.
acknowledges, private men; he must also acknowledge, it concerns only those
private men to defend them. But, from that Answer of his, I shall conclude a
little farther, and overthrow it by its own self; prove what it denies, out of
what it grants. For, it is in it self very clear, seeing the Quarrel was at the
Religion exercised, not established; Those Opinions, called the exercised
Religion, ought only to have been discarded, and the established Doctrine have
been made the Rule to reform by; by which they might have had the Law, and
their Adversaries too, on their side. But, because they name another Rule, It
is plain, they mean to alter that too; and, so are liable to those
inconveniences Mr. Cr. endeavors to free them from, by a strained
Interpretation, which their words and actions are no way capable of. Though it
is a pretty strange account of bringing Englands established Religion to the
Scottish mode, by Allegations out of Authors, which are contended for, to be no
part of that Religion so established.

Mr. Cr. does indeed set several Doctrines, and name Authors, many of which
have been eminently useful to this Church, and therefore hated by Rome, and
Scotland: but being there are no references to any part of their Works; with
what sincerity it is done, I am not able to say: But I may guess it to be done
with very little, if I may conclude by one which I single out: because that
sort of people have so little shame or conscience as to Preach it down to the
people as Arminianism. It is p. 47. That men had free will of themselves to
believe and repent he may justly say, The University was poisoned with
Arminianism, if this horrid Tenent was owned and there countenanced. Arminians
need not be angry, that they are slandered; for that is a tacit Confession:
there is not truth enough to object against them. Men must belly them, to make
them odious; part with their own Innocence to darken theirs. But I much wonder
Mr. Cr. should tell the Masters of Oxf. That, This Tenent among others was
defended by them from censure. Though people are apt to believe any thing of
Papists and Arminians; yet the Oxf. men are not so apt to believe any story of
themselves. They challenge all the world to tell when, and by whom they
defended that horrid Doctrine from censure. The utmost ground of this
accusation, is, some men in Oxf. might possibly affirm, they understood not
what it was to be made willing whether we would or no; how freedom and force,
liberty and necessi^ation, were the same thing. This is far enough from the
purpose. But censure is there a judicial word. I demand therefore, Whether the
University defended the men he means from the censure of these who had
authority to censure them; or from those who had nothing to do in the matter.
If from the former, I desire to know, How it was possible for them to do it,
and when they did it? If from the later, those who had nothing to do with it;
sure the harm is not great.

If I should grant all the Tenants he reckons up to be false, because it were
perhaps too hard to prove them so to one who would deny it; I do not apprehend
the considerable advantage he would get by it toward his Cause, because they
are only particular men's. He will not sure think himself concerned in all we
can prove preached in Camp, and City, and the men not only defended against the
King and the Laws; but encouraged, applauded, and preferred. Might not men
safely preach at London, Believers to be above all Ordinances, but those of the
two Houses. Was any more care taken at London (even when the Covenant was
Triumphant, and set up in Churches instead of the Lords Prayer, and Ten
Commandments) of what Opinions men were of, any more then of what Country, if
they would but fight against the King? Was there any Heresy, but Loyalty? or
Common Enemy, but the King? Might not those take the Scripture in any or no
sense, who would take the Laws in equitable sense? It is altogether as
reasonable to pull down Presbytery, because there were Independents in the
Parliaments Army; as they to Covenant us into the Doctrine of the Church of
Scotland, because some men preached what their ablest Defender acknowledges no
part of the Doctrine of the Church of England. And this is equal, supposing
those Doctrines false, which as yet are only said to be so.

But at last comes an Attempt to answer those Arguments, the force of which Mr.
Cr. has hitherto evaded by pretenses, which I have proved (and perhaps himself
perceived) groundless. It will not (says he, p. 49.) justify the Recusancy of
the Papists, because these things were never a reason of it.

This answer is none at all: because, if those things to which their conformity
was required were really sins, we cannot at all blame, nor justly punish them
for refusing to be partakers in them; It is not easy to think of any thing
which would more please them in, or justify them for, disobeying our
established Laws, than our proclaiming them thus to be grossly horrid, so
apparently abominable, as there was an unavoidable necessity of using the worst
of remedies, a Civil War; and the worst of dangers, hazarding our souls in the
most suspicious of actions, the defiance of our Prince; to remove them. It is
from hence, (if this be once granted,) clear, we have all along punished
Papists, for not conforming to what it is a Christians duty not to conform to.
And this is, sure, a competent ground for not assenting to this part of the
Covenant; for, be the grounds of sinfulness what it will, our selves by this
should own that to be sin which we punished them for not joining in: the
concession of which would be so pleasing to them, that I wonder to see those
men plead for it, who make spite to Rome the only rule they walk by.

As to the second part of the scandal, justifying the Separatists, Mr. Cr.
answers not much better. p. 50. Neither can such an acknowledgment justify the
Separatists: For, that the corruptions established, were never made such
Essential parts of the Worship, as to make a sufficient ground for separation;
and the godly Non-conformists contended against separation. This seems to me a
very pretty Argumentation. There was no necessity to separate from the Church
as it was by Law established in Discipline, Ceremonies, etc. yet there was a
necessity to pull it down [ lest we be partakers of other men's sins, and so of
their plagues, etc.] with other such like phrases as the Covenant expresses it.
Sure I am, if there was no sufficient ground for separation, there was no
sufficient ground for a Covenant to reform in so violent a way; and, to pull
down that Church, from which there was sufficient reason in your own judgment
to separate. If, as you truly urge, Our Savior kept Communion with a Church
much in need of Reformation, and taught men so to do; I would willingly learn,
Who taught men to take up Arms, to destroy what you acknowledge to be only such
a Church. If there was no necessity for even those, who did not approve the
Worship and Ceremonies, to separate; as you do, and say the godly
Non-conformists always did: What imaginable necessity could there be for these
English men, who were subjects, and the Scots strangers, to compel by force
Prince and People, who approve of both, to swear it down.

Now come (p. 53.) some Endeavors to prove the Doctrine and Discipline of this
Church to be not agreeable to the Word of God. First, Can. 36. Enjoins Common
Prayer, and no other, which they had broke by Praying at St. Maryes, and is it
self, a limitation of the Spirit, etc.

To the first, That the Church ever intended to bind men to say those Prayers
in the Pulpit before Sermon, is not true; but contrary to her own Laws and
practice. Those universal words must ( as all others of that sort are to be) be
referred ad subjectam materiam. The Liturgy was made for (what indeed it is,
and has approved it self to be, so far as skill and malice never questioned,
but carped only at particular phrases,) it was made I say, only, for a Complete
Form of Public Prayer, comprehensive of all our common needs imaginable; from
whence, none could pretend upon that score, reason to vary. But it was never
intended to banish occasional Prayers, (of which nature those before Sermons
are: for* which, a peculiar Canon is provided, and that penned in words which
admit of latitude, I suppose, because they are looked upon as occasional, and
so may better endure to be various.

Limitation of the Spirit, is a phrase equally admired by those who understand
nothing, as laughed at by those who do: It is vulgarly granted, but upon what
reasons I could never yet learn; That [ Praying by the Spirit] signifies in
Scripture [ To pray Ex tempore] Though to me it seems rather a sign of a
voluble tongue then inspired heart; and to pray without considering, is rather,
I should think, boldness then grace. But if that be the import of that phrase,
as Women and Lecturers generally hold; the Prayer of Christ is least said by
the Spirit of Christ; and so the most unacceptable Prayer we can put up to him
in all the world is his own.

But now I begin to think on that phrase, I profess my self unable to
understand it; which makes me think, the reason many do not apprehend when the
Argument drawn from thence is answered, is, Because they do not know what it
means. It would be no inconsiderable damage to the Puritan Cause, if they would
explain those terms, Limitation of the Spirit. I will pawn my Credit on it, the
very admiring Rowt shall laugh at it the very same moment they understand it;
the whole force of it consisting like that of a charm, in being unintelligible.
Whatever I can guess it to be according to those principles and purposes it is
used for, amounts clearly to this; He limits the Spirit in himself, who gives
over while he has one word left to say: and he limits it in another, when he
suffers any body to hear him; because he confines him to his words, when the
Spirit might possibly suggest to him different. And this is really so in every
Auditory, unless we can suppose that every man there, (were he called to
exercise) would use the same matter and words, which he who carries on the
work of the day does make use of.

But some men have ventured to say and prove too, (which I wonder Mr. Cr. took
no notice of it, if he thought it possible to answer it) That the Directory it
self was guilty of this evil, viz. Limiting the Spirit (if it be an evil) which
it was intended to remove. That Directory prescribed matter, and in most cases
the very order of Praying. Seeing it prescribes the matter; the only excellency
whereby it differs, is, it gives weak and careless that men (which are by much
the major part) leave to choose words unapt to express that matter it self
prescribes. It has then all the real inconveniences of unprescribed Prayers,
and that one fancyed one of prescribed.

The second Exception of his (p. 54.) is very Tragical and vaunting* In comes
great zeal and little wit, and tells us of a fault so very gross, that the very
plain Popish, Scotch Service Book, shall be commended for not being guilty: The
very first sentence (so called) of Scripture is not there; At what time soever
a sinner does repent, etc.

I persuade my self, Mr. Cr. has read in the New Testament of proofs alleged
out of the Old, barely according to the sense, the express words whereof are no
where to be found; the instances are various, I mention but one, Mat. 2.6.
taken out of Micah 5.2. But what need I stand to prove, that some men can very
be angry when there is little cause for it?

Nor escape we so: and therefore Thirdly, In the last we did read that which is
not Scripture; now we do not read what confessedly is. Much of the Canonical
Scripture is omitted, Apocrypha read, some parts of the Scripture dignified
above others, as the Gospel by standing, etc.

Many Chapters of the Canonical Scripture not being read in course, was one of
the mighty faults the wise Assembly took upon them to mend, and it amounted to
this. When the vulgar people came to Church to hear the Law of God according to
which they must frame their lives; a considerable part of the year they caused
to be spent in Genealogies, or less Edifying History, which could not but have
had the same effect upon the people read in Hebrew, as English; or else the
Ceremonial Law, which at this day concerns no body, and never did concern them
at all. This was so apparently absurd, that no imaginable account can be given
of it, besides that (not very Christian) resolution of spite and singularity;
or that politic Art of not receiving Pay, Preferment, and Applause, without
seeming to do something for it.

Our Dignifying (as they phrase it) some parts of Scripture above other, as the
Gospel by standing, is a thing which provokes their anger; and Mr. Cr. like an
angry Disputant confutes himself. Is that our fault, that we show a peculiar
respect to that part of it, which peculiarly concerns our Savior, his Words
and Works? Our particular obligation assures us, it were ill if it were
otherwise. Outward Reverence (provided we do not let it serve in stead of, but
use it to signify and promote inward) cannot in that case be a crime. But if
to dignifie some parts of Scripture above others be a crime, themselves are
guilty: as doing so to the Psalms of David, (only they are not David's, but
Sternholds) by singing them before every Sermon, a thing in Scripture no where
commanded. But so have I seen a distempered person in spite to another beat
himself.

The next thing considerable, is, (p. 55, 56.) Christmas, Easter, etc. and the
Holy Days, are superstitious, plainly repugnant to Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16.

If the Feasts there mentioned, were evidently not Christian Festivals: I
suppose, I may safely conclude Christian Festivals not to be plainly forbid in
that place, where they are not so much as spoke of. The Text in the Galatians
mentions expressly Months and Years, proportions of Time; no way to be
accommodated to Christian Festivals, or then, or now. That in the Colossians is
so plain, that it must be a worse Principle than Inconsideration, which
occasioned the mistake; not only, because it expresses New Moons; (a thing not
established by Christian Authority:) but, in the words following the 17. verse,
gives a clear account of the unlawfulness of those Feasts, of the Observance of
which he there complains, [ which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body
is Christ]. Those Feasts therefore were not reproved, as having been commanded
by any Christian Church, (which, it is clear, they were not:) but, because they
had in them not only a general malignity, as being kept in Obedience to the
Jewish Law, and so must suppose that to be still in force; but had besides a
peculiar malignity in their nature; being (and for that very reason reproved) a
shadow of Christ to come, and so consequently denied His coming. Now then, all
which can be gathered from this place, is, Christians must not keep Feasts
which prefigured Christ to come; Ergo, they may not keep Feasts in remembrance
that He is come.

There is a pretty piece of Divinity ( p. 56.) to enforce the former
Conclusion, which no doubt would be admirable, if it were but sense. To observe
the Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, severally; is
irrational and irreligious: irrational, because they are not in themselves
Mercies to the Church, but as they center in Man's Redemption; irreligious,
because without Divine warrant. That none of all these signal condescensions of
Divine goodness, should be esteemed in themselves Mercies, or worth giving
thanks for, when Edgehill, and Nasby Battails, though but in order to the
undoing of the King, were so accounted; argues a more passionate esteem and
concernment for the Covenant of Scotland, than that of Grace.

That it is irreligious, because without Divine warrant, is said, but not
proved; For a thing becomes unlawful, only by being against some Law; that is,
by being forbidden, not barely by being not commanded. Our Savior Christ, we
are sure, observed Feasts, which had not such Institution, notwithstanding that
prohibition, which was as strict to the Jews, whose Authority instituted those
Feasts, and in obedience to which He kept them, as it can possibly be to us. Ye
shall not add etc. Christ did indeed abolish the Ceremonial Law of the Jews,
(and, that was all He did abolish, so as to make unlawful.) From hence men
gather, That it is ^ sin for us to imitate them in any thing we find done by
them according to the Principles and Dictates of Nature, Gratitude, etc. as
Feasts of Commemorations clearly are. Though this is a Proposition sufficiently
distant; upon this pitiful ground (without any more ado) do men put off all,
which can be fetched out of the Old Testament; whereas though Christ abolisht
the Ceremonial Law, he left all other Laws and Rules as he found them. But, as
Christ observed Feasts not instituted by divine Authority; so possibly does Mr.
Cr: the command in Scripture for Sunday being not so very clear, that Mr. Cr.
cannot but doubt to be Irreligion and Will Worship in his notions of those
terms. No man can ground it on the fourth Commandment, that does not take the
seventh and first to be the same day, i. e. Seven and one to be the same
number. If he will interpret the Seventh-day to signify one in seven: I desire
to know, whether the Jews might have observed which of the seven days they
pleased; and whether then the Reason of the fourth Commandment was not
strangely impertinent to the Matter of it. That being expressed to be ( For in
the Seventh day God rested, etc.) seeing that was the very seventh, and no
other; and a command in the New Testament for it, I suppose, is not to be found.

The next three leaves 57, 58, 59. are spent in proving what none ever denied,
That, There are several things in the Form of our Service and Discipline not
commanded in the Word of God. A thing comes to be unlawful* sure, by being
forbid; not by being uncommanded. Seeing this is the only fault; I ask, Is the
Directory, the Form there prescribed, in the Word of God? I desire a direct
Answer to that. Can that pretend to anything but to be the result of Prudence
and Authority? Both Directory and Common Prayer agree in that, which the
Directory was made to differ from the Liturgy in; both were made by Men. The
only imaginable difference is; the one was made by those who had Authority, the
other by those who had none.

That the Scripture is a complete Rule of Faith. And what cannot be proved
thereby, as it is interpreted by that Original and unquestionable Tradition, by
which we receive the Scripture it self, is not to be believed as a revealed
Article of Faith. We not only assert, but in the defense of this Practice of
ours, whereby we are said to overthrow the Scriptures being a complete Rule,
we contend for it as an advantageous Truth in this Cause: Because, this
Doctrine, Nothing is to be in Discipline, or Order, but what we find in
Scripture, is a Doctrine in Scripture no where to be found. So, that the very
Accusation is the same Crime it would be thought to reprove. And, what is clear
concerning this Principle, is as clear concerning their Practice; Till the Form
and Order in the Directory prescribed, be showed to be so in the Bible too. The
demand of the Written Word for every particular of Order and Discipline is
hugely plausible and senseless. I will not throw away Reason upon unreasonable
men, to show the vanity of that admired tenent; That whatever (though but of
Order, Decency, Discipline,) is not in the Written Word, which is a complete
Rule for all, is Will Worship, etc. I shall, for quiets sake, grant the
Scripture to be so; and, that the Directory, or any other beloved way, is
plainly in terminis in the Bible. But then, I shall require this in return,
that they would show me where-abouts, for I would willingly read it there; and
truly, this is but reasonable. They, who when we obey the Church, though in
matters of Order and Decency, tell us, We hang our Faith upon the Churches
sleeve, (though, by the way, the word [ Faith] is not very properly applied to
such matters); They of all men should not require us to hang our eyes upon
their sleeves; believe that Form to be plainly in Scripture, which we who know
our selves able to read, know not to be there; let them but show it us there,
and we will believe. Themselves approve not, they tell us, Believing by an
implicit Faith, and we as little like to see with implicit eyes.

That things indifferent are not unlawful to be used, because commanded, we
need no other Principle but their own; That Humane Commands alter not the
Nature of things, Ergo, They do not become unlawful by it; Ergo, they may even
then be used without sin; and if so, Whether then it be not a duty, I leave to
him to consider, who remembers Obedience to all Magistrates Civil and
Ecclesiastical to be enjoined in the terms of the greatest latitude? Those
general Commands signify something: sure, the general Rule of Decency and
Order were not intended for nothing. St. Paul reproved the irregularities at
Corinth, upon other Principles then would admit the wild extravagancies of any
thing that might be mistook for, or called, Tender Conscience. If any man seem
to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. So then, to
plead Christian Liberty against the Customs of the Church, is indeed spiritual
Pride, Faction, Singularity, though it may be called Conscience. There was a
disorder in the Church of Corinth, as we read, Chap. 14. v. 23. St. Paul
rectified it by the Rules of Decorum, the Principles of Reason, without any
reference to the revealed Will of God. [ Will they not say, Ye are mad?] In the
26. of that Chapter, he tells them, One had a Psalm, another a Doctrine, a
third a Revelation, etc. Every one after his own way: as, if there be no common
Authority which has power to restrain, what can hinder? It is very probable,
it was upon this very mistake of the Liberty given by Christ, as appears in the
close of the Discourse, ver. 33. God is not the Author of Confusion, etc. i.e.
They mistake the matter quite, Christ indeed abolisht the Laws of Moses, but
never told them he did those of Decency: He never instituted Ordinances of
disorder, or Sects of rudeness. And, if there must be Decency, and Order, no
confusion: If Authority must not judge what is so, but every private man for
himself; then I would fain know, how Order differs from Disorder. Though this
is clear in the nature of the thing; yet I shall show out of Scripture it self,
allowed Instances of the Churches Authority exercised over, and altering of,
Institutions confessedly immediate of divine Institution. At the Institution of
the Passover, Exodus 12.11. it is commanded expressly, they should eat it in
that manner, with their loins girt, shoes on their feet, staves in their
hands: yet our Savior according to the allowed and accustomed practice of that
Church, eat it in a Table-posture, His loins not girt, nor His staff in his
hand. Now what account can be given of this matter by those who allow the
Church in matters of this nature no Power, but declaratory what the written
Word in this case (which every Cobbler who can read, has) let themselves tell
us? The practice of the Kings in varying, as occasion served, in such cases
from the Law is mentioned and commended in Scripture, and has been often urged
in this case. The Truth, as well as the Practice, is clear; That the nature of
Government can no more be divested of this Power, than it can of being what it
pretends to be. This power of varying with occasions from the very express
Letter of Scripture, the Presbyterians as well as all the rest of the world
allow and practice. The Eucharist was not instituted to be in the morning, nor
at the Public Service. The Decree Act. 15. of things strangled, and blood,
though made by the authority and direction of God Himself, and in peremptory
terms, is not observed; and he who says, The Reason of that Command ceases,
does not answer, but confirm my Argument, That in change of Times we may alter
what is established in Scripture: much more Power, sure, we have over what is
not at all mentioned there. The Order of Widows, treated of in the fifth Chap.
of the 1. of Timothy, no where now. The famous Love Feasts, every where ceased.
Let them not delude the World with a show of Scripture-Discipline, when of that
little part which is come to our knowledge, themselves retain nothing. Though
how according to their Principles who allow no Authority in the Church, but
confine it to the Written Word, be our Times never so different, they can omit
or add any tittle without the most horrid Impiety, I ununderstand not.

There is a Query, p. 59. which they are very happy in, having taken generally
for granted. Sure I am, They cannnot say one word of sense to prove it. Whether
the Instituting significant Ceremonies be not the very Formality of
Superstition? I am very confident, were not our Ceremonies significant, they
would be styled silly and useless; and now they are significant, they are
Impious. To the Query I say this; The word Superstition ((...)) is used several
times in Scripture: but in what place they can pretend it to have that meaning,
I wish they would consider first, and tell us afterward. The Critics, I
suppose, will not befriend them with such a notion of it in the learned
Authors. I find St. Paul charging the Athenians, Act. 17.22. downright with
this crime, Ye are too superstitious. I suppose Mr. Cr. will not prove the very
formality of their fault, to be significant Ceremonies. I find in Scripture a
significant Ceremony, viz. The Holy kiss. If it was instituted by the Apostles
as they were Ordinary Governors of the Church, in that capacity they were to
have Successors while there is a Church or World; and so it proves the Churches
Power to institute significant Ceremonies. If they did it as Apostles, it
concerns us now.

The most material Objection is, p. 60. How comes it to pass, that the work of
the Ministry is divided in Ordination, Deacons Baptize but administer not the
Lords Supper?

That the Church should give power to Deacons to Baptize, though not to
administer the Sacrament some account may be given from the different natures
of both Sacraments. Both of them, it is confessed, are equally Holy, yet were
always looked upon with some difference: that of Baptism as of greater
necessity; that of the Lords Supper, as of greater solemnity, and consequently
requiring greater preparation. Yet Baptism always so esteemed, as not to be
administered by a Deacon, but in the absence of a Priest. The great clamor
amounts to this then, The Sacrament of Baptism, because of the sudden occasions
which may often require haste, has therefore been thought fit by the wisdom of
the Church (rather than the administration thereof in case of danger should be
omitted) to be permitted to be performed by a Deacon, in case a Priest be not
at hand to perform it. The case in the Lords Supper is clear otherwise;
because, that is not usually administered without public notice given to the
People some convenient time before, when it shall be done; at which time, it is
presumed, the Priest who gave the notice, will be present to attend the
service. There is a clear disparity in the Natures of the two Sacraments; those
Reasons which Apologize for Permission in case of the one, will by no means
reach the other. Nor do we want evidence for the Deacons, power to Baptize, out
of Scripture it self. In the 8. of the Acts, we read, that Philip the Deacon
(ver. 12.) Baptized; that it was that Philip, not the Apostle, appears, because
we find Peter and John sent to lay hands on those he preached to, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost, and accordingly we read, that they two did lay
their hands; but no manner of intimation, that he did join with them: which he
would certainly have done, had he been an Apostle. In the 21. of the Acts,
where his being one of the seven, i. e. a Deacon, is expressly mentioned, he is
there owned an Evangelist, though but a Deacon. He who will say, he was a
Presbyter, ought well to consider how to prove it.

The next of the Oxf. Reasons, is; That in taking this Oath, they should break
another. And, what security can they expect by an Oath, who themselves teach
men to break them? By this Covenant they swear to alter what they had by the
Parliaments Order sworn to maintain, in the Protestation 5. of May, 1641. Which
Mr. Cr. thus reconciles, p. 65. The House of Commons, the then known
Legislators, explained the Protestation, to be meant only so far as is opposite
to Popery. That is to say, The House of Commons are Legislators distinct from
King and Peers: For in that capacity they made that interpretation of an Oath,
which, sure, they were not solely to interpret, because they were not the sole
Imposers, and they declared the Lords meaning contrary to their Lordships
express protest to the contrary, that that was not their meaning. Their being
sole Legislators in defiance of King and Peers, (for so it was in that case;)
is very pretty Doctrine, which I would have been glad to have seen one Law to
have proved. I wonder Mr. Cr. should think it would be taken for granted. But
indeed, Mr. Cr. has one expression which could not have been well spared, The
House of Commons were then known to be, etc. I must confess, there were many
pretty things then known to be, though no man knew why. The words of the
Protestation, [ The Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, etc.] Now what is in the 39. Articles, is, I suppose, The Doctrine
of the Church of England: and then if the Covenant be contrary to any of those,
these are contradictory Oaths. The 36. Article, which declares, that there is
nothing, in the Book of Consecration, superstitious or ungodly, is hardly
reconcilable to the second Article of the Covenant. Sure, the meeting of the
Assembly is irreconcilable with the 21. Article, if we suppose His Majesty was
a King at that time. As to the explication of it, by the House of Commons,
notwithstanding the Lords express dissent; it was an arrogating of the whole
Parliamentary Power (and more) to themselves solely, and so a breach of the
Fundamental Constitution of that Assembly. And then declaring none fit to bear
Office but those who would except of that explication, and so concur with, and
assist them in that violence; was against the Liberty of the Subject, as
depriving Men of what they had no way legally forfeited. Where the Legislative
Power resides, I do not here mean to decide: But certainly, according to the
worst Principles then owned, The Commons were not the sole Legislators; and
then, sure, not the sole Interpreters: and therefore the Oxf. Men had very
little cause to accept of their meaning for Authentic. That Man is little
obeyed, whose words must be taken in the sense that another (and he, as
frequently in our case, his declared Enemy) shall put upon them.

The next is, The consistency of the Covenant with the Oath of Supremacy, which
binds us to defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, granted, or
belonging, united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: of which in
the 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. this is one; That the Clergy are not to Enact, Promulge,
etc. any new Canons, Constitutions, etc. or by whatever Name they shall be
called, unless the KINGS ROYAL Assent first be had to make, promulge, etc. Now
the very meeting of the Assembly, and this Covenant* was a defiance to this His
Prerogative: unless the Votes of the two Houses be the KINGS ROYAL Assent.

Mr. Cr. answer to this, is, ( p. 67.) in short, High Treason. That the Power
given to the King, is such a Power, as Bishops, Cardinals, Popes had used, not
such as Parliaments; who ever retained a Jurisdiction in themselves over Church
and Crown. As I understand words, Your Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects
assembled in Parliament, signifies not your Lords and Masters. How comes
Treason to be against the King, and not against them, if they are Supreme? How
come they to have ever retained a Jurisdiction over the Crown; when our Law so
often owns all Jurisdiction to flow from the Crown? How comes the Kings Masters
to be so absolutely at His disposal, as to be turned out as easily as it is
possible for him to say so? How comes England, in our own and other Chronicles,
and Laws, to be styled a Monarchy, an Imperial Crown? How comes it to pass that
we neither pay nor promise Allegiance to these our true Sovereigns? The King is
expressly called sole Supreme Governor in the Oath of Supremacy; and yet he
has Superiors. Sharing in the Supremacy with the King was all, I had thought,
would have been required: not retaining Jurisdiction over him. I wonder, if
this be true* That Mr. Cr. did so prevaricate with his Brethren, when he
pleaded (as he calls it) for the King: when it was indeed only against the
Sectaries; and so was not Loyalty, but Spite. But, why did he, if this be true,
urge Precepts for, and Examples of, Obedience out of Scripture, and the
Primitive Church (though by the way, they were such as themselves had before
taught them to slight or answer)? Why did he urge them, when they reached not
the case? For those Princes were confessedly Supreme. Our King it seems is not:
not God's Vicegerent, but the Peoples Officer; from whom he received his Power,
and is but Tenant at Will at best. They still retaining Jurisdiction over him,
may abridge it at pleasure. He is a stranger in England, that does not know all
Land to be held of the Crown; and every one of us pays acknowledgment that we
received it from thence: and all manner of Jurisdiction to be owned in Law to
proceed from the King, without the least concurrence of the two Houses. In
England, when any does Homage, Fealty, etc. in their Oath they perpetually have
a Salvo, of saving their Faith to other Lords. In the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, we find no such salvo of our Faith to the two Houses. No nor if any
of us take them during their Session, do we promise any equal Allegiance. But
the very Members do promise Allegiance to the King: inasmuch as no Member,
though never so fairly elected, can sit without taking those Oaths. But,
according to this Doctrine of Jurisdiction over the King, never any Laws in the
World were so sottishly penned as the English: to place all Marks of
Sovereignty, where it is not; and none at all where it is. Nay, that the very
two Houses, when they send to the King, as in that capacity, should Petition
their Inferior; and acknowledge themselves Humble, Loyal, and Obedient
Subjects to him, over whom they ever retained Jurisdiction. Ever retained! O
the brave English Monarchy of the two Houses of Parliament! This is a strange
concealed Jurisdiction of the two Houses, which never any King owned, or
Parliament claimed. When King James came in, he should have recognized them,
not they him: Nor was that Parliament faithful either to King or Country, in
concealing so important a concernment. I will cite but one Law, and that not
Ancient; for none, I think, can doubt its Opinion in this point, but one. When
the assent of the two Houses to Law-making was required; and after those words
(so much, to serve some men's turns, wrested beyond their import) Be it Enacted
by the King, Lords, and Commons came in fashion. It is Anno 24 Hen. 8. c. 12.
Whereas by sundry old Authentic Histories, it is manifestly expressed, That
this Realm of England, is an Empire governed by One Supreme Head and King,
having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the IMPERIAL Crown of this Realm; unto
whom a Body Politic compact of all sorts and degrees of People, and divided in
terms, and by names, of Spiritualty and Temporalty bin bound, and ought to
bear, next to God, a natural and humble Obedience. If the King is next to God;
what Jurisdiction the two Houses have over Him, I profess my self unable to
comprehend: or how, owning natural and humble Obedience signifies retaining
Jurisdiction over Him. But those who are not of this wild Opinion, do yet
embrace the ground of it, and stand stiff for a share in the Government. These
two grounds Mr. Cr. often insists upon, That their Assent is necessary to the
making and repealing Laws: and that the King receiving his Power from them,
they reserved a considerable part of it to themselves. The former I have spoken
to in [ The Rebels Plea] That that does not at all evince any such thing: and
it is also false in Experience; for the Monarchs of the East, whom none ever
supposed to have sharers in the Government, could not alter all their Laws at
pleasure, etc. And I there referred to an Author who had so admirably stated
that Point in Law and Reason, in that Incomparable Treatise [ The Case of our
Affairs], that nothing can be added on that Head, it is there done so fully and
clearly. I think, it is not easy to show such a King, whose Laws are as
ambulatory as his pleasure; and yet, sure, there are some whose Subjects are
not Partners in the Sovereignty. And certainly, so long as Kings are but single
men, and not naturally stronger then all their Subjects; they must rule by the
help and advice either of Gentlemen, or Ianizaries. The former way is (I think)
more honorable for the King, and better for his People. There can be no way of
proving this Proposition; unless it carries its own Evidence: which though
generally granted, I do not apprehend why. The Prince promises not to exercise
such a part of his Power, without the consent of his People, Ergo, They share
with him in it, is a consequence far from Necessary. When Tenants get Rights by
Promise, Grant, or Custom; do they presently share in the Dominion? Is none a
perfect Landlord that cannot turn out all his Tenants, as easily as say so? Can
no man make another a firm Estate in the Tenancy, but eo ipso he makes him his
Co-Landlord? Is it the same to have sharers in the Authority, and to be limited
in the exercise of it? This is perfectly the case: The King has granted to us,
that he will not alter our old Laws, or make new, till by common consent it is
represented to him expedient for the Public good: from hence alone we gather
that we share with him in the making of them.

As to the other Point, That Princes received their Power by Election, is a
very plausible Impossibility. Let us consider a rude scattered multitude, (as
Men are supposed to have been, when they chose their first Governors,) living
sine Lege, sine Lare; to meet together about a business of that nature, where
could not but be many, who apprehended it their Interest to use Violence. Can
we suppose them all to carry it fairly, and prudently, and equally? A thing,
which certainly we could not expect from the most civilized Commonwealth this
day in the World. There could not want bold Villains, who would make it their
business, to usurp Dominion over their well-meaning neighbors. There could not
but be many, who would think themselves wise enough to Rule. Nor could there
want enough, to make their title good by strong hand, by the Combination though
of a very few; and the Combination of a very few, could not but have overpowred
a very great undisciplined Rabble. Surely those men were not of the same
species with us; where a whole People meet together without any force over
them; every one gives his Vote freely; every one names his man; every one
acquiesces. It were certainly a pretty sight, when all the World was wise and
innocent; and, had it been so still, they would have sound no want of vernment.
If the Original of Government, had been a fair and free Election; it is not at
all probable, that the most ancient Governments would have been Monarchies. Not
only for that to have made more then one, would have been a very good exdient
to reconcile competitors: But because it seems, also at the first sight, better
to trust more then One. Or if they had been so; it is not like they would have
been so absolute. Arbitria Frincipum pro-legibus was a trust that would have
seemed too dangerous: and* that unlimited Power, scarce fit to have been
exercised over those who made him what he was. Whereas we find the most
Ancient Governors, still the most absolute. The ancient Historians who tell us
that Government at first came in this way of Election; because they do not tell
us in particular, but in general only: They dream to us, That Governors were
of old days chose for virtue, (the Best was made the Greatest;) not as now, by
Fraud, Violence, and Money, etc. Wherein there is a manifest spice of weakness,
in doting upon those who lived a great while ago; as if they were better then
others: As old Men use to tell us, what brave times there were, when they were
boys. When the Scripture (which may at least have the credit of a History with
us) assures us, that before the times they so much applaud, The earth was
filled with violence. How they should come to suppose so much Innocence in
mankind, they never had experience of; might possibly be (as all errors are
founded in some truth) some obscure Tradition of Adam in his innocence. I know,
it is ordinarily said, We are all Men, and a King is but so: We are all born
free; and what He is more then us, is by our own Act. Whereas the ground of
this arguing, we are born free, is it self a contradiction; insomuch that
whoever is born, is eo ipso not free, as having a Father to whom he is obl^ged
for all that he has, or is. By him we were begot, and nourished: and he who
gave us our life, had anciently (before Principalities grew large) the sole
power of taking it away. That this Paternity was the original of Power in
England; it is no obscure Evidence, That those to whom the greatest share of
the Administration is committed, are to this day under the style of the Kings
Cozins [Cognato nostro] so in the Writ whereby the Lords are called to
Parliament) as if their Proximity in blood, were their title to their Power. If
any tell me, That I devise a title for Princes, that cannot be of any use; they
not being able to show their right to be Political Parents, by proving
themselves the true Heir to the Natural one of a whole Nation. To this, I say,
I have showed a title, to which any other can as little pretend to, and so they
are not at all the worse. And no man can pretend right, that cannot show
himself that very person, whose very place I show them to possess: and it is a
rule in Law and Reason, That he who is in possession, has a right against all
the World, but him who has the very right. The very right, if the present
Princes have not, none can pretend to; and if any have, they have: if any other
had, they have certainly relinquished it by so long a Nonclaim. And to set up
any other Person, or other Form of Government, for a People to pretend, that
because they were brought to that consent by force, and so not obliged any
longer then the force continues; is absurd: and their consent and submission
is obligatory; because it was free, though forced. Free, I say, though forced;
I am not ashamed to own that expression: For, no outward force can constrain us
to promise Obedience further then we our selves please. For it is a truth known
by all who understand Ethics, or themselves; That whatever I do to avoid a
greater danger, I do willingly: and as I judge it in that state of affairs, (as
taking it to be the lesser evil,) I may rationally; and it is clear, I do
freely, because I do actually, choose it. If I part with my liberty; nay, with
my conscience, to gratify him who has de facto a power to kill me: in this
later case as it is certain I sin; It is as certain I do it voluntarily:
because all sins are so. For, if he de facto may kill me; and, that he may not
use that power, I promise him to do this, or that: I have quid pro quo; my life
for my subjection. He who might kill me, and so prevent all the harm it were
possible for me to do, and upon my promise of obedience, lets me live; trusts
me: and then if I am false, I break my trust. Though he had no right to force
me to make the promise; yet he has an unquestionable tie upon me to the thing
promised, even my own promise.

If it be here replied, according to this; All who were forced to take the
Covenant, or engaged to the late Power, etc. are by this obliged to keep it.

I answer, First, I do not mean to make an excuse for any who did either. But
secondly, I deny the Consequence: Because, though I say, That our own Act, may
deprive us of our own Rights; I neither say, nor think, that it can deprive a
third person of his: which was the case, as to the King, and all the Bishops,
and Deans and Prebends. Consider though but as so many single persons of the
Covenant, it binding us to deprive them of their livelyhoods, they had not been
legally convict of crimes to forfeit the same: nor only does it bind to destroy
their Rights, but all the Royal Party; nay, all who had done any thing, which
at any time was, or might be voted malignity, though it were but in living
where the King took Contribution, when they had no where else to live. And
these to be judged, not according to any Rule; but as, (according to the fourth
Article) The Supreme Iudicatories, or Committees from them should think
convenient]. Though I affirm a man's own act may prejudice his own right: yet no
man had such a right over others concernments as to subject them to
Committeemens pleasure: and that will reach the case of the Oath of Allegiance,
it was not at his own dispose to give it to any late Powers. I have contended
against the Government being by compact, by having submitted to the King: for
be it Paternity, or Conquest in a War, just or unjust; it overthrows that
Doctrine, of Parliaments Ever retaining a Jurisdiction over Church and Crown.
But should I grant the Original of Government to have been compact; it would
not infer our retaining Jurisdiction: because we might have submitted
absolutely. If ^arliaments have such a power; they receive it from the King, or
People. Not from the King, sure; but if they have, let them show it. Not from
the People, as their Representatives; for so the Lords are not at all
concerned. If the Commons have it, they must show when the People gave it them,
(if they had it to give). Their Writ expresses no such thing; and by Grant
they must have it. For Assemblies are not born but constituted: their whole
Being, or Authority, is purely derivative: and if they will say by grant; let
them produce it.

But after all this, the Covenant is not justifiable, though the Parliament had
such a transcendent and unheard of Authority. For, being it is professed in the
Conclusion to be an encouragement to Foraign Churches, to enter into the like
Association and Covenant, etc. where there is no such pretense of Parliamentary
Power: the Covenant consequently must needs be scandalous, as inviting to
downright Rebellion; if there be a possibility for any such thing as
Rebellion; and so to sin, if Rebellion be a sin: and if it be not: I would fain
know what is? And for the same reason, except the two Houses be Supreme in
Ireland too; they cannot oblige us to reform that, where they as well as we
have no Authority. Though Ireland is under the Crown of England; I suppose the
Crown is not theirs.

The second Article of the Covenant.
As an inducement to like well of Episcopal Government, the Antiquity and
Universality of it is considered: an Argument worth considering at least;
certainly of moment, with any but those who will not be persuaded, that there
ever were pious or prudent men, who sought God, or were directed by Him, till
the Scottish Army came into England. It is, certainly, free from that prejudice
which lies against the Covenant; that Bishops Lands were Antichristian as soon
as their Calling was. Men had got a very fair Title to Bishops Lands, by
swearing the Bishops should not keep them; as if wrong ceased to be wrong, when
men entered into a League to do it. How the Parliament came to the power of
disposing of Church Lands; I am, (and believe they are too,) very ignorant. The
Bishops received their Lands from them who were the right owners; and therefore
certainly, had it in their power to give it to whom they would: nor were they
by any Law disabled from giving it to that particular use. And I presume that
that place in Scripture is not easily produced, Where whatever is given to the
Church, is declared forfeited to the State. For the weight (I suppose) in the
Argument, drawn from the Antiquity of Episcopal Government, is hardly avoided
by that Text, Redeemed from the vain conversation received by Tradition from
their fathers.

In his Answer to the Oxf. Reasons, Mr. Cr. urges The Bishops constant
struglings with, and encroaching on the Royal Authority, etc. p. 73. The
struggling of Bishops which he means, was in behalf of Papal, not Episcopal
Authority. Sure, he has forgot the Practice and Principles of the Scottish
Presbyters: and the English Promoters of this Covenant were, certainly, very
great encroachers upon the Royal Authority; if ROYAL relates to the KING. Their
Brethren in Scotland, whom they Covenant to be the same with; have stood in
(and owned the) Defiance of King and Parliament, and claim a coactive Power
Independent on either. The Convocations in England acknowledge themselves to
have no power to Enact or Promulge any new Canons, without the Kings leave.
Which of the two are the Encroachers then, it is not hard to determine. Si fur
displice at Verri, etc. The Disciplinarian Calvinists, objecting disloyalty to
Bishops, is like as the Doctrinal ones accused the Arminians of making God the
Author of sin, and damning men for what Himself had necessitated them to do.
It Is a good way of hanging others for our own faults.

The next Crime is, Punishing the best men for things indifferent. i. e.
Disobedience to such commands it could not be unlawful to obey in: because the
things were indifferent, i. e. such as were not unlawful. If they were, as Mr.
Cr. says, mere trifles: it is no sign of the best men to be contentious about
such things, about trifles. Some little prejudices against, or rather mistakes
about, Episcopacy, of no moment, I pass over, and come to the Capital
Objection, p. 75. Episcopacy is a plain and clear Popery, etc. So say Salmasius
and Beza, Episcopi Papam pepererunt. I do here very much question, whether the
Gentleman believes himself: and that not only, because of the notoriousness of
the contrary evidencing those two Governments, to all who understand the
Constitution of them, to be not only different, but inconsistent. But also
because the granting of the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy would overthrow
unavoidably that of the Papacy. And this is even by Mr. Cr. himself, before he
thought on it, acknowledged, when ( p. 82.) in summing up his Authors, he
brings none who speak so clearly for him as a Pope. He tells us, that Pope
Nicolas declared (we acknowledge their Desire and Interest it should be so
thought) Episcopatuum Cathedras instituit Romana Ecclesia, etc.

It seems, Sir, Popery is no friend to the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy. And p.
78, Mr. Cr. tells us, That the Pope's Legate interdicted the Dispute in the
Council of Trent, concerning the Divine Right of Episcopacy; or directed it in
such general and uncertain debates, that there might be no determination of it.

Is the Pope so much his own Enemy; as not to endure the determination of that
which is his best support? Does the Pope so much dread his best plea, as not to
endure to hear, it, or let any own it? Sure, they had other thoughts of the Ius
Divinum of Episcopacy at Rome: which, sure I am, is as much abhorred there as
at Geneva.

And truly they have Reason for it: and they know it. Hence proceeded that
violent Opposition and fearful Outcryes against that Tenent, we read of in
Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent, p. 497. Lan^rius a Jesuit tells
them, Meram esse contradictionem, Velle Pontificem esse caput Ecclesiae, velle
regimen esse Monarchicum; and tamen affirmare, Esse aliquam Potestatem non
derivatam ab ipso, sed aliunde acceptam. So that Bishops deriving their
Authority from Christ, destroys his Holiness from being the Spiritual Monarch:
because he is not then, the fountain of all Power. It seems, this Learned
Romanist understood very well, that these Tenants, which pass at Lectures for
one and the same; are irreconcilable Contradictions: and that which is called
Popery in England, quite destroys that which is so at Rome. This plain and
clear Papacy pulls down the Pope. And the Reasons are summed up to our hands, by
that incomparably judicious Historian, Inde enim colligebant Claves non fuisse
soli Petro datas, and Concilium esse supra Papam: fiebantque Episcopi aequales
Pontifici; cui nihil relinquebatur nisi quaedam prae aliis Praerogativa. Thence
would follow, if Episcopal Authority were by Divine Right, immediately derived
from Christ, without dependence on the Sea of Rome: It would follow, that the
Keys were not only given to St. Peter, and consequently the disposal of them
not solely in his successor; then a Council, as consisting of men whose
Authority was as immediately divine, as his own, would be above the Pope; every
Bishop was the Popes equal as to that, who would then by Divine Right have
nothing but a primacy of Order. These are amongst other consequences, from the
Divine Right of Episcopacy once granted, as impossible to be avoided; as unlike
to be approved at Rome. The clearing of this should, in all Reason, commend
Episcopacy to those men, who make opposition to Rome the rule of their Faith.
But oh the intolerable (though holy) villainy of those godly Cheats, who
Preached up this Tenent for Popery: which all, who understand what Popery
means, know to be the bane of it; and was at Trent, by the Sea of Romes most
skilful Advancers discarded as such. It seems some not esteemed Jesuits can
lie for God; and pious frauds can be used, and rayled at.

It is said by the Oxf. men in their third ground of their first exception,
That they are not satisfied of that Phrase in the Covenant [ Lest we be
partakers of other men's sins]. They do not apprehend how they are guilty of
those sins (suppose them to be sins, which is not yet proved) unless they
endeavor by fire and sword to root them out. To which Mr. Cr. Replies, p. 76.
That they are so guilty, but has not one word to prove it. That Saints in
Scripture did weep for other men's sins, I read: But that they esteemed them to
be made their own, if they did not fight them down, I do not read. There were
Kings of Israel who were Idolaters, and the Law was general, that they who were
such should be put to death: yet, I do not find the Prophets telling the
People, that it was the same thing for them not to stone the King, as it was
for him to worship stones. And yet this is the Import of that expression; Those
are our sins, we are partakers of them, if we do not pull them down: The
Foundation of the second Article of the Covenant, is harder then all the Laws
of God besides, (if it self be one). It binds us to the extirpation of all
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, or whatever shall be found contrary
to the Power of Godliness; and this they make to be every man's duty, and swear
him to it, under no milder expressions then these; [ Lest we be partakers of
other men's sins, and so in danger to receive their plagues]. And here, if we
consider the way of endeavoring this Covenant practiced and required, viz.
Fire and Sword; and with this their Invitation to Foraign Churches, where there
are no Parliaments with pretense of share in the Government, so that they must
only be looked upon as so many private men; on whom yet this duty is incumbent:
It teaches us this by that Engagement, [ Lest we partakers of other men's sins,
etc.] That a godly man can never be at peace with himself, till he be at war
with every one he knows or thinks wicked. He must perpetually expect Gods
vengeance on himself, when he is not executing it upon another.

The first thing of moment against this Article, is p. 78. That the Universal
alleged Practice of 1500 years will more weaken then strengthen the Divine
Right; for, the most pure estate was before that in the first 140. years. I
shall not at all insist upon the Catalogues of Bishops, in unquestionable
Histories to be had even from the beginning. But only say this, That all
Christian Churches in those days should deviate from the Primitive pattern,
and all the same way, no common cause imaginable inducing them to err the same
way, is a thing highly incredible. As to that which is ordinarily urged, viz.
Ambition, it could not, if we consider the Persons, or Times, have been
universal; nor, if we consider the thing, have been at all. Being a Bishop,
having only the privilege of being burnt next.

Mr. Cr. in the following Pages makes demands for Texts. Though the Article
insists only on Practice, and so is not concerned. Which if not granted good,
National, Parochial Churches, The Canon of the Scripture, and the Lord's Day,
are lost. Nor is this Truth utterly past by in Scripture: though if it had,
considering that the intent was to deliver to us Doctrine, not the precise Form
of Discipline, we might rationally have appealed to Antiquity in that Point, i.
e. to the Practice of those from whom we receive the Canon of the Scripture,
and without whose Suffrage, were it once questioned, it were not possible
without immediate Revelation to have it sufficiently attested to be what it
pretends to be.

Mr. Cr. tells us, that Bishops and Presbyters are entrusted with the same
Power of Governing. But I cannot be satisfied in this particular: since I find
Timothy and Titus being single men, are without any intimation of others being
equal with them, directed how to receive accusations, and to rebuke and
censure. Evidences, in my apprehension, pregnant enough of sole Jurisdiction.

To disprove the Universal alleged Practice, he tells us, That the King of
Denmark in the year 1537. exstirpated it, and so did the Scots since. Goodly,
goodly! And so did those he pleads for, the long Parliament. I cannot apprehend
but that either he droles, or is utterly ignorant of the nature of Tradition,
as taking it to be, what none ever contradicted; a notion of it, which they
that understand what it means, have not. Sure I am, at that rate, the Deity of
Christ, cannot approve it self to be Catholic Doctrine, because there were
Arians of old, and are Socinians now.

The mutual correspondence by Letters which was at that time used in the Church
forbad any Church to be ignorant of what all the Churches do hold; so that
Innovations could not but be discovered: And to suppose, that the same
Imposture should be imposed upon all the Churches together in those early
days, as an Apostolic Tradition, upon so many various Countries, and
Inclinations upon men, whose choicest care was in delivering, and dying for
that Faith they had once received from the Apostles; is to suppose all the
World to be out of their wits together. If they tell us, It was the ambition of
Pastors, that introduced that Order; no account can be given how this should be
universal, and yet not perceived, or resisted: and this is as strange as to the
Exemplar Piety of those Times. And yet more, in the nature of the thing it is
absurd: For their ambition in that case, could tend to nothing but a more quick
and severe Martyrdom, to be sooner burnt then their fellows. The Heathens spite
was at the Bishops as well as the Presbyterians.

Aerius being called a Heretic, for promoting that Opinion himself glories in,
he qualifieth with this; That Austin only calls it Proprium dogma, p. 87.
Which term in St. Austin's esteem signifies nothing less. In his judgment,
for a private man to oppose his own private Opinion, dictated by discontent (as
some late ones are known to have been for not being Bishops themselves) in a
matter of fact against all Records, Histories, and the owned Practice of all
the Churches, was Spiritual Pride and Folly. And St. Austin in that case, would
(if pertinaciously held) not at all have stickt to have called it Heresy. If
the expression he uses do not import as much.

In the Answer to the fourth Exception handled (I know not why) before the
third, I find nothing material, only p. 92. in answer to that acknowledgement,
That the Holy Church was founded in Prelacy, because the Church, when that
Statute was made, was Popish, he insinuates that it was so when it was first
founded in Prelacy. A thing which the Romanists have long in vain labored to
prove; and if Mr. Cr. will at last do it effectually, the Pope will (no doubt)
acknowledge his good sevice with many thanks.

The third of the Oxf. Reasons is now considered, Why it was not in its own
turn considered, I know not, unless this Book was wrote by a Club, and he to
whose lot this fell, was not timely provided.

The first was this, The Oxf. men allege, That they had, as they were by Law
required, testified their approbation to that Government as agreeable to the
Word of God, which they are now required to swear down as contrary to it.

To which Mr. Cr. (if not, for the above mentioned Reason, his fellow-helper)
tells us, The Article might only intend it to be a Political Civil
Constitution, as indeed all our Statutes do suggest, and so an adiaphoron, etc.
p. 94.

This is the best Salvo to reconcile this Oath with the Subscription, and this
Mr. Cr. himself refutes, p. 95. By telling us, That in the Book Ordering
Priests, etc. It is directly affirmed, That it is evident by the Holy
Scriptures, etc. That from the Apostles, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, etc.
Which words declare their intent to found that Government upon the Word of God,
not the Law of the Land; and so that Interpretation of his is false: and the
Oxf. men's Reason good, and the Covenant irreconcilable with the Subscription.

The Oxf. men's second Reason is, They had received Orders from Bishops Hands,
and theref^re could not so ill requite them, as to lay to their hands to pull
them down. To which Mr. Cr. Replies, p. 96. In so doing, they would do the
Bishops a real kindness, of which he gives us this satisfactory account.
Richard Havering Archbishop of Dublin, dreamt that a Monster heavier then the
whole world stood upon him, and when he waked, thought it to be his Bishopric,
and renounced it. Sure Mr. Cr. was scarce awake, when he thought to answer the
University with a dream.

The fourth Reason is this, They held their livelyhoods by such Titles, etc.
And, sure, being not convict of any crime, were not to be bound to undo
themselves, and were to the contrary sworn. Cr. p. 97. They held their Estates
at the pleasure of the Parliament, whose Power is over the enjoyment of all
public (much more particular) Societies, against whose Laws, no Domestic
Laws, or Oaths could bind them.

We have already showed how this Covenant destroys the Kings Prerogative: this
Doctrine teaches us in what a high degree it asserts the Proprieties and
Liberties of the Subject. The Power of Parliaments over our Estates, so as to
dispose of some part in Taxes according to our several Proportions, is indeed
clear and legal. (To prevent wilful mistakes, I do not mean to justify the
Taxes the Long Parliament imposed. For they may dispose of the Subjects money
to the King: They have no pretense of right to dispose of it to themselves).
But this Power of Parliaments which Mr. Cr, pleads for, is equally groundless
and unreasonable: a power so unlimited both in regard to their King and
Country; as it is not fit in regard of either they should have, nor does it at
all appear how, or when, they came to have it. It can never be made appear to
be one of the due privileges of Parliament: unless we suppose, whatever it is
possible for them to Vote, to be so, though against all the Laws and the King;
and then what a pretty Animal is his Majesty of England.

But in earnest, if it be considered by any, but those who no otherwise are
like to get Estates; or can justify what they have already got; That the two
Houses may dispose at pleasure of all the Lands of public and particular
Societies (and sure, then private men's; for so, beside that other capacity, are
those who are interessed in Public Lands) though c^nvict of no crime; That
they may cancel all Oaths: is, what I never till now thought to be, one of the
Liberties of the Kingdom. If their Power and Trust be so great, I would we had
not at least, the security of an Oath, that they would use it well. By this
Doctrine, they may even strike up a bargain, and share all amongst themselves.
And, call you this Securing Propriety?

A Monarchy may possibly be founded in Nature, and so in himself retain all
rights he has not parted with. But such a thing as an Assembly, as our
Parliaments, can have no pretense to any thing (as I before have observed) but
what they have by Grant from him who calls them, or compact with those who send
them. Whatever therefore they cannot thus show, they are not to pretend to; for
Assemblies are not born, but made.

As to Lands that the two Houses have any thing to do, further then by
Established Laws they are enabled, which receive all force from the Kings
assent; I cannot imagine ground for.

Our Lands we all receive from, and hold of, the KING; as Sir Edward Cook in
the first part of his Instit. and, as I remember, in the very beginning: but
that we at all depend upon the two Houses for them, He (though a great adorer
of that Assembly) affirms not. But if we had received them partly from the
two Houses, (of which there is not the least shadow or color,) yet that would
not justify this Doctrine, They may dispose of them at pleasure; as Mr. Cr.
prodigiously affirms to the Oxf. men, who allege, That they were not convict
of any crime, because they had not broke the conditions upon which they
received them. Did they, at the same time, give them, and keep them, at their
own dispose? And upon this ground it is, that His Majesty could not, without
injustice, and consequently without sin, should He have agreed to the Houses in
that particular; (though in the Courts of Earth, it might have had the effect
of a Law; yet in that of Heaven, it would have passed for Iniquity established
by a Law:) because by giving it to another, he passed away that interest from
himseif, when he gave it away. The Dominium utile I mean, and in this, I think,
consists the propriety of the Subject. But Mr. Cr. has placed this
All-disposing Power in the two Houses, when they were in hostile opposition to
the King: and so makes us as great Slaves, as Earth has any; to our
Fellow Subjects. And much greater slaves are all we freeborn People of
England, made by the assertors of our Liberties; then Villains were among our
selves. For I remember, though not the page, and have not the book by me, that
Sir Edw. Cook in his Chap. of Villenage, affirms, That whatever the slave had,
was his Lords; yet if the Villain passed any thing to another before the Lord
seized or claimed it, such a passage was valid: and if the Lord himself had
made the Villain any fixed Estate, he was so far from retaining any power over
it, that it enfranchised his Villain. In both these cases, we are worse then
Villains, though never so much freeborn. For after the first owner, i. e.
their founders, has passed the Land away, (as in the Oxf. men's case) the
Houses Power remains as good as ever: which the Lords of the Villains did not.
And in the second, let our Estate be never so fixed, it is, as Mr. Cr. assures
us, p. 97. but at the pleasure of the Parliament; and by that too, he means,
the two Houses. And this is securing Propriety: but so they secured the King at
Holmby, and the Isle of Wight. Certainly, this Scottish Doctrine would never
have been pleaded for by any, but those whom the two Houses had assured, they
should have a considerable share in the next scamble. But I marvel the People
should like this Doctrine; they have (sure I am) no Reason, but because it is
called Securing Propriety. And thus it is true of us, what Charles the Fifth, is
said, by Strada, to report of the Dutchmen, Nullos esse populos qui servitutis
nomen magis execrentur magis, patiantur. We cannot endure to be called, Slaves,
slaves; but will earnestly contend to be so. And truly, the effect would have
been the same in both, had our Noble Patriots been uninterrupted Victors; who
fought against Taxes, till we came to pay the greatest in all the World.

All this which has been hitherto urged in this Point, has been in their
behalf only as men which equally concerns all the Nation. There is something
yet for them, in that capacity, to be urged, which is peculiar to it. How? If
besides the interest the Oxf. men had in them as theirs; God had an interest in
them as His. Sure I am, if God does accept of any thing from men under the
Gospel: He has such an interest in those Lands; because they were granted to
God, by King and Parliament; and when they were in a National capacity, and so
according to Mr. Cr. Divinity, p. 145. That obligation not to divert them to
other uses, lies upon us while we are a Nation. By that National Act, each man
is barred, even those who are not by a Personal. This is Mr. Cr. own Divinity
throughout his whole Sixth Section; particularly in p. 145, 146, etc. The
Covenant swears us to that we were before obliged not to do. That that was one
alteration Christ brought into the World; That God would henceforth accept of
no fixed Estate in any thing from men, to the use of those who were employed in
the Sacred Function: is a part of the Gospel not at all revealed in Scripture.
That whatever is given to the Church, is forfeited to the State, (though given
before the Civil Law had prohibited it;) is a strange Statute of Mortmain. The
Money Ananias his Lands were sold for, God is said ( Acts 5.) to have an
Interest in: Would He not have had an Inrest in the Land too, had it not been
sold? This is a very strange Evasion; but only men must say something. When the
only reason why God had an Interest in the money, was, because it was the price
of his own Land. Whence can my title come to the money, for which such Land was
sold, co nomine, as the Price of it, if I have no interest in that Land? That
because God does not command our Lands, therefore he will not accept them; the
so much derided Oxford Casuists know to be a pitiful lame consequence. The
Supreme Authority, where ever residing, is every where the same equally
absolute. Suppose, had the Supreme Authority disposed of Ananias his Money; had
they not in that Case robbed God? Sure then, by the very same Reason, our
Parliaments may do so too. If you say, The case is different; (our Magistrates
are Christians, theirs not:) this is not to the purpose. For Civil Authority is
not founded in the truth of our Religion. And it is a pretty nicety, That it is a
great sin for any to rob God, but those who believe him to be a God. This were
a most admirable plea for a Rebel; who owned him whom he fought against, to be
his lawful Prince. If I should urge examples out of the Old Testament; the
answer is ready: Whatever is there to be found, if men have not a mind to it,
is part of the Ceremonial Law abolisht at the coming of Christ. Though why any
thing should be counted part of that Law, which Moses does not set down as
such; nor I, nor they, can give any tolerable account. They must, to begin,
say, Moses his description is imperfect. But that this is one of the
differences of the Priesthood of the Law, and the Ministry of the Gospel; that
in the Lands of the former God had an Interest, and not in those of the latter:
is, I think, not from Scripture to be found. What I cite out of the Jewish
story in this matter, is answered; They were Jews: what out of other stories;
They were Heathens. If I should cite the example of the Patriarch under the Law
of Nature, and show them to have always esteemed God interested in such Lands:
Then their answer is, themselves know not well what; but at last, all the
Patriarchs actions, were Figures of things to come, the body is Christ. And
that, as the rest, was Typical. If I ask, Typical of what? I must be fain to
tell them my self; Priests all along being capable of Land in Gods Right before
the Gospel, was Typical of this, That those under the Gospel should not be so
capable. Believe it, a most special and proper Type it is. If God has an
interest in those Lands, I hope the Parliaments jurisdiction, (though very much
improved of late) is not over Him too. I verily persuade my self, had the
Committee of Safety pulled down Tithes; some men would have found such a sin as
Sacrilege to be possible to be committed in the times of the Gospel, though
there be no command in the Gospel for them.

But after all this, there is a material thing in this Exception, not taken
notice of by Mr. Cr. which is, The Iniquity of this Article, in obliging the
Oxf. men to pull down those, by whose titles many of them hold their
lively-hoods, i. e. to bind them, (even before they are convicted of any crime)
to undo themselves. The wildly large power of Parliaments alleged, is not
large enough to reach this. For, though they have power to dispose of my Estate
at pleasure; yet, to bind me sincerely, to the utmost of my power, to endeavor
to assist them in ruining my self, is a thing far different. Where there is a
just Power, and deserved sentence (both which were in this case wanting) though
I may be obliged to submit; yet sure, not sincerely and to the utmost of my
Power to endeavor to have it executed upon me.

In the 101 page, He considers that Argument used in behalf of Episcopal
Government, viz. The agreeableness of it to the civil constitution of the
Kingdom, which he proves to be no Argument by two Mediums. The first is,
Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, Ergo. The second is this, Christ has a
Regal Power, and is faithful in the Administration of his house: ergo, The
agreement of a Church Government to the Civil constitution of the State, is no
Argument for such a Church Government.

As to the later Argument, I shall not answer it at all; but desire the Reader
to consult the place, that he may see that the Argument is his own: and then
ask him, Whether in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth; ergo,
The agreeableness of, etc. were not altogether as conclusive.

As to the former, though a slighted Argument, I say it is a material one: and
it is none of the least commendations of Christian Religion, that it provides
even for the temporal security of men and states; and, were they obeyed
universally, we should have a kind of heaven before we came thither. But had
Mr. Cr. but read over the whole verse, he argues from, and but considered the
occasion of its being delivered; he would sure not have used it in this
Argument. He could not have avoided a Doctrine, which sets a clear distinction
between the Church of Christ, and that of Scotland; it is this, My Kingdom is
not of this World, else would my servants fight: i. e. His Kingdom which was
not of this world, was not to be promoted by the way of this World. That Cause
which refused the assistance of Legions of Angels, scorned the aid of Armies of
Rebels.

Against Bishops superiority over Presbyters, and their meddling in Temporal
Affairs, there is a Prohibition brought out of Scripture, The Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion, etc. But it shall not be so among you; but whoever
will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and whoever will be Chief
among you, let him be your Servant, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. Mark. 10.42, 43, 44.
Luke 22.23, 24.

The Impertinency of this place is clear at first sight. For it proves nothing
of this nature, or too much: concludes not against us, unless against them too:
For it concludes for an absolute equality, if any thing in this Point; and so
Super-Intendents are as bad as Bishops, and the sin of Temporary Moderators is
coeval to their Office. The only difference which is to be between all
Christians, especially Clergymen, (if the sense of the words be this
alleged) is, Who shall be most humble. But sure, Christ's Precept and
Practice, did not so much differ: The Twelve and the Seventy were, sure, not
equal. Timothy and Titus were Superiors to those whom they were to rebuke, to
judge. The Angel of each Church in this Revelation had some authority, sure,
over those he was threatened for not inflicting Ecclesiastical Censures upon. If
this be the Import of the place, there is no manner of Authority in one
Churchman over another, (if there be of any Christian over another); so that
every Synod may be reproved with, Ye take too much upon you, etc. if one single
Presbyter dissent, and they punish him. But the truth is, These words do rather
teach Superiors how to behave themselves, then deny any to be so; and suppose,
rather than forbid, some to be greater and more chief then others: He who is
great, etc. He who is chief.

By the usual Application of this Mistake, it is also concluded (I suppose)
from the first words, The Princes, etc. exercise Dominion, etc. But it shall
not be so among you, etc.) unlawful for Clergymen to be endowed with any Civil
Authority: and Mr. Cr. p. 101. has stated the Question, What will become of
the Bishops, when the Dukes be damned?

That Clergymen may not meddle with Temporal Affairs, (if a truth) is such a
one, which, the Presbyterian Ministers are the most unfit people in the world
to plead for: of whose guilt in this particular, these Nations, and almost all
Europe, are public and bloody Testimonies. Nor did they procure the least
share they have had by the pretense of having none, and disclaiming to have
any. Here I might be copious, but to omit others, I shall peculiarly stick to
the business in hand, and only intimate the self-condemnation they brought upon
themselves, in relation to this Tenent, and the Oxf. men. To be Head of a
College, is certainly a Civil Authority: and this, sure, they did not refuse;
but contend for with War, fraud, and violence. Did they not very godlily Visit
themselves into what a godly Minister dares not be, as being incapable? To be a
Vice Chancellor as so, and in that right to be a Justice of Peace, are
Authorities, (I think) not purely spiritual. And to be a Schoolmaster is so
too. And to take the other Argument used in this case; The Ministry requires
the whole man: this takes up more time from his Function Ministerial than to be
a Peer of the Realm. And this last instance brings in another, To be Master of
a Family is a Civil Authority; Correction, there not purely spiritual.

But the truth, though urged in behalf of both these Presbyterian Tenants,
signifies nor of, nor on, to either. They are an Answer to a Question; they are
the deciding (or rather taking away the Foundation of) a Controversy. We shall
therefore endeavor to attain their true meaning, by that sure and easy and
neglected Method; considering the occasion upon which those words were
delivered. For it is not citing, but profaning Scripture, to urge it as a proof
of what it was never intended to concern: But such shifts those men are
unavoidably brought to, who first resolve upon Conclusions and Practices, and
then are necessitated to seek Principles to make them good; those men must make
the best of such as they can get.

The Occasion of those words must needs be the same with the Quarrel he thereby
appeased: unless we will suppose our Savior to have spoke besides the business
He spoke to; and the Disciples satisfied with nothing to the purpose: which
Disputes about being made great, seldom are. Which was this; The Jews had an
Opinion of the Messiah as of a temporal Prince; and the Disciples were not free
from that Error: and in this sense it was, they thought he should restore the
Kingdom to Israel. Upon this account, they thought their Religion entitled
them to Secular Grandeur, and were sharing the great Offices. And that this was
it Christ reproved, and that this was the very mistake; is as often evident, as
there are discourses of theirs about Christ's Kingdom: The not thorough purging
out of which Tenent, was the cause, that one branch of it occasioned the
Millenarian Error in the first Ages. Christ had indeed promised them they
should reign with Him in his Kingdom: But let them not nourish carnal pride,
for His Kingdom was not to be here. All which can be gathered from hence, is,
That Christians, as such, cannot claim Secular Honors: or, if they have them,
they are not by reason of them to be supercilious toward, but more useful to,
those who want them; not to scorn, but to help their Brethren. This does not
all prove, That if the Civil Magistrate, at whose disposal Honors are, will
dignifie Clergymen, they may not accept it; when it may be the concernment and
the welfare of Church and State: which are no such Enemies as that they cannot
be administered to by the same Persons. I wonder, how so much is so securely
built on this Text, when it cannot be made out, that Christ spoke these words
to the Apostles as in the capacity of Clergymen. That Clergymen, either as
so, or as Christians, have not an eternal Right to Secular Honors, I grant.
Christ bequeathed no such thing: but that He any where made them incapable, if
the Civil Magistrate (who is the Fountain of Honor,) bestows any upon them, I
no where read. He left those things as he found them: to be bestowed as he
whose right it was to dispose of them should see cause. Christ would,
certainly, have sharply and plainly reprehended such an Universal Custom, had
he intended to remove it. But seeing He and his Apostles said nothing against
it, they certainly intended it to remain as before.

The Exception to the third Article, is, That there is a limitation put upon an
absolute duty. [To defend the Kings Person and Authority, in the preservation
of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom]. Though the King is really
bound to those things: yet his neglect of his duty, does not discharge us of
ours. To this Mr. Cr. replies, Those words are not a limitation of duty; but a
predication of the capacity the Parliament and People were in, and so the
meaning is; We being in the preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdom, shall endeavor to preserve the King, etc. An Interpretation not
to be made good by Grammar: To which (I must needs confess this though) it may
as easily be reconciled, as to their Actions. All Declarations and Sermons were
but Satyrs against the King; they represented Him equally an Enemy to God and
Man, Religion and Liberty; upon which score, they justified Violences, as great
as they would have his Crimes thought. In short, they had this pretense, to
deprive him of all power, and that he was not fit to be trusted with any. Let
any man but ask himself, what case the King was in, what usage he had, or might
expect in those days; he would readily grant this Interpretation of Mr. Cr.
(which is indeed as far from the sense of their words, as truth of their
actions) to show them to be as Loyal, as he should be thought by Mr. Cr.
friendly; who should revile and persecute him all ways imaginable for
Nonconformity; and then should thus manifest to all the world his tenderness
to him, should engage multitudes of his powerful and enraged Enemies, in a
Covenant to defend Mr. Cr. in defense of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England. A Parenthesis would be in Mr. Cr. Eye, a slender ground of our good
will toward him. This is not only the natural and practiced meaning of that
phrase, but the confessed and owned one, Mr. Cr. Legislators, the Commons, in
Answer to the Scotch Commissioners 28. November 1646. p. 21. acknowledge and
plead for this sense of those dangerous words, [ They are to preserve the King,
etc. Relatively, viz. In the preservation of, etc.] And frequently in that
Declaration, blame the Scots, for mentioning the Preservation of the King, and
omitting that clause upon which they were bound to defend him. This being then
the natural and confessed meaning of those words, and, in Mr. Cr. own
jugdement, sinful, p. 103. Because, as he truly there urges, Allegiance, and so
the preserving the Kings Person and Authority, is an absolute duty founded in
the Relation, without regard to the Quality, Piety or Impiety of the Person,
etc. And this is a duty we are bound to God to perform. If there were no more
against the Covenant then this, Mr. Cr. must acknowledge the Covenant to be as
to the matter, unlawful; and so in his own esteem obliging to nothing but
Repentance: because it endeavors to bind us to to what he owns to be sin. But
if this which Mr. Cr. is ashamed to own, (either because he takes it not to be
true, or else not seasonable) be not the true meaning of those words, and the
King for misusing his Authority is not to be deprived; nay, even then they
swear to preserve it. I will not say, What meant that Resolve pleaded in the
aforesaid Answer to the Scots, p. 65. That until satisfaction and security be
given to both Kingdoms, the King was not to be admitted to come to them with
Honor, Freedom, and Safety. If to dispose of every thing in the Nation without,
and against his command, be to preserve his Authority, I wish They had been so
preserved. What mean the Votes of Non-Address, 1647. (Recalled, I confess; but
let us consider, it was when Affairs were so much changed, that the Army was
ready to give them the same Law they had given the King, to defend them just
so:) Nay, I shall go on; What means the Loyalty they so much brag of now, The
Isle of Wight Treaty? All Offices, Civil Military, Peers, Counselors, Judges,
Marriage of his own Children; in effect, all the Regalia: Call you this
preserving his Authority? Those horrid words are in themselves clear: and, if
they had not been so, their Opinions had made them so.

In the conclusion of this third Article, p. 104. After the supposed Jeer of
serious Casuists; he tells us, They must grant, that where the words of an Oath
seemingly doubtful may, they must be taken in a good sense. The Oxf. men were
in this case of another mind; where an Oath is so doubtful, I am rather to
refuse, for fear it should engage me upon a sin, and so I might be engaged to
dishonor God for his own sake. An Oath is to be taken in the sense of him that
gives it; otherwise it is no security, but a cheat. Shall I then strain a sense
upon an Oath which the words offer not, (not to say, will not admit), and the
Authors, I am sure, pursue not.

To the fourth Article, The Exception is, It will protect Impiety, and
necessitate Barbarism; it lays a necessity on the Son to accuse his Father,
etc. and makes way for those who are sick of their Fathers, etc.

To which the Reply is, p. 104. All penal Statutes for Felony, Treason, The
Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, the Protestation, the Law Deuteronomy, 13.6.7,
8, 9, 10, 11. do the same. As to the Law of the Land; it looks upon the harbor
Criminals receive from near Relations in some cases, as duty: which it would
severely and might justly punish in others not so related, as a crime. But not
to stand on that, at the very first reading, this Article suggests a
considerable difference, from all the abovementioned Instances. In those I am
only obliged to discover present guilt, and endeavors; which if not prevented,
may go on to the high dishonor of God, and disturbance of the Public.
Considerations if sincere, much above any private, or particular Obligements.
But this Covenant obliges to discover all who have been Malignants; no
consideration that the design is prevented, or repented of: and therefore
serves not at all for Public Security; but may, for private Ambition, or
Revenge.

There is another Exception, which though Mr. Cr. pleases to slight, I will be
bold to say, all the Earth cannot answer it, viz. That it betrays inevitably,
The Liberty of the Subject. We there swear to maintain in setting up an
Arbitrary Power, when all the Rule they are to go by, is, [ As they think
convenient] which Mr. Cr. answers by saying nothing to it. He repeats indeed
the other words, [ As the Supreme Iudicatories, or others from them, etc.] But
says not one word in answer to that expression, wherein the malignity lies,
[As they shall judge convenient]. Words fit only for those men to use, who knew
they had no Law on their side. It might here (not unseasonably) be asked, Who
are the Supreme Iudicatories? Certainly, the two Houses distinct from the King,
are so far from being the Supreme, that they are no Court at all; nor is there
in Law any style or form of their joint Acts.

To the fifth Article, It is said first, That there is a false Assertion, These
Kingdoms (if Ireland be one, as in the former Parliaments it is) are not at
Peace, nor dare the men of Oxf. abusively thank God for a blessing they do not
all believe, and Mr. Cr. proves by no better Argument, then that England and
Scotland entered in Covenant. As to the Peace which was between England and
Scotland, made by both Parliaments, I ask, If the Power of War and Peace be not
solely the Kings? If so, here is another of the Kings Prerogatives, this
Covenant preserved.

As to the second Remora, Mr. Cr. asks where this Covenant is defective toward
the Kings Rights etc? I might rather ask, where it is not; where it left him
the Authority (I do not say Name, but Power) of a King, or the freedom of a
Gentleman?

The very design of all their Proceedings, which this Covenant was a main
Engine to effect, was perfect dethroning him, when they made what the Law, what
their Wit, the foundation of all their Power: called, but his Counsel, his
Controllers. And this is a Truth so clear, that they durst not for shame but
call themselves his Subjects; even when they exercised all but the Name of his
Sovereign. When they raised Armies to compel; even then they made a resemblance
of their duty by sending Petitions to beseech. They could not be Rebels, but in
the style of Your Majesty's Humble and Loyal Subjects assembled in Parliament.
Let Mr. Cr. show me any thing that Law or Reason call a Right, or Prerogative
of the King; and I shall quickly make it appear, how they took it from the
King: and Mr. Cr. himself, p. 98. has proved the truth of the Maxim he so
much rails at, No Bishop, no King, by giving us just such a King as he has
allowed us Bishops. To the Bishops he will allow the formality of the Chair;
and the KING, for ought I perceive, shall have no more. The Lords and Commons
(Melthodi and Majestatis causa) apply themselves to him. Well said! though I
would the Law had been cited for it. The King, poor Gentleman, may sit
uppermost, whilst he is mannerly: his assent shall be asked if he will first
secure us, he will never refuse: If he does, he shall then be reminded where
the Reason of the Kingdom, nay and King too, resides. As in the Declaration
about Hull, in 1642. p. 36.

I am so far reconciled to this absolute depriving the King of his Authority,
that I like it much better than the pretty knack of sharing it between him and
two equal Houses, which would be the worst Government in the world. It is in
our Saviors judgment, Hard to serve two Masters. But this Nation should have
served three coordinate Enemies; whose Interests, and consequently commands
were thwarting. Every Convention would be a wrestling match, where each his
business was to give another a fall.

The Contradictions the Oxf. men assign, are so clear, as nothing more; I shall
therefore say little to them, because they best appear, when they are nakedly
considered. One Ambiguity I shall pitch upon, because it is the most
considerable part of this Mystery of Iniquity.

The Oxf. men demand [ Which be the best Reformed Churches?] Because before
they swear to make those Churches their pattern, it were well, certainly, that
they knew them. To which Mr. Cr. p. 129. The Covenant asserts not which are the
best reformed Churches; but binds the Covenanter to the observation of whatever
shall appear, and be found the best reformed, as the example to which he shall
endeavor England may be conf^rmed. Very well Sir, The Covenant asserts not
which is the best reformed Church, but binds me to reduce England, to what
shall appear the best reformed Church. That possibly may appear to me either
that already established in Old England, or that devised for New England.
Possibly I may not find Classes, or other canting knacks in the Word of God;
and then tell you in your own language, I dare not own that for the Scepter of
Christ: which I believe, nay can prove, to be an Humane Institution. I can tell
where and when it came first up: and that Policy was the very best, (and if any
was, that was, the only justifiable) Ingredient in all its constitution. How
shall I then reform England according to the Word of God, and the best reformed
Churches; and yet according to the Scotch mode, which I know to be neither? Or
if I am not bound to the Scottish pattern; How shall I bring the three Kingdoms
to Uniformity, not only in Confession of Faith, but Form of Church-Goverment,
Directory for Worship and Catechizing; and how preserve that in Scotland, which
I swear to do, and yet set up another in England, which in that case I am sworn
to also?

But because Mr. Cr. tells us, p. 129. The Covenant has not determined which
is the best reformed Church, etc. I would fain know, whether these three terms
we are equally sworn to, [ The Word of God, the best Reformed Churches,
Uniformity with Scotland] are three expressions of the same Rule, or of
different ones. If of the same; then it is not true, what Mr. Crofton being put
to his shifts, says, because it is expressly determined, viz. Scotland. If of
different; With what Conscience can we swear to all, when by keeping our Oath
to any one, we do necessarily break that part of it which was taken to another?
and in all probability, observing in it any one, is breaking it to both the
other? The Covenant obliges us to reform England according to the best
Reformed Church, but determines not which it is, as Mr. Cr. acknowledges. The
reason of which is clear; because by that reservedness, they engaged all Sects
to them, when, by declaring their meaning, they had engaged but one: every one
by this means; who was for the Covenant, the Covenant was for him; and such
ambiguity sure is not an Oath, but a Iuggle. But from this proceeds another
Ambiguity, Who are the common Enemies? etc. How shall I know, who are Enemies
to the best Reformed Church, if I know not which is so? Can I prosecute any as
an Enemy to the best reformed as such, and know it not? or, shall I tell him, I
know him to be an Enemy to I know not what? Mr. Cr. p. 128. waves this Plea,
and assures us, That the words plainly run to the Church of Scotland, etc. and
Independents by their enmity to the Church of Scotland are our common Enemies.

This Explication I must needs say, fits the meaning of the Covenanters, and
the no meaning of the Covenant. In different Pages, it is as in different
States of Affairs: one while the best Reformed Church is not determined;
another while it is plainly Scotland. If Independents were common Enemies, sure
it was from the Presbyterians, they received Arms and Authority. There is a
Contradiction alleged by the Oxf. men, which I thought not to have considered,
which because Mr. Cr. professes not to see, I shall show it him out of himself.
It is,

We are bound absolutely, and without exception to preserve, and yet, upon
supposition, to extirpate the present Religion in the Church of Scotland. To
which Mr. Cr. p. 131. That Supposition must be plainly expressed in the
Covenant to make it a contradict^ry Oath, which is not done.

The best way of proving a Contradiction, is, to lay the Propositions contended
so to be, together; which will clearly (if they are so) show themselves.

Thus then,

We are absolutely bound to preserve the Doctrine and Discipline, etc. of
Scotland.

We are to bring the three Kingdoms (of which Scotland is one) to Uniformity in
Doctrine and Discipline.

We are to reform 2. England and Ireland according to the best Reformed Church.
See the first Article of the Covenant.

The Covenant asserts not which are the best Reformed Churches; but binds the
Covenanters to reform England whatever shall appear to be the best Reformed
Church. Cr. p. 129.

Thus then,

The first Proposition binds us to preserve the Doctrine and Discipline of
Scotland absolutely. The second to bring the English Church, and the Scottish
Church, to an Uniformity in Doctrine and Discipline. The third to reform
England according to the best Reformed Church. The fourth assures us, that the
Covenant asserts not Scotland to be the best Reformed Church; but binds to
reform England according to whatever shall appear to be so. Now then, if
Scotland does not appear to be the best Reformed Church; the third Proposition
binds me to alter what the first binds me absolutely to maintain. If I am
obliged to make the same thing exactly after several Patterns; if they happen
not to be exactly the same, I must necessarily, in following one, differ so
much from the other, as I follow that which differs; for to agree with what
differs, is sure so far to differ.

I perceive the Covenant is, as it was at first, urged to several men, so as to
comply with their several humors, and interests. The well-meaning and
undiscerning Populacy they now (as they did formerly, before things were ripe)
engage to the Covenant, and tell them those horrid Consequences deduced from
it, belong not to it; but afterward engage men to them by virtue of the
Covenant they have taken, whose Obligation never fully appears til due season.
Their first aim is at that part, which is least guarded, Religion: which being
that wherein most are least concerned, is their first attempt. Because the
Church would not pull down the State; the State must pull down the Church. But
what followed? They who persuaded that the Nobles, and Prelates, were nor good
enough to be their Equals; made it out, that Cobblers and Draymen were good
enough to be their Masters. And besides the Grandees who acted in that change,
the whole Party were as forward to own the other House, as ready at any time to
take the other Oath. I very well know, many will not, in spite of Reason and
Experience, be persuaded, but that reforming the Church is the sole aim of the
Covenanters. In the new sense of reforming, the Church Lands being already in
their opinion disposed of, Reformation must begin at the State: and surely, it
is great pity, but, they who will not beware by the examples of others, should
be made examples to others.

The second Article of the Covenant is only talked of: and that being the
concernment of the Church; others think themselves not interessed in. But he
who considers, that they are in the sixth Article sworn, never to be wrought
off, no, not so much as to an indifferency or neutrality; but zealously and
constantly in despite of all impediments, pursue all they have sworn: And that
in the fourth Article, they swear to bring all to punishment, who have been
Malignants (Which words signify what they please,) and expressly all who have
acted contrary to the Covenant; and they to be punished as the Supreme
Iudicatories ( i. e. no doubt the two Houses, who are no Court at all) or
others from them shall think fit: will find the Cavaliers in an ill case; nay,
all who at any time did any thing which was ever Voted Malignancy by the two
Houses. The rigor of whose Sentence (they not being in a now capacity to
pardon being dissolved) must be now executed upon the first opportunity; nor
must they at all question the reasonableness or legality, because the Rule is,
As they, or any from them ( i. e. their Committees) shall think convenient. One
thing I shall observe, that though the Parliament may be trusted to act
arbitrarily, beside or against the Law, (which they are not); yet that they may
delegate such an extravagant power, over Lives and Fortunes, as is here
mentioned, to oothers (though men of such Principles, and Fortunes, as our
Committees were) who were to make Offenders by whom they might thrive, having
nothing to grow rich with, but an ill Conscience and other men's faults, is such
a Liberty of the Subject as destroys all the trust. Besides, it is a rule in
Law and Reason, Offices of confidence and trust (by our Representatives in
Parliament) are not, cannot be delegated; because that trust is only personal.

I have before observed, That that Invitation in the conclusion to foreign
Churches, (where there are no Parliaments with pretense of share in the Power,)
must be to them confessedly as Subjects: whom notwithstanding they absolve from
their Allegiance. Though it is not delivered in Scripture, that freedom from a
Master or Prince who is a Heathen, is any part of that liberty wherein Christ
has installed us; and so is seditious. Having showed it to be against Duty, I
will in a word show it to be against our Interest.

It engages us to pursue (by the way of the Sword, as their Practice and the
Invitation in the conclusion shows) all we have sworn to, all our days: which
is, [ Whatever is contrary to the power of Godliness]. So then, Every man is to
slay his brother, who commits any sin that deserves it: so many Covenanters, so
many Commissioned Officers. There is a Tribunal in every breast to condemn and
execute both. And if their Oath obliges them to any thing, it does to this;
they being equally sworn to all the other Articles, though that alone takes up
all their thoughts. What horrid effects there would follow hence, themselves
would quickly feel: should they thus begin to assert the Covenant, themselves
would quickly find its edge: They who set a house on fire, themselves be soon
made a part of that fire. It is not then more dishonorable to God, injurious
to the King, and the Nation: then it would, if pursued, be quickly found to be
to its most violent assertors. All that is desired of them, is, they would
either pursue the Covenant in all things, or none: that is, deal equally and
sincerely; show that they act out of the sense of an Oath, not of a party: or
rather let the Covenant be buried, placed in the Regions of Rottenness and
Forgetfulness; and let them be quiet, and suffer others to be so.

If any Reproofs seem in these Papers too sharp; I wish the unreasonabl^ness of
those expressions may thus appear, that few deserve them. But then, as few are
concerned in them, I should willingly make a distinction between those of the
Presbyterian Judgment, and those of the Presbyterian Party: (and I hope
themselves will concur with me in it, by making it appear, that there are
those who may approve that way of Government, yet abhor the usual way of
promoting it.) The former may possibly be reclaimed by rational discourses; the
latter by nothing but severe Laws.

FINIS.

