A TREATISE OF Lithotomy: OR, Of the Extraction of the Stone out of the Bladder.

Written in French by Mr. Tolet, Lithotomist in the Hospital of the Charity at
Paris.

Translated into English by A. Lovell.

LONDON: Printed by H. H. for William Cademan, at the Popes Head, in the
Lower-walk of the New-Exchange, in the Strand. M.DC.LXXXIII.

To the Ingenious and Expert Surgeon, Mr. Tho. Hobbs, Lithotomist in the
Hospital of St. Bartholomew in London.
SIR,
I Confess it is but a weak Apology for my Confidence in prefixing your Name to
this Book, to tell you that I can more easily satisfy the World, than your
self in making this Dedication; though indeed it be all that I have to say for
my self, for this Trouble I give you. The truth is, Sir, since most Books now
adays do court, what but a few deserve, I mean, Protection; as I would not be
singular in Publishing this Translation without a Patron, so I durst not be so
unjust to the intrinsic value of the Treatise, as to send it into the English
World no other ways provided than with the Credentials of a specious
recommendation to the train of some great Man, who, perhaps after all, would
not admit it into his Family without your Approbation. It was therefore in
imitation of the Ingenious Author of this Book, who gave me a Precedent for
Dedication, that following the guidance of Universal, and therefore least
erring Fame, I was led to your Door, there to leave this Foreign Child, which I
have taught to speak (I hope) intelligible English, to be by you disposed of in
the World, according as you shall think it deserves, and as you are pleased to
give it a Character. If it may be able to serve those that serve you in that
Famous Hospital, where you successfully Operate, or prove Useful to any that
profess Lithotomy, that laudable, but difficult and dangerous part of
Surgery; you are in the judgment of most men the fittest Judge; so that the
Public (I make no doubt) will justify my Conduct in submitting it to your
Censure. But, Sir, how you your self will Interpret this attempt of mine, I
dare not affirm; seeing Fortune has not encouraged me to it by intitling me to
those freedoms that mutual Conversation and long Friendship do allow: However,
Sir, I will not despair but that the kind Acceptance my endeavors shall meet
with in the World, will so far interceed for me, that what is intended, and
really found to conduce to Public Good, will not be thought by you to want any
private Motives to commend it to your Patronage. I shall say no more, lest by
seeming to know you better than indeed I do, I should spoil my own Plea, and
appear to be an Intimate Friend, when in reality I am,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, A. Lovell.
London, Sept. 23. 1682.
A TREATISE OF Lithotomy: OR, Of the Extraction of the Stone out of the Bladder.
CHAP. I. What is meant by Lithotomy.
LIthotomy, according to the Etymology of the word, signifies Cutting of the
Stone. It had been a more proper way of speaking, to have used a term that
might have expressed the part which is opened by the edge of the Instrument,
because the division or cutting of the Stone happens contrary to the intention
of the Artist; however I shall make use of the word Lithotomy, which is in
vogue, and understood by all that are skilful in the Profession. That we may
dive into the meaning, and give the definition of the thing; it is an Operation
in Surgery, practiced for the Extracting of Preter-natural hard Bodies which
are retained in the Bladder.

By Preter-natural Bodies is to be understood, all things that are retained
within the Body of Man contrary to the ordinary course of Nature: And seeing
sometimes there are several things in the Bladder which require the opening of
it, we have put in the definition Preter-natural Bodies, rather than the Stone;
and for clearer distinctions sake, we have subjoyned that Lithotomy is only
practiced for such as are hard, and retained in the Bladder.

CHAP. II. Observations upon the Parts of the Body of Man.
THE Vessels and Pores of the Glandules are the usual Conduits through which
the Corpuscules or little Bodies pass and are filtrated, when their bigness and
figure makes them fit to be received there; but if there be no proportion
betwixt the Conduit-pipes and the Liquors which should pass through them, they
stop: On the contrary, if the Humors have a very rapid motion, they distend
the passages, and many times break them.

Whatever the impulse of the Humors may be, their motion abates the more that
they communicate it; they make no sensible attempt to get out when they are
moved on every side in a place that can stretch and be enlarged to a certain
bigness, as the Bladder and the Basins of the Kidneys: But when the place
wherein they are contained is full, if they be not evacuated, they are the
causes of several Diseases; for the Humors consisting of parts of different
figure or bigness, it follows that sometimes they cannot glide through one and
the same passage. It is true that Bodies of the like or different extent may
pass through one and the same Channel; the contrary is not impossible, and may
give a beginning to those Tumors, which swelling outwardly higher than the
surface of the Body, go by the Name of Abscesses, after the same manner as the
internal collections have other appellations: And if the same Humors be
composed of unequal parts, and meet together in a narrow place that is full of
windings, some of them join together, and by their conjunction form a Body that
in respect of the rest is solid. This Body by its continuance there, and the
apposition of other Corpuscules, becomes more sensible to us; it hardens
according as the rough parts closely embrace one another, and the other
separate and continue their motion.

After the same manner as it is in Brooks and Rivulets, where the small stones
separate and retain the Mud; so is it in the Glandules through which the
Humors are filtrated: And in the Pipes where Water runs in great quantity,
though they be straight, Earth and other Sandy substances mingled with the
Water cleave close and stick together, and there form a stony Crust, which in
time hinders the passage of the Waters.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes of the Stone.
OUR Food liquified is not destroyed, and the diversity of Aliments makes it
apparent, that they have parts different in Bigness, Figure, and Number; the
most Nourishing, as Jellies and strong Broths have all these qualities, seeing
the Juices of Animals which are the basis of them are taken from the soft and
hard parts of the Bodies with which they were assimilated, or being still
within the Vessels and amongst the Glandules, tended to that assimilation; or
from those Bodies that were to be retained or voided, by Physicians called
Retenta or Excreta.

Other kinds of Food contain also parts of a different Nature because
Elementary Bodies are mixed, so that a simple unmixt Body is not to be found.
The Air wherein we live, and which we breath, is full of little Bodies
separated from different Substances, and contributes to our Health and
Sickness. If then, one breath a thick and gross Air, if he drink thick and
rough Wines that are not fine, muddy Waters of Lakes into which several Brooks
empty themselves, or such as Petrifie other Bodies, or Snow-water, which
contain matters that being frequently drank may lessen the motion of the
Humors; if he eat a great deal of unleavened Bread Waterfowl, Curds, Pap, Old
Cheese, hard Eggs, stony Fruits that are tart and not fully Ripe; as Quinces,
Medlars, Pears; if he feed on Beer, Pork, or the Legs and Feet of Animals,
Eels, Salt and Spiced Meats; or if he frequently make use of Medicines which
cause the more subtle parts to transpire, as Sudorificks and Diuretics: If he
bestir himself too violently at any time, and especially after eating. The long
use, or the excess of these things, will be the cause of the Stone; as likewise
too much idleness, and sleeping too long upon the back, because the Earthy
parts of gross Food may meet together in several places, and disturbing one
another, stop the passage.

If those who take the greatest care of their Health, are not exempted from
Living on Food which contains slimy parts, as strong Broths, what may we think
must befall them who to excess eat and drink indifferently of all things, or
indeed but to Moderation, since our Victuals participate of a Terrestrial
Matter mingled with a kind of Salt; and Chemistry teaches us, that in the Body
of Man there are some Juices which dissolve and liquifie our Food, and others
again that thicken it; whence it may be concluded, that if the one of these
Liquors by mingling with our Food, renders it fluid; but then being confusedly
hurried away, and conveyed by streighter passages, it may be that the same
Liquor does escape, and more easily glide away than the Nourishment that is
retained in, and does Nourish the part, or even destroy it, according to the
proportion or disproportion of the Humors which in general may be called
Alimentary. It is much the same if a Terrestrial Juice remain with the Food
after Chylification; for being circulated through all the parts of the Body, if
it transpire not, it will clog and obstruct, and many parts of the same Nature
joining together, will there produce a Stone.

CHAP. IV. Of the Consequences that are drawn from the foregoing Chapter, and
how the Stone is defined.
THE Blood is carried to all the parts of the Body; but if its motion be more
rapid than is usual, it may distend the Capsules and Ureters, and make some
drops of Blood fall into the Bladder, or other gross Particles mingled with the
Urine, which will then be red, bricky, and gravelly.

People do not always make water so soon as the Serosity is separated from the
mass of Blood: If there be a small Stone in the Kidney it may ulcerate it: It
descends toward the head of the Ureter, and when it is rough or of an
excessive bigness in respect of the narrowness of the passage, it stops it, or
by the impulse and force of the Urine that follows, making a great dilatation,
it opens a passage for it self unto the very Bladder, the patient in the mean
time, suffering most violent Nephritick Colicks, which sometimes are the cause
of his Death. On the contrary every soft part having a peculiar sense of
feeling, if the Kidneys have no exquisite feeling, and the Urine or small
Stones have by little and little dilated their passages, the Glandules will
separate and retain but a very small matter, all that was contained with the
Blood will pass through; and as through a Seive, several sorts of grain may
pass after that the holes are enlarged, so Gravel and little Stones may be
conveyed into the Bladder, with the Urine, and the Patient hardly feel any
pain or trouble.

It is to no purpose to allege that the dryness, or close Union of the parts
that compose the Kidneys does contribute to the forming of the Stone; because
in the Dead Bodies of those that have been troubled with the Stone, it is to be
observed that the Kidneys are moist and soft; and it is certain that in living
Bodies they are continually moistened with some Liquor: And besides it cannot
be said that their Bladder is narrow and dry, although Stones are more
frequently formed there, than in any other part of the Body.

It is unjust to accuse our Parents, to make us bear more patiently the pains
we suffer, because in every body the causes of the Stone may be sufficiently
evinced, without imputing them to those to whom we owe our life, and without
blaming of them, reason may be given, why we see Children subject to the Stone,
whose Fathers and Mothers enjoy perfect health.

We are to conclude that Age and Excesses render the parts weak, whose Fibers
being relaxated give occasion to obstructions in Old People, as well as in
Children; because the abundance of humidity slackens the motion, and the
earthy, slimy, and superfluous matters, that are not evacuated, occasion
several diseases, as well as the Stone.

Many distempers are bred according to the diversity of the food that one
takes. Thus a man shall be afflicted with the Stone, if he feed on course food,
and which may easily coagulate in the Body. There are not wanting sad instances
of this; persons of different Ages, Sexes and conditions, are subject to it,
and most of those who are troubled with the Stone, and who are to be seen in
the Hospitals of Paris, come from the Country, where most part of their food is
terrestrial and course; and many little Children who live in that manner are
cut there.

Stones are formed in all the parts of the Body, and according to their
dimensions that which stops the passage takes the name of Sand, Gravel, or
Stone: experience confirms this; for Stones are found in the Lungs, the Liver,
the Gall, the Spleen, the Kidneys, etc. Paraeus lib. 25. Chap. 15. reports that
he took one out of a man's Knee. Some are found in the Heart: those which are
found in the Nerves are by Paulus Aegynaeta named nodosae nervorum
concretiones, knotty concretions of the Nerves. It is likewise observed that
Stony crusts are formed about the Teeth. I know a man that above twenty years
ago voided one by the Navel: it was of the bigness of an Olive Stone; and the
man is still alive.

Stones are bred most frequently in the Kidneys and Bladder, because these
parts are appointed for separating and containing the serosity which always
carries along with it an earthy Sediment that accompanies the Urine; and the
Stones of the Kidneys and Bladder give greater pains to the Patient, because
they stop the emission of Urine; or irritate the parts whose use is frequent,
and the sense more exquisite than that of many others.

In a word, we may conclude, that the Stone is a preternatural hard body,
begotten of the terrestrial and slimy parts of our Food.

We have put in the definition the word slimy, to distinguish it from Viscous,
because Viscous things do not harden in a place where there is moderate heat
and humidity: but such as are slimy, like the White of an Egg, by little and
little grow hard, and incorporate with the earthy parts they contain, when they
have long continued in lukewarm Liquors.

This proposition may be confirmed by the experience of those who render an
Oily and Fat Urine, and who are not troubled with the Stone; and because
unctuous and viscous Medicines, such as Turpentine, give ease to those that are
afflicted with Gravel: Moreover, clear and slimy Urine is reckoned among the
signs of the Stone in the Bladder.

Authors are divided about the deciding of the question whether or not the
Stone be a disease if all their reasons be considered, it may take the name of
a disease, as well as that of a cause.

CHAP. V. How Stones are formed and grow in the Bladder.
THere needs no more but a grain of Sand, or any hard Body to serve for a
Center or Foundation for monstrous Stones, which cause terror in those that
behold them, and most frequently death to those from whom they are taken.

The Sand, and other things that are mingled with the Urine, sometimes are not
wholly voided out, their continuance within gives time to what remains to
gather together in some place; and after that one has made Water, if there be
still in the Bladder a little sand and slimy substance like the white of an
Egg, preternatural heat and the separation and evacuation of the humidity make
them join together in the same manner as the Saline and Tartarous parts of
Wine; and the Urine of those that are troubled with Gravel which distills into
the Bladder, being mingled with other Terrestrial parts, furnishes matter that
joining with that which remained there before, forms and augments the Stone:
Experience informs us that Stones are sometimes found which are in a manner
like a mixture of Sand with the Whites of Eggs, having so little Solidity, that
one cannot avoid the breaking of them betwixt the Teeth of the Forceps.

If a little Sand may be the Center or Kernel of the biggest Stones, a hard
body got into the Bladder and remaining there, may likewise be as we have seen
in an Italian Soldier; who to ease himself of a pain that he felt, thrust into
his Yard the Tag of a Point about Two Inches long, which slipped into his
Bladder, and there continued Eight Months. In the Spring of the year 1677, he
came to the Hospital of the Charity at Paris, where without much minding the
relation he gave of his condition, I was assured by the catheter that he had a
Stone in the Bladder, he was cut, and the Iron Tag taken out; about which a
Stone was formed, that hindered not but that it might be seen in several parts.
Pareus, lib. 25. chap. 15. Reports a like case. Fabritius Hildanus L. de Lith.
c. 3. col. 2. writes that one of Geneva having for the space of Twenty Eight
years complained of the Stone, at length died, and that he was found to have a
Stone, the Kernel of which was a Leaden Bullet petrified, which he had received
by a Musket Shot, and retained all that while. Joseph Covillart, Obs. VII. of
his operations, assures us that he had seen a Stone, the Center whereof was a
Musket Bullet which a Gentleman had received in the Bladder, Five years before
he was cut of it.

I had in cure a young man, who had been cut at the Age of Four years Old, and
who was troubled with a Fistula: since that time he had discharged Urine unto
the Scrotum, where by degrees a Stone was formed about the bigness of a little
Pullets Egg, ending in a point like the Stalk of a Pear.

It cannot be determined how long time the Stone is in forming and growing;
that depends upon the conjunction of the parts of the Sand, and the sudden and
quick secretion that is made of it in the Bladder: besides, it may be, the
Stone continues at a certain Size, because new Corpuscles do not always cleave
and stick to it. I know one that has had one for several years, seated in the
beginning of the Perineum, near the Scrotum, without any sign of dilatation or
sense of Pain.

The growth of Stones in the Bladder happens not without alteration of that
part; which becomes weaker according as the Stone increases.

This remark affords us a reason why the Bladder of those that are troubled
with the Stone is thicker than naturally it should be, which is only caused by
the debility of the part; because not being able to send back the superfluous
part of the Blood, it swells therewith as the womb in Women when they are with
Child, and the parts where there has been a Fracture, a great Contusion or a
Wound; and in the same manner as by Suppuration, or the Transpiration of
Wounds, Fractures and Contusions, or the Evacuations that happen after a Woman
is brought to bed, the parts return to their natural thickness, so the Bladder
being discharged of the burden that incommoded it, and besides assisted by
Medicines and a regular Diet, is restored again to its former state. Bev. c. 4.
de Call. Ren. and Vesic.

CHAP. VI. Of the differences of Stones.
THE most considerable difference in Stones, is in respect of their magnitude.
The least Stones of Children of Three, Four, or Five Years Old, are like great
Pease; or of the bigness of Cherries. Those of Seven, Nine, Twelve to Fifteen
Years Old, have them a little bigger. In men grown up, who are of Middle age;
and in Old men to the last period of life, Stones are found of the bigness of a
Hens Egg.

I pretend not to determine the exact Size of the Stones of every Age, there is
no rule for it; and it is sufficient to remark what is commonly observed; for
sometimes smaller Stones are cut from Children and Men, and at other times some
of such a bigness that with relation to the subject, they are called Monstrous.

The thing contained gives sometimes the Figure to that which environs it, but
Stones rather take than give it. The Bladder, the Urine, or the Pressure and
Justling of other Bodies, are the causes of many differences; do not we see
that water hollows Rocks, though it fall drop by drop? It may be observed when
the Stone is formed by minute Bodies that have Angles, the Urine or the Salt of
it blunts the points of them, and the wet Sand not having firmness enough, lies
slat by the sides of the Bladder when there is little Urine in it, and forms a
flat and smooth Stone, approaching to the Oval Figure of the Cavity of the
place, but if the minute Bodies of the Stones are Round, they Roll in the
Bladder from one side to the other; and when they join together and are dry,
they make rough Stones of a Spherical Circumference, with very great Pores; as
is represented by the Figures, the Superficies whereof are unequal like to
Strawberries or Mulberries: On the contrary if they be composed of minute
Bodies that draw near to a Triangular Figure, the contrary will be found, and
they will have smoother and less unequal Surfaces.

A, B, Gravelly Stones which are the Roundest.

C, D, E, F, G, Stones that have no other name then that of the things they
resemble; as an Almond, a Hens Egg, etc.

It is also to be observed that there are many more flat Stones smooth and
polished in the Surface, than round and rough: And this makes it probable that
most of them are formed of minute Particles, the points whereof are blunted.

As the Surface and thickness of Stones are not always uniform, so their
Particles are variously Figured or disposed. Indeed there is as little reason
to affirm depiction of assorted kidney stones page 20

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
that all kinds of food are of the same nature, as that all the things whereof
the Stone is formed, are alike: And though it were granted that the Stony
Corpuscles were of one and the same Figure; yet the difference of their
bigness, and of their modification and site by reason of the inequality of
their Angles, which would entangle them one with another, must needs give place
for greater Pores, than if they were disposed in the manner most suitable to
their nature for making a smaller bulk: And besides, betwixt the great Pores of
Globular Corpuscles, other little Bodies of a different shape may enter, which
may diminish the greatness of these Pores.

The Corpuscles of Stones being small, the Stone will have a fine grain and be
more polished and smooth, the Corpuscles that are bigg and Globular, make the
grain course, and the Stones lighter; because their Pores are full of Urine, or
of some other very subtle matter much lighter than the parts of the Stone;
hence it is, that of two Stones of the same bigness the rougher or less
polished shall be the lighter, and a dissolving Menstruum will Act much sooner
upon those which are Globular and unequal, than upon those which are Smoother
and more polished in their Surfaces.

When the Stone begins to be formed by Globular Corpuscles, they are in such
sort disposed, that they contain humidity in their Pores; the Stone in a short
time growing in bigness, that Water or Humidity is by heat rendered more
subtle according as the Stone grows harder, and then it acquires a motion that
may drive the parts from the Center, and making to it self a passage bigg
enough to transpire through, but too little to allow an entry to other
Terrestrial Corpuscles, that Stone will he hollow at the Center.

Corpuscles that come nearest a Triangle, cement and link the other Particles
together; because Triangular and Square Figures, are more capable to hinder
motion than Spherical.

The Stones whose Pores are full of Humidity, are the softer, and that softness
will be more or less, according to the quantity of Aquosity contained betwixt
the Center and the Surface; and therefore they are called soft Stones if there
be much Humidity; and hard, if there be none, and that the parts of the Stone
be closely compacted. It is certain, the hard are heavier than the soft.

Sometimes Stones are taken out whose Center is Globular, and the Surface
smooth; the reason is because betwixt the Pores of the parts of the Kernel,
other smaller, and less round Corpuscles are placed, and form a stony crust
which has a finer Grain. On the contrary the minute Bodies having formed an
equal thickness from the Kernal, if many Globular Corpuscles join with them
before the Stone be hardened, it will be unequal and rough in the Surface.

If the Stone be formed in the Kidney, and take its grouth there, it will be
Sized according to the shape of the Cavities wherein its Branches do extend
themselves. Hence it follows that a Stone formed and augmented in the Neck of
the Bladder, will have a Figure Oblong, Cilindrical, or like a Pear, having one
end smaller than the other; but if the Particles begin to join higher toward
the bottom of the Bladder, it is not repugnant but that at the same time the
Corpuscles may be separated without touching one another amongst the Wrinkles
and Rugosities of the Bladder, and there form Stones which change their place,
and which by mutual collision become smooth; as with two Stones of a moderate
hardness and a little Water we may make the experiment, and they will have one
or more sides flat, as is represented in the figures contained in the little
space of the former cut.

This may serve for instruction to those who have not seen the operation often
performed; because considering the stones, they will be able to judge if there
be many, which are sometimes uniform, sometimes unequal in thickness. It is
rare to find Stones covered with a coat, or slimy humor; there are some that
are sticking like those which have Prickles and Asperities, which are called
Gravelly Stones, to distinguish them from those which are Smooth, Round, or
Oval. Some are harder and more ponderous; others are gravelly only in the
Center, or in the Circumference, some are found to be hollow within, and others
again solid, as in their Superficies differences are likewise taken from the
Situation, because there may be Stones in the Vrethra, the Perineum, the neck
of the Bladder, the bottom of it, betwixt its Tunicles, in the Vreters, the
Kidneys, and other parts of the Body. In the gallbladder some are found of a
grayish color; those of the Joints and Phlegmatic Abscesses are Whitish and
those of the Kidneys and the Bladder are Reddish, Grayish, Whitish or of a
colournear to these.

We must not forget the number seeing it is sometimes excessive, and that
sometimes there have been found in People subject to the Stone to the number of
Twenty, Forty or Sixty stones; but the number is not to be limited no more
than the bigness, because many Stones may be formed at the same time, or
successively, and the fragments that break off from them by grating, produce
other Stones; and that is the reason that some are bigger than others. If a
Stone have several flat sides, there will be commonly three Stones; there may
be also more, or only but two.

Stones that are cut out of Man's body are not so smooth nor so hard as the
Pebles of the Earth; And there are not so many adherent Stones as is believed,
if you except those that have a coat, or prickles. The smoothest are not
extracted without pain if they be large and the passage be not sufficiently
dilated, or if they be not rightly laid hold off by the Forceps, or if the
Membranous parts be doubled through which they are pulled out. It is very hard
to judge whether the Stone adheres before the operation.

CHAP. VII. Of the Diagnostick and Prognostic signs of the Stone.
IF we reflect on the causes of Stones and their differences, we may observe
the diversity of their signs, of which the First discover that there is a
Stone, the Second if there be many, and the Third if the effects and
consequences of them will be dangerous. The signs that discover to us the Stone
or the number, are called Diagnosticks, and those which make us judge of the
consequences, are named Prognostics.

For facilitating the means to know if the Stone is in the Kidneys and that it
descends into the Bladder, we cannot cite a better Master than Galen, book vi.
of Places affec. chap. 2. who describes the signs of the Stone different from
those of other Colicks. A straining to vomit, and great and frequent vomitings
are much more troublesome to those that have the Colic; and then they vomit
more Pituitous and Corrupt Matter than those that have the Stone. They are more
bound and break no wind neither upwards nor downwards; The Colic seems often
to move and take up more place, and sometimes it increases in diverse parts;
but the Stone Colic torments in the same place without intermission. And
though pain that afflicts a place higher than the situation of the Kidneys be
always produced by the Colic, yet it does not follow that that which is fixed
in the region of the Kidneys, is an evident sign of the Stone; that situation
signifies nothing at all to distinguish it, because with these marks the Urine
must also be examined. Those that are subject to the Stone in the beginning
render a clear and pure Urine, and in the following days something troubled is
to be observed which subsides to the bottom, and at length it becomes all Sandy
and Gravelly; which happens not to those who being free from the Stone, are
tormented with the Colic, because if they render any gross excrements, one
would say that there were Flatuosity in them, and many times they swim on the
top of the water, being of a Consistency like to the Urine of an Ox. Moreover
these great pains of the Colic are much sooner eased by laxative Glisters,
than if they proceeded from the Stone. It happens sometimes that the Colic
ceases by the voiding of some cold humor, and then it is a remedy that not only
eases but cures and discovers the desease: In a word, as the one is cured by
voiding of cold Humors, so the other is delivered from their distemper by
voiding the Stone with the Urine, and at the same time we may know what part
suffers.

We have said that the Matter of Stones are all kinds of Slimy and Terrestrial
Substances linked together according to the Proportion of more or less that
forms a hard Body. That Stones forced against the side of the Bladder, cause
pain, Inflammation, Ulcers, and make one void Purulent matter in the same
Manner as the Acrimony of Humors, of Urine and Abscesses. Little Stones may
come out with the Urine: Sometimes they stop in the Sphincter or Vrethra; they
hurt the nerves of the neck of the Bladder which terminate in the circle or
crown that is the beginning of the Glans; they may in like manner if they be
bigg lay upon and press the Intestinum rectum and cause an extraordinary
weight, because these parts are only appointed by nature to bear the burden of
liquid things which are less ponderous than the Stone. When they have
Asperities, or are covered with a coat, they are detained in the wrinckles of
the Bladder: Now if they be very light, and without adherence, they float a
long time in the water; but because of that weight they have they descend
toward the Vrethra, and the smaller they are in bigness or the less unequal in
their Surface, the more they close the passage, because the small Stones slide
easily into the Vrethra, and the Urine may run down between the Asperities of
the Stone. That Obstruction hinders the passage of the Urine and obliges the
Patients to lie upon their backs; they hastily and with violence turn
themselves, to make the Stone change its situation, that so they may
facilitate the excretion of the Urine; and because pain makes the Spirits move
toward the neighboring parts, these are so distended that Men and young Boys
are fain to draw out the Yard and Prepuce to appease the pain, and therefore
they cross their Legs, and press their Thighs together: Moreover if the Stone
change its place a little clear Urine, or mingled with slime comes out:
According to the same principles it may stop the passage, which obliges those
that are subject to the Stone to have often a desire to make water. They are
commonly dry, because the Spirits and Humors are dissipated and spent by
labor, pain and watching.

By these observations we may judge that there are several Diagnostick signs
which are equivocal, as the Yard and Prepuce drawn out by the hands of the
Patient tormented with Inslammation, pain, and voiding of Purulent matter, by
sharpness of Urine and gravel; because Sandy matter or little Stones having
caused their symptoms, may be evacuated with the Urine; nevertheless when that
has a sediment mingled with Sand and thick Slime, when there is any shell of a
Stone within, or squeezed out of the Yard, it is a pregnant presumption, which
commonly serves for a certain sign.

The univocal Diagnostick signs may be drawn from the same observations; as a
sudden and fixed pain in the loins toward the one or the other side, and
sometime toward both in the region of the Kidneys; after which the Urine looks
reddish and Sandy, or sometimes Crude, Clear and Watery, a numness of the Thigh
on that side where the pain is when the Stone is bigg: There is a Flitting and
restless Itching toward the Pubis and in the end of the Yard, accompanied with
a frequent and sudden suppression of Urine, a pain and heaviness in the
Perinenm with a continual heat of Urine, and immediately after the making of
water a fresh desire to do it again. It may be observed why there are such
violent strainings for a stool, and why the Urine stops all of a sudden when
one is standing, which happens not in another posture.

One of the surest of all the Diagnostick signs is the thrusting of the finger
into the Rectum of Men. The Surgeon will feel a hard body betwixt his finger
and the Pubis, or a little higher. If the finger be not long enough, they make
use of a hollow Probe called a Catheter, which is introduced through the
Vrethra into the Bladder; And then is felt something that is hard making a dry
sound and noise as if one touched a Stone; this is the most certain of all
Diagnostick signs. It is very necessary to make an Experiment of this in dead
Bodies, by opening the Bladder, and putting Stones therein; and then having
stitched up the Parts, to introduce the Catheter by the Yard.

The Catheters that are made use of, to know if Women have the Stone, are of
another Figure; they shall be represented with those of the other Instruments,

When the Stone is skinned over by a peculiar Membrane, or when it is formed
betwixt the Membranes of the Bladder, or that there be an old excrescencie of
flesh, called a Sarcoma, (which are rare Distempers) or if there be a fungous
Body, it is not easy to discern it, because the Symptoms of these Diseases in
those Parts are much alike; but the Stone is much more frequent there, and one
is not often mistaken, provided he be attentive in sounding or searching.

What we have said of the external Causes of the Shapes and Figures, serves us
for Signs to foretell the plurality of Stones on which we see the marks of
Collision, when during the time of the Cure, a Stone is taken out which was not
left in the Bladder, it is said that Patient has a Quarry of Stones.

The figure and bigness of the Stone being considered after the Operation, one
may judge whither or no the consequences will be dangerous, for if it be
monstrous, the parts have been much dilated and coutused, and if it be craggy
and pointed, there has been dilaceration or adherence, and some times
complication, the Stones that have many asperities are never so big as those
that are even and smooth in their surface, and that for two reasons; the first
is, because the minute Bodies that compose those rough Stones, are not so
closely comparted, and some of them may break off and be voided with the Urine;
the second, because those asperities cause a more sudden and pungent pain than
other Figures, and force the Patient to betake himself more speedily to the
Surgeon for ease, who performs the operation, before that it has had time
to increase to a greater bigness.

CHAP. VIII. What is to be observed by the Surgeon before the Operation.
HYpocrates having taken an Oath never to undertake the cutting of the Stone;
has instructed us how necessary it is to observe all circumspection in
performing it. Wherefore when a Surgeon pretends to the cutting of the
Stone, he ought to frame to himself a Notion or Idea of opening to himself a
passage to the Bladder through a convenient place for extracting of the Stone;
by his Rules and Precepts he will know if he can Operate, and then he is to
resolve upon it. He that is troubled with the Stone, is his Subject matter, and
it is the duty of a skilful Surgeon to foresee the consequences, to the end
he may guard himself with necessary remedies against the accidents of the
matter, and of the Operation.

A Surgeon that is called to search or cut a Patient, ought to make himself
be distinguished from Quacks; this will be easy for him to do, if he observe
what is taught in the Principles of Chirurgie, where they treat of the
Qualities of the Surgeon and of the Servants.

It is one of his chiefest qualities to have great skill in Anatomy, that he
may know the formation and fcituation of the Parts, that so he may Operate with
necessary circumspection, being bold but yet not rash: he ought to make his
prudence appear by making his prognostic, and distinguishing between those
things that are ineffectual and perilous, and those things, wherein according
to the Rules of his Art he may succeed, without exaggerating the least
circumstances and events that depend not upon him, by an unnecessary stood of
words.

He is to consider the State, Strength and Age of the Petient; for knowing that
a Man is upon the brink of death, before that he search or probe him, he is to
acquaint those that are by, that it is no disgrace to him if he cannot search
him, or if though the Catheter be even introduced into his Bladder if he make
but little or no Water, by reason of his weakness; because a Patient falls
sometimes into an apparent suppression when he has no Urine to render: this
happened to me about 3 Years ago. I was sent for to search Mr. Sartorin an
advocate, he was very Ancient, Hydropical, and at the very point of Death, and
had not made Water for three days: I did not search him, and he died within an
hour after I saw him: when he was opened there was not one drop of Water found
in his Bladder; his Ureters were so closed up that the Urine would not pass.

The Surgeon ought to be Informed from the Patients own mouth, and by those
that wait on him, of the secret matters and distempers to which he is subject;
of the excesses that may have contributed to his Indisposition, nothing is to
be concealed from him because of the Remedies and Instruments which he is to
choose.

Hypocrates in the sixth Aphorism of his sixth Book affirms that old Men are
hardly cured of the Diseases of the Kidneys and Bladder; and elsewhere he
assures us that he never saw any past fifty years of Age Cured; because
according to Caelius Aurelianus, their Bladder is Nervous, and they have but
little natural heat; besides it is seated too high, so that Medicines cannot be
conveyed to it. They are weak, and many Excrements fall continually that way.
Nevertheless several have been cut and cured of the Stone at a greater Age.

It is a good presage for the Cure, after the operation is performed, if the
Patient sleep, if his respiration is equal, his tongue moist, and if he be not
dry nor do vomit; the lower region of the belly little or not at all swelled,
with moderate pain and a slight Fever; because in that disposition, (according
to Celsus) the inflammation ceases most commonly about the fifth or seventh day.

He ought to know that the Patient oftener dies by the accidents that accompany
or follow the Operation, than by the Stones whilst they are in the Bladder.

If the Patient be too weak, he ought to have time to gather strength,
otherways the Operation would reduce him to evident danger, and the Surgeon
ought to give notice of it, that he may avoid the blame: before the Operation
some time is to be allowed for the digestion of the food that the Patient has
taken, that so his Body may be in better plight to endure it.

Celsus observes that most of learned men have a weak stomach, and that they
are not strong by reason of Watchings and over Studying.

The Medicines of Pharmarie cannot cure the Stone; they only bring relief when
the Stones are very small in the Kidneys or Bladder, and when they are as yet
but a kind of matter easy to be resolved into Powder, and to be evacuated with
the Urine. The Surgeon ought to make his prognostic, examining, if he can,
the bigness of the Stone, with his finger thrust into the Fundament; informing
himself, how long the Patient has complained of it, observing the season,
place, and other circumstances directed by the Principles of Chirurgerie.

Those that have the Jaundice, or Dropsy, are not strong enough to endure the
Operation.

When one has discovered the signs of the Stone or Gravel, if the Urine after
it has been bloody, or becomes full of purulent matter, it is a sign that
there is an Ulcer in the Kidneys or Bladder, caused hy the roughness and
asperities of the Stone, and that there is no hopes of curing an Ulcer in the
Kidneys, because hot and penetrating Medcines are required for expulsion of the
Stones, and the contrary for Ulcers: nature sometimes stirred up or assisted by
diverting Medicines, discharges it self of that load, and gives opportunity of
easing the Patients of their tormenting pains.

The Surgeon ought not to expect a Cure, if after the Patient has been cut,
the Nephritick Colic continue long, with pains that are sometimes heavy and
dull, and sometimes acute and sharp; because that is a Sign that there is a big
Stone, or many little ones, which still remain and take growth in the Kidneys.

A Patient laboring under a suppression of Urine, cannot be cured after the
third day, if he be taken with a drowzie fit, and if he can hardly fetch
breath. The Hicket is a mortal symptom.

The Gout happening to those who are troubled with the Stone, may sometimes
cure them; the contrary also, through the abundance of humors does also happen.

When the Stone is Adherent, or covered with a Coat, or if we meet with a
fungous or sarcomatick Body, the separation of them is gradually to be
attempted by injection and moderately detersive Medicines.

Children are sooner and more easily cured by this Operation, because they have
a more sedate Mind, and less troubled with Passions, being nearer the source of
Life, than those that are stricken in Age.

Whilst all things are preparing, it is the Chirurgions part to comfort the
Patient, ordering likewise that he have Spiritual and Ghostly helps Administered
unto him.

CHAP. IX. Of the Method of Searching.
WOmen are least troubled with the Stone, because their Vrethra is shorter,
wider, and more direct; and therefore is not so obnoxious to Diseases as that
of a Man: but seeing all sorts of Persons are subject to the Stone: having
first inquired into the Signs, the Patient is to be put in a convenient posture
to be searched, that so the causes of their Pains may be discovered. If it be a
Woman, she is to be laid upon her Back, her Buttocks a little raised, and
having chosen a Catheter, bending only at the end, and anointed with
Salade-Oyl, or some other sweet Oil, she is to be made to open her Thighs a
little. Then the Operator is to open and separate the Nymphae, with two Fingers
of the same Hand, that the Orifice of the Vrethra may appear beneath the
Clitoris; afterward the Catheter is to be thrust in gently with the other Hand,
and so a search to be made whether there be any Stone or not.

It is no great matter whether the bended part of the Catheter be turned
toward the Pubis, or the Vagina, because of the conformation of the Vrethra,
and it is convenient not to be just opposite to the hollow of the Catheter; for
fear of the Eruption of Urine.

For the more easy searching of Men, they ought to lean a little back, or to
be laid upon their Backs; and the Surgeon having made them open their
Thighs, he is to raise the Yard, and hold it straight betwixt the Thumb, and
the fore and middle Fingers of the same Hand, Skinning and taking the Prepuce
off of the Glans, afterward with the other Hand he shall gently thrust an oyled
Catheter to the very bottom of the Vrethra, holding it by the end where the
rings are, like a Pen betwixt his Fingers, with this difference, that the rings
of the Catheter are be hid with the same Fingers, his Hand being half open,
turned toward the Pubis, and the bending or bill of the Catheter toward the
Anus; then must the Catheter and Yard be moved toward the Groyn that is
remotest from him that searches, and in the mean time he is to turn betwixt his
Fingers the Catheter, and the bill of it toward the Pubis. Observe that the
fore and middle Fingers touch the Catheter on the one side, and the Thumb on
the other, answering exactly to the space betwixt the Fingers; at the same time
the Surgeon is to press a little more with the fore Finger, which is higher
than the middle Finger, so that the Center of the motion be upon the Thumb; by
that means the handle of the Catheter is covered, and the bill or bending of
the Catheter raised, that it may press the Sphincter, and enter into the
Bladder; this is the Figure of it.

Whilst the Surgeon is turning the bill of the Catheter toward the Pubis,
he is to pull the Yard a little up, that the Vrethra may be extended and free
depiction of stone removal procedure page 44

from wrinckes; because it being a Membranous Part, the Plicatures thereof may
hinder the Catheter from slipping down.

Sometimes, when the Catheter is introduced to the very bottom of the Vrethra,
and when the bill of it is turned toward the Pubis, the Surgeon is obliged
to let go the Yard, and to put a Finger into the Anus, and by a light
compression of the Vectum, and the Vrethra, the Catheter is conducted into the
Bladder; which being done, he is to draw out his Finger, and hold the Yard no
longer.

The Wire or Stilet is taken out of the Catheter before it be introduced, and
when it is in the Bladder, it is held by the rings betwixt the fore and middle
Fingers, having the Thumb upon the hollow of the Catheter, and the back of the
Hand turned toward the Patients Belly: then the Surgeon is to give some
easy Jogs, moving the bill a little to the right and left, without turning the
Catheter fully round. The rings are lowred, that the bending may mount toward
the bottom of the Bladder, and sometimes they are inclined near the Belly,
without forcing the Catheter out of the Sphincter, and by these kinds of
motion, if one be very attentive, when it is a Stone, one shall hear a little
sound as of two small Stones that touch one another, or at least something is
to be felt that makes a collision with the Catheter, as if it were rubbed with
a Stone, if it float, it may be felt when there is Urine in the Bladder; And
that requires that the Operator should stop the hollow of the Catheter with his
Thumb; but if nothing be felt, the Urine is to be let out by the Catheter, and
then diligent search to be made.

There is another way of searching Men; the Yard is to be raised and moderately
pulled up, laid upon the Groyn, and the rings of the Catheter inclined toward
the Belly; so that the bill be turned toward the Anus.

There are Ungosities in the Bladder that sometimes deceives him that searches;
but they may be discerned, because then, one finds only something that is soft
or but moderately hard, which makes no noise by the touch of the Catheter, the
Bladders of Children have no Ungosities like to those of Men.

In the Hospital of the Charity at Paris, about the beginning of a cutting in
the year, 1681. Two Children were presented to be cut; but the Stone not being
felt, they were put to Bed again; notwithstanding, after many others had been
cut, they were examined the second time, the Stones discovered, and immediately
cut out, because they were prepared. This makes it appear that one should not
be too hasty to give his Opinion, if sometimes the Stones are not felt though
the Signs seem evident, because they may be small or change their place. At the
same time a Man was searched with a Catheter, used to make Patients void Urine.
After that the bill had been inclined to the right side, and several times
thrust toward the bottom of the Bladder, the rings were pressed down toward
the Belly, as if there had been a design to bring out the Catheter; but when
the bill of it was judged to be near the Sphincter of the Bladder, it was
turned to the left side, which could not have been done sooner, because of the
length of the bending of that Catheter, and the smalness of the Bladder; the
Operator continued to search the Stone, which not being felt, was found with
another Catheter, whose bill from the beginning of the bending, was not so
long, and therefore that Catheter turned easily in the Bladder.

This observation instructs us what Catheters are to be chosen for voiding of
Urine, whose bill ought not to be so long as those that serve for making of the
incision, and which are Channelled or Furrowed. There are some Men who have
very narrow Vrethra's, which require small Catheter like those for Children,
and of a sufficient length. Catheters that do not easily bend or bow, are
likewise to be chosen; and that depends on the Work of the Artist that makes
them.

When the Stone is in the Neck of the Bladder, it is not necessary that the
Catheter should be introduced so far as the bottom of it, because the Stone may
be felt, provided the Catheter be only introduced as far as the bottom of the
Vrethra.

When there is a Carnosity, which hinders the Catheter to slide into the
Bladder, the Operator must put a finger into the rectum, and if there be a
Stone he will find a hard and ponderous Body toward the Pubis, if there be a
great inflammation, it is the opinion of Fernelius, that no search should be
made; in that case one should observe to search gently and seldom, because
otherways it may be the cause of pain, inflammation, excoriation, a gangrenous
Ulcer in the Sphincter, nay and even a Supression of Urine, or a peircing of
the Vrethra.

Besides these Diseases, one cannot sometimes search because of a Phymosis, and
of a Stone in the Vrethra; something must be said as to that, as much as is
necessary to be known upon the account of Lithotomy.

CHAP. X. Of a Phymosis, and of the Stone in the Urethra.
MAny Children have a Phymosis; to search them, we must hold the Yard betwixt
the little finger and the ring finger, the back of the hand being toward the
Belly, and with the other fingers pull back the Prepuce, as if one intended to
skin the Glans, the thumb on one side, and the forefinger and middle-finger on
the other, gentlely pressing with these three fingers toward that part of the
Nut or Balanus, where one Judges the end of the Glans to be seated, that by
that means the Orifice of the Vrethra may be the more dilated; then the
Catheter is to be entroduced gentely, searching for the perforation of the
Glans; one may know that he is in the Vrethra, if the Catheter enter easily,
and by feeling with the fingers of the other hand along the Vrethra on the
under side of the Yard.

If the Prepuce be so strait that the Catheter cannot be introduced, or if one
cannot hit upon the Orifice of the Vrethra, there is no danger, to dilate a
little the Prepuce sideways, with the point of a common Bistori or a pair of
sharp Cissars.

Observe that before the introducing of the Catheter, it will be fit to squeeze
the yard with the fingers along the Vrethra, and so to try if one do not feel
some hard Body which stops the passage, as Carnosities or Stones. When it is a
Stone the Catheter is to be drawn out; and if before searching it was known to
be a Stone, and that it stuck in the middle of the Yard between the Glans and
the Testicles, there is no searching, but having only pressed the Yard with
the fingers from the Pubis to the Stone, the Operator shall take a Curette or
Extractor oyled, and having introduced it by little and little, and passed it
beyond the Stone, he may therewith draw it out of the Vrethra.

The Curette or Extractor is like an earpicker, made of Steel, because it is
less apt to bend than if it were made of another Metal, the Operator must have
of them of several sizes in bigness, four or five inches long; the figure of it
you may see in the lower end of the second plate of Instrments.

The extremitiy of the Vrethra may be dilated in the upper part of the Glans,
when stones are extracted with the Curette, and when being brought as far as
the Orifice, they cannot pass without pain.

The Urine serves for a Remedy; and if there has been a Contusion and Pain, it
is enough to foment the Yard with the oil of Roses, and cover the Nut or
Balanus with a little pledget dipped in the liniment of Arceus, dissolved with
a little mel rasatum moderately expressed out with the Nucial or Cross bandage
open in the middle, and the band with three heads to wrap it up in, and it is
not to be forgot, if there be need for it, to put a girdle about the Child, to
which the band may be tied, nay and a Collar hanging about the neck like a
Chairmans Strap, the lower part of which is to be fastened to the girdles that
it may not sink lower than one would have it.

That Bandage serves for other Distempers of the Yard, begininng to apply it
upon the Glans, and then bringing it nearer to the Belly, with slight coulings
and circumvolutions to keep the Medicine fast to the part, and near to the
Pubis an indifferent hard knot is to be cast, then the two heads at the other
extremity of the Band or Truss are to be ^ied to the girdle.

The precise length and breadth of all the parts of that bandage cannot be
determined, because it depends upon the Judgment of the Surgeon to make them
so long and so narrow as that they be not Cumbersome.

There is still another way of extracting the Stone out of the Yard, when it is
at a distance from the Sphincter of the Bladder. And that is this; having drawn
back the skin of the Praepuce as much as one can toward the Nut of the Yard,
Ligature is made betwixt the Stone and the Pubis; or otherways one may with the
fingers compress the Yard and the ^kin be fore and behind the place where the
Stone is observed to stick, and afterward make Incision upon the Stone a little
side-ways in the Vrethra, that so the Stone may be taken out by means of the
Curette or Extractor, introduced into the Orifice of the Incision, the Ligature
being removed and the Skin losened, the Incision stops and is cured by the
Balsom of the Urine; without other Medicine.

If one be unwilling to make Incision in the Vrethra, or if the Stone cannot be
got out with the Extractor, it will be fit to give Diuretic Medicines to force
it forwards to the Glans thereby to facilitate its Extraction.

CHAP. XI. Of the time of Searching and Cutting; of the Instruments; of the
patients Diet; and of the first Preparation.
A Patient may at any time be searched or probed to make him render his Water,
and to discover the Disease; if one find himself extremely troubled with the
Stone, cutting is not to be delayed without danger; but since some diseases
requires a speedy Operation, we shall not speak of the time which is called the
time of necessity; but only of that of Election, which is laid hold of, when
the distemper is in such a Condition as to give opportunity to do things in
order and without precipitation.

The Spring is the most temperate season of the Year; wherein Vitriol the
father of all Productions, gives verdure to Plants, and contributes to the
vigor and strength which men find renewing in themselves at that time, then do
men undertake what was interrupted by the excessive cold or heat of other
seasons, that in the Atumne they may enjoy the fruit of their past labors.
With great reason then men choose the Spring time for many Operations, and
amongst others for Lithotomy. In this Conutry we must expect till the
impression of the Winter cold, and the frequent Rains be over. Though the
Spring begins on the eleaventh of March, nevertheless according to the temper
of the Air, the Operation of the Stone is accelerated or retarded; but commonly
it is performed in the Month of May, Next to the Spring, the Autumn is to be
preferred before the other seasons.

Though Liquors and Menstruums for dissolving of Stones were in use, yet must
we of necessity speak of the Remedies of Surgery, which are Instruments of
Iron or other Metalls proper for Lithotomy. Take here their figures and the
names of their parts.

1. A Rasor to shave off the hair from the privy parts.

2. Common Cizars for ordinary Incisions.

3. A Hollow sound or probe, called a Catheter, for searching of men, and
making them render their Water, and its Stilet or Wire to cleanse it.

4. A Catheter or Staff for making Incision in men, furrowed in the back from
A. which is the bill or bec, to the place marked B. without any cavity in its
length.

5. A Hollow Catheter and only depiction of surgical instruments page 56

conductor forceps male dilator female dilator dilator hook scoop cannula
languette wound dressing curette depiction of surgical instruments page. 56
razor 1
scissors 2
catheter 3
catheter 4
hollow catheter 5
straight catheter 6
bistoury 7
languette 8
bistoury 9
probes 10
conductor 11
crooked at the bill for searching of Women, and its Wire for cleansing it.

6. A Straight Catheter or Staff and hollowed or furrowed from the bill to the
place marked C. which is sometimes made use of for making Incision at the
Orifice of the Vretha of Women. It is requisite to have always in the Catheter
case a part, a little piece of a Sponge moderately moistened with Salad-Oyle,
because sometimes it may be wanting when there is need of it to anoint the
Catheters.

7. A Bistori that opens like a Lancet with a point and edge like the same
only the point blunter, at the head whereof there is a flat tail to keep it
firm against the handle when it is opened,

8. A Languette or roller to mount the Bistori, it is slit at the end, a finger
broad, and a foot and half long.

9. A Bistori mounted, that is to say, armed with the Languette or Roller.

10. Conductors or Probes, whereof a pair serves for the Operation, that which
is next to the Bistori mounted is forked, and the other has a line in the
length of its cavity, for guiding and conducting the former. Nevertheless that
alone which is remotest from the Bistori may be used for conducting the forceps
or tenette.

11. Another kind of Conductor composed of the two above described; it turns
with an elbow about the middle, and has a Spring betwixt the branches near the
rings; it was invented by Joseph Covellart.

1. Another kind of Conductor called in French a Gorgeret more commodious and
more in use. It is hollow tapers and grows narrower at the end, where there is
a bill that is introduced into the furrowing of the Catheter, whilst it is held
by the other end shaped like a T. There are some who do not approve of this
Conductor, saying that it dilates the parts too much, and that it occasions
Fistula's, but without ground, for it is narrower than the forceps which is
drawn out with the Stone and possesses more room, and the Fistula is only
occasioned by the consequences of the Operation, as shall be explained in its
proper Place.

2. Sreight and crooked Forcipes or Tenettes. A. their Teeth, B. their
Branches, C. their Rings.

3. A Dilatatory for Men. It is named a Compound or great Dilatatory. D. the
bill or bec of the Dilatatory. E. the handle.

4. A simple Dilatatory for Women. The extremities of it are blunt, and very
small, the Branches are joined in such a manner that closing the one end, the
other opens. It represents the letter X.

5. Another Dilatatory that may serve for Women and little Boys. It has a
spring near the handle, and can dilate but moderatly. It may be used when one
fears that some Fibers have been left in time of the Incision.

6. A Hook or Crochet to pull out the Stones that are in the Passage, either in
the lesser Operation or otherways, some cause them to be made with little Teeth
in the cavity of its bending; but there is no necessity for it.

7. A Button, a Scoope. About ten Inches long, and as big as a quill. F. the
part properly called the Button. G. the body of the Button, H. the other end
which is hollow, called the Curette or Scoop of the Button. I. a slight line to
conduct the Forceps.

8. A hollow Tent, Pipe or Canula, having rings at one end called the Head, the
other end is called the Point, where there are two holes called the eyes of the
Tent.

9. A Languette or Fillet for mounting the hollow Tent, introducing it into the
Slit, and putting the two ends of the Fillet through the rings of the Tent,
then it is called a Tent mounted. That Fillet or Languette is to be two foot
long, and a finger broad.

10. Two Ligatures by the French, called Scarffs for persons grown up; they are
made of silk and wool mixed together, each of them is four or five else long,
and four or five fingers broad. If the Surgeon want Ligatures or Scarffs;
when he is making his Preparation, he may cut bands of strong linnen-cloath,
and make use of them. There is nothing lost in that, for he may afterward cut
them to serve for a Truss or page 62

depiction of medical and surgical supplies tourniquet 1
bolster 2
plaster 3
compress 4
bandage 5
truss 6
pledget 7
plaster 8
plaster 9
bolster 10
compress 11
tourniquet 12
bed 13
Froude, and for dressing the Patient.

11. An Extractor or Curette for extracting Stones out of the Yard.

1. A Chair used in the Hospital of the Charity at Paris, on which the Patient
is set, for the more commodious performing of the Operation. There are behind
two bars or rods of Iron in form of Butteresses; they are hooked, that so they
may enter into the rings of the Chair, and sharp at the end to stick firmer in
the Floor, because the Patient struggles and uses violence in the time of the
Operation. The Chair should be placed a little obliquely for the light to come
upon the right hand of the Surgeon, that he may see the better when he is
about his Operation.

Instead of that Chair, the Patient may be seated upon the side of a Bed, or on
a Table, with a Mattress or Quilt, whereof one part covers the back of a common
Chair reversed, about half a foot distant from the edge of a Table, in a
sloaping manner. That Chair is to be made fast with many strong cords, if there
be no Matteress or Quilt, it will be sufficient to lay a Pillow or any other
thing to make the place soft, and a folded Sheet over it.

2. A Sheet folded length-ways with many folds, to cover the Chair that has
been described, or the Matteress in the time of Operation: one part of it is
before, and the rest hangs behind.

3. A Budget to put in separatly the straight Forcipes in the one side, and the
crooked, with the hook in the other, in the bottom the Dilatatory, the Button
and the Conductor are hid. It may be shut, lifting up the sides of it where
there are Button-holes, into which are put the Buttons that are fastened to the
places marked C. D. near the strings.

A Table whereon the Porringer with Oil is set, and the mounted Bistoris laid,
under which a piece of linnen-cloath folded with many plaits, is put crossways,
that their points may not touch any thing. It is fit that several Bistories
should be mounted, though there be but one Operation to be made, because the
edge or the point are sometimes blunted, and it is necessary to have some rags
of linnen-cloath and napkins in readiness.

All the Instruments may be made of Steel or Iron, nevertheless the Catheters,
Conductors, Button and Tents, are neater when they are of Silver, and less
subject to rust. Of each kind there ought to be several sizes, and those well
polished.

It is not enough to have spoken of the Instruments of Chirurgie, we must
likewise, according to the Rules of good method, take into consideration, what
things are necessary before, in the time, and after the Operation. Before the
Operation the Patient ought to be prepared for some days by a Diet,
Bloodletting, Glysters, Purges, reiterated more or less, according to the
advice of a skilful Physician; and the night before the Operation, the Patient
must take a laxative, or else an astringent Glyster, according as need shall
require. He must have a days time at least to rest in after he has taken
Physic: and spiritual Remidies are not to be omitted.

At the time of cutting, the Operator must choose four faithful servants at
least, a Chamber indifferently warm, and in a good Air where the light of day
may suffice. He must have an Apron and Sleeves, and under the Table a tub of
warm water to wash the Instruments; upon the Table there must be Salad-oyl or
oil of Roses, and there he is to lay his Instruments in order for the
Operation: all these things are called the preparatives. (Appareil) for the
Operation: the Bandage and Medicines that are made use of to dress the Patient
that is cut, are called the preparatives for the dressing, which ought to be in
readiness, because they are used immediately after the Operation.

The Medicines, both Powders and Ointments ought to be astringent, warm,
Oxycrat and Oxyrodinum.

The Bandages as well for Men as Women. are 1. The Ligature, or Colier, which
is a great band for Blood-letting, when the two ends of it are tied together,
it is of an oval Figure, which is put over the Head, and comes down as far as
the Navil. This band may be put about the Patient before the Operation. 2. A
Bolster or compress of a moderate thickness, three or four fingers broad, to
put upon the wound when the Operation is done, and when the Patient is to be
carried to bed; it ought to be laid upon the Table, with the Bistories and the
Catheters. 3. An astringent Plaster of a sufficient bigness to cover the Belly.
4. A Ventriere or Belly-clout, which is a great Bolster or Compress to cover
the Belly, it is to be dipped in warm, Oxycrat. 5. The Froude or Bandage or
Trusse with four Heads, A. the Heads which may be called Twins, because they
begin in the same place, and are destined for one and the same use. 6. The
Truss or double T. or second Trusse, B. B. the girdle of the Truss, C. C. the
Tails or Straps of the Truss. 7. A Pledget Plumacean covered with Astringent.
8. Astringent-Plasters of several sizes. 9. A Plaster longer than broad, to be
put some days after the Operation upon the Pledget instead of the former
Plasters, this Plaster ought to be somewhat longer than the Wound. 10. A small
square Bolster or Compress indifferently thick, and somewhat larger than the
Plaster above described. 11. Another double compress an Inch broad and a Foot
long for Males, called a Truss. These two Bolsters are to be moistened in war m
Oxycrat. 12. A Ligature or Farettiere, which is a long band to be Swathed about
the Thighs, that the Patient may keep them within a moderat nearness to one
another. 13. A Bed covered with a Rowling-Sheet, or a Sheet doubled into many
folds, and laid cross the Bed, in the place where the Kidneys and Thighs of him
that is cut do Rest. There is need of several Sheets or Alaises to shift and
make it dry when it is wet, it is to be warmed with a Warming-Pan; if it be
needful, it is requisite also to have a good many Napkins in Readiness to put
under the Patient, when he has a Looseness that he may be the sooner laid dry,
and sometimes besides that Sheet a Sere-Cloath or thin Blanket is put betwxit
the Sheets and the Quilt to preserve it from spoiling and rotting by the
Urines; but a Sere-Cloath makes the Bed too hard, and is not good but when
there is a want of Sheets or a Quilt to shift the Patient. It is not to be
forgot that a cord must be fastened to the top of the Bed or some other place to
help the Patient to raise himself.


There are some Operators that hide their Instruments in their pockets, or put
the Catheters in their Button-Holes before they anoint them with Oil; others
lay them in a Dish, nevertheless seeing it makes a noise when the Operator
takes them up to Operate with, it seems more commodious to have them in a
Pouch or Budget.

CHAP. XII. Of the Posture and Situation into which Children are to be put;
when they are to be Cut.
ALL things being prepared, the Catheters put into Oil, the Bistoris and Tents
mounted, and laid upon the Table, the Tub with warm water underneath it, the
straight and crooked Forcipes with the hook placed in order in the fore part of
the Budget, a Conductor, the Button and Scoop, and a Dilatatory, if it be
thought necessary in the bottom of the Pouch or Budget: the Patient is sent
for, brought to the place of Operation, and set upon the Chair standing a
little obliquely, that the light from the Windows may dart upon the right side
of the Operator, who is to keep his Instruments from the sight of the Patient.

If it be a Child of four, five, seven, ten or twelve years of Age, two
Servants may hold him by the Hand and Feet on each side, whilst another getting
up upon something behind the Chair, and looking forwards, may commodiously lean
upon the Patients shoulders, placing the Thumb of both Hands toward his Back,
and the other Fingers upon the Clavicles, for the surer hold, the Servant who
is on the right side of the Patient, ought to put his left Hand betwixt the
Patients Thighs, and take fast hold on his right Hand wrist, and that the Child
be not hurt, the sleeve of his Shirt may be pulled down to cover his Hand;
after that the same servant with his Right Hand shall lay hold of the Leg on
the same side by the Foot and Anckle. The Servant on the Patients Left Hand
shall do the same, taking hold of the Left-Arme with the Right Hand, and with
the Left Hand of the Left-Leg near to the Foot.

In this posture the Child's Hands must almost touch his Heels, and if he but
any way hold fast, his Thighs spread, the Lithotomist has Room to Operate, and
because Children do extremely Struggle and Strive, two other servants may
likewise keep their knees a sunder; but it is chiefly to be observed in this
posture, that the Patient lean half backwards according to the shape of the
Chair, or for want of that, near the Beds side, or the Table, covered with a
Quilt or Matteress, so that his Fundament may be seen, and that his Feet do not
rest upon any thing, so that he have less force to stir or move himself. Hear
is the Figure of it.

There are some Operators who choose a strong Man, and make him sit upon a
pretty high common Chair, or upon the end of a Bench, who having a Cushion
against his Belly, and a Sheet over it, takes the Child, who is to be cut, upon
his Knees joined together, the Man having his Knees close, puts his Hands
betwixt the Child's Legs, and so takes hold of his two Wrists; by this means the
Child is put into a convenient posture to be cut, take here the Figure of it.

Besides the Man that holds, it is requisite that some other persons lean upon
the Child's Shoulders, open his Knees, and keep his Feet steady.

depiction of stone removal procedure page 70



depiction of stone removal procedure page 70



Nevertheless, seeing the Operation is sometimes laborious, and that the Man
who holds may be weary, it is better to make use of the first way.

CHAP. XIII. Of the different ways of Extracting the Stone, according to the
Custom of the Egyptians.
The Practice of the high Operation
SOmetimes the Surgeon cannot introduce the furrowed Catheter, because of
pain or inflammation, occasioned by too frequent searching before, or because
there may be fear of putting the Patient to too much pain, or that there may be
a Carnositie or Callositie in the Part, or because the Stone is in the
Perineum, or in the Neek of the Bladder.

These different dispositions oblige the Operator to consider how and in what
manner the Operation is to be performed. The first which is not in use, is
called the high Operation. The second and third are daily practiced, and are
called the lesser, and the great Operation.

We pretend not to comprehend the two Methods, mentionded by Prosper Alpinus,
in the fourteenth Chapter, of his 3d. Book of the Medicine of the Egyptians,
where he relates their Practice of extracting the Stone of the Bladder, without
making Incision, but only by Dilatation of the Vrethra by blowing into the Yard.

When I lived in Egypt, says he, a certain Arabian named Haly, in great
Reputation for Extracting Stones without Incision, took out several in my
presence from Horam Bey, a Turkish Commander, in this manner he set about it;
he made use of a wooden Pipe eight fingers long, and about the thickness of
ones Thumb; having applied this to the passage of the Yard, he blew into it
with great force; at the same time with the other hand he pressed the extremity
of the Privy Part toward the Perineum, to hinder the Wind from entering into
the Bladder; then he stopped the mouth of the Pipe, to make the Vrethra swell and
stretch. This being done, a Servant put his Finger into the Anus, and brought
the Stone by little and little toward the neck of the Bladder, and the
beginning of the Vrethra: and then the Operator perceiving that the Stone was
near the Perineum, he suddenly and with force drew back the Pipe from the
passage of the Yard, and so dexterously Extracted the Stone, which was about the
bigness of an Olive-Stone. I was present at this Operation which he performed
upon that Turkish Commander; and afterward I saw him Practice it upon two
Jews, one of which was a little Boy, from whom he took 8 small Stones, and the
other was grown up, from whom he took one as big as an Olive. This Arabian made
use of the same Method to draw Stones out of the Bladder.

In the same Chapter he speaks of a Letter written to him by Octavius
Poveretus, a most learned Physician in Egypt, for the Commonwealth of Venice.

Some Months ago, says he, an Arabian of Sidon, a Christian, Extracted a Stone
without Incision from another Christian named Cophtus, and it was done in this
manner. The Arabian had many Pipes of different sizes, much of the shape of
Flutes, or Pipes which are musical Instruments. They were made of a
Cartiliginous matter, which would easily streatch: he introduced the smallest
into the Vrethra, and thrust it forward as far as the Bladder: immediately
thereupon, he blew in it with all his strength to make it swell; then he pulled
out that Pipe, and put in a bigger, blowing in it after the same manner, and so
continued charging the Pipes until he put in the fourth, which was the biggest;
and when he thought by this means that he had dilated the passage sufficiently
to make way for the Stone; he placed the Patient in a convenient posture, and
put one Finger into the Anus, to bring it toward the neck of the Bladder where
the end of that great Pipe was, into which he endeavored to make the Stone
enter. This being done, he put his mouth to the other end of the Pipe, and
sucking with all his strength, he did what he could to draw the Stone toward
him, which broke often when it was too big, as it happened to this Man named
Cophtus; for he fetched from him but a part of it, and the rest being a big and
large fragment could not be got out.

This way, says Kovoretus, is easy to be learnt, and perhaps a skilful
Surgeon might have better Success in the Practice of it, which is a thing to
be desired by those who are troubled with the Stone. Beverovicius makes mention
of those two ways taken from Prosper Alpinus. But it is more pertinent in this
place, without examining the circumstances of those two ways, to give the
descriptions of those which are called the high, the great, and lesser
Operation.

De Franco was the first that practiced the high Operation, which is so called,
because it is performed in the Hypogastre, and though he does not advise the
doing of it, yet if there were a necessity for it, it does not seem
impracticable in this manner. Let the Patient be laid and held fast upon a
Matteress or Quilt, then let a Servant thrust his forefinger and middle finger
one after another into the Rectum, to make the Stone rise as high as one can;
at the same time the Operator is to make Incision gently above the Groyn and on
the side of the Linea-alba (the white line.) The Bottom of the Bladder may
without doubt be opened withoutuhrting the Parts of the lower Belly, because it
is situated between the Duplicature of the Peritoneum, and the fuller that it
is of Urine, the more Apparent it will be: by means of the Urine the simple
Dilatatory may be conducted, and then the button, which after the Dilatory is
taken out, may serve for a Conductor to the Forceps. Mr. Jonnot told me, that
Mr. Bonnet a Surgeon who heretofore Practiced Lithotomie in the Hotel Dieu
of Paris assured him, that he had cut in that manner. Mr. Petit a Master
Surgeon of that Hospital told me that he had seen Mr. Bonnet Practice it
upon a young Girl.

The Cure is to be performed as of simple Wounds in the lowor Belly, or
otherways the Method may be changed according as Symptoms happen to follow.
Experience teaches us that the Wounds of the Bladder are not allways Mortal.

If any one would Practice the High Operation, it would be necessary to try
many Experiments on dead Bodies, after the Water is taken out of the Bladder De
Franco in the same place, Chap. XXXIII. Proposes another way of cutting, which
is immediately after the Incision to put in a Tent, unless the Stone present it
self at first, and some days after when the pain is ceased to pull out the
Stone. But this way is only Practiced when the Operation is Laborious; and
instead of a Tent, a Pipe is made use of.

CHAP. XIV. The Practice of the lesser Operation for Men.
THE lesser Operation has been so called because the Practice thereof requires
but a few Instuments; it was invented by Celsus, and described in the seventh
Book, twenty sixth Chapter, as it was heretofore Practiced; but if the Stone be
not toward the neck of the Bladder, and that it be felt in the Perineum near
to and under the Scrotum, the manner of extracting it is different.

That I may give a clear Notion of the thing, I shall here Observe what
happened in many Lithotomies in the Year one thousand six hundred and eighty,
in the Hospital of the Charity of Paris. Though I had my share in those
Operations that were Laborious, yet I shall only mention one that happened to
Monsieur Jonnot, the Circumstances whereof agreed exactly with other Operations
which I performed in his presence: this Relation will give ground for making
two kinds of lesser Operation for men.

There was brought to him a Boy of seven Years of Age that had been cut the
Year before. He needed not make use of the Catheter to assure him of the
destemper, for with two fingers one might feel the Stone toward the middle of
the Perineum above the former Cicatrice.

To hold it fast, it was needless to put the fingers into the Anus, because the
Stone being too high it could not be compressed, as is usually done, when it is
in the neck of the Bladder; but having caused the Scrotum to be lifted up, and
the Skin held strait, Monsieur Jonnot turning the inside of the left hand
towords the Cods, he pressed the Tumor with his Thumb and forefinger on both
sides of the Suture where he had observed the Stone; at the same time he made
the Incision on the side of the Suture upon the Tumor, and having opened a
passage, with a middle sized Hook, he extracted the Stone; afterward feeling
with one finger that there were others still remaining, he was obliged to keep
the place dilated with the same finger that introduced the Hook, and that the
Stone might not shift its place, he held it fast with the forefinger of the
Left Hand put upon the upper part of the Wound, and with the Thumb on the lower
part. By that means he happily finished that Operation, that he might cut the
same Patent by the great Operation; for having pulled out all the small Stones
and Fragments that were in the Perineum, he introduced by the Yard a furrowed
Catheter werewith he found another Stone in the Bladder, and upon that Catheter
he continued the Incision with the other Circumstances whereof we shall speak
in the great Operation. I was necessitated to do the same to a young Man of
twenty two Years of Age.

I remember that before Monsieur Jonnot made use of the Catheter to cut him by
the great Operation, be introduced into the Yard a great straight Wire or
Stilet to force down some Fragments that stuck a little higher than the
Incision, whilst he compressed the Vrethra underneath, and then putting his
Thumb below the Wound, he drew them out with a small Scoop without any trouble.

This ought to serve when one cutteth the Stone out of the Perineum, because at
the same time we must search if there be none in the Bladder; and that it may
be done with less pain and trouble, a Catheter that serves to make Women void
their Unrine may be introduced depiction of stone removal procedure page 81

depiction of stone removal procedure page 81

by the wound. This I saw practiced upon one who had contracted a Fistula upon
cutting, and had a Stone in the Bladder, who endured the great Operation after
that the Catheter was taken out.

It is not needful to make the Patient jump before he be cut by the lesser
Operation; if he be a little Boy, and the Stone in the Neck of the Bladder, it
is enough, after that he is put into a posture, and held fast by the Servants,
that the Surgeon dip his forefinger and middle-finger into Oil, the nails
being pared; and if one Finger be not suffiicient, that he thrust them one
after another into the Fundament, as far as possibly he can, that they may
reach beyond the Stone, and press it down to the Neck of the Bladder, betwixt
the Rectum and the Os Pubis, a Servant in the mean time lifting up the Scrotum
with one hand, and with the other armed with a Compress leaning upon the Belly,
to make the Stone come down; then the Surgeon is to dry the Perineum, and
stretch the Skin very strait with his other Fingers, as it is represented in
this Figure.

The Tumor that the Stone covered with Teguments makes, renders the Incision
(...) on the side of the Suture, which may be made long enough for extracting
of the Stone; care nevertheless must be had, to avoid the Rectum, the
Hemmorhoid Veins and the Cods. One must not fear the spoiling of the edge or
point of the Bistori, for every time that it is to be used of new, it must be
set again.

So soon as the Incision is made, the Stone appears, and then the Operator lays
aside the Bistori, and takes the Hook or Crochet; he is to hide it in his Hand
as much as he can, the end of its Handle being toward the little Finger, and
the Forefinger covering the length of its Body: without drawing the Fingers
out of the Rectum, the Hook is to be slipped in betwixt the Pubis, and the Stone
in this manner.

When the Hook is behind the Stone, and that the Operator intends to pluck it
out, the Handle of it ought to be in the Hand with the end resting upon the
Thumb, that it may be used with greater

depiction of stone removal procedure page 82



depiction of stone removal procedure page 83



The Fingers are not to be taken out of the Anus before the extraction,
nevertheless when the Stone breaks because of its softness or shape which is
sometimes crooked like a Cressant, if the rest cannot be extracted with the
Hook or a little Forceps, the next course is, to remove the Fingers out of the
Anus, and introduce the Button into the wound for searching of the Stone, and
having felt it, conduct a Forceps upon the Button to lay hold of it, and gently
draw it out.

By what Operation soever an Operator may cut, when the Stone breaks, though
many Stones have been taken out, it is still necessary to introduce the Button
to search and examine if there be no more fragments remaining.

When those that are of Age and grown up, are cut by the lesser Operation, it
is not necessary to make the Incision so high as in the great Operation,
because one cuts exactly upon the Stone, and it is also easier to avoid hurting
of the Rectum.

If a Patient has been already cut; the Incision is to be made upon the
Cicatrice or the Fistula.

CHAP. XV. The manner of both the lesser and greater Operation for Women.
WOmen and Maids are cut by the lesser Operation, introducing the forefinger
and middle-finger into the Vagina Vteri, if it can be done without Violence, or
into the Rectum, for feeling of the Stone, and holding it firm, whilst with the
other hand the Operator presses the lower Belly to make the Stone come down.
Then he is to make use of the hollow straight Catheter, which being introduced
into the Vrethra, is to be held by a Servant, and the Orifice of the Vrethra is
to be dilated by a simple Dilatatory, conducted in the Cavitie of the Catheter:
it is not to be dilated too far forward, because the passage is short, and that
the dilaacerted Fibers may not hinder the unvoluntary emission of the Urine,
the dilatation being made, the Catheter is taken out with the Dilatatory, and
the Fingers being still in the same place into which they were introduced, the
Stone is pulled out with the Hook or a Forceps, in the same manner as from
little Boys.

Women and Girls may be excused from the violence which they sussex by the
lesser Operation, because the great Operation is more convenient for the better
succeeding in it, the Patient is to be placed upon the Chair, or upon the end
of a Matteress, and that Conductor which is shaped like a Sword, and has a
bill, is to be introduced into the Vrethra, then a small simple Dilatatory; and
having made a moderate dilatation, whilst the Dilatatory is still open, the
Surgeon according to his own discretion and the bigness of the Stone, may
cut a little sideways to the right and left, the external Orifice of the
Passage, then draw out the Dilatatory, and introduce the Forceps along the
Conducttor, to take hold of the Stone, and to extract it in the usual manner,
its scarce credible how much the Vrethra may be dilated both in Men and Women.

There are some Operators who having introduced the straight hollow Catheter,
th^^ thrust in one of the Conductors, shaped like a Sword that has a bill; and
the Catheter being drawn out, they slip easily in the other Conductor, which is
sorked, because the first has a line that directs the second. Between those two
Conductors which they press betwixt the Forefinger and Middle-finger of the
left Hand; they thrust in a Forceps to continue the Operation. Others
succesfully make use of a narrow Gorgeret which serves for a Conductor to the
Forceps. Mr. Jonnot makes only use of a hollow straight Catheter, or of a large
Probe or Stilet for conducting the Forceps.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Practice of the great Operation for Men, and of
circumstances during the time of the Operation.
JOannes de Romany a Physician of Cremona, in the year 1520. Invented and
Practiced at Rome, the great Operation, so called, because it requires more
Instruments than other Methodes do.

Men who are cut by the great Operation occasion more trouble, not only in
respect of the Operation, but likewise in respect of the Cure; because their
Vrethra is crooked, long and narrow, and their way of living renders that Part
many times subject to more Diseases than those Parts in Women.

When the Patient is prepared and ready, he is set upon the Chair, or other
ways laid up the side of a Matteress or Quilt, placed upon a Bed or a Table of
an indifferent length, his Buttocks a little raised, his Head and Body
inclining backwards, and leaning upon the back of a common Chair reversed, and
so ordered that the hinder Feet be near the Patients shoulders, and that he may
continue still in a good Posture, two Scarffs are made use of in this manner;
having laid them both together long ways, there is a knot tied in the middle of
them, and they are put about the Patients Neck, the knot behind. If they be too
long, they are shortened by tying a knot upon them, and a noose made of the same
Scarffs is let hang down behind. This being done the Master takes the Scarffs
on the right side, and a Servant on the left, then both of them stand before
the Patient, and make him set his Feet against them, each side of the Scarffs
being double, the Master and Man each on his side makes one end of them come
before upon the Clavicles, and the other end upon the Shoulder Blades, and then
bring both crosways under the Armpits: there they twist them together, giving
them two or three turns: after that they bring the Patients Knees as near as
they can to his Belly, and at the same time draw depiction of stone removal
procedure page 89

one of the Scarffs betwixt the thighs, and the other on the outside of them,
and they join both together underneath, giving them one cast over another, in
like manner the Patients Heels are raised near to his Buttocks, whilst in the
same fashion they tie his Leg; after that they make him put his four Fingers
under his Soul of his Foot, and the Thumb below the external Ankle-bone, as if
he were to take hold of his Heel. In this posture they tie the Wrist and Hand
to the Leg and Foot, bringing the ends of the Scarffs under the Foot like a
Stirrup, and then they draw them betwixt the Feet and the Thumbs, because the
Ligatures must be made indifferently strait, which would hurt the Thumbs if
they were tied underneath, to which the Patients struglings would not a little
contribute. Here you see the Figure of it, in which there is but one Servant
represented leaning upon the Knee and Foot, keeping the Legs asunder, and
supporting the Patient that the Rowlings and Swathings may be seen; for there
ought to be a Man on the other side, and sometimes two on each side when the
Patient is strong.

This posture is somewhat terrible to the Patient, and therefore since there
are some Men of a strong Resolution and invincible Courage, if they be
unwilling to suffer these Ligatures; it will be sufficient to bind their Thighs
and Legs in the manner described, and cause their Arms to be held by two Men;
or perhaps they may like it better to have their hands tied a part by
themselves, making them lay their wrists one upon another which being tied
together by the middle of a Bandage wrapped two or three times about them and
two indifferent hard Knots, the two ends are to be brought about the the neck
and tied, together with a running knot, so that the hands rest about the pit of
the Stomach or the Cartilago Ensiformis.

I saw a Genteleman who had had his Leg cut off, cut at Mr. Jonnots. his Arm
was tied on the same side with his Thighs and the want of his Leg was supplied
by the number of Servants who held him fast if one or both his (...) had been
cut off, he (...) have (...) mastered by the number of Men who could have held
him by the Arms and Stumps, whilst others leaned upon his Shoulders, without
any use of Ligarures.

Women ought to be Situated in the same posture.

Whilst the Scarffes are applying, it is fit that the Chrurgion should speak to
the Patient, but in few words, that he look upon him and encourage him with
discourse, shuning every thing that is undecent, because one must be very
reserved, to oblige those that are present to be silent and with respect to be
attentive, which wonderfully comforts a Patient; calling to mind, that to laugh
at the disease, the infirmity, or expressions of a Patient, is to insult over a
man in affluction. Neminem riseris ne miserum ririseris.

It were better to have but a few spectators, because a great many may
incommode the Operator, frighten the Patient, and put a bad construction on the
accidents that sometimes accompany the Operation: it is fit, as much as
conveniently may be, that a Churchman should be present to talk now and then
to the Patient, that may help to divert his pain, and increase his Patience
dureing the Operation.

When the Patient is seated, the Surgeon, is to place his People to support
him and make him spread open his knees, lean upon his shoulders, and to lift up
the Scrotum or hold the Catheter, if a Servant present a Bistori, he is to be
on the right side of the Operator, who is to cut with the right hand; and he
shall hold it in this fashion.

With the Right Hand in which he hides the Blade of the Bistori. The Operator
when he takes it, is to put his hand upon the handle, the other Servants are
placed in the same manner for the lesser, as for the great Operation; but they
hold the Patient in a different manner, as it has been represented by the
Figures.

When there is a Hernia or burstness the Scrotum is to be lifted up very high,
depiction of surgical instrument page 92

and care is to be taken in making the Incision not to hurt the Testicles nor
the parts which cause the Hernia.

Before the Operation there is sometimes a Procidentia or falling of the Anus
occasioned by the straining of the Patient: if the falling be considerable, the
Operator may endeavor to thrust it up without violence, and then lay a Bolster
upon the Anus, which a Servant is to press hard: but if the Servants hand
hinder the Operator, there is nothing to be put upon the Rectum; for after the
Operation is over it is reduced, and many times returns again of it self.

if the Patient have been cut already, the Incision is to be made upon the
cicatrice, or the fistula, as has been said speaking of the lesser Operation
one may cut on the Right side as well as on the Left, taking heed not to cut
the suture, because it does not so easily cicatrice, and is also attended by
many accidents.

The Incision in Children is made at least two fingers breadth in length; in
men 3 or four fingers breadth or thereabouts, according as the Stone is thought
to be of bigness, and according to the Grosness of the Subject. Not that it
ought to be made too large, for when the Stone is in the passage, if the
Incision be too small, recourse may be had to a Cut with the Bistori, or with a
pair of Cizars in a convenient place. The Incision of the Skin and Membrances
is easily made, but many times the Vrethra is not sufficiently opened unless
one press the Bistori hard in the furrow of the Staff; Incision is never made
in the neck of the Bladder, but always in the Vrethra, and experience convinces
that a great Incision in that Operation is as soon cicatriced as a small one.

The Patient being set in a posture and bound with the Scarffes, his Arms and
Legs are held by two strong Men, and, if need be, two others take care to keep
his knees asunder, a Servant gets up behind the Chair to press upon his
shouldiers, during the time of the Operation, which is performed, if it be
possible, by the lesser Operation, or at least in the great (which is commonly
made use for Men and litttle boys) by introducing a furrowed Catheter,
wherewith the Operator searches, and is certain if there be a Stone or not.

If nothing be felt with the furrowed Catheter, it is necessary to introduce a
Catheter, whose bill is not so long, making the Patient void his Urine; and if
there be a Stone it will by that means be more easily found, because when it
Floats, being little and smooth, it will follow the course of the Urine; and
the Catheter will turn better in the Bladder. When the Stone is found the
furrrowed Catheter is again to be introduced.

If the Patient has been cut, it is harder to introduce the Catheter, and
therefore one is to be taken of a size that would suit with a younger Subject,
and sufficiently long, according to the age of him that is to be searched.

There are some Operators who hold the Catheter themselves when they make the
Incision: others cause a Servant to hold it, who is placed at the side of the
Chair, opposite to the Groyn whereon the Operator is to make the Incision; for
example, the Surgeon performing his Operation on the left side of the
suture, the Servant shall be on the Patients Right Hand, and having wiped and
dried the Scrotum and Perineum, he shall lift up the Cods with the Left Hand,
and shall rest his other hand upon the Rings and end of the the Catheter,
inclining the furrowing a little toward the Patients left side, and he must
take care not to make it come out of the Bladder, which he may avoid: if he
bring not the Rings of the Catheter too near the Belly. The Surgeon ought to
mind first bidding him hold fast and not waver, and causing others to lean upon
the Patients shoulders, because at that very time the Operator ought to pull
the suture toward the right side, placing the Thumb of his Left Hand near the
Anus, and his other fingers near the Scrotum having felt with the fore finger
of the Right Hand, and observed the place where the back of the Catheter is in
the same manner as one does to find the Vein before blood letting) pulling
still the suture to the Right, with the Right Hand he is to take the Bistori
mounted, which the Servant presion in the place designed, as you see
represented by this Figure.

In making incision he is to search for the furrowing of the Catheter, into
which he is to thrust the point of the Bistory, he is to press hard, swathing
above toward the Cods, and below sinking the Wrist, that the point of the
Bistory may be always directed into the furrowing underneath the Catheter that
the Urethra may be exactly cut, avoiding the Scrotum, the Rectum and the
Hemorrhoide veins; then he shall return back the Bistory. And take the Gorgeret
to introduce it into the furrowing; after that with the left hand he shall lay
hold on the Catheter by the end which the Servant held.

To prevent the Fingers of the Operators left hand from sliding during the time
of the Incision, he may make use of a very narrow compress, to help him to
press and pull the suture toward the patients right side.

If in making Incision the Operator himself hold the Catheter, the Servant who
extends the Perineum may upon the same account put very narrow Compersses
betwixt his Fingers and the Skin, that so he may hold the two sides of the
suture firmer toward the Thighs; by that means the Humidity will not hinder
him to press upon them as much as is necessary.

Monsieur Ruffin a sworn Surgeon of Paris, one of the ablest of his time,
performed the Operation in this manner in the Hospital of the Charity.

After that he had introduced the Catheter, and was sure of the Stone, he
caused a Servant placed on the Patients right side to lift up the Cods, and
having dried the parts that were wet, the same Servant holding his hands almost
open, put his right hand upon the suture pulling it to the right, and the Skin
to the left with the other hand which he rested toward the left Groyn, lifting
up the Cods with both his hands: The Operator inclined the Catheter a little
toward the Belly, and pressed upon the Rings with the left hand, whilst with
the right forefinger he marked the place of Incision; then was the depiction
of stone removal procedure page 99

Bistory presented to him, and during the time that the Servant held the
Perineum, stretched to the right and left without the use of Compresses, he
made the Incision as in the other way: This is the Figure of it; the Servant
may also with one hand lift up the Scrotum, whilst with the other that is
extended he presses hard upon the Perineum, holding between two fingers the
place where the Operator intends to make the Incision. The Servant may likewise
do otherways, it is enough that he hide his two thumbs in his hands, and with
the two fore-fingers he may extend the Perineum for the same purpose.

The furrowing of the Catheter being discovered and the Bistory returned back,
he took a Conductor with an elbow toward the middle which is composed of two
in the form of a Sword, he thrust the Bill of it into the furrowing still
holding the Catheter, and when it was introduced into the Bladder, he drew out
the Catheter, and conveyed his Forceps betwixt the Branches of the Conductor
to introduce it into the Bladder: the Conductor being taken out he continued
the Operation.

These two ways are very good, and have both their advantages, because when the
Operator himself holds the Catheter he is sure what place it is in; but also
after the Incision, sometimes it is hard to find the furrowing because of Fat,
Membrans and Blood that hide it; it is true that after Incision the point of
the Bistory may be left in the furrowing, and may be held by some body whilst
the Surgeon slides the Bill of the Gorgeret along the Bistory, but when a
Servant holds the Catheter, after that the Incision is made and that the
Operator has given back the Bistory, as we have Just now described, he may put
the Nail of his left Thumb into the Wound, and having found the slit or
furrowing, thrust therein the Gorgeret which ought to be hid in his right hand,
so that the right forefinger cover the length of it, suffering nothing almost
to appear but the Bill: So soon as the Bill is in the furrowing, he takes the
Catheter by the rings in the left hand, as is here represented.

depiction of stone removal procedure page 100



And now there is great care to be taken in introducing the Gorgeret into the
Bladder, for if the Patient push hard he may make the Catheter to come out, and
then bad accidents happen; for if one thrust forwards the Gorgeret and then the
Forceps, when they are not in the Bladder, a space is made betwixt the Urethra
and the Rectum. To avoid mistakes the Operator ought to have an attentive mind,
and not talk. And then having passed the Bill of the Conductor called the
Gorgeret into the furrowing of the Catheter, he is to hold them fast, keeping
the Bill always in; And as if one intended by guiding and making it slide along
and under the furrowing, to thrust the Bill upwards; by this means one is sure
to introduce it into the Bladder, and holding it with his right hand the
Catheter must be disengaged from the Gorgeret by turning it with the left, and
then softly and easily drawn out of the Yard. A certain sign that the Gorgeret
is in the Bladder, is the emission of Urine along the Conductor; that is, if
there be any in the Bladder.

When the Gorgeret is in the Bladder, and the Catheter drawn out, it is taken
hold of with the left hand, and a convenient Forceps with the right, which is
to be thrust upon and along the same Gorgeret in this manner.

Though the Gorgeret or Introductor be put into the Bladder, yet it may be
forced out again by the Patients struggling, which may be prevented, by causing
some to press upon his shoulders, and others to hold him fast by the hands and
feet; the Operator in the mean time who then holds his Gorgeret with the left
hand that he may take a Forceps in the right, must not forget to take notice if
any of that which he has introduced come out again; for if he perceive it much
without the Incision, it must not be thrust forwards to make it enter again as
before, nor yet wholly drawn out, because perhaps it may not be out of the
Bladder, and if it were, it would be too great a risque, because the Urethra
and other parts falling together again, a space would be made betwixt the
Bladder and the Rectum, as has been depiction of stone removal procedure page
103

already said; but having taken a Forceps of an indifferent size rather small
than too great, he is to pass it along the Conductor, without forcing any
thing; if he find any resistance when the thrusts it gently forwards, the
Conductor is to be drawn out; if he cannot but with difficulty open the
Forceps, he may be sure that he is not in the Bladder, and then without
speaking, the Forceps is to be taken out, and whilst it is a washing in warm
Water, and making dry, the Surgeon shall take the button with his right
hand, and if need be lift up the Cods with the left that he may pass it into
the Wound, turning it toward the Yard, and conducting it upwards toward the
Bladder, in this manner.

The Button being blunt hurts not the parts in passing, and when it is in the
Bladder (which may be known, because then it may be easily turned every way)
the Stone is softly to be searched for by gently jogging and moving the
Instrument; which being felt, the Surgeon is to take the Button in the left
hand, conducting with the right the Forceps close upon the Button into the
Bladder, this is the Figure of it.

If it be a crooked Forceps, whilst it is introducing, the Bill being turned
toward the Yard, the rings are more to be raised, as may be observed in this
last Figure, in a manner different from the former Figure, Page 92. which
represents the straight Forceps conducted upon the Gorgeret with the right hand
bending lower upon the left. The Crooked Forceps is made use of, when the Stone
is thought to be very near to the Groyn; but most commonly the straight
Forcipes are sufficient, and both the one and the other ought to be laid upon
the line of the Button, so that it touch on both sides.

When the Forceps is in the Bladder the first thing to be done, is to open it
for dilating of the passage, then having joined the Rings almost together, it
is to be gently turned and moved every way to search for the Stone, whilst the
Forceps is in the Bladder, the Teeth are not to be joined again, for fear of
offending some part, and then the Patients depiction of stone removal procedure
page 104

thighs may be brought a little nearer together, and not kept at such a
distance during the rest of the Operation as they were before the intromission
of the Catheter.

It is to be observed that as often as one would change a Forceps, or introduce
it, there is a necessity of making use of the Button, except immediately after
the Incision is made, when the Conductor is introduced, on which the Forceps is
thrust forwards.

Remember that after the Incision is made, and the Conductor introduced into
the furrowing, when one would disengage the Catheter, or that it is out of the
Yard, the Patient sometimes strugles before the Conductor be in the Bladder; or
other ways when the Urethra has not been cut enough toward the Bladder, or
that the Bill of the Conductor be not dexterously thrust into the Slit or
Furrowing, instead of entering into the Bladder, a space is made betwixt it and
the Rectum. Then must the Conductor be drawn back; and if afterward one cannot
introduce the Button, it will be necessary to take the same furrowed Catheter,
or one somewhat smaller and less Furrowed: For better passing it into the
Bladder, making use of the Second way of searching Men, described in the Ninth
Chap. by that means the Catheter is gently introduced into the Urethra, without
turning of it any way, lest it should come out at the Incision, and when it is
passed into the Bladder, the furrowing is to be searched by the Wound with the
Bill of the Gorgeret, that so the Operation may be continued.

When the Gorgeret is in the Bladder, if it be feared that the passage is not
open enough, a close dilatatory is to be taken, and held in this manner that
one branch of the handle pass upon the thumb betwixt the right forefinger
which the Surgeon is to extend a long the dilatatory, and the other three
fingers underneath, that it may be held fast; it is introduced along and upon
the Conductor, and without turning it any ways, the bottom of the Incision is
dilated in length, as much or as little as it is thought sit, making the
branches of the handle depiction of stone removal procedure page 106

to come near one another in this manner.

There is as little use of this made as can conveniently be, nevertheless if
necessity require it is used; after which it is pulled out, and without parting
from the Gorgeret, the Operator takes a close Forceps conducting it into the
Bladder to search for the Stone, where it must be gently turned and jogged
every way, as has been said.

It is to be minded also that it has been said, that so soon as the Forceps is
in the Bladder, it may be moderately opened with both hands to dilate the
passage a little, and at the same time to bring the Rings almost together, and
afterward with one hand it may be thrust and moved gently to the right and
left, up and down where the Sphincter of the Rectum is, to feel the Stone,
sometimes turning the Forceps so that one of its Rings be higher than the
other, thereby endeavoring to lay hold of the Stone, which may be flat, or lie
hid at one side of the Bladder.

When it is found, the Forceps is to be opened with both hands, to gripe what
has been felt. The Operator is sometimes so fortunate as to take good hold of
the Stone in a small time; which is to be known, because after that the Forceps
has been opened, the Rings cannot be made to meet again, and some hard matter
is to be felt betwixt the Teeth: This is the surest sign, for very small Stones
may be taken hold of about the middle of the Forcipes, where they are more bent
than else where; which will not hinder but that the Rings may be brought to
meet; but still some hardness is to be felt. This has happened to me, and it
was thought that there had been nothing; but I felt that hardness in the
Forceps, and I have the Stone of that Operation still by me.

When the Stone is laid hold of, one must not at first pull toward him, but it
is requisite to turn gently the Forceps to the right and left, holding it with
one or both hands according to the convenience of the Operator, that so he may
know if the Stone lie right in the Teeth, and disintangle it from among the
Plicatures, pulling to him afterward without violence: the Rings of the
Forceps are to be raised and low'rd alternatly, to make the Stone slide with
greater ease. If one have made use of a crooked Forceps, the Bill of it must
have been turned toward the Pubis just at the passage of bringing it out; and
the Rings be very near the Yard: that one may not be mistaken, it would be
necessary to put a mark upon one of the Rings of the Forceps.

When the Stone is in the Forceps, special care is to be had not to turn it
quite round, because if the Stone be big or uneven, it will much confuse the
parts of the Bladder: If the Stone be soft, it breaks and moulders, and the
Forceps easily shuts; but then one feels as it were a heap of sand, and then
the Rings are not to be brought wholly together, because then a small matter of
gravel would be drawn out, and the parts of the Bladder might be hurt; the
Forceps with what is betwixt the Teeth of it is to be pulled out, and this is
to be reiterated conducting it upon the Button, as often as shall be judged
necessary: And then a Tent or Pipe is to be introduced, as shall be mentioned
in the following Chapter.

When the Operator judges the Stone to be flat and of the shape of an Almond,
he may endeavor to make one of the Teeth of the Forcipes slide under, and the
other above; though commonly the Stones are taken sideways, and when it is
taken hold of, he is to turn the Forceps again, so that the thickness of the
Stone may answer to the length of the Incision.

Sometimes a Stone of the shape of a large Hens-Egg is caught hold of by its
two ends: which may be guessed by the great distance that is observed betwixt
the Rings of the Forceps, nay one may see it when the Stone is near the
passage; to keep it fast, the Forceps is to be thrust back into the Bladder,
the Teeth of it a little opened that the Stone may be loose, and it will turn
without fail; by that means it is afterward taken hold of by its thickness
sideways, and the passage thereby less dilated.

If the Stone be adherent and stick very close, it were better to delay the
extraction of it, because suppuration contributes to the separation thereof.
And if the Operator cannot hold the Forceps fast enough, he may make use of a
Napkin to wrap the Rings in, that his hands may not slip.

When it is excessively big, it is better to let it alone than to expose the
Patient to evident Death, especially if Age and other circumstances are
contrary to the Operation. Pareus and Beverovicius advise to break it with
Forcipes whose Teeth resemble the Teeth of a great Saw: And Tevenin, Chap. 121.
Of his Operations, proposes the introducing of a pretty long Tent or Pipe, to
hinder that the Stone fall not upon the Sphincter, that so the Patient may make
his water; that Pipe should shut with a Screw, that it may be used as need
requires.

When all the Stones have been extracted in an Operation, it is not needful to
introduce a Tent or Pipe: Nevertheless there are some Operators who always use
them, to void, as they say, the clots of congealed Blood; but they liquifie and
come out by the Yard, or by the wound without a Tent which hinders the
reuniting of the divided parts that still are Bleeding. It is true that they
who well understand the conduct of that Operation may succeed in it, without
leaving a Tent or Pipe long in the place; but yet it is sometimes necessary to
use it for some days when there is an Ulcer in the Bladder; that injections may
be the more conveniently made into it.

CHAP. XVII. What time the Patient may be kept under the Operation, and what is
to be done, when it is hard and laborious.
AN Operation is called hard and laborious, when by a skilful man it is not
performed in a short time. In such a case the Patient is not to be held in pain
until the Stone or all its parts be extracted. Sometimes it so stops the
passage, that the Conductor or Forceps cannot but with great difficulty enter:
and therefore an expert Surgeon will not scruple to take out his
Instruments, and with his Finger or the Button thrust back the Stone into the
Bladder; and will afterward make use of the Botton and Forceps to continue the
Operation.

It many times happens that after that the Stone has been often laid hold of,
it escapes and mounts up again, because the Forceps gives way, or the Teeth of
it are not good, or otherways because the Stone is monstrous in respect of the
passage, or that it breaks when it is held too strait, or because it is soft,
and cannot easily be extracted when it adheres.

These circumstances are to be observed very exactly, and the Surgeon ought
not to be more careful in his Operation, than in considering the strength and
Age of the Patient, with the time that he has been upon the Chair, keeping him
under the Operation rather too short a time than too long, lest he be surprised
by death, if he be made to endure too much: But if after the Operation has
been methodically carried on, nothing is extracted because there was no Stone
in the Bladder, or that the Stone is small, or if fragments remained, he may
take the Button with a scoop by the small or middle; and introduce the scoop or
spoon into the wound, and so endeavor to extract somewhat, and this having
been two or three times reiterated, he ought to make use of a Tent or Pipe
proportionable to the subject, and mounted according to Art. For introducing it
he may make use, if he pleases, and with more security of the Button, put into
the Incision, and having dipped the end of the Tent in Oil, he may conduct it
along the Button even to the Bladder, in this manner.

The ends of the Languette or piece of Linen wherewith the Tent is mounted,
may be tied to the girdle that is made with the bandage, one before and the
other behind: or otherwise one may carry an end along each Groin of the
Patient, and leave them on the Pubis. Next day or some days after, the Tent is
to be taken out, and if there remain depiction of stone removal procedure page
114

still somewhat in the Bladder, one may endeavor with the Hook, or the Scoop
of the Button, or with the Forceps conducted by the Button, to extract the
Stone whilst the Patient lies a Bed; or otherwise he may be placed upon the
Chair as at first, yet without useing of Ligatures or Scarfs, because then the
Patient is weak, and it would put him in too great fear.

When the fragments are but moderately big, they may be extracted a Bed, and it
is good to leave the Tent until one be certain that there is nothing more
remaining within: which may be known, if one observe what came out during the
Operation, or afterward with the Medicines.

Moreover, after the Tent is taken out, one may introduce a Catheter crooked at
the end, or a big Wire through the cavity of the Tent, without taking it out;
and by several little joggs or motions, search as far up as can be done without
Pain. One may likewise make use of a Feather to clear the Tent of Blood, or of
Slime and Purulent matters that are formed in the Bladder. The injection of
warm Barley Water is proper, and after the first day one may gently press the
Belly with the hand in time of Dressing.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Symptoms of Lithotomy.
THE Symptoms of Lithotomy are divided into those which accompany the
Operation, and those that follow it, the first called Concomitant and the
others Subsequent.

Accidents which accompany the Operation are Hemorrhage or Bleeding, the length
of time which makes it to be called Laborious, the Bruising and Breaking of the
Stone, the difficulty of extracting it, or the impossibility, the number and
fragments which cannot be extracted because of their bigness, numerousness, or
weakness of the Patient: sometimes also nothing is found, though the Patient
has been searched and examined before. A contusion Superveens if the Forceps
be thrust too rudely or too frequently when it is in the Bladder, Excoriation,
or even a Rupture of the Bladder, or other parts as well by the bigness and
asperties of the Stone, as by the Teeth of the Forcipes, if they be shut close
when they are in the Bladder, because it is wrinkled, and the sides of its Body
or Bottom may be laid hold on without the Stone or with it.

The Symptoms that follow the Operation in the Cure by Lithotomy, are a painful
tension of the Belly, the retention of Urine, Watchings, Inflammation in the
parts affected, Looseness, Diarrhaea, Worms, Ecchymoses, Fluxions, Abscesses,
Excoriations, Itchings and Putrefaction, Ulcers in the Scrotum, and the
Neighboring parts, Ulcers and Putrefaction of the parts of the Bladder, to
great, or too long Suppurations; voiding of Purulent matter by the wound, or
with the Urine by the Yard, Fevers, universal or particular Consumptions or
Marasmus's, Hemorrhages as in the time of Operation, Syncope's Convulsions,
Vomitings, Lightheadedness or Deliriums and Shiverings.

The painful tension of the Belly is caused by an inflammation that attracts a
Fluxion, because the Ligaments which suspend the Bladder, and the other parts
to which it adheres, have suffered violence: The Fever and Restlesness proceed
from the Intemperies of the chief parts, agitated by the passions of the mind;
And the Hemorrhage from the Incision, or Erosion of the Vessels: The retention
of Urine is occasioned by coagulated Blood, or the inflammation of the parts
during suppuration, or by some little Stone fallen down from the Kidneys, or a
fragment remaining after the Operation: The inflammation comes from a circulat
motion of the Humors; the Scourings, looseness of the Belly, and Worms in
Children through the abundance of Phlegm; the Ecchimasis is an effect of
extravasated Blood; the Abscess is produced by a collection and continuance of
Humors in the interstices of the parts: the too great and too long
suppuration, by the quantity of the matter whereof the Abscess is formed, or by
the Ulcerated Kidneys, and by the liquefaction of the Humors of the whole Body,
of which part do suppurate whilst the rest are dispersed by Transpiration or
Looseness, which causes at the same time a Marasmus or extenuation of the whole
Body: The Ulcer of the Bladder is caused by contusion and suppuration of its
parts, which excites the running of Purulent matter by the Yard or Wound:
Fungous carnosities by a superfluity of ill concocted and too serous Blood; the
Itching and excoriation are the effects of the sharpness of Urine, or of too
strait bandage; the Putrefaction of the Ulcer comes from the corruption of the
Humors and of the Air, or from the too great humidity of Medicines, and the
Virulence, from the Acrimony of the Humors and Medicaments: The Vomiting
happens after the Operation, because many nervous Fibers of the sixth pair are
distributed and inserted into the Ventricle. There are other accidents
occasioned by the distribution of the Nerves, which pass through the holes of
the Os sacrum common to the Sphincters of the Bladder and Anus, which have been
bruised or lacerated by the Forcipes, or by the asperities of a great Stone,
especially when the Operation has been hard and laborious.

The Fainting or Syncope, is occasioned by a great Flux of Blood, and the
dissipation of the Spirits: The Convulsion happens by Vomitings, the Diarrhea
and Hemorrhage, which hinder the Nerves from receiving a sufficient quantity of
Spirits: The Delirium and Lightheadedness Superveens, when there has been so
great a dissipation of the Animal Spirits, that the Brain retains not enough
for it self, and for supplying the whole Body with a quantity sufficient for
performing the functions of its several parts. In a word, Fate puts and end to
all these accidents by destroying the Machine; that is to say, by abolishing of
Motion at the instant when the Soul is separated from the Body.

If any be surprised that we have spoken nothing of Pain, they ought to
consider that that is a Symptom, or rather an essential property of all
diseases of the parts that are capable of feeling, since it always happens,
where there is an Intemperies with a solution of continuity of the soft parts
and by consequence it is more sensible in Lithotomy, than all the other
accidents that we have been speaking of.

These Symptoms have their causes, their Diagnostick and Prognostic signs:
some are the cause and the signs of others, and all the Symptoms in general,
are caused by Pain, Fear, Hemorrhage, Contusion and Dilaceration of the parts.

The Prognostics are taken from the time, the violence, and the state of the
subject in which the accidents happen. The Symptoms that appear at first, are
not so dangerous, and those which last long, or happen in a Cacochymick Body,
are more to be feared.

An Operator who is expert in performing the Operation will avoid many
concomitant Symptoms. There are some nimbleblades who have the knack of
feigning that they have extracted a Stone, and convey one, though they have
found none.

The Symptoms that follow the Operation, are either by themselves apart, or
many together according to their Nature, corrected by various Medicines.

The first care is to assuage Pain by Imbrocations and Fomentations: a
Hemorrhageis sometimes to be feared, and therefore astringent topics are to be
employed for preserving the treasure of life. The loss of Blood ceases commonly
through the weakness of the Patient, because the Medicines that are applied to
this part are dissolved by the Urine; and besides no other bandage but the
contentive can be used, when in other parts one may put his Finger upon the
Orifice or opening of the Vessel, or cut it in two, apply to it a Button, a
Ligature, Pledgets and Compresses. It is commonly observed that the first
dressing be kept on, for the space of Twenty four Hours at most: it is tenderly
to be taken off, leaving a Pledget upon the place out of which the Blood does
Issue, if it can be known; and if the Hemorrhage recurr, recourse is had to
astringents.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Method of curing those that are Cut, and removing their
Symptoms.
WE come insensibly to the cure by Lithotomy, the method of which is either
general or particular. Having spoken of the Causes, Kinds, Signs and
Prognostics of the Symptoms, it is now proper to give you a notion of those
things which ought to be observed from the time of the Operation until the
perfect cure of the Patient. By that means we may treat in particular of the
remedies against accident; since they happen whilst the Patient is in the
Surgeons hands.

By the general cure by Lithotomy we understand that wherein no Symptoms happen
which are of the Nature of a cause. And by the particular cure, that which is
attended by troublesome accidents, such as cause the methods to be changed: of
each of these we shall speak apart. Supposing that the Surgeon has
succesfully performed his Operation, he must dress the Wound, and endeavor by
the help of Medicines to cure it.

The first thing that is to be observed after the Operation, whilst he that is
cut is still in posture, and that with all expedition he is a clearing of the
Ligatures, if any have been used, is to put upon the Incision a square dry
Compress about three or four Fingers breadth in bigness and indifferently
thick, and holding it on with one hand, to take the Patient about the Body, and
with assistance and help to carry him to Bed.

We have already said that the Collar may be put on before the Operation,
afterward taking a Frond or Truss suitable to the Patient, it is to be laid
upon his Back above the Buttocks, that so the two heads or straps called the
twins, and which may be then called the superior, may serve for a Girdle, the
Body or middle of the bandage, in the mean time, declining toward the place
where the Incision has been made, which hinders the stopping up of the Anus.

Before the two superior straps of the Frond or Truss he tied together for
making of a Girdle, Imbrocation is to be made upon the Belly and the Cods with
the warm Oil of Roses and Camomile, to prevent the painful tension of the Body,
and to cure it, and an Astringent Plaster is to be applied to the Belly, with
the Ventriere or Belly piece soaked in warm Oxycrat; then must the two
superior or upper straps of the Truss be tied together toward the Patients
right side, the one of them passing under the Collar.

Afterward, the Compress which was put upon the Wound dry, and is since the
Operation steeped in Blood, is to be taken off, and Medicines applied to the
place.

If there be a Hemorrhage Astringent, Powders and Pledgets are to be made use
of; and when there is no Hemorrhage, an indifferent thick Pledget covered with
Astringent is to be put upon the Wound with a Triangular Plaster covered with
Astringent, and the Cods are to be kept up with a Truss whose ends pass along
the two Groins, and afterward a small Square Compress dipped in warm Oxycrat,
as the Truss ought to be, is to be put upon the Plaster holding all the
dressing of the Wound with one hand (for one must be ambidexter) and with the
other hand taking hold of the Bandage betwixt the Thighs, by the end which is
near the Anus, it is to be brought over the little square Compress that is upon
the Wound, and carried along the left Groin; declining betwixt the Thigh and
the Hand that holds on the dressing, and that end is to be left upon the
Girdle still holding the dressing fast: then one must take the other end which
is more remote from the Anus, and giving it a turn outward toward the Body of
the bandage to make an equal compressure, it is likewise to pass over the
Square Compress that is upon the Wound, and disengaging the Fingers wherewith
it is held, it is to be carried along the rite Groin making but a very slight
compression: then the hand that held on the dressing is to be removed, and with
the help of both hands this last end is conveyed under the girdle before, and
on the right side, and then tied with the knot, called the Mariners knot; the
same is done to the other end on the left side; or otherwise if both ends be
long enough, after they have been brought under the Girdle, they are tied
together by the Collar toward the left side, during the whole time that the
bandage is used, a Ventriere or Belly peace is to be applied to the Patient,
and care had that the ends of the bandage keeps on the dressing of the Wound,
for the Body of the bandage must not descend lower than the left Buttock:
afterward the Thighs must be made fast and kept at a moderate distance from
one another with the garter or thigh band tied together under the Knees, with
the knot on the outside toward the Thighs.

If it be a Woman that has been cut, the dressing is to be put upon the Belly
as to Men, and the Pledget covered with Astringent upon the Orifice of the
Vrethra with a Plaster, Compress and the Frond or double T, of which a Girdle
is to be made as with the Truss, and the other ends which make the tails of
the T, passing betwixt the thighs, and crossways upon the dressing, will hold
it fast, and press it as little as one pleases. When the Patient has a mind to
make water, the bandage is to be taken off; they are not subject to so many
accidents, and they are sooner cured than Men.

In Men the first dressing may be removed within twelve hours after the
applicat on, renewing the Imbrocation, with the same Astringent and the same
Belly piece, for four or five days at least or more, if the Belly be Swelled or
Pained; one may likewise make use of Fomentations of the Belly with rough Wine
and Red Roses, and sometimes they are to be reiterated four or five times a day.

The Wound is to be dressed with the Liniment of Arceus half Melted, to make it
Penetrate the more, with the Finger, or Feather of a Quill introduced to the
very bottom of the Wound as gently as may be: then a little flat Pledget dipped
in the same Liniment is to be applied upon the Lips of it, with a Trianglar
Plaster, soaked in warm Oil of Roses, using a Compress, and a Truss moistened
with warm Oxycrat; and a clean dry Frond or bandage to be changed at every new
dressing as at first: for the following days the Patients are to be dressed
twice every four and twenty hours, duly changing the dressings, except that of
the Belly, which may serve for the first days, and ever now and then the
Patients are to be made dry; which is observed to be done when they are a
dressing, not forgetting to make them clean for avoiding a Gangrene. They are
to be dressed with all speed and diligence, and the Wound kept open as little
as may be, having a fire always in the Room to correct the badness of the Air.

After five or six days there is no more use made of Oxycrat, nor Astringent,
nor of the Triangular Plaster, but only of a dry Belly piece; and in the
Incision three or four drops of the Liniment of Arceus with a Feather or the
Finger, and a flat Pledget upon the Lips of the Wound. The Balsam of Peru, and
of Capivei, which is called natural white Balsam, are Sovereign remedies for
Agglutination; that of Capivei is excellently good from the beginning to the
very end. Some take equal parts of the Liniment of Arceus and the Oil of Eggs,
others make use of the Liniment of Arceus during the whole cure, others again
of Capivei; some there are that make a Mixture of equal parts of Basilicum, of
Venice Turpentine, and Oil of Eggs, or the Liniment of Arceus, and the success
is alike, provided the Operation has been fortunate, and no bad accidents
superveen.

Upon these Medicines a Pledget is put and a Plaster of Diacalciteos a little
longer than the Wound, and of a breadth proportionable to the subject, a dry
Truss to bear up the Cods, a Compress, and a bandage upon the Wound, as has
been before described, pressing it a little harder than in the beginning: the
Jarretiere or Thigh band is used till the cure be perfected. After the first
days are over, it is proper to advertise the Patient to press with his hand a
little upon the dressing, that he may more freely make water in his Urinal.

Though the Wound of it self requires consolidation, yet care is to be had that
the Lips and Teguments thereof turn not inwards; and after some days when the
fluxion is over, or if none have happened, with the help of little and very
narrow Compresses the Lips are to be kept equally raised, and a little distant,
only at the Orifice of the Incision; for that purpose several Compresses are to
be put near the Lip which is on the side of the left Thigh, to the end the
bottom may consolidate, before the Cicatrice be made. When one is sure of the
bottom, then he is to use desiccatives upon a little Pledget, and several
Compresses unequal in thickness and indifferently narrow, one on each side, and
a Plaster to cover them, and over that another little Compress transversly at
the upper part of the Wound, and over these three, two others of unequal
breadth, to keep the bandage, by that means, the faster. If there grow up any
fungous carnosities, they are to be consumed with calcined Alum, or with Lapis
infernalis.

There are some Patients that by reason of a good constitution of Body are
cured in eight, fifteen, or twenty days; but the ordinary time of curing
Lithotomy is thirty or forty days.

It is prudence in a Surgeon to observe the alterations that happen to the
Patient, that he may discover the bad Symptoms that we have mentioned, which
change the method of the general cure, and which require to be prevented, or
corrected by a particular method contrary to their Nature.

This is performed by Diet, Surgery, and Medicines: the Diet, until the
seventh or eighth day consists in abstaining from Wine, unless the Patient be
very weak; he is to use a Tisanne made of the shavings of Hartshorn, and
Ivory, or with a little Lint Seed, and the Roots of Mallows and Marshmallows,
or at least, in time of need, he is to drink of Chalybeat Water, or of the
Tincture of Red Roses, yet not according to his Thirst, but a little less for
fear of a Looseness; it is enough that in four and twenty hours he take five or
six messes of Broth, and very few Eggs: Blood-letting, and cooling and Anodyn
Glysters are good if he have a fever, and pain in the lower Belly, but all by
the advice of a Physician. And after the first seven or eight days are over,
and that the Symptoms have ceased, his food is to be made stronger, beginning
with Porrage, or Panadoes, then a little Meat and Bread, after that he has
been Purged, which is commonly to be done about the fourteenth or fifteenth day
after the Operation.

Surgery is necessary, when Blood letting is to be reiterated, abscesses and
their Sinus's opened, places where there is a disposition toward putrefaction
scarrified; sometimes Cizars are made use of, to clip off Membranes and other
parts that are wholly corrupted; Medicines are changed to discuss tumors, and
ripen Abscesses; the Ulcers of the Scrotum and Bladder are cleansed by
Injections and other Medicines that resist mortification and putrefaction.
Extraordinary Symptoms appear before one another, or many together which make a
complication: we ought therefore to speak of the remedying of every one of them
in particular.

It has been said that Pain is mitigated, by Oxyrrhodinum upon the Belly, the
Groins, and the Cods; Hemorrhage by Astringents; a Fever by Blood-letting,
especially if the Patient has not lost much Blood in the time of the
Operation, or after, and if he have strength: restlesness is conquered by
cooling Apozems, Emulsions, and Soporificks after the first days; the
inflammation of the parts after suppuration is extinguished by the Ceratum of
Galen, or by Nutritum; fragments and small Stones are voided with the Urine,
and by the injection of warm Barley water, or they are extracted with the hook,
the Extractor, Forceps, or the Scoop of the Button. The too great retention of
Urine is cured by passing the Woman's Catheter into the Wound, and then by a
Tent or Pipe left in it for some days; Gripings and Looseness are stopped, by
Anodyn and Carminative Glysters, and by Juleps of Red Poppy, the Oil of sweet
Almonds, Plantane Water, and Hartshorn Jelly: Worms and Vermous matter the
cause of their generation, are brought away by Medicines and Physic which help
digestion, as those into whose composition enter, Rheubarb, Wormwood,
Tamarinds, Aquila Alba in a small quantity, etc. The Ecchymoses, Fluxion and
moderate Tumors are dissipated by resolutives and discussing Plasters, by
comfortative Cataplasmes and Anodynes, according to the degrees of the evil,
and the rules of Art, observing to apply more comfortatives, than simple
Emollients and discussives, because of the Humidity of the part: Abscesses are
formed commonly above the Incision and many times pressing the head of the
Tumor with one Finger, and the sides with other two, the Purulent matter is
Evacuated by the Wound; but if it be perceived that the skin is very thin, and
the matter ready to burst forth in a torrent, they are to be opened to the very
bottom of the Sinus, and the cure performed according to Art. Detersive
injections are made use of to mundifie and cleanse the Bladder; and Emulsions
are given to the Patients, that the purulent matter may the more easily be
evacuated.

Excoriations and Itching are cured by Nutritum, Vnguentum album Rhasis, the
Cerat of Galen; Pompholyx dissolved in the Oil of Roses, and other desiccative
Anodynes, taking heed not to compress the bandage for some days; and if the
Excoriations and Itching possess a great space, the Patient might for some time
be dressed without applying the Frond or Truss, but only the Triangular
Plaster covered with convenient Medicines, upon the Medicaments of the place
where the Operation has been made, making always use of the Thigh band to keep
the Thighs at a convenient distance one from another. The same thing is to be
practiced when the Scrotum or Testacles are much swelled and in pain, and on
that occasion Anodyn and emollient Cataplasms, etc. spread upon Linen Cloth
cut in the shape of the Plaster called the Plaster for the Scrotum, are to be
made use of, with a bandage or suspensory, which is applied as in other
distempers of the Cods or Testicles.

Patients that are cut are subject to other accidents when they have lain long
upon their Backs; they are to be remedied according to their kinds and degrees,
and when they abate, the common bandages are made use of, such as the Truss,
Frond or double T. which is more proper in the end than in the beginning,
because it compresses more easily, and it is more commonly made use of for
Women than for Men: to use it a right, the Girdle is to be put about the
Patients Body, and one end of it being carried within the Collar, and both ends
tied, one of the ends of the Tail of the T. is to be taken betwixt the Thighs,
and making it pass obliquely upon the dressing, it is tied to the Girdle in the
opposite side to that from whence it is taken; the same is to be done to the
other end, fastening them together by a kind of a knot called the Mariners
knot, having a care not to stop up the passage of the Anus.

Fainting, Convulsion, and Vomiting, go often hand in hand together; but the
last appears more frequently than the others; it is remedied by Wine, and by
cordial Potions made of Treacle; the Confection of Hyacinth, Alkermes, Coral,
prepared Pearl, Powder of Vipers, Syrup of Pomegranats, in Balm Water and
Scorzonera Water, Carduus benedictus, and Woodforell, etc. according to the
various indications: these Medicines and the Dose of them are to be chosen and
determined according to the advice of a Physician, giving them at first in a
small quantity often renewed, because of the debility of the Stomach.

When the Vomiting is stopped; the Convulsion ceases, and the fainting is cured
by succulent nutriment, such as good Gellies, strong Broths, new laid Eggs
which strengthen the Patient if they stay with him: the reason is evident,
because inanition is the cause of these two Symptoms, and the Animal Spirits
being but in a small quantity, prick the Nerves, which contract and draw
toward their Origination.

The Wound does sometimes foul, and by too great suppuration, according to Guy
of Chauliac; it is observed to degenerate into a sordid Ulcer, and most
commonly virulent, because of the Acrimony of the Urine, and irritated Humors
that grow mordicant and biting. These kinds of Ulcers are never without
Inflammation, Itching, and Excoriation of the part: for such accidents we are
to make use of diverting, restraining and local Medicines, applied according to
the Temperament of the part, and the counsel of the same Author, in the Chapter
of Wounds with Hemorrhage: When many Symptoms appear together, the same Rule is
to be observed, and to have regard to the order, the urgency and the cause, and
especially to that which is most urgent, amongst other things carefully
observing the effects of topical Medicines, wherein Surgery does most
consist.

For curing of Diliriums and Lightheadedness, strong broths are given, minced
meat made with Veal, Pullets, Partridges cut small and put into an earthen then
Pot glazed, without water, well luted, and digested in Balneo Mariae; hearty
food that is full of good Juice, and of easy Concoction, for speedy repairing
of the inanition, and tempering the Animal Spirits, the truth is a Dilirium
with cold in the Extremities are of such affinity, one with another, that they
may be put into the same rank, and a Dilirium after Lithotomy is, as it were,
the last degree of the Disease, the struggling of Nature, and the forerunner of
Death.

CHAP. XX. Of the Ischuria, or suppression of Urine.
THE Bladder is a Membranous part, that may be distended and enlarged by the
quantity of matter contained therein, and when it is full or stimulated, that
which is within opens the Sphincter that it may make to it self a passage into
the Vrethra.

When all things are in a natural state, Man suffers no inconveniency because
the things contained within are in due time evacuated; but congealed Blood, or
coagulated Pus, condensed Seed, a Stone, a Fungous Body, gross Humors, or
Phlegm with Sand, one or more of the inferior Vertebraes Luxated, hardened
Excrements, a Child dead in the Mothers Womb, a Carnosity or Callosity
sometimes stop the Sphincter of the Bladder, or a place of the Vrethra, it is
the same when a Viscous Humor causes a Numness of the Bladder, or when a
Patient is in a dull and drouzie fit; which is occasioned by a diversion of
sensation, an ecstasy in the Brain, or a convulsion of the Nerve which goes
from the Os sacrum to the Sphincter of the Bladder, and by Malignant Fevers.

Besides those causes of suppression of Urine which we have reckoned up, we are
to take notice of the shrinking or flagging of the Vrethra, to which Old Men
are subject; the Compression of the Neck of the Bladder caused by the falling
down, or inflammation of the Matrix, or the Prostates and Parastates, the
internal Hemorrhoide Veins, or by a great quantity of Urine which distends the
Fibers of the Bladder, as is related by Pareus, L. XVII. of a Young Man, who
having kept his Urine too long, fell into a suppression though he had no Stone,
and was cured by the Catheter. Fabrit. Hild. says, L. de Lith. Chap. 3. Col. I.
that that excellent Mathematician Tycho-brahe being in a great assembly at
Prague, where being forced to keep his water very long, he fell into so violent
a Suppression, that he could not be cured, but died of it.

The retention of Urine, from what cause soever it proceed, produces a violent
Pain, and insupportable inflammation in all the Neighboring parts of the
Bladder, from whence a suppression is occasioned, because the Urine is not
voided, and that it is continually augmented in quantity. In that case Patients
are all over in a heat, their eyes look red, their face burning, have an
Oppression, Restlesness, Fever, a hard, painful and very large Swelling above
the Pubis; bilious Vomitings, and all these troublesome Symptoms reduce them to
such a state, that without speedy help, they expect nothing but death.

The Surgeon will know that it is a clot of Blood that is the cause of the
Suppression, if the Patient has been lately Wounded in the Kidneys, or has
pissed Blood; if an Ulcer in the Kidneys has preceded, and the Patient has
made Purulent water, he may conjecture that a collection of thick and viscous
Pus is the cause of it: if the signs of the Stone have appeared, he is to
acquaint the bystanders with it, he may discern it from a Fungus by the
Catheter, unless the Stone be wrapped in a Coat; he may know if it be a
Carnosity or Callosity, by means of the Catheter or a searing Candle. I say
nothing of the Patients manner of living, whose excesses may have been the
cause of sharp Humors, or a great inflammation: nor shall I neither speak of
other causes which manifest themselves. Now if many causes of Suppression join
together, the diversity of Symptoms will serve for a sign to make the
Prognostic by.

The Patient cannot for many days endure a Suppression, without being much
weakened and in danger. When it is caused by a falling down of the Matrix,
there is no more to be done, but to reduce that part; when the Hemorrhoides
press the Neck of the Bladder, they must be opened with a Lancet or Leeches;
the Numness of the Bladder is remedied by a grain of Salt or Nitre put into the
passage of the Urine, or with a composition of Mel Rosatum and the Powder of
Hiera, or the Oil of Scorpions: when there is congealed Blood, Purulent Matter,
or thick Phlegm in the Bladder, we may make use of an injection of Oxymel with
the Oil of sweet Almonds; in the Flagging of the Vrethra, hollow Wax Candles
are employed; if there happen any Carnosity or Callosity in it, they are
incided and eaten off, and afterward a Leaden Pipe introduced into the place.
When one has kept his water too long, if he be afraid of being searched, bags
of Pellitory of the Wall moistened with the Oil of Capers or of Turpentine are
to be laid upon the Pubis; and if he do not find ease upon that, he is to be
persuaded to suffer the intromission of the Catheter. The inflammation of the
Rectum, the Matrix and Prostates is allayed by Blood-letting, and Glysters of
Oxycrat, Pellitory Water, or the Decoction of it with Mel Rosatum, and a Bath
of warm Water.

For all suppressions of Urine, when there is no other apparent disease, it is
of singular advantage to let Blood, give cooling Glysters and Bath; because
commonly they are caused by mere inflammation, and the weakness to which the
Patient is reduced, does often laxat the parts, and make way for the Emission
of Urine, the retention whereof puts him in danger of Death.

Galen 13. of the Meth. before Pareus L. 17. C. 37. advises not to give
Diuretics, nor strong purgatives before Blood-letting; because they may
accelerate the motion of Humors, or of Praeternatural Bodies toward the
Bladder, and fill it fuller, whilst the obstruction of the Sphincter hinders
the evacuation of the Urine.

But though all remedies have been used; yet sometimes the Patient is not
eased; in that case if he cannot be searched, and the distemper be very urgent,
it is better without delaying several days, to bring him to consent to be cut,
if he be troubled with the Stone. And if it be only Urine retained through an
inflammation of the Sphincter, or by a thick and viscuous matter, it will be
necessary to Prick or Tap the Perineum.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Puncture or Tapping of the Perineum.
IT is to be supposed that the Patient has found no ease from all the
Medicines that have been administered unto him, and that the suppression
continues with such Symptoms as give ground to a sad Prognostic, and call for
speedy relief to the Patient.

The great relation that there is betwixt Lithotomy, and the Pricking or
Tapping of the Perineum, gives us ground to propose three ways of Practicing
it; and seeing they have no proper names we shall distinguish them by those of
the various Methods of Lithotomy, to wit, the Hight, the Great, and the lesser
Operation.

Though it has been said, that the High Operation is not in use, nevertheless
it would seem that the great Tumor above the Pubis, caused by the suppression
of Urine, especially in an extenuated Patient, might render the Operation
easy, without any fear of hurting the parts of the lower Belly; and that for
that purpose, having Pricked the Tumor with a Lance as deep as the Bladder
without Tying the Patient, it will be sufficient to introduce a Wire or Stilet,
that may serve for a conductor to a crooked and convenient Pipe, passing it
into its cavity.

The High Operation of Tapping the Perineum may likewise be practiced by means
of a Trocart with which the Punction may be made in the Tumor above the Pubis;
it may be certainly known when the Bladder is open, and then a Wire is to be
passed into it; and having pulled out the Trocart, the Wire will serve for a
Conductor to the Pipe, just so as to the Parakentesis or Tapping of People in
Dropsies. We shall give the description of this Trocart, and of the manner of
using it, when we come to speak of the third way of Pricking and Tapping the
Perineum.

The second way that is in use: is the great Operation, as I have seen it
practiced by men of great skill and reputation, whose method I have followed.
There needs no more but a Pipe or Canula mounted, a small Tent proportionated
to the Cavity of the Pipe, two Plasters, and two Compresses the one a little
bigger than the other.

All things being in readiness, and the Patient seated in posture and held as
for Lithotomy; to be more assured of the way that must be taken in making the
Incision the furrowed Catheter is to be passed into the Vrethra as far up as it
can go, without forcing any thing; if the inflammation be moderate, or if there
be no carnosity, nor other obstacles, it is to be introduced into the Bladder:
A Servant or the Surgeon himself may hold the Catheter, and he is to observe
all circumstances as in cuting for the Stone, making the Incision lower than
for Lithotomy, and shorter upon the slit or furrowing; into which he is to
thrust the Bill of the Gorgeret, to introduce it the more easily into the
Bladder. It is fit that the furrowing continue like a gutter, without any thing
to stop it at the Bill or Extremity of the Catheter; the voiding of Urine is a
certain sign that the Gorgeret is in the Bladder; and then the Catheter is to
be disengaged and softly pulled out. The Surgeon is to hold the Gorgeret in
one hand, and in the other, the Tent or Pipe mounted with the end dipped in
Oil, and he is to conduct it into the Bladder, by means of the Gorgeret, or in
defect of that, if it be come out of the Bladder, he may take the Button with a
Scoop, and use it as has been said already. If there be no Button, one may
make use of a big Wire, which being introduced into the Bladder, will serve for
a conductor to the Tent or Pipe.

Though one could not pass the furrowed Catheter into the Bladder before the
Operation yet it will easily enter after the Incision, because that little
Blood that is spilt, will dissipate the Spirits which caused the inflammation
and tension in the parts.

Tavenin Chap. 121. of his Operations proposes, not to introduce the Catheter,
but the Patient being put into a posture to make the Incisio with a Bistory
betwixt the Anus and Scrotum, on the side of the Seam or Suture, in the same
place that it is made in for Lithotomy; being come, (says he) near the Bladder,
it is to be opened, thrusting the Bistory or Lancet boldly up, until that the
Urine come out, then the Tent is introduced, and so the Operation is
accomplished.

It is not convenient to evacuate all the Urine, if it was excessive in
quantity; because too great evacuations are always hurtful, according to
Hippoc. Book 2. of his Aphorisms; but having voided as much as may consist with
the strength of the Patient, with a little piece of Linen Cloth one may stop
the Orifice of the Tent or Pipe, and having put a Compress upon it, some Body
is to hold his hand thereon, assisting the Patient to Bed; then lay upon the
Tent a thick Pledget covered with Astringent, a little Plaster; another
moderate Compress, and over that the Triangular Plaster covered likewise with
Astringent, and another Compress still upon the Plaster, a Truss to bear up
the Cods, and the Frond or double T. with the Thigh-band, as has been
described. The bandage that is only contentive, hinders not but that a little
Urine may come out; nevertheless when the Patient has rested and taken
refreshment, he is to make Water through the Tent without pulling of it out.

In dressing the Patient the Surgeon is to examine if it be a Fungus which
caused the suppression; and he may know that, by the Finger or the straight
Catheter, by inspection into the matter that is voided with the Urine, or by
the injection of warm barley Water, Detersives and the other Medicaments that
are used in dressing such a Patient. If a Stone be felt, it is to be extracted
with the Scoop, the Hook or the Forceps.

Fungus's are fetched off by injections; if it be an Ulcer, proper remedies for
cleansing it are to be used. An inflammation is more easily cured than any
other distemper, because many times it is kept in being by the retention of the
Urine. When the cause of the suppression is removed, the intention of the
Artist ought to be the reuniting of the parts: And therefore the Tent is drawn
out, and the Patients are dressed like those that are cut of the Stone,
according to the general cure, if no accidents appear, or the particular
method, by remedying every Symptom.

If the Catheter cannot be introduced into the Vrethra, or if the Patient will
not admit of it, the Operation is more depiction of surgical instruments page
153

Laborious; nevertheless seeing it is a pressing distemper, for the
prolongation of life, there is a necessity of Operating after another manner,
to wit, by the high operation that has been mentioned, or after that way to
which has been given the name of the lesser Operation for the Pricking or
Punction of the Perineum: for that end one may make use of an Instrument called
Trocart, a Stilet or Wire, and a Tent or Pipe mounted. I invented this Trocart
above five years ago and this is the Figure of it.

This Trocart may be made of various kinds of Metal, excepting the point, which
ought to be of Steel; it is seven or eight Inches in length, that it may be the
more commodious for use, and as big as an ordinary quill: in the shape of it
several things are to be considered; for the end of it which is of Steel, is of
a Pyramidal and Triangular Figure. This point is about a Fingers breadth in
length; in one side of it there is a furrowing that reaches from the point, or
very near it, to the other end of the Trocart, and because of that furrowing
the Instrument in its length represents a straight Catheter for making
Incision, because it is hollow on the one side and round on the other, which is
the out side of it. The Pyramide of Steel tapers and grows smaller from the
basis till ye come to the point, but from that basis to the other end of the
Trocart it is alike in bigness.

The Wire or Stilet is straight, indifferently small, of the same bigness all
along, and supple and pliant, about eight Inches long, proportionable to the
furrowing of the Trocart.

The mounted Tent, that is used in this Operation, may be crooked for the high
and straight for the lesser Operation in the Punction of the Bladder, long and
small in proportion to the Grossness and Age of the Patient, that so the end
may be thurst into the Bladder, without making too great a Solutio Continui it
is to be observed that the end of the Tent, where its eyes are, ought to be
proportioned to the middle part of the Pyramide of the Trocart, that it may
easily enter into the Orifice of the Punction, and that the body of that Tent
be of a Conick Figure, growing bigger and bigger by degrees, as it comes nearer
the head where the Rings are, though the extremity of the Tent, were smaller,
yet it might suffice for conveighing of the Urine; but it would be useless, if
some more thick and viscuous matter were contained in the Bladder.

In using of these three Instruments; when the Patient is situated in the
posture that has been said, the Cods are lifted up,, and having marked the
place where the Punction is to be made in the Perineum on the side of the Seam
or Suture, the Trocart is thrust in, and sinking the end by which it is held,
the slit or furrowing being upwards, the Pyramide is to be thrust on forwards
toward the Body of the Bladder, which being much distended, is therefore
easily opened.

So soon as the Trocart is within, the Urine will come running out by the
furrowing, and the Wire is to be taken, and conducted into the Bladder by the
same furrowing; afterward the Trocart is drawn out, in place whereof, holding
the Wire in one hand, the Tent mounted is to be taken, and passing the Wire
into its Cavity, it is to be made to slide along the same. When the Tent is
near to the Perineum, the Wire is to be taken by the end, and the Tent at the
same time conducted into the Bladder, we may know that it is in, when the Urine
comes out at its Cavity: And then the Wire is pulled out; and as much Urine
suffered to be voided as may be thought convenient, other things being to be
performed as in the other manner called the great Operation. This Trocart has
one thing that is singular, which is, that so soon as the extremity of its slit
is in the place where the Water is, the Urine is voided, without any danger of
being thrust too far in.

There are some who make use of another Trocart for the same Operation this has
a solid and round point of Steel about a Fingers breadth in length; others
cause it to be made Triangular, or a little slat and two-edged; but still
proportioned to the Tent or Pipe, the instrument in its length is straight and
hollow, and has two openings near the basis of its point; that Instrument is
passed into the Tent, and in that posture the punction is made, the opening of
which is always less than the Orifice of the Tent; and it cannot be introduced
without great pain to the Patient; besides, this Trocart must be Thrust deeper
in than the other, before the Urine can be perceived to come out. All men are
free to examine and try those things, and to choose what pleases them best.

These Trocarts may serve for other Operations, as in a kind of Hydrocele,
where the Waters are gathered together, without being stilled into the very
substance of the Membranes; in the Parakentesis; or even in making perforations
through the Skin, and passing the Silk and Stones because about three or four
fingers breadth from one end of the Trocart that was first described, a hole
may be made like the eye of a great Needle through which the Silk may be passed.

Every time that it has been used, it must be new set, for the Urine blunts
the edges very much. It is good to practice such kind of Operations upon dead
Bodies: for that end, one must with a Syringe Squirt as much matter as possibly
he can, into the Bladder, then tie a Ligature about the Yard, and make the
Punction as has been described, and then make a dissection of the Bladder, to
observe what has been done, that so he may take his measures for another time.

We may avoid offending the Rectum by conducting the point of the Pyramide
toward the Bladder, which then is much distended, and we need not fear to open
it in the Body, because these Wounds are not absolutely Mortal. And though they
are said to be harder to consolidate in the Membranous part thereof,
nevertheless we should banish such apprehensions, because we see by experience
that they are cured, and that the business is to save the life of a dying Man.

They to whom Fistula's do remain after the Punction of the Perineum, make use
of a Tent which they cause to be opened, and stopped now and then for the voiding
of the Urine: they may be made to stop with a Screw for greater security. The
ends of the Linen Cloth or Languet of the Tent; are tied the one before, and
the other behind to a Girdle, held up by a Collar, like those which have been
described when we spoke of the bandage of the Yard for a Phimosis Chap. X. If
some Symptom of Lithotomy succeed the Punction of the Perineum, it is to be
remedied according to its kind; and when none appear, or if they be cured, the
Patient and Surgeon may have good hopes, and both doing their duties, with
external assistances the Lithotomy and Punction of the Perineum are brought to
a perfect cure. Nevertheless what care soever the Surgeon may have, and how
obedient, confiding and quiet, so ever the Patient may prove, assisted as he
ought to be by those who attend him, and the administration of proper
Medicines, yet sometimes he has the trouble to be incommoded by the other
distempers contained in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXII. Of diseases that happen after cutting for the Stone, and of the
way of curing them.
GVY of Chauliack in his second Treatise says, that if there be no Metastasis
of the Humors into Apostemes, they are terminated by Discussion, Suppuration,
Obduration and putrefaction and afterward he speaks of the manner of treating
and curing them. This shows that there is a difference betwixt their term,
their curing and their cure, the end of one disease may be the beginning of
another; the cure has an uncertain end, though healing be that which is
proposed according to Art; we see but too many instances of this in those that
are troubled with the Stone; that evil is terminated by the extraction of the
Stone; and that Stone taken out, or that the distemper ended by the Operation,
produces a Wound, or other accidents, the cure of which is necessary; and which
nevertheless do not always terminate in a cure, but sometimes in a new Stone, a
Fistula in the Perineum, an involuntary spilling of the Water, a preternatural
voiding of excrements, or in many diseases together; they have each of them
their Causes, Differences, Signs, Prognostics and Ways of Curing.

We shall say nothing as to the Stone which may be observed after that the
Patient has been under cure; we must only take notice that the cause of it may
be this, that there is a Quarry in the Kidneys, which from time to time
furnishes the Bladder with Stones, and then the Operation ought to be delayed,
unless the Patient be fully recovered in strength, the season be favorable, or
that the accidents be remedied; And above all the Patient had need of a very
great stock of resolution to endure a second cutting.

The Fistula in the Perineum whereof of we speak is a Sinuous Ulcer below the
Scrotum, with a Callosity along the length of it, by which the Urine issues
out. It is caused by the Surgeons fault, or by the Patients, by the
supervening of accidents, or indeed by many things concurring, when the
Surgeon and Patient do not do their duties, and that bad and violent
Symptoms appear in the time, or a little after the Operation.

By the fault of the Surgeon; when in the beginning he suffers the Lips of
the Ulcer to be to soon joined together, before he be certain that the Bottom
of it is detersed and agglutinated, or because no accidents appearing he has
dilated the Bottom of it to much, and that he has not had care after the first
eight or ten days at most were over, moderatly to Compress the bandage, and to
make use of small and very narrow Compresses laid upon the two sides of the
Incision.

On the part of the Patient, when his Urine being too sharp corrodes the
Vrethra, and hinders the reunion, or that he lies not still as he ought, not
observing Directions, and not suffering himself to be treated according to the
rules of Art; to which must be added his being emaciated, the abundance of
Urine, and if he moderate not his passions, or exceed in his food, the
superfluities whereof causes a too long suppuration.

The most remarkable accidents that contribute to the Fistula, are a
Putrefaction, which causes great loss of substance in the Vrethra, and
adjoining parts; an Ulcer in the Bladder, or Kidneys, the suppuration whereof
requires that the parts be kept dilated.

The differences of these Fistula's are drawn from hence, that some of them are
even and straight from the Skin to the Vrethra, without any other profound or
superficial sinuosity, and are apparent on the side of the seam; others have
their Orifice in the Rectum; some are accompanied with great loss of substance,
others have one or more sinuosities in the Vrethra, and in the neighboring
parts, or otherwise they happen in a bad subject; and these differences are
discovered, if it be observed in time of dressing the Patient, that thirty or
forty days after the Operation, the Ulcer cicatrises, except one or more little
passages, or a small Lump or Tubercle, which is named, the Pullets rump on the
side of the seam, through which the Urine escapes; or if the Patient being much
extenuated, the superveening accidents have caused a great loss of substance in
the Vrethra, or that new Flesh cannot breed; the issuing of the Urine by the
Anus makes it apparent that the Orifice of the Fistula is in the Rectum.

All Fistula's in the Perineum are not alike hard to be cured; for the first
kind may be taken into cure, provided there be no great loss of substance, and
that the subject be good, the rest being commonly incurable; some of those who
are troubled with Fistula's have this comfort that they do not always run. If
the subject be good, not too lean, and the Ulcer filled with well conditioned
Flesh, the cure of the Fistula may without interruption be undertaken: but if
the Patient be extenuated, or if there be great loss of substance in the
Vrethra with Callous Flesh, the cure is not to be attempted, until the strength
be restored, that it may be tried if new Flesh can be procured. In that case he
must be comforted, giving him hopes that at another time he may be cured. Those
that have their Orifice in the Rectum are sometimes less troublesome and they
are not to be tampered with.

For curing of the Fistula, we shall not speak in this place of the universal
regiment, we suppose that to have been observed, either whilst the Patient was
under cure for the Stone, or since, but we shall only treat of the particular
management of that cure. Authors speak of Potions and many Topical Medicines
for the cure of Fistula's: but since my design is only to describe what I have
observed to have been successful, I can affirm that many have been cured by the
following means; which consists in introducing into the Bottom of the Fistula,
a Catheretick Trochisque described in the last Chapter; next the falling off of
the Escar is to be procured by Basilicum; and then the Patient is to be dressed
like one that has been cut of the Stone after the seventh or eighth day; some
make use at the same time of a desiccative Wax Candle, which they thrust into
the Yard up to the bottom of the Fistula: others cure them without the use of
Wax Candles; when any accident appears, it is to be remedied, as has been said
Chap. XIX.

If those that are fistulous are to be pitied, they who are troubled with an
unvoluntary emission of their water by the Vrethra, ought also to be ranked
amongst the Miserable, as those also, who piss not at all: But they from whom
the gross Excrements drop against their will, surpass the rest in Misery. What
may be said then, if one should suffer many of these Inconveniences at the same
time?

The spilling of the Water is caused by a Palsy in the Sphincter of the
Bladder, by the Incision of its Fibers, or by a great Dilaceration, when a big
and rough stone has too much widened the Passage, and has caused a
Suppuration of long continuance.

The Kinds and Differences are taken from the Greatness or Smalness of the
Emission; the Signs of it are visible, or rather most sensible and uneasy to
the Patients, because Shame and Vexation hinders them sometimes from seeking a
Remedy; from whence the Prognostic may be made, That all of them are extremely
hard to be cured, the most part incurable; and that the Cure most commonly is
but palliative.

Women are not subject to Fistula's, but only to this spilling of their Water,
which is more uneasy to them, than to men, because of the Conformation of
their Vrethra, and that their Sex which has Modesty for its Property, obliging
them to a greater reservedness, hinders them from seeking relief: and this
makes them to have Clouts or Spunges about them to receive the Water, or to
employ something else, that Necessity and Uneasiness suggest to them.

When the Spilling of Urine remains with men, they may have recourse to a
little Engine, such as I saw in the Possession of a Person, whose Character and
Quality allows me not to name him; I have heard him say, that it was very
useful and commodious for him.

That Engine is made of Steel, Iron, or any other convenient Metal: It is
composed of two parts, each about three Inches long, and a Fingers breadth
wide; one of the two pieces bends a little in its Longitude, and the other is
straight; these two pieces join together at one end with a turning joint like a
Compass, and at the other end both are bent backward to fasten within one
another, so that pressing with the Finger, they may be opened and shut. These
two pieces are covered with Linen, as much, or as little as one pleases;
afterward the Yard is put into that Instrument, observing to keep the crooked
part uppermost; and when one has made water, it is shut: the Compression may
be made as slightly as one pleases, covering or facing the Engine more or less,
that it may be suffered without Pain, and letting the Urine pass through, which
in some manner supplies the action of the Sphincter of the Bladder.

I have seen some who have made use of Boxes of White Lattin, or other Vessels
of Leather made in form of an Urinal, tied to a Girdle, and wherein the Nut
always hung, which is not done without Pain and Trouble. There is another
Instrument much like to a Truss, for ruptures; it is made like the Steel
Trusses, having a Girdle of the same Fashion, and on the left side, in stead of
a Bolster, the end of the Girdle bends Elbow-ways downwards, and terminates in
the shape of a small Iron Plate, which is covered with Felt, Leather, or Cork,
sufficiently waxed over, that it may be of a unequal Figure like an Olive, and
indifferently hard, that it may exactly answer to the Vrethra above and near to
the place where the Incision has been made. When the Bandage is applied, the
little Eminence presses the Vrethra below the Cods, and to keep it firm, it is
made fast by the other end, where there is a strap of Leather of the same
fashion as in the Steel Trusses for Ruptures; and besides, if a man were
troubled with a falling down of the Intestines, one of these Trusses might be
made on purpose for him, where there might be a Bolster for the Rupture, and
the little eminence for compressing the Vrethra, and hindering the shedding of
the Water. Though this Bandage or Truss be in effect only for a palliative Cure
of this Distemper, yet it may sometimes serve for a real Cure, because hereby
the parts gather strength, and are corroborated.

There is another kind of Bandage still, the Girdle whereof is made of Fustian,
and that part which is to pass upon the Pubis of a piece of Wood of the length
and bigness of the Patients Finger, covered with Fustian and Wax, betwixt which
and the Pubis, the Yard being compressed, lies along looking upwards; that
Posture hinders the spilling of the Water: The same Bandage has Points fastened
to the fore part of it, that they may be carried betwixt the Thighs, and tied
side-ways to the Girdle, that so the Bandage may not rise too high.

Involuntary voiding of the Excrements is caused sometimes by the Surgeons
Fault, if in time of Lithotomy he make the Incision too low, and if he cut the
Rectum, especially in the lesser Operation, if he take not good heed; most
frequently the violent Motions of the Patient contribute to it, but much more
Putrefaction, Abscesses, or other Accidents that follow the Operation.

Their Kinds, Signs, and Prognostics, are taken from the more or less Ejection
of the Excrements by the remaining Fistula, which is far more uneasy than the
spilling of the Water, or the Fistula alone. The Cure of this stercoral
Excretion is impossible, when it is caused by Incision of the upper part of the
Sphincter of the Rectum, or when there is great loss of Substance; if any
pretend to take such Patients into Cure, they are to observe the Method of
curing Fistula's in the Anus.

We need not enlarge to prove, that these kinds of Distempers may have several
Causes concurring at the same time; when many of these Indispositions happen
together, we must have our recourse to the Method of curing complicated
Distempers, as well for the Prognostic Part, as for the order of the
Complications.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Medicines to prevent the Stone, for avoiding of the Stone, and
of Medicaments for dressing those that are cut.
THough we promised to enquire into the Medicines that may prevent the Stone;
we must, however, confess, that it is very difficult, and perhaps impossible to
determine precisely wherein they do consist; because the most learned in
natural Discoveries, speak only in general of the Figures of Bodies, and
Microscopes have not been able to make known the particular Nature of every
one, nor yet of all their Pores. Possibly we might succeed without observing
all these Particularities; for though Enquiries into Nature were pursued to
that very point, yet still there would be causes that did not depend on us, and
which might form the Stone; the Bigness, Figure, Number, and Motion of the
Particles of Bodies of which we are composed, and of those which serve us for
Food, are no ways in our power; though these things be sufficient to produce in
us the Maladies that we fear, if the Secretions and Excretions be not performed
according to the Course of Nature. That we may reap Benefit from the Miseries
of others, it is to be considered, that they who are most subject to the Gravel
or Stone, live after such a manner, as may be avoided, or at least corrected by
other means; and seeing we have spoken of fenny and marshy Places, gross and
thick Air, calculous Food, muddy Waters, and of the Excesses that may much
debilitate the Parts of the Body, they are carefully to be avoided, using
moderately those things that are for our Nourishment, following Exercises
suitably to our strength, without affecting too much Niceness and Delicacy: It
were better to use a little too much, than not enough; because Life consists in
Action, and men love themselves too well, not to repose and take their Rest; if
we be not guilty of Excesses, the Parts of our Body continue in good Health,
ready to resist all attacks.

Though few things contribute more to the forming of the Stone in the Bladder,
than continuing long without making of Water, yet we must not at first give
Diuretics, but only gentle Purgatives to empty the Intestines and adjoining
Parts: of that kind are Manna, Cassia, Catholicum duplex, Lenitive Electuary,
Diaprunum simplex; a day or two after, Turpentine prepared in this fashion, may
be given in drink: Take an Ounce, or Six Drachms of the best Turpentine
unwashed, dissolve it in a Mortar with a little of the yelk of an Egg, then add
to it two or three ounces of the Water of Winter-Cherries, Smallage, Pelletory
of the Wall, or of some other Liquor, according to the Nature of the Disease,
and the state of the Patient: Stir all together that it may be exactly mixed,
and become of so white a Color, that it looks like Cream or coagulated Milk.
Bever. C. XI. of the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder. The Bath gives ease to
those that are troubled with the Stone, and contributes much to the bringing
away of little stones that stop in the Kidneys and Bladder.

The use of the following Ptisanne, or Barley-water, is very good against the
same Distempers: It is made with an Ounce of Linseed, and the Roots of Mallows
and Marshmallows, of each two Ounces, put into five quarts of water boiled away
to four; into three Ounces of this Ptisanne may be dropped four or five Drops
of the Spirit of Sulphur, and it may be made stronger by augmenting the Dose of
the Ingredients in the same quantity of water: It is approved of for making one
void Water, mitigating Pain, and bringing away Stones.

The two following Receipts were given me by Monsieur Jonnot, the first of
which, he told me, has often (to his Experience) been successful in easing
Nephritick Pains, and those who are subject to void small Stones; and that the
second never failed him, provided the Stone be of a Bigness fit to come out of
the Pelvis, or Basin of the Kidneys.

The first Medicine is to be taken in the Spring and Fall, every Morning for
three days together. Take six Ounces of the Water of Pelletory of the Wall, an
Ounce of the Oil of sweet Almonds, and an Ounce and a Half of the Syrup of
Limons; in case of necessity, it is taken at any time.

For the second Remedy, the Patient must be once or twice blooded, and twice
purged with two or three Drachms of Sena infused overnight in the Decoction of
Dogs-grass, Roots of Marshmallows, and a little bundle of Flax; to the Colature
of which must be added an Ounce of cleaned Cassia for every Dose: The day after
he is to make use of the following Limonade, and is to continue it three days
successively in the waning of the Moon, fasting three or four Hours after.

Take of Argentine, or Wild Tansey, Water Lentils and Cresses, of each one
Handful, let them boil half a quarter of an hour in a quart of water, when it
is taken off the Fire, add to it the Juice and Rind of three or four Limons;
let all infuse together for the Space of four Hours, then strain it, and add
thereunto three Ounces of the Powder of Sugar Candy, and twenty Grains of the
Spirit of Salt: Keep it for the Use aforesaid.

The Garden-flags, or blew Flowerde-luce that grows upon Walls, infused cold
into what quantity one pleases of White Wind, and an Ounce of the Infusion,
taken for the first time by Children of ten or twelve Years of Age, brings away
the Stone: The Dose is to be increased or diminished, according to the Age of
the Patient and its Operation, giving always too little, rather than too much,
for fear of drawing the Stones in too great abundance toward the Sphincter of
the Bladder, which would cause a suppression of Urine. One may renew it two or
three days after, and Purge by the Advice of a Physician. The use of
White Wind, Raddish-water, and Wine made of the Fruit of Eglantine, or Sweet
Briar, taken now and then, is good.

Paracelsus, in the end of the Preface to his second Treatise of his great
Surgery, prescribes for remedying the suppression of Urine, the use of the
stones that are found in the Heads of Crabs, beat into a subtle Powder, drank
in the Juice or Water of Raddishes, and if the Patients do not thereby make
water, to make a little bag of Saffron, and lay it upon the Kidneys, or the
Belly, toward the passage of the Ureters, and upon the Perinaeum: Or to make a
Powder of dried Acorns, and give it to be drank in the Water or Juice of
Raddishes, in what quantity the Physician shall judge fit.

The two following Medicines are approved of for bringing away of Sand and
small Stones. In the wain of the Moon, the Patient being Purged, let him take
in the Morning the bigness of a Nut of fresh Butter, and swallow it down like a
Pill; then let him take a four Limon, and squeeze out the Juice of it into four
Ounces of White Wind, let him drink that Potion a quarter of an hour after that
he has swallowed the Butter: This may be reiterated two or three days after,
according to its effect, and then Purge again.

For the same effect, take a little white Onion, cut it into small pieces,
infuse them over Night upon hot Embers in four Ounces of White Wind, and strain
it; having taken the same quantity of fresh Butter in the manner above
directed, a quarter of an hour after drink of this Infusion; it is more violent
than the former. The Butter is taken first, that the Stomach may not be stung,
or too much pricked by the Wine, the Limon-juice, or the Onion: And it is to be
observed, that if the Patient should but once take a greater quantity than
these Doses prescribed, instead of giving ease, it would expose him to a
suppression again, because these Medicines are very Diuretic, and carry
rapidly along with them what they meet with in their way.

They say that Jet has so much Virtue, that it is enough to hang it about the
Arm, or to carry it in ones Pocket, to obtain ease of Nephritick pains, and to
bring away the Gravel and Stone.

The cold infusion of Nephritick Wood is Excellent; put what quantity of that
Wood you please into water, to which it will give a Tincture; take of it two
Glasses in the Morning, and one at Night, or at any other hour of the day, if
the Stomach be empty; this Medicine asswages the pain, and brings away Sand.

Pareus, Book 17. Chap. 37. describes the following Broth, and says, that he
has by Experience found it to be of mavelous Essicacy for hindering the
forming and confirming of the Stone. Take a Cock and a Knuckle of Veal, boil
them in water with a handful of Barley, Parsley-Roots, Sorrel, Fennel, Sichory,
Butchers-broom, of each an Ounce; the four cold Seeds bruised, of each half an
Ounce; toward the end, add Sorrel leaves, Purslain, Lettice, Mallowtops, and
March Violets, of each half a handful; and then keep the Broth, of which the
Patient for four Mornings together fasting, shall take about half a Pint with a
little of the Juice of a Limon, making it boil one turn over the fire, every
time before it be taken; you will quickly see, says he, a wonderful Operation,
and it is a Medicamental Aliment.

In the same place he gives the Receipt of a rare Powder against the Stone.
Nucleorum mespil. Unc. 1. Pull. elect. Diatrag. frigidi, Dracn. 2. Quatuor
seminum frig. majorum mundatorum, glycyrisae rasae ana drac. 1. Sem. Saxif. dr.
2. Seminum milii solis, genistae, pimpinellae, brusci and asparagi, ana Scrup.
1. Seminis Altheae, dr. 1. semis. Sacchari albissimi, Vnc. 6. fiat pulvis. This
Powder is to be taken the first days of the New Moon and First Quarter, of the
Full Moon and Last Quarter; and so for all the Months after, to the quantity of
a Spoonful in the Morning three hours before eating. For the same Effect he
prescribes the following Powder. Coriand. praep. scrup. 4. Anisi, Marathri,
granor. Alkekengi, Milii solis, ana drach 2. Zinzib. Cinnamomi, ana scrup. 2.
Turbith Elect. drach. 1. Carvi scrup. 2. Galang. Nucis moschatae, and lapid.
Judaici, ana scrup. 1. Foliorum Senae mundatorum ad duplum omnium, Diagredii
dr. 2. Semiss. misce and fiat pulvis. Dosis erit ad drach. 1. Cum vino albo.
Capiat ager tribus horis ante prandium. Glysters for asswaging Nephritick
pains, are to be made of the Decoction of Lettice, Scariole Purslain, the
Flowers of Violets and Nenuphur. Melilot, Camomile, Dill, the leaves of
Mallows, Marshmallows, Bran, and Linseed; and in the Colature is to be
dissolved cleaned Cassia, a little Sugar, yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine, which
is a Sovereign Remedy.

Beverovicius speaks of a great many Medicines; but seeing he may be consulted,
we shall here wave the Description of them, and speak only of Medicines that
are used after the Operation, and for Remedying the Symptoms.

They have nothing that is particular, but that they ought to be more moistning
and humectant than for the other parts. Every Surgeon makes his Astringent
Powders, and other Medicines to resist Putrefaction, and breeding of new Flesh.
Sometimes the Rumps of Pullets are dried with a little Rock Allom Calcined, and
scraped Lint; or else there is added to it the Powder of Burnt Lead malaxated
with a very little Diapalma, or de minio: A very good Epulotick is made with an
Ounce of Pompholix, half an Ounce of the Plaster de minio, two Drams of Rock
Allom Calcined, all incorporate together. In like manner a very good
Desiccative may be made of Bole Armoniack and the Litharge of Gold, of each an
Ounce; the Salt of Saturn, and Crollius his Medicamental Stone, of each a Dram;
all being reduced into a Powder, they are to be made into an Unguent with a
sufficient quantity of the Oil of Roses.

To remove the Callosity of Fistula's, one may make use of the Powder which is
found at the bottom of Sphagedenick Water: You may take what quantity you
please of that Powder, let it dry in the shade, and then grind it upon
Porphyry-stone, or Marble; add thereto a little Water, in which Gum Arabic
has been dissolved, and make it up into long and small Trochisks of diverse
shapes.

A more violent and efficacious Catheretick for the same purpose may be made of
equal parts of Corrosive Sublimate, and Rock Allom Calcined, a little Opium and
Saffron; all must be pounded together, and to give it a Body, add as much
Gummed water as is necessary, and make it into Trochisks according to Art.

We ought not to forget the Description of the Liniment of Arceus, which in
Dressing serves for a Digestive: Thus it is doscribed. Gummi Elemni and
terebinthinae abietinae ana Vnc. 1. Sem. saevi castrati antiqui and liquefacti,
Vnc. 2. Pinguedinis Porcinae Vnc. 1. Misce and ad ignem Linimentum facito.
Arceus, in his first Book of the good Method of Curing Diseases, says, that
this Medicine is of so great Virtue, that with half an Ounce of it one may Cure
the greatest Wounds, provided no Accident supervene; sometimes they add to it
as much of the Oil of St. John's Wort as is thought convenient, according to the
intention that is had in using it.

Pareus gives the Description of the Oil of Eggs, page 752. Take the Yolks of
hard Eggs, rub them betwixt your Hands, and fry them in a Drying Pan over a
gentle fire, stir them with a spoon until they become red or tauny, and the Oil
come from them, then put them into a Hair-cloath, and press out the Oil, as
that of Almonds, and keep it for Use.

Here we may subjoyn the Description of Hartshorn Jelly, which is Excellent
against the Looseness that happens to those that are cut of the Stone; it is
made of two Ounces of the shavings of Hartshorn, and as much of Ivory, which
are to be boiled in a quart of Water until the Juice of them be Extracted:
Then the Decoction is to be strained through a Cloth, and the Colature
clarified with the white of an Egg, adding thereto a little of the Juice of
Limon, white Sugar, and Cinnamon; the Colature is to be set over the fire
again, and when it begins to boil, a white scum will rise, then a little
White Wind is to be put into it to settle the scum, and a little after, when
the scum rises again, some more White Wind is to be put into it; the Humidity
is to be let evaporate, until one perceive that the Liquor becomes Glewy, then
it is to be taken off, and quickly strained through a clean Linen Cloth, and
put into Vessels, to be kept for Occasion: A spoonful or two of it is now and
then to be given to the Patient, to stop his Looseness.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for William Cademan, at the Popes Head in the Lower-walk of
the New-Exchange, in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of General History; or the History of the World. By William
Howel, L. L. D. in Two Volumes. Historical Collections; or, an Exact Account of
the Proceedings of the Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. A Journey into
Greece, by George Wheeler, Esquire in Company of Dr. Spon of Lions. In Six Books.
Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2. An Account of
Constantinople, and the Adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the Lesser Asia.
4. A Voyage from Zant through several Parts of Greece to Athens. 5. An Account
of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens, into Attica, Corinth, Boeotia, etc.
With variety of Sculptures. Pharamond, Complete in English, an Excellent
Romance. Clelia, a Romance, in English. Parthenissa, Complete in English. An
Historical Heroic Poem on the Life of the Right Honorable, Thomas, Earl of
Ossory, (with his Picture neatly engraven on a Copper-Plate) Written by Elkanah
Settle. A Protestant Plot no Paradox; or, Phanaticks under that Name Plotting
against the King and Government. The English Jeroboam, or, the Protestant
Reforming Magistrate, and what the Church of England may expect from such a
one. Considerations Offered to all the Corporations of England, containing
Seasonable Advice to them in their Future Elections of Burgesses to serve in
Parliament.
Quarto.
An Historical Relation of the First Discovery of the Isle of Madera. The
Protestant Religion is a Sure Foundation, etc. By the Right Honorable,
Charles, Earl of Derby. The Jesuits Policy to Suppress Monarchy. By a Person of
Honor. A Warning Piece for the Unruly, in Two Visitation Sermons, by Seth
Bushel, D. D. The Great Efficacy and Necessity of Good Example, especially in
the Clergy, in a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D. A
Sermon Preached before the King, by Miles Barn, Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry Piggot, B. D.
Praise and Adoration, a Sermon on Trinity Sunday, before the University at
Oxford, 1681. by Thomas Manningham, M. A. late Fellow of New-Colledge in
Oxford. A New-years-gift for the Anti-prerogative Men; or, a Lawyers Opinion,
in Defense of His Majesty's Power-Royal, of Granting Pardons as he pleases;
wherein is more particularly discussed the Validity of the Earl of Danby's
Pardon.
Octavo.
The Spanish History; or the Differences that happened in the Court of Spain,
between Don John of Austria, and Cardinal Nitard: with all the Letters, and
Politic Discourses, relating to those Affairs. Rapin's Reflections on Ancient
and Modern Philosophy. The English Princess; or, the Duchess Queen, a pleasant
Novel. Court Songs and Poems, being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death,
with other Poems. By a Person of Honor. Hogan Moganides; or, the Dutch
Hudibras. Liquor Alchahest; or, the Immortal Dissolvent of Paracelsus and
Helmont, etc. A Philosophical Essay; or, the History of Petrification, by Dr.
Sherly. Gulielmus Ferrarius de bello Batavico. Westminster Quibbles, very
Pleasant. Zaide; or the Spanish History, a Pleasant Romance. Memoirs of the
Duchess of Mazarine. Anima Mundi, an Historical Narration of the Opinion of
the Ancients, concerning Man's Soul after this Life, according to unenlightened
Nature. Clarks Manual; a Book of Presidents. Saunders his Astrological Physic.
A Copy of the Two Journal Books of the House of Commons, in which is the whole
History of the late horrid Popish Plot. The Wits Paraphrased; or, Paraphrase
upon Paraphrase. In a Burlesque on the late several Translations of Ovid's
Epistles. Two Discourses; the First showing, how the Chief Criterions of
Philosophical Truth, invented by Speculative Men, more eminently serve Divine
Revelation, than either Philosophy, or Natural Religion. The Second
manifesting, how all the Foundations of the Intellectual World, viz. Reason,
Morality, Civil Government, and Religion, have been undermined by Popish
Doctrines and Policies. By Thomas Manningham, M. A. Fellow of New-Colledge in
Oxford, and Rector of East Tysted in Hantshire. Machiavel Redivivus; being an
Exact Discovery or Narrative of the Principles and Politics of our Bejesuited
Modern Phanaticks. The Present State of Geneva; with a brief Description of
that City, and the several Changes and Alterations it has been subject to,
from the First Foundation thereof. Amarillis to Tityrus; being the First
Heroic Harangue of the Excellent Pen of Monsieur Scudery; a Witty and Pleasant
Novel, Englished by a Person of Honor.
Twelves.
The Amors of the Count Du Noy; a Witty Novel. The Penitent Hermit; or, the
Fruits of Jealousy; a Novel. The English Monsieur, a Comical Novel. History of
the Pallas Royal; or, the Amors of the French King, and Mademoiselle de la
Valiere. The Amors of Madam, and the Count de Guiche. The Novels of Queen
Elzabeth, in Two Parts.

