AN ADDITION TO THE APOLOGY For the two Treatises concerning INFANT BAPTISM,
Published December 15. 1645. In which the Author is Vindicated from 21. unjust
Criminations in the 92. page of the Book of Mr. ROBERT BAILLIE Minister of
Glasgow, ENTITLED ANABAPTISME.

And sundry material points concerning the Covenant, Infants-interest in it,
and Baptism by it, Baptism by an unbaptized person, Dipping, Erastianism and
Church Government, are argued, in a letter (now enlarged) sent in September
1647. to him, by

JOHN TOMBS. B. D.

London, Printed by Hen. Hills for Hen. Crips, and Lodowick Lloid, in
Pope's Head Alley, T. Brewster, and G. Moule at the three Bibles at the west end
of Paul's 1652.

ERRATA.
EPist. Dedic. Edius read Edingh. page 2. line 23. visible r. invisible, p. 3.
l. penul. needlessly r. heedlesly, p. 4 l. 18. obhorrency r. abhorrency, p. 5.
l. 7. we r. he l. 8 know r. knew, p. 6* l. 11 Examination r. Crimination, p. 9.
l. 20. divert r. derive, p. 10. in margin all in r. Allin, p. 11. l. 10.
baptizeter r. baptizetur, p. 12. l. 22 considerately r. considerate, p. 13. l.
4. desire r. devise, p. 18. l. 6. credible r. incredible. l 26. it sufficient
r. insufficient, l. 33. right r. rite, p. 25. l. 3. r. nor Mr. p. 28. margin
design. r. de Syn. p. 29. l. 32. all r. ill, p. 32. l 23. a r. no, p. 33. l. 4.
refers r. reserves, p. 34 l. 19. scoffical r. scoptical, p. 36. l. 8. no type.
r. no less

To the Right Honorable Bulstrode Whitlock Sergeant at Law, John Lisle Esquire
Richard Keble Sergeant at Law, Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
England; Major General Thomas Harrison; Edmund Prideaux Esquire Attorney General
for the State.
OUt of a love to truth, and respect to my Engagement by Solemn Covenant I
framed, and out of desire to prevent (if possible) the oppression of men, for
holding a truth, I printed (some years since) Two Treatises and an Append^x to
them, and after that an Apology for them, with a Postscript; which were
presented to some of your hands by me. Finding that great hatred is against
such as dissent from the Assemblies determinations, specially in the two points
of Baptism, and Discipline, (which this writing treats of;) and those that
shelter them from violence; and that a great part of the quarrel between
England and Scotland is, for not establishing Presbyterial Government, with
rigor, which is thus expressed in the Scottish Assemblies Reply to the (...)
Declaration, Edius. 22. Julii 1650. Sess. 17. That Jesus Christ be Lord over
his own house, and that his Ministers keep Courts and exercise Jurisdiction and
discipline, and all the censures of the Kirk from the lowest to the highest, in
his name only, against all that depart from and do oppose the truth; or that
walk loosely as does not become the Gospel: and hoping this writing to one of
the Chief Presbyterians in Scotland* may contribute something to discover the
unreasonablenesse of their violent proceedings in their way; and some Truths,
not commonly discerned; I have yielded to the publishing thereof, in this sad
time of a bloody war, raised much from the forementioned hatred.

Such as it is, I humbly present to your Honors, in testimony of my
thankfulness for the favor and pity to me, vouchsafed by some of your Honors
in conferring on me, and others in being eminently instrumental in the quiet
settling of me in this place; in which, after plunderings, and many tossings up
and down, I have had some abiding: wherein I still endeavor to be serviceable
to the public, and to acquit my self

Your Honors humble and devoted Servant, JOHN TOMBS.
Ledbury-Hospitall in Herefordshire Sept. 4. 1650.
To the Reverend the Moderator and Commissioners in the next National Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, or the next Provincial Assembly unto which Glasgow
in the Kingdom of Scotland belongs; the Complaint of John Tombs Presbyter,
Humbly shows,
THat in pursuance of the SOLEMN COVENANT taken by me to endeavor reformation
in Gods worship, according^^ the word of God; I published Two Treatises about
INFANT BAPTISM at London December 15. 1645. and an APOLOGY for them in August
1646. ^^d that in the year 1647. a book entitled ANABAPTISME was published at
London, by ROBERT BAILEY Minister of Glasgow: wherein I was wronged by many
grievous false accusations: concerning which I have (as near as I could,)
followed the rule of Christ Man. 18. 15, 16, 17. as may be perceived by the
close of the letter to Mr. BAILEY himself: For after I had advertised him by Mr.
Henry S^^dd^r, of the injury he had done me, I wrote to him July 22. 1647.
which letter was delivered to Mr. Samuel Rutherford Sept. 17. 1647. with
Directions how to send back. And in the year 1649. I wrote a letter to Mr.
Rutherford, to certify me what became of my writing delivered to him? with
desire to know what Mr. BAILEY would do to right me; yet after so long waiting,
I find no remorse or righting of me made by the said Mr. ROBERT BAILEY: And
therefore I do devolve the matter into your hands, being taken for the Church,
to which such complaints should be made, according to the rule Mat. 18. 17. and
do expect to have right done by you to him and me, as to a Fellow-Christian, --
Presbyter, -- and Covenanter with you, as is meet in such a cause concerning
the truth of God, and innocence of your Brother. And forasmuch as the charge
against him and proof may be evidently seen in this letter to him, and his and
my writings, (which [if you please to take notice of,] you may easily come by;)
I presume you will not expect my personal appearance before you to pursue this
Complaint: but of your selves examine the matter, as I conceive the rule of
Christ binds you; besides the engagements toward a Fellow-Covenanter in the
sixth article of the Sol^mne League and Covenant: and permit your
fellow servants to attend the work of Christ, in the place where he is seated;
who shall pray for your welfare; and continue

Your brothor and Fellow Servants in Christ, JOHN TOMBS.
London Sept. 24. 1650.
To the Reverend, Mr. Samuel Rutherfurd Professor at St. Andrews in Scotland.
SIR,
ANno 1647. was delivered to you a letter of mine to Mr. Robert Bailey of
Glasgow your fellow-Commissioner, which you undertook as I am told to send to
him, and not hearing any thing from Mr. Bailey in answer to it, Anno 1649. I
sent a letter to you to i^treate a word from you, what became of that letter
with directions to what place in London your letter might be sent for me; of
which likewise I have heard nothing. Forasmuch as without publishing something
a blot indelible may lie on me and (which is more) on the truth I assert for my
sake, and that in after ages when Mr. Bayly's book shall be read, and those
false criminations found therein without any Vindication of mine, and I
perceive by experience that such false reports as have been vented in Mr.
Edwards his Gangr^n^ (upon whose credit Honorius Reggius has blazed them in a
Latin writing) and in Mr. Bayly's Disswasives have made many men undeservedly
odious, and such reports vented in pulpits upon their credit have been the
bellows that did blow the fire of war, which has to the rejoicing of
Malignants and grief of godly persons wasted your and our Country, and Mr.
Cotton of N. E. thought meet to print an Apology for himself and the Churches
there to vindecate himself from Mr. Bayly's aspersions in one part of his
disswasive, I have thought it necessary to vindicate my self in this, and have
sent it to you, being one that I conceive cordially affected with the breaches
that are among the Godly and studious of truth and peace, that you may impart
this as you may opportunely to some Synod in your Country, and endeavor, as
conscience and Covenant I think bind you, in the most prudent way you can to
take of the injury of Mr Bailey; and which is the chief thing I aim at and
humbly desire, that there may be some Course taken effectually to prevent such
injurious misrepresentations of men's tenants, and practices in pulpits and
presses, that so (if the Lord shall vouchsafe such a mercy) dissenters at last
may in a calm and amicable way debate differences to the healing of our
breaches: which is the prayer and aim of

Lemster in Herefordshire December. 4. 1651. Your Fellow Servants and Brother in
Christ, JOHN TOMBS.

The Contents.
Sect. 1. OF the first Crimination, That I spoil all infants of all interest
in the Covenant of Grace. Sect. 2. Of the second Crimination, That I make
Circumcision to the Jews a seal only of earthly and temporal privileges.
Sect. 3. Of the third Crimination, That I (...) the Jewish infants all right to
the New Covenant, (...) they become ^^^tuall believers, from whence occasion is
taken to show the insufficiency of Mr. Gerees shift in expounding the words of
the Directory [the promise is made to believers and their seed,] and the
insufficiency of Mr. Marshals proof, of Connection between the seal and the
Covenant, from Gods institution; and Mr. Bailies from the nature of the terms.
Sect. 4. Of the fourth Crimination, That I give a power to unbaptized persons
to baptize others. Sect. 5. Of the fifth Crimination, That I make Apologies for
the worst of the Anabaptists. Sect. 6. Of the sixth Crimination, Inveighing
against the first Reformers. Sect. 7. Of the seventh Crimination, Inveighing
against the Assembly at Westminster. Sect. 8. Of the eighth Crimination,
Inveighing against the Church of Scotland. Sect. 9. Of the nineth Crimination,
Inveighing against Mr. Marshall. Sect. 10. Of the tenth Crimination, Of
inveighing against Mr. Thomas Goodwin. Sect. 11. Of the eleventh Crimination,
Of Invectives against others. Sect. 12. Of the twelfth Crimination, That I
esteem baptism an unnessary rite. Sect. 13. Of the thirteenth Crimination,
That I am carel^sse of my own baptism. Sect. 14. Of the fourteenth Crimination,
That I am unwilling to join with any of the Anabaptists Churches, and they
unwilling to baptize non-members. Sect. 15. Of the fifteenth Crimination, My
allowing frequent rebaptization. Sect. 16. Of the sixteenth Crimination, That I
make it lawful for persons unbaptized to partake of the Lords Supper. Sect.
17. Of the seventeenth Crimination, That I am a Complete Erastian, wherein
reason is given of my doub^, that in Scripture no such juridical
Excommunication is appointed as is now contended for. Sect. 18. Of the
eighteenth Crimination, That I avow, no scand^-lous professor ought to be kept
from the Lords Table. Sect. 19. Of the nineteenth Crimination of me, That I
hold no censure of excommunication. Sect. 20. Of the twentieth Crimination,
That I hold Christ has not appointed any particular government for his Church.
Sect. 21. Of the one and twentieth Crimination, That I hold that the Government
of the Church belongs to the Magistrate only. Sect. 22. Of my new way, and
boldness. Sect. 23. Of my silence concerning DIPPING, and of the novelty and
insufficiency of SPRINKLING, instead of BAPTIZING. Sect. 24. The Conclusion,
requiring reparation of the wrong done to me by Mr. Bailey.
To the reverend and worthy Master ROBERT BAYLIE, Minister at GLASGOW in
SCOTLAND.
SIR,
IN your Book entitled ANABAPTISMI, you charge me falsely in these following
Accusations chap. 4. page 92. you say, in these following things he flies as
high, as any civil and discreet Anabaptist I have met with.

1. In spoiling Christian infants not only of Baptism, but of all interest in
the Covenant of Grace. And in the margin, and Table in the end of your book,
you say, He spoils all infants of all interest in the Covenant of Grace.

2. In making Circumcision a seal to the Jews only of earthly and temporal
privileges.

3. In denying to Jewish infants all right to the new Covenant, till in their
riper years they become actual believers.

SECT I.
Of the first Crimination, that I spoil all Infants of all interest in the
Covenant of Grace.
To prove these accusations which you so expressly charge me with, and tend to
make your adversary odious, (which it seems you made your business, and not to
clear truth;) you refer the Reader to the letters A A page 110. where you
cite one passage of my Apology page 64. which does directly deny the first
accusation, and where the passage of Mr. Marshall you allege for proof of it,
(a most unreasonable way to prove a man's position by his Antagonists conceit of
it, as, that Calvin made God the author of sin, because Bellarmin accused him
of it,) is sufficiently answered: yea in my Post script to Mr. Blake in the end
of my Apology Sect. 22. I charge Master Blake of unjust crimination of me in
this, and challenge Mr. Marshall, Mr. Vines, Mr. Calamy, and now your self to
make good that charge if you can. And yet you are not asham^d to say, page 113.
All our adversaries deny to all infants all right in God, all interests in his
promises, and Covenant, as much as they do to Turks, and Pagans. And chap. 4.
page 89, 90. after you had charged this accusation on others; in the close you
say, This makes them uncertain what to say of infants dying before conversion.
Some save them all, (which is contrary to what you say page 133;) others
incline to the damnation of them all; others profess the uncertainty of the
thing, whether infants before their conversion be within the Kingdom of Satan,
or that of God. And for proof of this last you refer the Reader to the letter
K; and there you allege my words in my Apology page 64, 66. which speak not at
all of the uncertainty of the thing you were speaking of, to wit, the salvation
or damnation of infants dying before conversion, but the contrary, saying
expressly, That every infant is either in the visible Kingdom of God, or of
Satan, that is, elect, or reprobate. And for the certainty of the subject, I
conceive neither you nor I, nor any on earth are certain what child of a
Believer is elect, or reprobate. Sure I am Mr. Marshall in his Sermon page 48*
says, Charity is not tied to conclude certainly of any of them, although in
the beginning of his Sermon page 7. he would ground the salvation of all the
infants of believers dying in their infancy, on Gods promise, to be the God of
Believers, and of their seed. Besides, my words in my Apology page 64, 66.
which you allege, speak only of infants belonging visibly to the Kingdom of
the Devil or God; and I still deny that they belong to either visibly, until
they make their profession, according to the constitution of the visible Church
of Christians, which it behoved you to disprove, and not to misreport my words
as you do.

SECT. II.
Of the second Crimination, that I make Circumcision to the Jews, a Seal only
of earthly and temporal privileges.
AS for your second accusation, you bring only Mr. Marshals words which only
declare his suspicion; yet so unreasonable and groundless, as one might wonder
any man should have the face to draw me into a suspicion of that, the contrary
whereof is delivered in my Exercitation page 2. and very often in my
Exercitation and Examen of his Sermon; in which I still make the Covenant made
with Abraham Genesis 17. which Circumcision confirmed, to be a mixed Covenant,
containing both spiritual and temporal promises. And yet you expressly accuse
me of the contrary; and against my plain words prove your charge, only by
Master Marshals suspicion expressed in this manner; What your meaning is in
this expression, I cannot tell; it has an untoward look, as if the meaning
were, etc. which was unreasonable in him to raise such a jealousy of me for
citing only a passage in that so approved Treatise of Cameron that learned
Scot, de triplici foedere, th. 78. (which was also much approved at Heidelberg)
by the publisher of his works according to an order in a Synod of the French
Churches; as to be styled in Cameron's Icon, accurratissimae theses; and they
are now translated into English by Mr. Samuel Bolton, and printed at the end of
his treatise, of the true bounds of Christian freedom with this commendation (
too precious to be any longer concealed, or hid under the shell of an unknown
tongue.) And yet these words were cited by me so warily page 4. of my
Exercitation as that I say, and if we may believe Mr. Cameron; yet Mr. Marshall
had so much ingenuity, as to say of me in that place page. 98. of his Defense,
It is too gross a thing to imagine of God, and so expressly contrary to the
word, that until you own it, I will not impute it to you: which words you
leave out in your allegation against me from Mr. Marshall, whether needlessly or
fraudulently, I leave it to your own conscience to consider.

SECT. III.
Of the third crimination, That I deny to the Jewish infants all right to the
new Covenant till they become actual believers, from whence occasion is taken
to show the insufficiency of Mr. Gerees shift in expounding the words of the
Directory [the promise is made to believers and their seed] And the
insufficiency of Mr. Marshals proof of Connection between the seal and Covenant
from God's institution, and Mr. Baylies from the nature of the terms.
AS for the third accusation, you bring not a word to prove it, yet you often
charge sometimes all your adversaries, as in chap. 5. page 133. sometimes the
principal of them (among whom I assure my self, you reckon me) with it, as
when you say, page 151. chapter 5. The ground of this reason is granted by the
Principal of our adversaries, who avow their exclusion of infants from baptism
upon this ground mainely, that they believe they are excluded from the Covenant
of Grace, remission of sins, the saving grace of the Spirit, till in the years
of d^scretion they be brought actually to believe, which thing I do expressly
deny in my Exercitation pa. 24. with obhorrency from it, and Examen page 150.
and page 109. I say, it were a madness to go about to put them out of the
Covenant of Grace. You are often told in my Examen as page 29, 38, 110, 154.
and many more places, that I avow exclusion of infants from baptism upon this
ground mainly, that there is no Institution of it gathered by precept or
Apostolical example, and therefore it is will worship: As for a command of
Circumcision I conceive it is a brogated, and so can be no rule now about
Baptism; and the maintaining that a command of Circumcision sti^l binds us (as
Mr. Marshall does in his Sermon page 35, 36, 37.) is the most manifest heresy
of any, as being condemned in the first Council by the Apostles, Acts 15. 28.
and 21. 25. Indeed to show the weakness of Mr. Marshalls argument thus framed,
The infants of believing parents are within the Covenant of Grace, therefore
they are to partake of the seal of the Covenant, which in Mr. Marshals
language is all one with baptism: I did say that I did conceive the antecedent
of his Enthymeme not true, Examen Part 3. Sect. 1. page 39. conceiving that as
your practice is, so Mr. Marshall intended to defend this conclusion; All the
infants born of a believer by profession are to be baptized according to
ordinary rule, and so I expressed my self in my Examen Part 3. Sect. 15.
Exercit. page 1. and elsewhere, and then his antecedent must be thus, All the
infants born of a believer are within the Covenant of grace, or else his
argument is manifestly inconcludent; if we would prove, all infants of
believers are to be baptized, because some only are in the Covenant of grace.
Now I know not how to conceive that Mr. Marshall meant any other, then the
Covenant of saving grace (of which I have given reasons not yet answered by Mr.
Marshall, in my Examen page 45. and could add more if it were needful) and
that the believers infants were in the covenant of saving grace in that God
has made that promise to them. And in this sense I denied this proposition,
All the infants of a believer are within the Covenant of Grace, and disproved
it so fully in my Examen part 3. Sect. 4. that Mr. Marshall renounc^th that
proposition in that sense page 116. of his Defense, and then betakes himself to
this shift, to understand it of the outward covenant as he calls it, in which
sense I have proved in my Apology Sect. 10. his first argument to be mere
trifling, and his speeches to be full of equivocation, or ambiguity, which I
have also further proved in my Postscript in answer to Mr. Bl^ke Sect. 6. Mr.
Geree being enforced to deny that proposition in that sense, and being pressed
by me with the words of the Directory, [that the promise is made to believers
and their seed] he shifted it off in his Vindiciae paedobaptismi page 13. by
interpreting the words of the Directory thus, This is to be presumed by men out
of charity, till they discover the contrary, that all the infants of believers
have the inward graces of the Covenant, which I proved could not be the sense
of the words of the Directory in my Apol^gy Sect. 9. especially from the term [
made] which imports Gods act, not man's charitable presumption. Now what does
Mr. Geree reply hereto? In his Vindiciae Vindic^arum chap. 4. page 16. he
alters the words of the Directory thus, That the promise is to believers and
their seed, leaving out the word [ made] upon which my argument rested, and
then page 18. tells me, the quaery is in what sense and in what respect
children of b^lievers are said to be in the Covenant of Grace, whereas the
quaery is in what sense the Directory meant these words [ the promise is made
to believers and their seed] not in what sense either in Genesis 17. 7. or Romans 9.
4. or Acts 3. 25. Children of Believers are said to be in the Covenant of
grace. And whereas Mr. Geree in the same book cha. 10. page 41. complains of my
words in the Epistle Dedicatory of my Apology, that the doctrine of the
Directory is disavowed by two of my most eminent Antagonists, meaning himself
and Mr. Marshall, I have, and am further ready to justify that speech, and if
many of the Assembly have assured him in private, that they intended the
expressions questioned by me in no other sense then he expounded them, I would
have them know, that either they must alter the words as Mr. Geree does, not
reading them as they are printed, and as Mr. Marshall in his Defense page 116.
Mr. Geree Vindic. Paedobap. page 13. reads them, or else those Assembly men
must make a new Dictionary for us to understand their language by before any man
that understands common English will understand them so. And whereas he would
have by this one Examination men judge of all the rest, I am contented with it,
provided that men by his superficial and shifting dealing in this judge of all
the rest. But to return, as I denied the antecedent in Mr. Marshalls
Enthymeme, so I denied the consequence page 36. and did more then make some
v^litatio^, I proved by a just dispute that the proposition is not true, All
that are in the Covenant of Grace must be sealed, and though Mr. Marshall page
92. of his Defense, say somewhat to prove it from Gods will Genesis 17. 7, 9, 10,
14. yet what is said there is only of circumcision, nothing of baptism, and
the word [ therefore] upon which Mr. Marshalls proof rests is in the Hebrew
(...) which may be and is translated otherwise, as by the Tig^r^^es Et tu by
Parreus Tu autem, by Piscator Tu vere, etc. and the proposition is manifestly
false in Mr. Marshalls sense, yea he granted page 92, 182. that the formal
reason of their being circumcised was the command of God, which I truly
observed and proved in my Apology in the Epistle Dedicatory and in the Apology
it self page 90. overthrows his argument from the Covenant to the seal, which
rests on this, that such as received the initial seal, received it because they
were in the Covenant, which are Mr. Marshalls words in his Defense page 92. you
in your Anabaptisme chap. 5. page 132. say, your proposition is grounded on the
nature of the terms, which you never go about to prove but dictate thus: The
Major, [Whoever have right to the chief promises of the New Testament, they
have right to the first Sacrament of the New Testament, if the Lord have not
put some impediment to their participation of that Sacrament] is grounded on
the nature of the terms of the preposition the chief promises of the New
Testament, and the first Sacrament, this is the sign and seal, that the thing
signified. The reason proceeds not from every thing signified to every sign but
from the chief thing signified to the first sign.

Give me leave to tell you that I seldom meet with a passage that has more
absurdity then this of yours. 1. You set not down right the terms of your own
proposition, which are not [ the chief promises of the New Testament, and the
First Sacrament] but [ having right to the chief promises of the New Testament,
and having right to the First Sacrament, if the Lord have not put some
impediment to their participation of that Sacrament] as if you had forgotten so
soon or could not analyze your own proposition. 2. You tell us [this is the
sign and seal, that the thing signified] as if this were the nature of the
terms. But what an illogical conceit is this? Logicians call a reason from the
nature of the terms, when the terms are included, the one in Conceptu
quidditativo alterius, so as that the one cannot be conceived without the
other. Now may not the chief promises of the New Testament be conceived without
the first sign and seal? Did not God make the chief promises of the New and
Old Testament before ever any sign or seal was appointed, much more before
baptism? Did not God make the chief promise (...) Tit. 1. 2. which we
translate before the world began, most rig^tly as I conceive Dr. ^wisse Vind^.
great. lib. 1. par. 1. dig. 2. cap. 5. referres to that in paradise Gen 3. 15.
your own Mr. Dicksor, either to that or to Gods promise to Christ before the
world was made, all I meet with make it antecede any first sign or seal of the
Old or New Testament? Now how is there a connection between terms from the
nature of them, whereof one may not only be conceived, but be also existent
both de facto and d^iure without the other? If the terms were [having the chief
promises of the New Testament, and having the First Sacrament] yet there is no
such connection from the nature of the terms. Innumerable may have, and have the
chief promises of the New Testament, that have not the first Sacrament, et vice
versa. Else you must hold worse positions then the Papists that none but
baptized persons have or can have the chief promises of the New Testament, and
that every baptized person has the chief promises of the New Testament. There
is less connection from the nature of the terms between the having right to the
chief promises of the New Testament, and having right to the First Sacrament of
the New Testament. For if you mean it of right before God, thousands may have
right in Gods election and covenant with Christ, that are not in being, that
are in their mothers womb, that are yet among infidels uncalled: have these
right to the First Sacrament? If you mean it of right in facie Ecclesiae only,
then I grant the proposition is true: but your Minor has clean another sense
then your words and proofs import you conceived of it: however this right comes
merely from Gods institution, which is to be the rule of the Churches judging
and administrators action, and that is not from the right to the chief
promises, but from profession of faith arising from Gods will not the nature of
the terms. There is no essential connection between them constitutive or
consecutive, neither is one of the definition or essential property to the
other: and God has much more plainly put a bar against infant baptism then
infant-communion, not only in that there is neither express precept nor
example for it in Scripture, but also the very in^titution excludes them,
appointing it only to disciples Mat. 28. 19. putting believing before baptism
Mark 16. 16. and in practice requiring it Act. 8. 37. besides the image of it
in all ages of the Church requiring profession of faith of some for them even
in the baptism of infants. But you show the nature of the terms in these
words, This is the sign and seal, that the thing signified. By your Logic then
if the chief promises of the New Testament be to be defined you would define
them to be the thing signified by the first Sacrament of the New Testament:
which were to define ignotum per ignotius, and by that which is merely
extrinsecal to it. A promise is an action: the thing signified by the first
Sacrament is not only something to come but also something past as the death,
burial, resurrection of Christ in baptism Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 12. the thing
promised is something we are to have, the promise is Gods act, the first
Sacrament the administrators act. How inept a definition is such a definition
in which the genus does not praedic^^i in quid on the definitum, ^or the whole
definition is reciprocal with the definitum, besides other defects? But it
maybe you meant that it is of the nature of the first Sacrament to be a sign
and s^ale of the chief promises of the New Testament. Were this so, you should
not rightly argue: for then the right to the promises should be derived from
the seal, not to the seal from the promise, if the promise be of the nature of
the seal, and not e^contra: wher^as you say that your reason proceeds from the
chief thing signified to the first sign. But how can you or any make this good
that it is the nature of the first Sacrament only (for you exclude the second
expressly after in these words, nor do we (...) but of the (...)) to be a
sign and seal of the chief promises of the New Testament? Is not the second
sign as well a sign and seal of them as the first? Besides what is the term
[seale] there but a Metaphor? And is it not absurd to make a Metaph^r of the
nature of a term, which does not show what a thing is but what it is like,
contrary to the rule of Logicians? Scheibler. ^op. ^a. 30. number. 126. Definitio
non sit ex verbis Metaphoricis. Ita Aristot. Top. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect 4 K^
ker^^ Syst. Logi^. Lib. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 2. etc. Yet how absurdly is a seal of
the Covenant made the Genus in the definition of a sacrament being but a
Metaphor, and books and Sermons stuffed with collections of duties and
privileges about the Sacraments from a mere Metaphor? A thing I am assured
worthy Lamentation when I consider the trouble it has brought to many
consciences, and disquiet in the Church. But were it granted that the term,
sign or seal were of the nature of the first Sacrament, how does it appear
that it is the nature of the Sacrament to signify Gods promise to us rather
then our promise to God? Though I deny not but baptism signifies and in a
sense seals Gods promises to us, as may be seen in my former writings, yet so
far as I am able to discern the chief and primary use is to signify our
profession and promise to God, and therefore it is required as our act and
duty, and therein we are said to put on Christ. And why then should we not
rather say, that it is the nature of baptism to be a sign or seal of our
profession, and then we have a better argument from the nature as you speak,
from the use, as I would speak, of the first Sacrament to prove that infants
are not to be baptized, then that they are. The truth is Sacraments are not
signs natural but positive, and so have no nature to sign or seal but by
institution, and therefore there is no connection, or right between the Covenant
and seal, as they speak, from the nature of the tenns, but by Gods institution.
And therefore Mr. Marshall did more considerately ascribe it to Gods will, then
you do to (...) it from the nature of the terms, you miscarry as much in that
which follows when you say, The reason proceeds not from every thing signified
to every sign, but from the chief thing signified to the first sign: yet before
you expressed the nature of the terms thus, The one is the sign, the other the
thing signified, and you give no reason why there should be more connection
between the chief things signified, and the first sign, then the not chief
things signified, and the second, nor do I know by what rule you proceed in
making some promises of the New Testament chief, and some not: It follows, Some
of the blessings which Circumcision diaseal belonged to Melchizedeck, to Lo^ to
Job, and others who were not so far as we read circumcised, but the main
promise sealed by Circumcision, In thy seed all the nations of the earth shall
be blessed, The Messiah coming of the posterity of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
the Covenant of Grace as it was administered under the figure of the Ceremonial
Law did belong to the people of Israel alone, and to the proselytes who joined
themselves to their body. You intimate truly that the reason of circumcising
infants was not taken from the common right of believers to the Covenant of
Grace, but from the end God had in signifying Christ to come of Abraham, which
is a good evidence that baptizing infants now has not the same reason that
circumcising of infants had then, and so all your argument from the analogy
between I^fant-Baptisme and Infant-Circumcision from the like reason of both
falls to the g^ound: But sure the main promise of the New Testament did belong
to (...), Lot and Job as much as to believers now, and if righteousness by
faith be sealed by circumcision, as you expressly teach page 141. from Romans 4.
11. then the main promise sealed by Circumcision belonged to Melchizeck, Lot
and Job, and so if there be such a connection between the chief promise and the
first seal they should have been circumcised as well as the Jews: and it is
as strange to me how you can make the promise of the Messiah coming from
Abraham belonging to proselytes more then to them. But this is enough to give a
taste of your manner of disputing. But I must follow you, you go on.

SECT. IV.
Of the fourth Crimination, that I give a power to unbaptized persons to
baptize others.
IN giving a power to unbaptized persons to baptize others. For proof of this
you refer the Reader to the letters BB page 111. and there I find one passage
of Mr. Marshall^, which only declares his own conceit, and one passage of mine
from my Apology page 54. which speaks not at all of that point, but of another,
whether in any case an unbaptized person may receive the Lords Supper. As for
that you charge me with, I remember not where I have spoken to it in my printed
writings. But for the thing it self. If no continuance of adult-baptisme can be
proved, and baptism by such baptized persons is wanting, yet I conceive, what
ma^y Protestant writers do yield, when they are pressed by the Papists to show
the calling of the first reformers, That after an universal corruption the
necessity of the thing does justify the persons that reform though wanting an
ordinary, Vide Ans. of the Elders of New Ergl to 32 que. q 21. p 72, 13, 74.
all in defe of answ. 109 (...) sit. page 156.
regular calling (which thing I find fully avouched by the Ministers sent to
Oxford in their Account given to ^he Parliament page 28, 29.) will justify in
such a case both the lawfulness of a Ministers baptizing, that has not been
rightly baptized himself, and the sufficiency of that baptism to the person so
baptized. And this very thing, that in a case where a baptized Minister cannot
be had, it is lawful for an unbaptized person to baptize, and his baptism is
valid, is both the resolution of Aquinas part 3. q. 67. art. 5. and Lanchius
an eminent Protestant Comment. in Ephesians. 5. 26. Loc. 2. part. 2. cap. 4. number.
21. quaeritu^ an is possit baptizare eos quos ad Christum convert^, cum ipse
nunquam fuerit baptizatus baptismo aquae? non dubito quin possit, and vicissim
curare, ut ipse ab alio ex illis a se conversis baptizetur. Ratio est: quia
minister est verb:, a Christo extra ordinem excitatus: eoque ut talis minister,
potest cum illius Eccles^olae consens^, symm^stam constituere, and ab eo ut
baptizerer curare. Whereby you may perceive that this is no new truth, that an
unbaptized person ^ay in some case baptize another, and he baptize him being
baptized of him. And if you hold it so heinous a positier, you might do well to
answer Mr. Spil^^ry his reasons in his book entitled the Sa^nt interest,
chiefly page 10. which book you cite in the third and fourth chapters of your
ANABAPTISME, though in your third chapter you mistake, in alleging words as
Mr. Spilsberie's, which are in the preface to the book made by Mr. Cox.

SECT. V.
Of the fifth Crimination, that I make Apologies for the worst of the
Anabaptists.
IN making Apologies for the worst of the Anabaptists even those of Munster.
And in the margin and the table in the end of your book, you say of me, He is a
friend to the worst Anabaptists, and injurious to all who oppose them. And for
proof of this you refer the reader to the letters CC, where is one passage
cited out of my Apology page 31. which has not a word of Apology or friendship
for, or toward any of the evil practices of the Anabaptists; but you might
have read in the next page before, a professed abhorring of their wicked
practices, and judging them worse in them, then they would be in others not so
baptized. As for the words you allege, they contain only a declaration of my
suspension of my judgment concerning some things related of them for reasons
there alleged. In which suspension I am the more confirmed by your palpably
^^righteous, if not malicious dealing with me in these accusations. And I
conceive your, Mr. Marshal's, and other Paedobaptists dealing in mis-reporting
of me and others will better serve for their Apology, then my words. It Is true,
I endeavor to remove that prejudice against the truth of Antipaedobaptisme,
which your, and other men's bitter writings and preachings create to it in your
charging the miscarriages of Muncer, and at Munster and some others upon the
doctrine it self, never considering that now for a long time no such
miscarriages are charged upon them justly, they live as peaceably as other men,
their doctrine disclaimes them, the like miscarriages have been in removing
other evils that are confessed to be such, as in the Iconoclasts,
Antiprelatists, etc. which you would think it to be unrighteous to charge on
those that have sought the removing of Images, prelacy and ceremonies. Why then
do you deal so unjustly with others, forgetting that golden rule of Christ
Mat. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you even so to
them: for this is the Law and the Prophets?

Whereto let me add that reading lately in Grimstones General History of the
Netherlands lib. 9. page 442. that the inquistion of Spain advised the King of
Spain in these words art. 7. They shall hire at our charge thieves and spoylers
of Churches and images, whose offenses shall be by all the world imputed to the
rebels, by some subtle means, and so we shall vanquish them. I conceived my
speech in my Apology page 31. (which you interpret as very heinous)
considerately, when I said, I do count the story of the Anabaptists to contain
in it many things, the true reasons of which, and the true knowledge of the
circumstances concerning them will not appear till the day of the revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. And I confess it makes me somewhat suspicious
that in these days by Jesuiticall Emissaries horrid opinions, and unruly
practices are vented; and attempted to make the party that are for reformation,
and truth at this day odious to the world.

SECT. VI.
Of the sixth Crimination inveighing against the first reformers.
ANd invectives against the best that oppose them; the first reformers. For
proof hereof you refer the Reader to the letters DD page 111. where is
alleged one passage of my Apology in page 32. which has not a word of
invectivenesse against the first reformers, much less any invective against
the best that opposed the Anabaptists at Munster, but only in as mild an
expression as I could desire, a declaration of my opinion, that the reformed
Churches have been to blame that they never yielded to reform Paedobaptisme
in a regular way. Will not you say the Saxon Churches have been to blame in not
taking away of Images out of Churches, the English Churches in not removing
Prelacy and ceremonies? yet you would think he wronged you, that should say,
that in that speech you made an invective against those Churches. Yet this is
your dealing with me.

SECT. VII.
Of the seventh Crimination inveighing against the Assembly at Westminster.
THe Assembly at Westminister. For proof hereof you refer the Reader to the
letters E E page 111. where is cited one passage out of my Apology page 106.
which has not a word of exception against any man, much less of
invectivenesse against the Assembly at Westminster: only it contains the
expression of my belief that the ablest of the Assembly contrived Mr. Marshalls
book, and my wish, that it were declared whether the Paedobaptists would stick
to it or any other work: which I conceive a reasonable wish, finding the
Proteus-like inconstancy of Paedobaptists in many points of the dispute between
us, particularly in the chief argument from circumcision and the covenant Genesis
17. to infant baptism, one forming the argument one way, another another way,
one deriving the connection between the Covenant and initial seal from the
nature of the terms, another from Gods will, one ascribing an interest in the
outward Covenant only to all infants of believers, another ascribing an
interest to them in the inward Covenant also according to charitable
presumption, another conditionally, another asserting the Covenant of Grace to
belong to them for the most part, one grounding infant baptism on the
judgment of charity, another denying that sufficient: and requiring a
judgment of faith, one stating the question concerning all infants of
believers, another concerning some only, one interpreting 1 Cor. 7. 14. of
federal holiness, another of real holiness, one waving the argument from
succession of baptism to circumcision, another avouching it, with many other
differences, which tend to the wearying of a disputant and the e^ud^^g of a
Reader that desires to find truth, and to spend time in examining what is
fixed, not to lose it in disputing against that which one will own, but it may
be most will disclaim. What the Assembly have done in this matter does not yet
answer this wish. What is said in the Direstory, it may be well doubted whether
Assembly-men now hold, by that which has pa^^ed between me and Mr. Marshal and
Mr. Geree, about the proposition, [ the promise is made to believers and their
seed,] what is said in their ^dvice concerning a confession of faith Chapter 28.
Art. 4. is so far from satisfying, that it is yet a riddle to me how
infant baptism can be drawn from Ge^. 17. 7, 9. with Gal. 3. 9, 14. which I
remember not alleged by any Paedobaptists since I entered on the dispute, save
what I heard from Mr. Herl^ now the Prolo^utor; (which I mention in my Apology
page 41.) which he did with so little evidence for his purpose, as I supposed
it had been his own peculiar conceit, not the Assemblies argument. And for the
rest of the texts, if the Assembly can say any more the^ Mr. Marsh^ll and
others have said for deducing of Paedobaptisme out of them, it were fit it
should be known, if not, I for my part count my self as much unsatisfyed by the
Assemblies alleging impertinent texts, as by a private mars doing the same.
This I declare to give the reason of that speech of mine in my Apology. As for
the Assembly though I have expressed my jealousy of some defects in them, and
perhaps shall not agree with them in all their determinations, yet I have cast
no filth in their faces, as Mr. (...) injuriously accused me, even for my good
will to them; but have (...) and spoken respectively of them, as Ex^men page 1.
studying what I could to prevent those blemishes in their proceedings and
determinations, which will in time more appear then yet they do, and am induced
to believe that there are so many of them therein that know me so well, as that
they would be loath to disclaim me, whatever they do of my opinion. And though
Mr. (...) in his Suspension Suspende page 21. says, Mr. (...) is approved by
the Ass^mbly, and so takes his book to be approved by them; and you count my
words of that book to be an invective against the Asse^^ly: yet I do not take
it to be approved by the Ass^m^ly till they declare it to be so, though I have
reason to conceive, that diverse of the ablest of the Assembly, especially in
some part of learning, had their hand in it.

SECT. VIII.
Of the eighth Crimination inveighing against the Church of Scotland.
THe Church of Scotland. For proof of this you refene the Reader to the
letters F F page 112. in which you cite one passage of my Apology page 93.
which does not so much as mention any Church, much less the Church of
Scotland, but only the mannagers of the censure of juridical excommunication,
whom however the Pap^st: and Prelates use to speak, I think you use not to call
the Church of Scotland, nor do I. Nor is there a word of invectivenesse aginst
any in those words, but only a declaration, what I question upon my best
intelligence which had less reference to Scotland, then to other parts of the
world.

SECT. IX.
Of the nineth Crimination, inveighing against Mr. Marshal.
MAster MARSHAL. For proof hereof you refer your Reader to the letters G G
page 112. and there you cite two passages out of my APOLOGY: one of which page
57. is this. I find the words of an intelligent man true concerning Mr.
Marshal, that he was apt to mistake, and in the other page 69. I say, that I
find him still a confused disputer: which indeed contains some complaint of
Mr. Marshal, much less then I had cause: but not any invective, which I take
to be an oration against a man to make him odious, such as T^llies Philippicks
against Antonius, and Demosthenes against Philip, and Nazia^zen against Julian.

SECT. X.
Of the tenth Crimination, of inveighing against Mr. Tho. Goodwin.
MAster Goodwin. For proof hereof you refer the Reader to the letters H H
page 112. And there you cite two shreds of a large passage concerning an
accusation of Mr. Marshal, in which he charge me as vilifying Mr. Thomas
Goodwin, which charge I there answer, and then use some words which are not
invective, but a declaration, what I conceived of his discourse, which if it
may not be allowed in dispute the best writers among us will be condemned Dr.
Twisse, Mr. Gataker, and your brethren Mr. Rutherfurd, Mr. Gillespy, your self,
and who not? your own words in the first part of your Dissuasive page 119. do
come nearer to an invective against Mr. Thomas Goodwin, then any words in my
Apology or Examen; the former of which the licenser although Mr. Goodwins
tender friend, yet judged mil^.

SECT. XI.
Of the eleventh Crimination, of invectives against others.
ANd others. For proof of this you refer the Reader to H H 2. page 112. where
you cite two passages of my Apology, the one containing no accusation, no nor
so much as a complaint against any one, but only a mention of my experiment,
which I wish the case of Doctor Twisse (that I instance in no other) had not
verified; the other passage is no invective against any but merely an applying
of Mr. Ley's words to my Treatise, which he had avowed of my Antagonists
writings.

Sir, I suppose it would better have suited with charity, I living the last
summer at the Temple not far from you, if you had in a brotherly way minded
me of my flying h^gh, of my in^ivility, or in^is^retion, that I might have
seen your love in your reproof, before I saw your accusation to my disgrace in
print.

But you add more accusations of me, and say. But in those thing he goes far
beyond all the Anabaptists I have met with.

SECT. XII.
Of the twelfth Crimination, that I esteem baptism an unnecessary rite.
FIrst he esteems baptism so unnecessary a rite that men who are meet to
receive it may very well be without it, as Constantine, Ambrose and others did
delay to their old age that Sacrament. And in the margin, and table at the end
of your book. He makes baptism a rite needless either to young or old, and
for proof whereof you refer the Reader to the letters II page 112. and those
letters refer to B B supra, where two passages are cited, one of Mr.
Marshals, which only declares his own conceit about another point, that
supposing infant baptism a nullity he cannot understand how any in the world
should this day be lawfully baptized, and another passage out of my Apology
page 54. which is cited by you maimedly as Psalm 91. 11. was cited Math. 4. 6.
leaving out five lines that come between [ perplexities] and [ for besides]
without any etc. perverting thereby the sense, as if the words [ for besides,
etc.] were a reason of that you cite before, whereas they are a reason of that
which I express; but you leave out, that I do not think an unbaptized person
receiving the Lords Supper is either such a new opinion or practice, as Mr.
Marshall made it. And yet in the words as you cite them, there is no proof of
that you charge me with. There is no mention at all of Ambrose, and that which
I mention of Constantine is done without any approbation. Nor will it follow
from my determination, that because I say, if it be stood upon in point of
conscience, so as in no case an unbaptized person is to be permitted to partake
of the Lords Supper, it will of necessity make many superstitious perplexities
in Ministers, and infer many an unnecessary schism; therefore I esteem
baptism a needless rite, that men who are meet to receive it may very well be
without it. This argument (and such I take your proof to be) I would say, if I
may use that School expression any more, is a baculo ad angulum. And yet a man
would think you had need of a strong proof to make men believe that I hold
baptism a needless rite, who have suffered and still suffer very much for my
opposing infant baptism. But my words truly understood do infer the contrary
to that you charge me with, since they assert baptism before the Lords supper
necessary to be stood upon in point of prudence for right order, and intimate
the like in point of conscience except in some cases. When I consider this
dealing with me I cannot guess why you should thus abuse me in this so
credible a thing, unless you would slily insinuate as if I were of the
Socainians mind in this, and thereby help to load me with the most unbrotherly
charge of Socinianizing begun by Mr. Marshal in the beginning of his Defense,
for which the Lord forgive him and you.

SECT. XIII.
Of the thirteenth Crimination, that I am careless of my own baptism.
ANd it seems himself is careless to be baptized to this day. For his
infant baptism according to his arguments must be null, and another baptism as
yet it seems he has not received. Here you accuse me of carelessness of my own
baptism. But, Sir, let me tell you, that unless you knew it by my own
confession (which I am sure you did not) you go beyond your line to judge my
secret practices, yea my very thoughts, for carelessenes is a privation of
cares which are thoughts. You say, I am a very bold man, but you no where find
in me such boldness as this to judge a man's thoughts. You might do well to
remember what is said Mat. 7. 1. James 3. 1. But for the thing you say, my
infant baptism according to my arguments must be null, and as yet it seems I
have not received another baptism. Let it be granted that my infant baptism
according to my arguments must be null, that is as I understand insufficient
for the doing of the duty of being baptized according to Christ's appointment
(which yet you have not so much as attempted to prove) and that I have not yet
received another baptism, how does this prove my carelessenesse of mine own
baptism? For if it were true indeed that according to my arguments my
infant baptism were null, yet if it did not so appear to me (as I confess I
was once doubtful, as my words Exercit. page 22. show, conceiving the maine use
of baptism being a confirming of my profession of Christ, by that right an
after profession might ratify a former baptism though not every way right,
though I dare not rest upon that conceit) and therefore I did not receive
another baptism, that would prove I was not altogether careless of my own
baptism. But what? if I did conceive my infant baptism a nullity, and yet
doubted whether any could now be rightly baptized, because no unbaptized person
can give baptism, as Mr. Marshall professes in his Defense page 245. or
because none can now give the spirit, and therefore received not baptism yet,
this might free me from your charge of carelessness of my own baptism. Again
if I were resolved that right baptism might be had notwithstanding these
doubts, and were resolved to receive it, but either waited to see what the
Assembly would do about examining the point of Paedobaptisme, or the Churches
of New England, or how I might do my duty to Christ with least offense to the
State, or to my brethren in the Ministry, and with most satisfaction to my own
conscience concerning the administrator, administration and other circumstances
about it, I might be rather over-careful then careless of my own baptism for
ought you knew to the contrary, and consequently your accusation of me might be
(as it was) both rash and false. Will you say the Ministers about London, that
have differred adminstring the Lords Supper for many years for want of settled
discipline are careless of the Lords Supper? and yet were not you partial I
were more excusable in my action about this thing. But I hope your accusation
of me shall do me so much good, as to quicken me to a more sp^edy resolution
what to do in this great business, though I confess my over-tendernesse to
give^ offense to my brethren in the Ministry who have showed little or no
tender regard of me, but rather have set themselves to make me odious, to keep
me under in my credit and estate, and (which is excessive impiety) to hinder me
in the work of my Ministry of the Gospel, has made me somewhat the slacker in
resolving and accomplishing what is my duty in this thing.

SECT. XIV.
Of the fourteenth Crimination, That I am unwilling to join with any of the
Anabaptists Churches, and they unwilling to baptize non-members.
FOr he professes an unwillingnesse to ^oine himself as a member to any of the
Anobaptists Churches, and I suppose they are unwilling to baptize any, who will
not join in Communion with them. And for proof of the former you refer the
Reader to the letters K K page 112. at which you cite (not as they are in my
book) some words of my Apology page 10. which neither as they are in mine, or
your book do prove my unwillingnesse to join my self as a member to any of the
Anabaptists Churches. For a man may be willing to join himself as a Member to
any of the Anabaptists Churches, and yet not dare to ga^her a separated Church,
not every one who joins as a member with a separated Church being guilty of a
schism, which a gatherer of a separated Church may be guilty of. Besides a man
may not know how to justify at one time the practice of gathering a separated
Church or joining with it, who may know how to justify it at another time, when
there is no hope of reformation, and men are judged heretics, and
excommunicated for holding truth and doing their duty. The seven dissenting
brethren in the Assembly had subscribed with fourteen more of the ablest of the
Assembly to certain considerations to dissuade from further gathering of
Churches in that present juncture of time, to which my words you cite had
reference, who it may be now would not dissuade from gathering Churches. But
the truth is my not daring to gather a separated Church then was my
willingness to join with any Churches of Christ (and I think as much ill will
as you bear to them, yet you will not dare to say, that none of the Anabaptists
Churches are Churches of Christ) though I was not willing to be a separating
member in any Church but willing to be a conjoined member with all the Churches
of Christ in general, and each in particular: So far is your allegation from
proving what you charge me with that it proves the contrary. And for that you
say, that you suppose the Anabaptists Churches are unwilling to baptize any who
will not join in communion with them, if you mean thus, they will not baptize
any who will not join in Communion with them as fixed members entering into the
Covenant called Church Covenant, and professing the way of discipline called
the Congregational way as the only way, and separaring from any Church of
Christ that is in any other way of discipline (for not doing which it seems you
conceive them unwilling to admit me to baptism) I have cause to think you are
mistaken. For having upon occasion of these your words written to an Elder of
one of their Churches entreating him to consult with some others, and to give
me resolution in these questions.

1. What joining in Communion do you require without which you will not b^ptize
any?

2. Whether on my profession of my repentance and ^aith in the Lord Jesue, and
readiness to hold communion with all the Churches of Christ in the things of
Christ, though I do not promise to be a fixed member in any of their
Congregations, you would admit me to baptism? I received this following answer
subscribed by three graduates in schools, godly and learned men in these
words: That which we require and without which we will not baptize any is a
persons manifestation of himself to be a believer in Jesus Christ, and to
desire baptism according to the revealed will of Christ, and in obedience
thereunto, we do not baptize any into this or that particular congregation: but
only into that one body in general spoken of 1 Cor. 12. 13. As touching joining
in communion, we in this case require no more, then a manifest readiness to
hold communion with all the Churches of Christ in the things of Christ, and
accordingly to show a real willingness to have communion with any particular
Church of Christ according as the hand of God shall give opportunity, and true
seasonablenesse of and for the same. Thus we judge and practice accordingly.

Benjamen Cox. Henry Jesse. Hanserd Knollys.


I do testify the substance hereof to be the professed judgment of that
congregation whereto I am joined, and also that congregation, where Mr. Kiffin,
Patient, and Spilsbery are joined, who did affirm so much to be their own
judgment also. The Scripture upon which we so practice is that Acts 8. 37, 38.

Hanserd Knollys.




SECT. XV.
Of the fifteenth Crimination, of my allowing frequent rebaptization.
SEcondly when a man is baptized according to his own mind, he allows him to
be often thereafter rebaptized, even so often as he repents for sin, which by the
godly is done (as the least ought to be done) oftener then once. And in the
margin and the table at the end of your book, He allows a frequent
rebaptizing: and for proof you refer your Reader to the letters L L page 112.
and there you send your Reader back to the letter C supr^. Now after you had
said: but to put the equity of this reproof out of doubt, their great Patrons
now are come to defend the lawfulness of baptism not only twice, but if ye
will ten times; yea so often as you repent for sin, which ought to be oftener,
then once a day. So of Anabaptists they become Hemerobaptists, and more, for
proof of this you refer the Reader to the letter C, and there you allege one
passage in my Examen page 23. and another passage in my Apology page 53. and a
relation of unnamed Eminent Divines.

It is true, that to show the unreasonable dealing of those that made
rebaptization an heresy, I did entreat one good argument to prove it unlawful
in se for a man that has been baptized rightly to be baptized again, and to
show the weakness of the arguments brought to prove it unlawful in se to
rebaptize, I breiefly answered the two chief, the latter whereof seems to be
that upon which the Assembly rested, in that they allege, to prove this
proposition, The Sacrament of baptism is but once to be administered to any
person, only the text Tit. 3. 5. where God is said to save us by the washing
of regeneration. Advice for confession of faith, chap. 28, art. 7. And then I
added, that if there were as good example for Paedobaptisme, as that of Acts
19. 5, 6. for rebaptizing, the controversy concerning Paedobaptisme were at an
end with me. In which passage I did not assert the proof to be good for
rebaptizing; but compared with the proof for Paedobaptisme to be better, that
is more probable then the other, and such as if I had had but the like for
Paedobaptisme I had not moved any more about it. Which I wrote, because I knew
that very many writers both ancient and latter do very probably from express
words in that place conceive, that Paul did rebaptize, whereas there is not any
probability, that any infa^t was baptized by the Apostles; nor have the
Ancients (that I know) ever gone about to prove it from any example in the Acts
of the Apostles but by tradition. But in all this I did not at all set down my
judgment of the thing, whether rebaptizing were lawful or not, but only
questioned the proofs alleged to make it unlawful, whether they yielded good
arguments. I know there was another argument from circumcision but once: but I
did not think that argument worth answering, nor do I yet, notwithstanding Mr.
Mar^hals esteem of it, nor it may seem would the Assembly build on it by their
omitting it in the place before quoted. I still profess, that I reject all
arguments drawn since the Apostles from analogy of rites or customs of the
Jews in mere positive things so as to conclude thence any thing to bind us as
uredivino by Gods appoinntment. And I conceive they serve for no better
purpose, then to cause much wrangling, to fill people with superstitions, and
to weary scholars, and that they better fit Papists and Prelates turns, then
Independents or Presbyterians. And I was sorry to read in your brother
Gillespy his Aarons rod blossoming book 1 cha. 3. page 15. that from 2 Chr. 19.
8, 10, 11. the reverend and learned Assembly of Divines have drawn an argument
for ruling Elders, hoping they would have discarded all such arguments. But I
said also Examen page 84. I conceive it true, that there is no necessity of
administering either circumcision or baptism above once: but a demonstrative
argument to prove it an heresy or unlawful in it self to rebaptize I yet
expect. These passages Mr. Marshall page 67. of his Defense says, do clearly
discover my itch after new opinions. But this was inconsiderately and
uncharitably said, since my words lead him (...) another reason of those
passages, though it were but intimated, which is the misery and mischief which
comes by men's magisterial determinations of heresies and errors, and binding
men's consciences with a pretended jure divino upon topical reasons, it being
the cause of many schisms, and much hatred between Christians, and is the true
cause of (...) confusions and wars between Christians, that arise upon
difference of opinion in matters of religion. I said indeed, that Mr. Marshals
reasons were not convincing to me, nor is the holding of rebaptization such a
new opinion as he would make it. But how do any passages of my Examen page 23.
or my Apology page 53. prove that which you charge me with, that when a man is
baptized according to my own mind I allow him to be often thereafter rebaptized,
even so often as he repents for sin, which by the odly is done, at least ought to
be done every day oftener then once, that I allow of a frequent rebap^ization,
that to put the equity of the reproach of rebaptizing out of doubt, I (whom you
dubbe the Anabaptists great Patron, though indeed a Patron of nothing, but
truth, and right) am now come to defend the lawfulness of baptism not only
twice, but if ye will ten times, yea so often as you repent for sin, which ought
to be oftener then once a day, so of Anabaptists they become Hem^robaptists and
more.

But you have a tale of some eminent Divines to help you out, that in my sermon
before the House of Commons (for to whom else [ his] can refene I see not,
there being no other but Mr. Marshal and my self mentioned in that paragraph)
I did avow in terminis, that it is no fault to baptize ten times. Now sure
those Eminent Divines, and your self by hearkening to them, and reporting this
in print without ever speaking or writing to me about it, though I lived not
far from you or them, do show that to be true, which is every where
complained of, that rigid Presbyterians are very apt to receive false reports,
and to publish them of any that dissent from them, that they rake into every
dunghill to find some filth to throw into the faces of their brethren, and
therefore godly persons are very unwilling to come under their yoke. But that
you may know the plain truth, I never yet preached a sermon before the House of
Commons, nor in such sermon did avow in terminis, that it is no fault to
baptize ten times. I have enquired about this tale, and it is conjectured by
some, that this tale was hatched out of a passage of a Sermon of Mr. Wal^er
Cradock before the House of Commons July 21. 1646. on 1 John 1. 3, 4. page 28.
which was this, When I have communion with a Saint I must not look whether he
be of such an opinior, or whether he have taken the Covenant, or have been
baptized ^nce or twice or ten times, but see if he have fellowship with the
Father, and with Jesus Christ, which it is likely was misreported; and made him
in the margin put these words: I speak not this as if my opinion were for
rebaptization, etc. This forwardness to misreport things done now, as it
discovers much ill affection in men's spirits, and that the Presbyterian spirit,
when persons grow factious, will run into undue courses as well as the
Anabaptistick spirit; so it gives much cause to considerate men to doubt
whether many things reported of the Anabaptists heretofore, and all taken up in
your dragge-net whether true or false (which are the best pillar you have to
uphold the great corruption of Paedobaptism or Paedorantism as now it deserves
to be styled) were true as they were reported.

SECT. XVI.
Of the sixteenth Crimination, That I make it lawful for persons unbaptized to
partake of the Lords Supper.
AS for that you charge me with when you say, Thirdly he makes it lawful for
persons before they be baptized to partake of the Lords Supper, and refer
your Reader to MM and thence to BB and chapter 3. page 53. when you say, And
some of their greatest Doctors hold it in no wise incongruous to admit persons
to the Lords Table before they be baptized, and for this you cite my words page
54. of my Apology, had you dealt heartily with me, you should have set down my
opinion as I propound it, which was that in some case it might be permitted.
But neither you nor Mr. Marshall have dealt fairly with me in this matter. You
set not down my opinion rightly, but leave out the limitation which did rightly
state my opinion, and Mr. Marshall page 167. of his Defense misreports me, That
I confess I find no example of an unbaptized person receiving the Lords
Supper, and neither youn or Mr. Marshall do take upon you to answer my reasons,
which are either in my Examen page 85. or in my Apology page 53, 54. but only
censure me for freaks and outleaps, and a spice of itch after new opinions for
propounding my opinion with reasons about a case of conscience, which troubles
many, and is of very frequent occurrence, in a place that lead me to speak of
it. But it seems neither Mr. Marshall nor your self are willing to let any
thing pass, that may make me odious, or ridiculous, though you do but show
your own inconsiderateness, and uncharitableness, the like dealing you use
toward me in the following charges.

SECT. XVII.
Of the seventeenth Crimination, That I am a complete Erastian, wherein reason
is given of my doubt, that in Scripture no such juridicall Excommunication is
appointed as is now contended for.
YOu say, Fourthly, to show how little inclineable he is to join with the
Anabaptists, he declares himself a complete ERASTIAN. Sir, what I said, and to
what end, I expressed plainly enough in my Apology page 91. The occasion of
printing what I conceived, was a passage in Mr. Marshalls Defense, which he
stuffed with all the exceptions he could thrust in against my person, but
answered little or nothing punctually in the maine points of the dispute,
(which praevarication, I may perhaps in time discover also, in your dispute
(chap. 5.) of your ANABAPTISME) The occasion of speaking in private conference,
was, to show my sensiblenesse of the misery of the Land, by reason of the
present differences, upon some speech that was moved by some friend of mine,
(as I remember,) when the Assembly brought into the House of Commons, their
Petitior, desiring power to suspend persons from the Lords Supper for all
scandals, without restriction; and asserted the Presbyterian Government, (unto
which they advised the Parliament,) to be jure Divino, by the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ. What I spoke then, and since printed; was to show
my compassion of my native Country like to be ruined, by the violent asserting
things disputable, to be ure Divino; and thereby necessitating men to oppose,
lest conscience be brought in bondage, according to the Apostles warning Col.
2. 20. It was not (as you say) to show how little inclineable I am to ^oine
with the Anabaptists. Nor did I declare my self a Complete ERASTIAN in the
words you allege at the letters NN out of my Apology, as you charge me; but
only express my doubts; much less did I declare my self a complete ERASTIAN,
that is in your sense one that holds with ERASTUS in all things, wherein he
differs from BEZA in the disputes between them. For whereas there are two main
points in difference between them, Excommunication, and the mixed Presbytery;
Concerning this latter, my words in my Apology speak nothing against it, but
rather for it, when I say, And if any Assembly of Ministers and Rulers be set
up, for the better discovery of such as live viciously, or do contrary to the
Christian faith, or worship, that a person be not charged with those evils upon
uncertain reports, I think it agreeable to Gods will 1 Timothy 5. 19. And whereas
Mr Gillespy in his Aarons rod blossoming, page 249. has these words, Eras^us
page 175. has not spared to say, that the Magistrate may in the New Testament
(though he might not in the Old,) exercise the Ministerial functior, of he can
have so much leisure from his other employments, and page 315. in very truth
the Erastians* do oppose not only the institution, but the Lawfulness and
agreeableness to the word of God of a Church Government distinct from the
civil; yet you cannot show that I hold either of these positions. I confess I
have read ERASTUS his Theses and Confirmatio thesium; but I could not do it so
exactly, as I would have done it, if I had had Beza's book to compare with it.
I have read that which Mr. Rutherford disputes against Erastus but it does not
satisfy me, in that he dictates many things without proof, which are most
necessary to be proved; and proves something by the sayings of Authors, that
deserve to be examined; and many times omits in reciting his Antagonists words,
that which is either most or very material; and makes not his own answers
punctual; which things Mr. Mather also charge him with, about another point;
besides many incoherent, and imperfect speeches, and inserting things
impertinent. Besides in this dispute* I conceive, Mr. Rutherford does yield
that, which overthrows that which he concludes for. As when in his Divine
right of Church Government chap. 4. q. 1. page 223. he has these words, It is
evident from the text Mat. 18. 15. that Christ speaks of such sins in a
special manner committed against me or a particular brother, which are within
the verge of my power or his to pardor, as not being yet publicly scandalous.
which if true, then it can be meant only of personal injuries, which alone a
private person has power to pardon, and so is not an institution how to
correct scandals under that notion, which Mr. Gillespy contends so much for, in
his Aarons rod blossoming, book 2. chap. 9. page 295. and book 3. chap. 2. As
for his a^gument from proportior, Christ did appoint this to be done in case of
civil in^uries, much more in scandals: it has no strength to impose a thing
as by Divine institution upon men's consciences; yea it is no better then a
humane invention when only gathered by such reasoning; such arguments from
proportions being weak probations, as rightly Mr. Rutherford Due right of
Presbyteries chap. 2. sect. 2. page 37. and all Logicians acknowledge that an
argument a comparatis is but Topical, yea easily overthrown if any disparity be
assigned. And this is enough (though much more may be said) to show that Mat.
18. 15, 16, 17. is impertinently alleged, though it be one of the chief tex^s
urged importunately for Church Government by Prelates, Independents,
Presbyterians, even the Assembly it self Advice concerning a Confession of
faith chap. 30. art. 2, 4. to prove a power of excommunicating for sins as
scandalous, and so all scandals. And for the power of the keys Mat. 16. 19.
Mr. Rutherford chap. 3. q. 1. page 236. makes the power of the keys to belong
to Church-Rulers, that are the Stewards of the house, and the d^spensers of the
heavenly mysteries, but this may be only preaching the Gospel, of which the
Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 4. 1. which place is impertinently alleged in the
Assemblies confession of faith chap. 27. art. 4. to prove, neither Sacrament
may be dispensed by any, but a Minister of the word lawful ordained, the
Scripture no where calling the Sacraments mysteries, but the doctrine of the
Gospel; however the Greek Fathers often call them so. As for binding, and loosing
though I conceive Dr. Hammond has more exactly disputed this matter in his
book of the power of keys, chap. 4. then others, yet I conceive it more
agreeable to other places in Matthew (leaving Mr. Seldom to justify his
explication in his preface to his book of the Calender of the Jews out of the
Talmudists as he conceives fit) as Mat. 23. 4. and 11. 28. besides Acts 15. 28.
Revel. 2. 24. Luke 11. 46. to draw the Metaphor from binding and loosing
burdens, rather then prisoners; which is confirmed in that the phrase is not [
whomsoever] but [ what things soever ye shall bind on earth] Mat. 18. 18. and
this may very well stand with the coherence, signifying Gods ratifying in
heaven the Commands of the Apostles, and the Church on earth in the matters
wherein they are to be obeyed v. 17. and so the binding and loosing belongs not
to vindicative judicature as by Excommunication, but to Stewardly declarative
authority what is to be done or not to be done; and consequently proves not
juridical Excommunication. I add that Mr. Gillespy in his Aarons rod blossoming
book 3. c. p. 412, 413. will not have binding and loosing by a dogmatical
authoritative declaration of the will of Christ here excluded, but proves this
sense from Mat. 28. 20. Acts 15. 28. and from the coherence with the 17. v. As
for 1 Cor. 5. 5. Mr. Rutherfurd cha. 9. 4, 5. page 329. denies not many
learned Protestants to conceive, that delivering to Satan might be a bodily
punishment or conjoined therewith, etc. yea he adds, and the learned Molineus
denies delivering to Satan to be expounded of Excommunication, and will have
the destruction of the flesh to be some bodily tormenting of his Body by Satar,
and so do sundry of the Fathers, especially Ambrose, Hieronymus, Augustinus,
and Chrysostom, though Augustine be doubtful; which if true it will be hard to
prove juridical Excommunication now contended for from thence. And for the 13.
v. if it be read as it may, And ye shall put away, not, therefore put away and
(...), not (...), the evil thing, not the evil person, as it is said to be in a
Manuscript copy at Saint James, and is the more likely, because it seems to
many learned men, that the Apostle took these phrases (...), v. 2. (...), v.
3. (...) or (...), from the Greek version, Deuteronomy. 17. 5, 7. and 22. 21, 22; 24.
it will note, not a command, but an event; and so it may be either expounded
impersonally, as Deuteronomy. 17. 7. ye shall put away the evil, Seldom. l. 1. design.
c 8. p 18. codices prisci, optim^que habent (...).
that is, the evil shall be put away from you, or if it be referred to their
action, they may be said to do it, because they mourned that he might be taken
away, ver. 2. and it was to be done when they were gathered together, ver. 4.
now the phrase of taking away from them, compared with those places in
Deuteronomy, with the Apostles speech ver. 5. is more likely to be meant of
killing then Excommunicating. And the putting it, ver. 13. in such an abrupt
manner like to that, Deuteronomy. 17. 7. does give great cause to imagine it has the
same sense. But if it be a command, and be referred to Excommunication with the
judging them that are withir, ver. 12. yet it cannot be gathered from the text
that this was the juridical Excommunication contended for, invested in some
Officers, or the people with the Officers as superior judges: but rather by
verses 9, 10, 11, 12. precedent, this judging and putting away belongs to every
private Christian jointly in a constituted Church, or severally by themselves.
I have read Mr. Gillespies Aarons rod blossoming, and I think the strength of
all is in the 9. chapter of his 2. book: in which I doubt whether any of his
21. arguments will prove such a forensical Ecclesiastic government, as he
contends for. The argument from two distinct governments, and judicatories to
censure vicious manners (in which Mr. Gillespy in his first book seems to be
most elaberate) in the Jewish policy to prove the like to be among Christians
is many ways faulty. It will hardly be proved the Priests had peculiar
cognizance of scandalous manners, or that any was kept from the sacrifices for
moral uncleanness, much less that the reason is good, men were kept away for
legal uncleanness from the sacrifices, Ergo much more for moral, or exclusion
for legal pollution typifies exclusion for moral in the Christian Church. You
say truly in answer to Mr. Cotton first part of your Dissuasive chap. 7. page,
172. There is no argumenting from symbolick types except where the spirit of
God in Scripture appl^es a type to such a signification and use. Nor is the
Jewish policy a pattern for us. If it were we must have a Bishop answering to
an High Priest, a Parliament consisting of Bishops and Nobles, as they had
their Synedrium at Jerusalem of Priests and Elders of the People. These
arguments cannot stand without asserting that the Jewish judicial laws bind
still. I have bin the larger in this, because in some writings especially of
your Nation, to be an Erastian is now counted an high crime, and if the advice
of the Assembly concerning a confession of faith chap. 30. should be
established as a law, assertion of a Church Government corrective of manners by
censures in a juridical way would be pressed on us as of Divine institution
distinct from the Civil Magistrate, which I conceive it concerns the Assertors
better to prove, then yet appears they have done, or else they will in pressing
it on others usurp dominion over other men's fiath. But sure in many
particulars I am not of Erastus his mind, and therefore you do ill to term me
a complete Erastian. And though I find not by Bullingers and Gualther's
letters to him, Beza's preface to his answer to his theses, Philip Pareus his
Relation of his fathers life, and other ways, but that Erastus had the repute
of a werthy man, yet I take it all at your hands to be named by any name, but
Christ's, as you, and your fellow-Commissioners did take exception at the
Apologetical narration of the five brethren for calling some Churches
Calvinian. But how do you prove me to be a complete Erastian?

SECT. XVIII.
Of the eighteenth Crimination, that I avow no scandalous professor ought to be
kept from the Lords Table.
YOu say, that I avow that no scandalous professor ought to be kept from the
Lords Table, and for proof, you refer your Reader to the letters N N, where
some words of mine are recited out of my Apology page 92. which avow not any
thing but my doubt, nor that of the thing it self, but of the proof, and that
not out of any Scripture whatsoever, but only the fact of delivering to Satan
the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Nor do I express my doubt to be how
from that it may be concluded, that any scandalous professor ought to be kept
from the Lords Table: but how hence may be concluded any power of suspension
from the Lords Su^per for every emergent scandal so judged by a Congregation or
Congregational Presbytery. Yea to show how ready you are to mis-report me, in
the very next page of my Apology I have these words, And if it happen that any
such facts be perpe^rated as are like to that of the incestuous person, I doubt
not but the whole Church may and ought to disclaim the person so offending,
and to exclude him from all brotherly Communion, because I conceive so much was
done to the incestuous person; as I gather from 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. So that my
doubt was not of suspension for any, but for every emergent scandal, for which
the Assembly were so earnest with the Parliament. Many scandals there are in
abuse of liberty in things indifferent, in sins of evil council, and example
which may happen through strength of temptation by infirmity in men not
habitually vicio^s, which are not of that heinous nature, as to deserve keeping
from the Lords Table; Nor does the Scripture either prescribe such a thing to
be done, or give power to do it. I like not Doctor Ames his determination lib.
4. de conscientiac. 29. number. 7. Proprium and adaequatum ob^e^^um hu^^s censurae
est scandalum datum ^fratre, which I imagine was the cause of the Assembly's
mistake upon which they petitioned.

SECT. XIX.
Of the nineteenth Crimination of me, that I hold no censure of
Fexcommunication.
YOu further charge me, as avowing also that there is no such thing as any
censure of Excommunicatior, and for proof you refer your Reader to the
letters O O, where is cited one or two passages of my Apology, page 91. in
neither of which do I avow any thing but my doubt, which is of 5. things,
whereof one is, whether ever Excommunication a sacris, that is (as I after
express my self) ^uridical, forensica, ^^horitative, Excommunication by some
officers, or the whole congregation as superiou^s that have jurisdiction
without special gift as the Apostles had, would be proved to be ^ure divino by
Christ's appointment. And I confess I have still the same doubt,
notwithstanding what I have read in Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Gillespy or any other.
And I should be willing to be resolved, how citing to appear by power of
office, keeping Courts or Assemblies, requiring persons, yea of all sorts and
qualities to answer as before Judges, examining witnesses, hearing causes,
passing sentence, inflicting so great a punishment as Excommunication without
liberty of Appeal (if by a national Assembly of Elders) on ministers and
people, even the chiefest, not as Arbitrators to whom the parties refer the
matter, but as Ecclesiastical Officers to whose judgment they must stand
whether they will or no, will be acquitted from that dominion condemned Lu. 22.
25, 26. Mat. 20. 26. Mar. 10. 42, 43, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. as the Assertors of the
Presbyterian discipline expound the texts against the Prelates; and what
dominion more like the heathen the Prelates take upon them, then such an
Assembly, and whether the Prelates against whom you plead may not acquit their
Prelacy which they claim from the dominion you charge them with, out of these
texts of Scripture as well as you. But in this I do not avow, there is no such
thing as any censure of Excommunitation, as you accuse me: yea I do expressly
grant a social medicinal Excommunication by the whole Church from all brotherly
communion with the whole, and by each member from arbitrary communion with
himself, Allin defense of Ans. to 9 posit. p. 171. in case the fraternity
without officers should cast out any, yet it is not altogether the same with
that which may be dispensed by the officers thereof it being no official act.
provided they do not rashly or unjustly exclude. And this I gather from 1 Cor.
5. 9, 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. and other places, as in my Apology page
93. may be seen. And I think the Congregational way in this nearer to the use
of Excommunication in Scripture then the Presbyterian, though I think they
miss in two things. 1. That they make it an act of superiority and
jurisdiction, or, as they speak, of the power of the keys in the whole Church
over the person censured. 2. They ascribe this power only to that particular
congregation of which the offender is a fixed member, which I conceive common
to any other Church or brother in another Congregation, and is in effect
nothing else but the non-communion, which they ascribe to one Church toward
another. Nor do I conceive what other Excommunication Christians could in the
primitive times exercise or did exercise one toward another, when Victor
Bishop of Rome would have excommunicated Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, or the
Western the Eastern Church about Easter, or Stephanus of Rome Firmilianus
Bishop of Caesarca in Cappadocia holding with Cyprian about rebaptization of
persons baptized by heretics, then this non-communion. And for the texts Mat.
16. 19. Mat. 18. 16, 17, 18. I am not yet moved from the interpretation I gave
in my Apology page 91. but rather conceive that I can prove it true,
notwithstanding what I have read hitherto to the contrary.

SECT. XX.
Of the twentieth Crimination, that I hold Christ has not appointed any
particular government for his Church.
YOu say further, That Christ has not appointed any particular government for
his Church, and for proof hereof you refer the Reader to the letters P P, at
which you cite two passages of my Apology page 91. 93. of which neither says
the thing you charge me with, the former only making two things, according to
my conceit, prudencial, to wit, the Independency or Dependency, and the
fixednesse or moveablenesse of Pastors, and Congregations. In the other I
acknowledged a discipline proper to the Church, and showed what it was. And
therefore you do manifestly wrong me in saying I avow a particular governmen^,
when my words expressly yield the contrary, only I said, I suppose the manner
of doing the thing is left to prudence, that is by whom, when, in what order
evils committed should be examined, the persons charged, admonished, avoided,
which I think you will not deny. Surely you will be hard put to it, to prove
out of Scripture, the particularities of your, or any other discipline. To tell
you my mind yet more plainly, the word government comes from the Greek (...),
now (...), says Suidas, he that guides ^^ship by steering it. Being applied to
men I conceive government is either by counsel, directing, admonishing,
reproving in words or actions (as by showing favor or dislike, in looks,
embracing or shunning company, etc. giving example, etc. or by giving laws,
and inflicting punishments or giving rewards. I conceive Christ has not left a
particular government for his Church the latter way, but referres that unto
himself, but in the former way he has in the hands of some Officers, whom he
has made as Stewards in his house, whose government consists chiefly in
declaring the will of Christ, convincing gainsayers, ordaining Pastors to
teach, and declaring ^alse teachers to be shunned, and such like offices: but
for the juridical government mentioned before I find it not appointed them by
Christ. I like H^^romes expression on Tit. 1. That the Churches co^muni
presbyt^r^^^^ consilie, cura, solicitudine (not imperio) guvernabantur, and I
like Salmasi^^ his observation in his Apparatus de primatu Papae page 148.
(...) primatu Papae part. 1. cap. 1. that the government of the Church is (...)
^urati^, oversight, not potestas, magistracy, empire. And this me thinks best
suites with the Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 3. 5. Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1
Peter 5. 2, 3.

SECT. XXI.
Of the one and twentieth Crimination, that I hold that the government of the
Church belongs to the Magistrate only.
YOu add further, that I say, that the governing of the Church belongs to the
Magistrate only, and to such whom he appoints to that service by virtue of a
Commission flowing from himself. And for proof hereof you refer the Reader
to the letters q q page 113. where you cite a passage out of my Apology page
93, which has not a word of that you charge me with, but only a declaration
of my opinion in point of prudence, that the not devolving so much jurisdiction
(as some desire) on a Presbytery does not so much disadvantage the Church, as
some conceive, for reformation of manners, but only for suppressing the
dissenters in opinion, who are for the most part the most conscientious, and
right-hearted; For usually the ruling Elders are Magistrates, or both teaching
and ruling Elders are chosen and act according to their mind, and serve their
ends. And therefore if the Christian Magistrate be good, there is no great loss
to the Church concerning the reforming of vicious manners, though he Presbytery
have not such power as some desire: if bad, little is done by the Presbytery.
And for errors in opinion they are scarce ever amended by bare Excommunication,
for that (if there be any number of dissenters) does but usually produce a
schism, but by teaching and clearing truth with meekness and forbearance one
toward another, and a freedom to debate things in Synods, which is, I
suppose, the proper use of them, and not to determine things and impose laws
the persons censured being never heard. This I said to allay the heat of men
in engaging a Kingdom to war upon such a cause. But because this is only a
point of prudence from experience I leave this to be considered by those that
are better acquainted with humane affairs then I am. The thing you charge me
with is no where asserted by me and therefore in this you also charge me
falsely.

SECT. XXII.
Of my new way and boldness.
THere are some other things in your book wherein you abuse me, as page 91. in
your margin and table when you put Mr. ^ombes new way, and when you say, that
at this time when so many new ways are in hand, I have thought meet to make a
hotch-potch of many of them together; which is a mere reproachful or scoffical
calumny, as if what I wrote, I did it out of a design to make a new way of
mine own. Whereas what I have said, I was necessitated to it, as I show in my
Apology, and was done in pursuance of the Covenant, and should have been taken
with the right hand by men that are desirous to find out truth especially from
one that you term learned, and with all his strength and greater diligence then
any before him has sifted a point. As for my boldness, I confess God has in
mercy to me put more boldness and courage into me in this matter, then either
agrees with my natural complexion, or the state of my affairs. But if you mean
by saying that I am a very bold man, that I am one that is of an audacious
disposition to be a ringleader in a faction or an attempter of a desperate
design, or in any other bad sense (which it is likely you mean) you are
deceived, it being truth which makes me bold, which I am the more bold to
avouch to be so, because having tried your strength with my other Antagonists,
I find, that you defend that which I impugn by mere sleights.

SECT. XXIII.
Of my silence concerning DIPPING, and of the novelty and insufficiency of
SPRINKLING instead of baptizing.
YOu say, that you have marked nothing to fall from my pen for the rite of
dipping, or against the custom of sprinkling. And in the margin and the able
at the end of your book you say, He is a rigid Antipaed^baptist, but not
against sprinkling. But this is more then you could infer from this, that I
meddle not with this controversy in my writings. But though I say nothing,
there is enough to be found of that innovation of sprinkling, in all sorts of
authors. Mede in his Diatribe, or discourse on Tit. 3. 5. I ^dd^, because
perhaps some men's fancies are corrupted therewith, that there was no such thing
as sprinkling or (...) used in baptism in the Apostles times, nor many ages
after them; and therefore it is no way probable that (...) in St. Peter should
have any reference to the Laver of bapt^sm. Salmasius Appar. ad librum de
primatu Papae page 192. Non enim id (...) est quo hodie infantes initiant, non
mersio, non t^^ctio, non lot^, non lava^rum, nec (...) ut etiam Graeci vocant,
and vox Baptismi Graece significat, sed (...) aspersio vel infu^^o aquae. The
like is in his Epistle ad Colvium page 669. Ancient and later writers do
generally avouch John Baptists and the Apostles and Ancients use for many
hundreds of years to have been by dipping or (...) under water: Salmasius
Apparat. ad librum de primatu Papae page 193. Tempore Hieronymi omnes Ecclesiae
hunc morem observ^bant in baptismo ut ter Caput sub aqua mergerent quibus id
sacramentum dabatur* Aquinas 3. part. (...). 66. art. 7. Tutius est baptizare
per modom immer^^onis, quia hoc habet communior usus. Chanier, panstrat.
Cathol. tom. 4 lib. 5. c. 2. sect. 6. Caeterum in usu^lementi abinitio
immersionem fuisse totius corporis: quae vis est (...): unde Joannes baptizabat
in flumine: deinde tamen mutatam in asse^ sionem: incertum quando; aut
unde^f^cto init^o, etc. The manner of dipping, plunging, or immersion under
water is agreeable to the relations, M^^. 3. 16. John 3. 23. Acts 8. 38, 39. It
is acknowledged to be alluded to by Paul, Romans 6. 3, 4. by the new Annot.
there; By Calvin in John 3. 22, 23. A Joanne et Christo celebratum Baptismum
fuisse totius corporis submersione. Calv. in Act. 8. 38. To tum corpus in aquam
mergebart. Mr. Daniel Rog^r^ in Treatise of two Sacraments part. 1. chap. 5. 2.
Edit. page 77. says, The Greek Tongue wants not words to express any o^^er
act, as well as Dipping, if the i^stitution could bear it. And sur. -- the
Lord meant not that the infant should be sprinkled only; -- but baptizea:
which word signifies the true act of the Ministry, to Di^, or Do^ the Body,
or some part of it into the water. And the (...) of Baptism in the
symbolicalnes of it, urges no. -- What resemblance of our burial or
resurrection with Christ is there in sprinkling? -- So that -- they loo^ more
at themselves, then at God therein. And a little before he says, To dip the
infant -- I so ave^, as thinking it exceeding material to the Ordinance, and no
sleigh: thing: Yea, which both Antiquity ( --) constantly, and without
exception of Countries, hot or cold, witnesses unto, and especially the
constant word of the Holy Ghost, first and last approves, as a learned Critic
(Causanbon) in Mat. 3. has noted. P^s^at. Schol. on Rom* 6. 4. Diodati anno^.
in Romans 6. 4. Grot. annot. in Romans 6. 4. etc. and Coloss. 2. 11, 12.
acknowledged by Beza annot. in Col. 2. 11. and Gal. 3. 27. Davenan. in C^l. 2.
12. etc. by the new Annot. on Mat. 20. 22. to have been the manner in Christ's
time; so that Keckerman. syst. Theolog. lib. 3. c. 8. says, Non possumus
diffiteri primam institutionem baptismi immersion, non ver^ adspersione
constitisse, quod diserte patet ex cap 6. Roman. ver. 3. and 4. Casaubon.
^nnot. ad Mat. 3. 6. (...); hic enim fuit baptizandi ritu^, ut in aquas
immergerentur: quod vel ipsa vox (...) dclarat satis: quae ut non significat
(...) quod est sundum petere cum sua pernicie: it a profecto non est (...).
Differunt enim haec tri; (...). unde intelligimus, non esse abs re quod
^ampridem nonnulli disputacunt de toto corpore immerg^ndo in ceremonia
baptismi; vocem enim (...) urgebant. Sed horum sententia merito est jampr^dem
explosa: quum non in eo posita est mysterii hujus vis et (...). Tertullian, who
lived within less then a hundred years of some of the Apostles, frequently
calls Baptism, Dipping; and says the parties were Dip^, Tincti: ( never
sprickled, a^^ers, etc.) The like phrase has Musculus on Mat. 3. etc. The
Dut^l Bibles have it thus Mat. 3. 1. Johannes de Dooper. John the Dip^er,
ghedoopt inden Jordaen ver. 6. he dipped them in Jordan. Mat. 28. 19. Doopende
^nden Nam^-Dipping them in the Name. So in Mar. 1. 5, 9. Act. 8. 38, etc. So
Mr. Thomas Goodwin holds out this manner of Baptizing fully, in his Treatise of
Christ se^forth in his Death, Burial -- Section 3. chap. 7. It was questioned
in the third century whether the (...) or sprinkling or pouring about of the
element, that is, those who when they were sick on their beds and ready to die,
were baptized, were true baptism? Cyprian lib. 4. Epis. ad Ma^num. After it was
questioned, whether a threefold immersion were necessary, or one would suffice?
(...) s^ntent. lib. 4. distinct. 3. sect. 9. Aqu^n. 3. part. q. 66. art. 8. The
Jews, (from whom this rite is conceived to come,) took the baptism wherein
the whole body was not baptized, to be void, Seldom de jure nature. and gent.
^uxta dis^i^. Hebr. l. 2. c. 2. The force of the word (...) is so manifest to
signify dipping, plunging, drowning, that Pi^^rus in his Pythia ode. 2. calls
Cork swimming (...), upon the face of the waters unbaptized, and Plucerch a
ship floting on the waters (...), unbaptized. Insomuch that I marvel greatly,
that those who hold breaking of bread necessary, if not essential to the Lords
Supper, having but example, use of the word, and allusion for it in Scripture;
yea that are so stiff for a table gesture; should upon such pretenses as these
[that (...) sometimes signifies washing, that our Countries are in a cold
climate, or the like, alter so confirmed a (...), and determine that baptizing
for the manner of doing (...), is not only (...), but sufficient, and most
expedient to be by pouring or spri^klin^ on the face of the child, in the
Directory; and that dipping of the person into the water is not necessary: but
baptism is rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water upon the person.
Advice (...) confession of faith chap. 28. (...) 3. and that so small a vessel
should, according to their minds be set up, as that the Primitiv^ (...) cannot
be continued by those that would, and perhaps do make conscience of it.

SECT. XXIII.
The Conclusion requiring reparation of the wrong done to me by Mr. Baillee.
NOw Sir, I refer it to your self to judge whether any Author, Papist or
Protestant, have in so small a compass as one page of a leaf in 4. and some
few lines in another so wronged his adversary, as you have done me in so many
false accusations tending to beget prejudice against my writing, and hatred
against my person. Which I take the worse from you as being done not only to a
fellow-Christian, and a fellow-Protestant, but also to a fellow-Minister of the
Gospel, whose life and labors are not very obscure; yea to a
fellow-Covenanter, and one with whom you ate bread at his and others
invitation, out of the desire I had to hold amity with you, and the Churches
from whence you came: nor do I know that I have done or spoken any thing that
might tend to the contrary since: and this have you done in print, whereby it is
likely to spread to many, and to remain upon record to posterity, without any
provocation by me, and without any conference with me by word or writing, which
might have satisfied you; though living not far from you while you were
framing your book; as I conceive you could not be ignorant from sundry passages
in my Apolegy. The sin of false accusing is one of the sins, that makes times
perilous, 2 Timothy 3. 3. from whence the enemy of mankind has his name, and from
whence much of our disunion, and misery comes. I do now write this letter to
you being remote from you, Mr. Henry Scudder.
as I did write to a near friend before, to acquaint you with these exceptions
against you; having an eye on the rule of Christ, Mat. 18. 15. that I may show
my desires of peace, and you may see truth, and confess your wronging of me,
and may fully right me. If this do not take, I shall some other way endeavor
to wash away the dirt cast in my face by you, and remain

Your brother and fellow servants in Christ Jesus JOHN TOMBS
Bewdley in Worcestershire. July 22. 1647.
June 2. 1650.

Imprimatur

John Bachiler.


